RVSTICVS Ad ACADEMICOS IN Exercitationibus Expostulatoriis, Apologeticis
Quatuor.

The Rustick's ALARM to the Rabbis: OR, The Country Correcting the University,
and Clergy, And (not without good cause) Contesting for the Truth, Against the
Nursing-Mothers, and their Children.

In four Apologeticall, and Expostulatory Exercitations. Wherein is Contained,
as well A General Account to All Enquirers, As A General Answer to All Opposers

Of the most truly Catholic, and most truly Christ-like Christians, called
QVAKERS, and of the true Divinity of their Doctrine.

By way of Entire Intercourse held in special with Four of the Clergies
Chieftanes, viz. John Owen D D. late Dean of Christ's Church Coll. Oxon. Tho.
Danson M.A. once Fellow of Magd. Coll. Oxon: since one of the Seers for the
Town of Sandwich in Kent. John Tombs B.D. once of Bewdly, since of Lemster.
Rich. Baxter, Minister at Kederminster. Another Eminent Master in this
English-Israel: Which Four Fore-men hold forth the sense and senseless Faith of
the whole Fry, and write out the Sum of what is, or is to be said by the whole
Fraternity of Fiery Fighters against the True Light of Christ, and its True
Children.

Alias, An Universal Vindication, or General. Justification of the Sincere
Practices, and sound Principles of That faithful People, in such Points as the
Priests oppose them in (hinted in the Epistle, and handled in the Book ensuing)
against the Collegian Calumnies, and Clerical Cavils of All, who Causelessly
Quarrel with them.

By Samuel Fisher, Who sometimes went astray, as a lost Sheep among the many
Shepherds, but is now returned to the Great Shepherd, and Overseer of the
Soul.

I Kings 18.27. And Elijah Mocked them, and said, Cry aloud, for he is a God,
etc.

Numb. 25.17, 18. Vex the Midianites, and smite them, for they vex you with
their Wiles, etc.

Isa.57.3, 4. Against whom do you sport your selves? Against whom do you make a
wide Mouth? etc. Ethnici, non Credendo, Credunt, Christiani, Credendo, non
Credunt. Error Minimus in Principio fit Major in Medio, Maximus in Fine.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson in Martins, near Aldersgate, 1660

TO THE READER.
TO premise nothing at all to such a Bulk, as seems to promise by its Great
Quantity to have something of weight, worth, or Good Quality in it, were to
erect a spacious City with no Gate into it, an extreme on the other hand)
well-nigh as absurd, as that of his, who, building the little City Mindus, is
said to have made it is Gates bigger then the City.

To praefix a prolix Epistle to a large Book may prove as Cumbersome to a
Conscientious, as it is Ridiculous to a Rational Reader to make many long
Proaemiums to a short one.

As therefore I shall forbear lashing out into any long or loud Proclamations
of what profit may accrue to an unprejudiced Peruser of the following Fabric
(Vino vendibili non opus est Haedera) So shall I (yet not for custom, but
convenience) not altogether omit, in way of Initiation, or Introduction, to
premise First, some words more generally to All sorts of Readers. 2 dly, more
particularly some to All plain Country People. 3 dly, 2. or 3. words to All
proud-Spirited Priests, and Scholastic Rabbis. 4 thly, some few to the
present Powers of these poor Priest-ridden British Nations.

If^ Then, as for the Book it self in the 4. parts thereof, which this relates
to, Know All people that herein ye have the tall Academicall Sons of Anak, to
whom the Seed of Jacob seem but as Grasshoppers, incapable to grapple with their
greatness, taken down, or that Great Goliah's head cut off with his own Sword,
by the Power of God in the heart and hand of a despised Country Stripling, who
coming from following the Ewes great with young, and perceiving him in pride to
disdain, and defy Gods Armies, in the name of the living God went forth to meet
him in answer to his Arrogant challenge and with a Stone and Sling in his hand,
brought down the uncircumcised Philistine to the ground.

For herein, By way of plain Reply to sundry Books of those four men aforesaid,
viz. I. I. O's. Two English Treatises, which Treat (pretendedly) For, but (in
very deed) Against the Scriptures, as to That very Authority, and Integrity of
their Hebrew and Greek Texts, he pretends to plead for; together with his third
Tractacle of Latin Theses Pro Scripturis, Contra Fanaticos; in which not
without a Legend of as loud Lies of the Quakers, as Lewd Laughings, at the
Lords Spirit and Light within, in opposition unto both he as vainly adventures
to evince it, that the Scripture (Alias the outward Letter) is the True^t
Light, the only most firm Foundation and perfect Rule of all saving belief, and
holy Life, that it is in Esse both Reali and Cognoscibili, yea properly, as to
Name and Thing, no less than the very Living word of the Living God. II.
T.D's. Two Trifting Tractacles, Termed 1. The Quakers Folly manifested, etc. 2.
The Quakers Wisdom not from Above, etc. occasioned Originally by 2. or 3.
Public Disputes at Sandwich, held with him and his Adherents, by three of
them, viz. R. H. G. W. S. F. III. I. T's Nine Sermons. Tru^t into one Treatise
(untruly) Termed, True Old Light Exalted, etc. and not only Backed, but Thrust
out also by R. Baxter, in his Blind Zeal against that same unblinded People.

To which said Reply is Annexed an Appendicular Postscript, Abridging into a
closer compass many of those Absurdities, Self-Contradictions, Confusions,
Riddles and Rounds the Rabbis run into unawares, in their unwary wrestlings
against the Quakers. And a Positive true Testimony, according to the External
Letter, to the Internal and Eternal Light, both in Latin, wherein it was first
written, and also in English, whereunto it is (for further service) Translated.
Herein I say is the Dimn^s of the Divines, and mere Humanity of the Doctrines
of the Academicall Doctors discovered: Also the Q^a. with the Innocence of
their cause cleared against the Insolency of the choicest Champions that
contemn them, and the Divinity of their Doctrines vindicated from their
clamours, in the points hereunder specified, viz. Anti-Papism; Liberty of
Conscience; Having the faith of God without respect to the persons of men;
Justification by the righteousness of Christ alone; The Scripture, and what it
is? as to Name and Thing; The Word of God, and what? as to Name and Thing; The
Light of Christ in the conscience, as to its universality, and sufficiency, and
bow It, and not the External Text, or Letter, is the only firm Foundation of
the Churches Faith, the only true, Touchstone of all Doctrines, the only Right
Rule of all saving Belief and holy Life; The Infallible Spirits Infallible
guidance of all that follow him, as their Guide at this very day; The general
Grace and Love of God in Christ to the whole World, and every Individual in it,
and how it is Great, Universal, True and Unfeigned, notwithstanding ( through
each perishings-man, own fault) very few in it are saved; Election and
Reprobation, how it is of two Seeds only, absolutely, and of Persons, only
conditionally, as born of, and growing up (respectively) into the Image of
those several Seeds; Perfection, as to freedom from sinning in this life; And
such other, for which We are as unjustly, as uncessantly Assaulted.

About which points, it is hard to say whether the Quakers Opponents do more
Oppose them, or Abuse them (by misreporting them, as holding far otherwise
then, they do, in those and other of their Tenets) to the World.

For when we declare against Persecution, and cruel forcing of all men to
uniformity in mere outward forms of Religion (by which men, for fear,
conforming to do, and to say they believe what they believe not to be truth,
are more made hateful Hypocrites, then faithful Christians) and for Liberty
of Conscience, as that without which Now no Government, in either Church or
State, can ever stand long unshaken (those Powers being ever more feared ( if
not abhorred) then either loved, obeyed, or honored by the tenderest of their
own people who touch, and under penalties impose upon them, in that part (i.e.
the conscience) which is (...) tender, and in which being trod upon all people,
when they can help themselves, will turn again, but those Iu^t ones, whose way
it is, when they are killed, to make no resistance, Jam. 5.5. Then they tell
people we are against all good Government, and Authority, settled Ministry and
good. Orders in the Church, and such like. Whereas and all good Government in
States to Suppress unrighteousness we own, and good Orders in the Church too,
denying that only, which they call Order, who, merely under that Name and
Notion of Decency and Order, have filled the Nations (called Christian) with a
numberless multitude of Ceremonies and Customs, which are Vain, and create
nothing but Confusion: Also they tell people we do but barely insinuate that of
non-persecution to be our principle, that we may be let alone till we grow
numerous, and get outward Power into our own hands, that then we may rise, and
cut throats, and by force and cruelty subject all people to our ways.

T. D. ( deducing it, as is seen in the book ensuing Thus from a certain
Quakers drawing of his Sword, who had no Sword at all about him) The truth is
(quoth he) the Qua. now declare their intentions to propagate their persuasions
by the Sword.

Whereas we live in that Light which leads to that Love, which abhores all
cruelty, and it is the dark places of the earth, in which themselves dwell, that
are full of the habitations of cruelty: and (could we once be by others as
heartily consirved and credited, as it is by us conscientiously and clearly
declared) so far are we from that pernicious principle of persecuting (for
conscience sake, though blinded) any men called Christians in any Nations, that
(were it as (...) in our hands to effect, as it is in our very hearts to wish
the contrary) nor Jew, nor Turk, nor Pagan, much less Christian (so c^^^d)
whether Papist, Prela^icall, Presbyterian, Independent, Baptist or any other
(behaving themselves, as peaceably and subjectively, as we do, to all civil
Laws in civil things) should ever be in the least mole^ted (more then by words
of love, whether smooth or sharp, to win them to the truth, th^^ their souls
may be saved) in any merely Spiritual, or Religious matter, but in all
Ecclesiasticalls (so far as (...) consistent with, and not destructive to any
other men's) have in their consciences (where Christ alone is King) truly, and
fully, as much Liberty as our selves; even All people to walk every one in the
Name of his God, as we in the Name, and Light of the Lord our God, from
henceforth, even for ever.

And because we say some Truths, and teach some Doctrines, which (to their
misunderstanding minds only, wherein they wrest everything the wrong, and even
the worst way they can, and as they sound it out in words of their own, which
are none of ours) seem only to Savor of Popery, viz. Because we assert the
Good Works of Christ in his Saints to be necessary to their justification, who
cannot be justified by any, of their own; They not only charge us as joining
with Jesuits, and Papists, but oft-times also (as far as they dare in such a
thing as they have no proof of) they down rightly pronounce us to be such.
Whereas how near of Kin they are in their Own, and how none are more contrary
then Our Tenets to the Pope, and how well T. D. proves the Author of this
Epistle in probability to be a Jesuit ( as he falsely affirms) is to be seen in
Sundry pages together of the following Work viz. from p. 47. of the 1 Exer. to
the end.

And because we make mention of Christ in us, and the Righteousness of the Law,
as necessary, in order to Salvation, to be performed and fulfilled in our own
persons ( as Paul does Romans 8.4.) though we mean no other Righteousness then
the same that is in Christ, and is wrought in us by no other power, then that
of Christ, and that same Christ too, of whom the Scripture speaks, that To him
give all the Prophets witness, Act. 10. That in his Name, and through faith in
his Name alone, who ere believes shall receive remission of sins; then which
Christ, and his Name, there is no other under heaven given among men, whereby
they must besaved; They (...) us both to God and men, as denyers of Christ and
of his Righteousness, and of Justification by Christ, alone: Witness one
Ackworth of Rochester, who was once heard, by the writer hereof, deprecating
and declaring against the Qua. in these words to God himself, in his public
Prayer viz. Above all things Lord ( quoth he) deliver this poor city from the
Qua. they are a peole Lord, that deny God, deny C^rift, deny the Righteousness
of Christ, deny Justification by Christ alone. Whereas, As it was at that time
by this Author prefered (though not permitted) to be presently and publicly
proved to his face, on behalf of that people, whom he told lies on to the Lord
himself, that they own God, own Christ, own Christ's Righteousness, and own
justification by Christ alone: So against all the Priests, who in their several
Parishes misrepresent us, as going about to Establish our own Righteousness
only, and not Christ's to our Justification ( among whom T.D. is in that point
the most gross false accuser of us) as it was (clearly enough, to men not
minded to be blind) by word of mouth at the disputes at Sandwich, and has been
since by George Whiteheads printed Replyes' to T.D 's. printed misrelations of
us in that matter; so is it abundantly proved more at larg in the first
Exercitation from p. 80. to the end thereof, that there is no people do more
fully, or so truly disclaim their Own, as dung and filthy rags, and stablish
Christ's Righteousness alone (which, as wrought by Christ in his Saints, T. D.
makes no better then dung, loss and filthy rags) to both the Justification,
Sanctification and Salvation of sinful men, from All their sins, then the
Quakers do, who are by the Parish peoples Blind Leaders most abominably belye^
to them, as denyers of it.

And because we do not with the misty Ministers ((...)) of the mere Letter (
which the Apostles were not Ministers of, but of the Mystery, of the New
Testament or the Spirit, 2 Cor.3.) own the bare External Text of Scripture (
which themselves confess to be corrupted, vitiated, altered and adulterated in
all Translations) to be ( at lea^t in their Heb. and Greek Transcripts of it)
entire in every Tittle, Letter, Vowel, Syllable and Jota, and the self same
without any loss, as it was at the first giving out; but say it has suffered
much loss of more then Vowells, single letters, and single lines also; yea
even of whole Epistles and Prophecies of inspired men, the Copies of which are
not by the Clergy Canonized, nor by the Bible-sellers bound up in the Bulk, and
compass of their modern Bibles; and specially because we own not the said
alterable and much altered outward Text and Letter, or Scripture, but the Holy
Truth and inward Light and Spirit, which the Scripture it self testifyes to,
which at times that Text and Letter came from, to be, as to Name and Thing, and
that properly, the Word of God, which is Living, the only firm, infallible
Foundation of all Saving Faith, and invariable Right Rule of holy Life, the
most sure, sound Balis, stable Standard, True Touchstone, for the due Trial,
determination and discerning of all true Doctrines of Christ, from men's
Tradition, and cunningly devised Fables; Therefore they cry out against us, as
Siders with Jews, Papists, Athiests, and All Scripture haters, as decrying the
due Authority of the Scri^tures, as such, by whom Satan assaults the sacred
Truth of the Word of God, in its Authority, Purity, Integrity and Perfection;
and as Opposers of the Scripture, and the Word of God, as to both Name and
Thing; witness J.O's. Epi^t Dedicatory of his doings against the Quakers, to
all young Divinity Students, p. 28.30. and elsewhere, as is seen hereafter.
Whereas how (though Christ, and his living Word in the heart, which the
Scri^ture exalts also, is Exalted only on the Throne) yet the Scriptures are
owned by us in their due place, and how (though Christ's Light and Spirit alone
in the Conscience is, according to the Scripture, asserted to be the only most
perfect Rule, Foundation, etc. and not the ^etter ( as they darkly Divine) yet
the Letter is acknowledged by us, full as much as it is by it self, to have
been written by men moved of Gods Spirit, and to be useful, profitable,
servicable, etc. to be read and heeded, and how all-J.O's. lying Calumnies
against the Quakers, as concerning their carriage to the Scriptures, and the
Word of God, and the Foundation and Rule, etc. are clearly wiped away and
cashiered (as well as T.D's foul and false Aspersions of them in his
Narratives, as to matters of Fact, are in the 1st. part of my 1st. Exer from p.
18. to p. 38.) is to be read at large throwout the 2 d. and 3 d. Exercitations,
which consist well nigh wholly in vindication of the Truth, against their
cloudy conceits about the Scriptures.

And Moreover because we (as the Spirit also in the Scripture bids us, Jam.
2.1. etc.) have not the Faith of God with respect of persons, as they are high
in this world in the Church where Christ is the one Master, and all the rest
are Brethren; Therefore they misrender us, as proud, obstinate, uncivil,
churlish, discourteous, disrespecting, contemning all men's persons. Whereas we
truly honor all men in the Lord, and what we do in denying those vain
Complemental Customs of the Nations, as vailing the Bonnet, or putting off the
Hat, which is part of the outward habit, and bowing and cringing to the ground,
when we come before men, and in our keeping to that plain, yet not True,
Ancient and proper English Language of Thee and Thou ( which is used to God
himself) to each single person, great or small, when we have to do with them
(who have no law of man neither whereupon to imprison and punish any for doing
herein as we do) we do it (God is witness, and will once Judge between us and
them) not in a Spirit of Pride, Arrogance, Disrespect, Disdain, or Contempt
toward any man, but in Conscience to the Lord, that we may stand clear before
him, who forbids us to bow to the likene^^e of any thing in Heaven, Earth, or
under the Earth; and in humility only, and that fear of the Lord, whereby we
are bound to depart from all conformity to all such fond foolish fashioning of
our selves according to our former Lusts in our ignorance, and to This World,
which we are chosen out of: A more clear discovery of the unsuitablenesse of
which Ceremonious services of men to the Saints of God, is made (as in the
Scripture it self) so in the 1st. of the ensuing Exercitations, from page 40.
to page. 47.

And because Christ's Headship, Kingship and Supremacy alone we (together with
the True Church, which is in God the Father, and in Christ Jesus the Light) can
own in the Court of Conscience, and in matters purely Spiritual, and of mere
Religious and Soul concernment, and not any mere man's (much less the Popes or
any Priests in such Sacred Secrets) therefore are we mistaken, and misranked
among such as are utter enemies to the present Kings Supremacy in these
Dominions. Whereas we do, according to what the Spirit requires of us, in all
civil causes and cases between Man and man, submit our selves to every
Ordinance of man himself (I say in such cases) even for the Lords sake, whether
unto the King, as Supreme, or to such as are sent of him to be a Terror to
evil doers, and a Praise to them that do well.

And if those, who have the Sword in hand, shall turn it against us for well
doing, and so act against the good will of God, or impose, by Gods permission,
upon us contrary to our Conscience, even there, where we cannot obey actively,
we are willing to bear patiently, without violent Resistance, what God will
leave us to suffer from the hands of such, as should protect us, not reviling,
nor threatening, nor cursing, but committing our case in quietness to him that
Judges Righteously, and our Souls to him in well doing: And that Passive
deportment must be and is judged by All to be Aequivolent to that Active
obedience, which others yield, for fear, to what laws soever are made among
men.

And because we are no Strikers, or Fighters, as some men (called Christ's
Minister's, alias Servants) are, though no such should be, 1 Timothy 3.3. 1 Tit.
7. with Carnal Weapons, the Weapons of our War-fare, being not Carnal, but
Spiritual, nor such as theirs, among whom are found Wars and Fightings, which
come from the lusts that War in their Members, Iam. 4.1. and cannot with good
Conscience to God ( as to Military matters) appear in Arms against any;
Therefore are we prejudged, as not submitting to, nor owning Magistracy, as we
say we do. Whereas we do truly own, and are subject thereunto: Witness the
Tenor of a Paper given out from among us, under many hands, some while since
in that particular, A true Copy whereof is here Printed in the Margent.
Magistracy we own, and, for Conscience sake, ^hereto are Subject, as an
Ordinance of God, and for this cause have we at all times paid Tribute. Custom,
Exc^se, and Assessements, and all other dues thereto belonging, that we may
live a godly and quiet life under their Government, wheniever God calls thereto.
For to peace are we called with all men, and that we seek, and can freely
contribute to the Magistrates power, that bears the Sword for that end: But out
of Wars we are redeemed, and may neither learn, nor teach wars any more: So
it is not for saving our many, nor in contempt of any Authority set over us,
that we have hitherto refused to raise: Arms with, or against any Power, since
we were a People; for the money we give to him whose Superscription it bears,
but our Lives and Consciences we give up to God alone. And what ever we Suffer,
a killing Instrument we may neither Form nor Bear against any of Gods Creation;
for he that is our Savior from all our Enemies, Leads us to save men's Lives,
and not to Destroy.


And because we cannot Swear at all, but forbear it in obedience to Christ's
and his Apostles words, who (intimating Math. 5. a permission under the Law to
Swear ( so be men did not forswear, but perform to the Lord their (then lawful)
Oaths, for to Swear by any but God, or to Swear by God in ordinary
Communications was as unlawful then as now) Which shows, against that late Toy
that John Tombs has put forth in proof of some Swearing now (which is scarely
worth any further Answer, yet is Answered by Richard Hubberthorn) that what
Swearing was then allowed of (as before a Ruler it then was, to end a Strife
among men, who are yet in Strife) is now unlawful among his Saints, who are
Redeemed out of Strife, and the rest of those fleshly works, which it is one
of, Gal. 5. Nor does John Tombs's insisting on the Greek word (...) 1 These.
5.27. add a jot to his proof; for howbeit it is Ordinarily used to signify to
Adjure or bind one by Oath, yet (being as some suppose, of (...) to confine, or
(as some) of (...) a bound or limit) it Originally signifies to bind, limit,
confine, oblige any way, by Word or Promise, as well as Oath: And J. T.
confessing Paul's Charge in that place, and those, 1 Timothy 6.13. 2 Timothy 4.1. to be
alike, therein confuses himself however: For the words (...) and (...) there
used, are no more then to Engage before some Witness (God or Man) or solemnly
to Command or Charge, and not to Swear one, and cannot be taken so strictly, as
to Adjure, though (...) may be taken in the moderate sense, i.e. any way to
oblige, as well as in that rigid way of Swearing. And as for his saying (...)
is a Particile of Swearing, I say it is not necessarily so, but often of
Affirming only, as Quidem, Profecto, Truly, Verily, etc. And however, where
Paul uses it, 1 Cor. 15.31. he does not Swear, ( as J.T. divines he did) for
since he, and all confess none are to Swear by any but God alone; Paul's
swearing there (had it been an Oath) had been unlawful, it being not by God,
but by his, and the Corinthians rejoicing.
says unto us, Swear not at all (i.e. in such cases wherein men might Swear in
old time, who then might not in common Communication) and above all things
Swear not, no not by any Oath, but let your Communication, i.e the whole of it
(before Rulers as well as others) be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, least ye fall into
Condemnation, for whatsoever is more than that comes of evil, Mat. 5.33, 34,
35, 36. Iam. 5.12. Therefore are we, in some places by well-nigh Scores at once
put in prison, as persons suspicious of Treachery and unfaithfulness to the
present Powers. Whereas, howbeit we decline all Oaths for the Reasons
aforesaid; yet, as it has been owned by the King himself as satisfactory to
him, as if we did Swear, if we can say we are, or promise to be Innocent, as
toward him; so we both do, and can declare our Present, and Promise Future
Integrity to Him, and the present Government ( reserving our Consciences to the
Lord alone in Spiritualls) in all cases of civil Concernment; And As our
Promise binds us, more than their Oaths do them, who^make as little Conscience
to keep the Oaths they take, as they do to take whatever is imposed, and for
Fear, Swear themselves To and Fro into the Favor of every Form of Government,
as it stands its time upon the Stage: So our Practice will Preach out our
Performance of what we Promi^e, and that performance prove our words, once
passed, to be of as much worth and weight to us before the Lord, as their
Swearings by his Name are, who are found utterly out of his Nature.

And because we talk of an universal Redemption by Christ's coming
intentionally to save All men, though (through their own default) All are not,
but few only actually saved; They pittyfu^^y propound us as denying Gods
Eternal, unchangeable Decree, and his Praedestination, Election, Reprobation,
and such like. Whereas how the universality of his grace appearing, and
bringing Salvation truly and intentionally to All, but that most put it from
themselves, as the Jews did, Act. 13. is no way inconsistent with, but rather
stablishing Gods everlasting, immutable Council concerning men, as to
Salvation and Condemnation, it is most clearly demonstrated in the Fourth
Exercitation from p. 87. to p. 152.

And because we call All men to look to the Light within their own consciences,
and to take heed to that, as ever they intend to enter into Life, assuring
them, that by the leadings of that Light, if they will, they may come to God,
and work out their Salvation, and escape the Condemnation that is to come: They
make people believe, as if we held that all men in the Fall had of themselves a
Free will, and a Power of their own ( without God) to save themselves, and
without any special, spiritual or supernatural grace or gift of God, even by
their own Natural Light, which flows from the Principles of mere Nature, to
help, deliver, and Redeem themselves, and as if we did destroy all that free
grace, great goodness, and rich mercy of God, of whose mercy and grace only it
is, and not of themselves, that they can be saved. Whereas we ascribe all the
glory of our own, and every man's Salvation to God alone and his mere mercy and
free, grace, which is, and alone is sufficient thereunto, and not to any man,
nor any thing at all in man, that is of man, and not rather the free gift of
God to him, saying that it is not in man, without the gift and grace of God,
either to guide, or to bring himself to Salvation, nor in him that wills, nor
in him that runs, but in God only, that shows the mercy: And That Light of his
in every man's conscience, even in the heathens, which these men, in the
cloudiness of their own consciences, which come not to the Light that is in
themselves, call natural, we say is that special gift of Gods own grace,
every degree of which is sufficient to help, heal and save him, that takes good
heed to it, and to lead him forth that follows it (as it increases on him that
does so) to the Light of Life: Yea it is a measure of that Spirit of his, a
manifestation of which is given to every man to profit withal; of that Spirit
that strives with all men (but that most resist it in their stiff necks, and
uncircumcised hearts) that convinces the whole world of Sin, Righteousness and
Judgment, though all are not thereupon converted by it, same measure (at least
one Talent) of which is given to the most unprofitable Servant, till, ^for not
trading therewith, it be taken from him; it is something of that goodness of God,
which (though men will not know it, and few are led by or follow it, while it
draws them, yet does lead them, and though they refuse to return, and so fare
the worse for it, does its own part, so far as to draw them to Repentance: Yea
it is, though in men, yet of God, and no less then his own Law in their own
hearts, of which Law the Letter says (though men, till spiritualized by it,
are carnal, and sold under sin, yet) is spiritual, holy, just and good,
whereby every man is a Law to himself before God, who wit Judge him, and either
accuse, or excuse, acquit, absolve, clear, justify, or condemn him, in the day
when he judges the secrets of men by Christ out of the book of their own
consciences ( once to be opened, in which thereby both Jus and Factum, Right
and Fact is manife^t) according to the Gospel, that is preached in it, and by it
in every creature under heaven, as well as to somely man's ministry, and to all
by some outward ministry or other also, and is not any mere Natural Faculty (
as our Naturalists call it) that is as Natural to men, as his mind it self is
(as J.O. mindlessely asserts it to be,) for then it must be de Es^e homini, so
Essential to a man, that he neither is, nor can be truly called A man without
it; whereas (though Man in the Fall is in indeed so short of the man made at
first after Gods Image, or of Man restored back again thereunto, that he is
(comparatively to such ^ one) but as the ^east of the field, that perishes,
yet) in the Fall he has all that is Essential to him, as a man, and flowing ex
principirs naturae; But (and this may be an Addition to the other Arguments in
the Book, if it be not touched upon therein already) Gods Law or Light in the
consciences of all men, which we call them to, though given of God in some (
not the same) measure at first to All, so that universally every Individual or
has, or has had something of it, yet, through man's not using it well, may (he
yet remaining Essentially a man be totally taken from him) as the Talent from
the s^othfull) and darkness come upon him, and be left to walk in utter
darkness, and to stumble in that dismal night, of which its said then, and of
that time, he that walks in it, knows not whether he goes; and to stumble,
not only because he hates the Light (as he did before, while yet he had it) but
because now he has it (...), and because now there is no light left in him: Of
which Light and of its universality and sufficiency to save such as seek God in
it, and how it is a supernatural, spiritual gift, and grace of God to all men,
where it is, and not the natural faculty of man's understanding only (as our
Opponents pittiful^y pra^^e to prove it is) is most plain^y proved in the 4th
Exe^citation from p. 49 to p. 194. and made more apparent in the Appendix also.

And when we assert the Ministry of Christ to be an infallible Ministry, and
the Spirit of God, by which his Ministers are ever guided in the work of his
Ministry ( for they are out of his Ministry or Service, and in the Devils at
that time, who ever are at any time guided by any other) is an infallible
Spirit ( for God has no fallible Spirit that we know of) and that all the
directions, leadings and guidances of that Spirit are infallible ( which Spirit
has no fallible guidance ( as J. O. little less then seems to intimate he
has) that we know of) and consequently that All, who are led by that Light or
Spirit are (so far) infallibly led, and that all, and only they are the Sons of
God, that are led by that Spirit of God, and that God has Children at this day
in the world, and so consequently that at this day, his Ministers and Children,
who are all ^aught of God, are infallibly taught as they attend, to that
Anointing, that is given to be their Teacher, that leads into all truth, which
Spirit of Christ also whoever has not (as his teacher) is none of Christ's:
Then they belly us as saying of our selves that we, as of our selves, as (...)
(as J.O. flouts) are infallible. Whereas we say no such thing at all of our
selves, nor of any men, but that All men, as in themselves, and in the Fall,
are no more then fallible: But because men in the Fall are fallible, liable of
themselves to err still (as they are erred already) to their own ruin;
Therefore God in his love has sent his Son a Light into the Nations, So to be
his Salvation to the ends of the earth, to lighten them that sit in darkness,
and to guide their feet in the way of peace, out of the crooked paths they are
in, in which who walks can never know peace, and that the Light and Spirit of
him, who is the Light of the world, the Lord, that Spirit, which is Truth it
self, and no Lie, is lent (as the Letter speaks of it) to every man, and even
that True Light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world, given to
lead him back infallibly unto God, from whom it comes, who can be known out of
that, no more then the Sun can be seen by any other Light, then what shines
from it self, in which Light, wherein he looks after the Lost, whoever look
after him are not (...) but (...) and shall find that Salvation of which he
says, Look ye unto me and be ye saved All ye ends of the earth: Of the
Infallibility of which Light and Spirit, and of its guidance of all Christ's
Ministers, and Children, and of all men also, so far only, and no further, then
as they are led by it (as of old, so at this day) there is much said in answer
to those Ignes fatuos, that fain the contrary, in the 4 Exercitation from p. 1.
to p. 47.

And because we call on men (as the Scripture does) to perfect holiness in Gods
fear, and to cleanse themselves from all uncleanness of Flesh and Spirit (then
which there is no more) as a thing attainable by Christ's grace and Power only
improved; as a thing not only Possible to be done here, as God requires (who
calls not for Impossibilities from his People on pain of Eternal Punishment,
if they Perform it not) but also needful and necessary to be done here, if
they mean to do it at all, since (as Themselves say with Us against the Pope)
there is no Purgatory in the World to come; They commonly accuse Us of saying, in
A Self-Vaunting, Proud, Disdainful, Vainglorious Boasting Way over all other
men, of our selves, that we are perfect, and (as J. O. impudently intimates)
that we impudently Glory in it, that we are free from not only Hypocrisyes,
Fraud, Wickedness, Lies (which it seems he cannot Glory yet that by the Grace of
God, he is yet free from) but even from all other, even the very least evils,
and so would have us have Punitiones, Incarrationes, Punishments, Prisons, etc.
for so saying.

Whereas we use not to bear Testimony to our selves, but to the Truth of
Carist, and though by the Grace of God only We are what We are. and His Grace (
to whom alone therefore We give the Glory, and not to our selves, who have
nothing but what we have received, and Glory not (as some do in Sin and Shame)
nor boast (as they do in evil doing) of anything that's Good, As if we had not
received it) is not in vain, so, but that our walking is such that they cannot
accuse some of us Justly of the least Evils, yet we Testify the Truth rather
as a Doctrine to all, Teaching not what our selves are (what ere we are) so
much as what both We and All men should be, and also may be by the Grace of
God, who is not wanting to us, if we be not wanting to our selves; and must be
also, (viz.) Deniers of all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and Godly,
Righteous, and Sober Livers in this present world) or else it had been better
men had never been born, seeing for them that loose their day for it here, it is
too late to begin that life in the world to come, where there is no Purgatory,
nor place for Repentance, though it shall be then sought carefully with Tears,
Pro. 1. Math. 25. Luke 13. In this Doctrine, as in many more, if they do not
Maliciously mis-represent us, yet at best they most Miserably mis-understand
us, not well heeding these things that hereunder follow.

1st. That the Qua. themselves hold not out, as attainable such a Perfection of
Holiness, Grace or Glory ( as to degree) here, as admits of no addition of a
greater degree of it hereafter, for of the increase of Christ's Image, Glory and
Kingdom there is no end; but such a Perfection only, as is without unholiness,
or committing any Sin, or Transgression, as whereby there is a perfect Defacing
and Destroying in them, the Works, and the Old Contracted, Ugly Image of the
Devil; Anger, Hatred, Envy, Wrath, Blood, Cruelty, Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
and all such like Lustings to Evil; which whoever are^ not purged from before,
can never enter into the Kingdom of God, and Christ, which is that
Incorruption, that Corruption cannot Inherit: Full Deliverance from the doing
of which Evils, is a true perfection of Holiness ( according to the measure of
it) though not so great a measure of it, but that hereafter there may be more;
as Adam in Innocence had no Sin, yet not so much of God, Good and Glory, but
that it might possibly be Augmented: The Elect Peter writes to received the end
of their Faith, the Salvation of the Soul, which is from Sin, or nothing, by
him, who was manifested a Light into the world, to this end, even here, to
Destroy the Works of the Devil. 2dly. That we hold not out a Condition of full
Freedom from Temptation, which if any be without, he is wise enough to keep it
to himself, and not to prattle of it to the Priest, who (for all his Preaching
against it) cannot with patience hear of turning yet from all Transgression (
And lest any should think of me, as more then I yet am, I am not yet that man
(who ere he is) that's free from Temptation.) but in our several measures, what
we witness in our selves, by the Power of God, and Gospel of his Light and
Grace, viz. a Liberty ( not to Sin, which is that some long for, but) from Sin,
and a freedom from following any Lust, and an Ability ( such as we found not
while we were where Priests and their people are) to walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit, and to be saved from Sinning, though not from sins
Objecting it self to us, and from Transgression, though not from Temptation: So
it is a True State of Perfection, and a State of True Perfection, or else
Christ himself, who was often Tempted, Matthew. 4. yet never sinned, was not
Perfect. 3dly. That we hold not (as there are some that sillily suppose of us,
saying the Qua. say they are so perfect they cannot Sin) an Impossibility of
those men's sinning, who, while they sin not, are Saints [ for the Denominations
of Sinners, and Saints do tollere se invicem, so as he who is a sinner, while
such, while sinning, is no Saint, as T. D. dotes, and he who is a Saint, or
Holy One, clean from sinning is no Sinner ( specially not as David was, while
in his Guilt, and Filth of Murder and Adultery, as T. D. dreams also) for no
Sinner is a Saint while sinning, nor is any Saint a Sinner, while a Saint, or
Holy One] but a Possibility only not to sin, as men take heed to themselves by
the Word, and Light: Non posse peccare is one thing, and Posse non peccare is
another, and the Divines can see it so sometimes, when they please, though they
will not own their own Distinctions when the Qua. make them: They say men must
needs sin while in this world, (measuring others by themselves, who are yet
sold under sin, and so under a necessity of committing it, and falling under
the Law of it) and because we own them not in their Extreme, which of the two
is farthe^t off from the Truth, they dream we are in the other, so as to say
men after they once one the Light, cannot sin: Thus the Vile Person and Churl,
whose Instruments are Evil, destroys the poor with lying words, when the needy
speaks right things; for we say that men, though they ought not to sin, yet
may or may not sin, according as they heed the Light, or heed not the Light,
which is the Power of God against it, by which, Psalm. 119.9. a young man,
heeding it, May cleanse his way, not Must necessarily, whether he heed it or
no: Let him that stands take heed left he fall: To say men must sin is one
thing, cannot sin is another, may or may not, as the Light is kept to, is the
Truth. 4thly. That we Doctrinally hold not out such a full Freedom, and
Attainment of Po^er over Sin (per Saltum) at once, or at the first Step of a
Person from the Darkness, wherein he dwelt, toward the Light, so that after
once Converted to the Light only, and to wait in it, there is a full Deliverance
witnessed without any more ado ( as our National Ministry, who are often more
willing to mistake us, then rightly to understand us, make it out in their
muddy medlings against the Qua. before their people) but that those that turn
to the Light in their Consciences, which Reproves and Condemns even the most
Secret Sins in the flesh, and obey it, and abide by it, waiting patiently on
the Lord; in the Way of his Judgments, while the Spirit thereof, and of burning
passes to the purging away the Filth, Dross and Tinn, to those only (as well
as to all those at last) Judgment shall be brought forth into Victory over the
Sin that is Judged, and the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled, by the Power of
Christ in them, bringing it near to such as Thirst after it, and Revealing it
in the Light, from Faith to Faith, Romans 1. And the Salvation of God from sin,
which shall once come, and not tarry, to such as thus quietly hope and wait for
it, Isa. 42.12. 13. Lam. 3.26.27. We say not it is the work of mere man, nor of
a day, but the Work of Christ, which in due time, he will, without failing and
being discouraged in it, perform and bring to pass ( for the Battle is not
ours but the Lords) in such as stand still, beholding and following him in the
leadings of his Light; to the Rooting out of all Iniquity, and Establishing of
Equity in the Earth; to the accomplishing of the work of Regeneration, or
begetting men back from the Image, and Nature of the Devil, and life of sin,
through the Death and Blood of Christ's Cross, which being but begun in the
first Act of Conversion to God (which our Prie^ts, to the deceiving themselves,
and people, think is Regeneration enough for them, and to serve their turn,
though their turning to God (as they call it) be not yet from Darkness, Sin,
and the Power of Satan to God in his Light neither, but from some one empty
dead literal Form of Profession or other, to another) they look for the fullness
of* as to freedom from sin no sooner (though (for shame) they say not so much
in words, because they would seem at least to be at odds with the Pope about
that Point) then in some certain Purgatory in the world to come; not mattering
to be Holy here, as God is Holy, Merciful, as he is Merciful, to walk as Christ
walked, to be as he is in this world, in whom there is no Sin, to be pure as he
is pure, as men are required to be, and till they are it is Condemnation because
of sin, and as such as sing with him on Mount Sion, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. are, and
must be; but contenting themselves to be, as ever learning and teaching, never
learned nor taught, so ever purifying, though never purifyed: And if the work
were as truly doing too (as it is pretended to) there were then (according to 1
John 3.3.) some true hope, because a hope that it would once be done (
therefore we own the lea^t weakling that is waiting on in his measure of the
Light of Christ in his own Conscience, as one that is in a truly hopeful way,
in which keeping he will once come to something, though a little child, who if
he do sin [as he knows he should not] knows he suffers for it, yet is not
without an Advocate, 1 John 2.1, 2.) But Alas, what hope that the work of
purging from sin shall ever be done, where its never rightly doing? as it is
not among the Priests, and their people, who are not only out of the Light, in
which alone life comes, but also out of the love of it, and so at odds, and
falling out with it, as to Blaspheme it, by the Names of Figment, Fancy,
Fanaticism, etc. [as J.O. does] and out of the faith of the thing also: The
work is not so far as in Fier^ yet, while men, in their Fiery Spirits, are
fiercely Fighting against the Light, which only can do it, and believe not it
is Possibly to be done; What hope then is there that ever it should come forth
in Facto esse?
Having 1st. given this General Account, to All Sorts, of the Work hereafter
following, and of what Points are therein Principally propounded to Public
View, and how We hold them; a Word or Two more Particularly to Some sorts of
Readers.

Know then, 2dly. All ye Honest Minded, Well-meaning Persons, who possibly may
conceive your selves not much concerned in Viewing over such a Volumn, as
Relates so Directly and Immediately ( as this mostly seems to do) to the
Learned Linguists, and Academical Scholastic Rabbis, who get as much Skill,
as their Skulls can Scrape together, in Scrawling, and Scribbling against each
other, about their Hebrew, and Greek Texts, and Transcripts of the Scripture,
the very Literal Sense of which ye (who may know the Truth nigher hand) can Ken
no otherwise, then by their (confessedly) untrue Translations; Know (I say)
that howbeit this is intended mainly as an Alarm to All Sleepy Shepherds, that
lie down to Sleep, loving to Slumber; and so consists of Various matter, much
of which may Run beyond their Reach, who are neither by Nature, nor their
Nursing Mothers mere Natural Nurture, Skilled any further then their Mother
Tongue, nor yet by the Spirit, in the things of the Spirit neither, yet here is
some matter (and that not a little) of such a Nature, as is no less plain to
be understood, then Profitable ( not to say necessary) to be Learned by the
Lost Sheep, that have long Slept with their Drowsy Shepherds, and in the Dream
of their Night Visions, in the Dark and Cloudy day of their dimm Divinations
have bin Scattered from their own Border, and driven to and fro, from Mountain
to Hill, from Form to Form, Profession to Profession, Tradition to Tradition,
and from one outward Observation to another, and caused to Err after them, and
wander together with them up and down, in dry and parched places, in the Thick
Wood of their own Thoughts, in the Wilderness of their own Wretched Wisdom,
where they have found no Sound Health, nor Real Rest, or Refreshment, but
rather more Wounds and Weariness to their Restlesly Wounded, and Wearied Souls.

Be not therefore bolted out by the fight of sundry passages of it, that are
pend on purp^se to the Pecular Purpose of others, from beholding that in it,
which, if Perused by you in as much purity, as it was penned in pity to you,
may be of precious use to your selves: For herein also is an hand lent (in love
to the lost) to lead you in (O poor Perishing Parish people) by the door, above
which you and your Clergy have been long Climbing up (as high as Heaven with
Capernaum) in your self-conceived, Lukewarm, Laodiceau Literature, but are so
far from obtaining entrance into that Pure Pasture, which Christ's Sheep partake
of, who hear his voice, that in stead thereof (except ye yet Repent from your
Powerless Profession, of what ye are out of the true way to the true Possession
of) ye shall all (as assuredly as She was of old) be brought down to Hell.

Yea, herein all along throughout the whole work, lies as it were a little line
before all, save such as love to look beside it, laid for any that will lay
hold on it, to lead them, not from, but to, and by, and together with the
Letter of the Scripture, to the Light of him in the heart, which the Letter
came from, who is the only Light that leads thoroughly to the Life; even his Own
Life, and to Himself, who is the Truth, Way, Door, Light, and Life it self of
the Sheep, and looks after them that have gone astray from Him, to gather them
back to look after himself alone for Salvation in his own; and to learn of him
alone, who alone has the Words of the Eternal Life, which all the foresaid
Word-stealers and Truthsellers, while refusing to stand in his COUNCIL, and to
receive the Word from his own mouth, are (so living, so dying) Universally shut
out from for ever.

Moreover, if any, either through Misunderstanding of my honest meaning, or
Male Construction of my good Intention therein, shall be offended at my meddling
so much as I have done, [specially toward the latter part of the second
Excercitation] in matters, that seem to any, who are more seriously addicted
then most Scholars are [whose life is wholly lost in looking after littles] so
Immomentary to the Life of God, as the mere External Text of that Eternal
Truth, that is therein talked on, and those Hebrew Points, Tittles, Vowels,
Accents, Letters, and Syllables of it are, which I am, in not a few pages
together, well-nigh totally taken up in, and for a time taken off by from
Points of more Immediate Pertinency, and truer tendency to Salvation; Their
unjust Offense at me shall not so far Offend me, but that, for their sakes, I
can and shall here stoop so low, to take that Stumbling Block out of their way,
as to tell them and the whole world the Naked Truth how it was with me in that
particular, and the Real Reason why I went so far in a talk (comparatively to
the Truth) of Toys and Trifles, and was so taedious to my self, and such as
looked long since for an end of this labor, and wasted so much paper in a work
so worthless (as it may seem to some) as is fitter for J. O's Iuniors to be
busyed in at their Schools (where Pueri tam Puerilia tractant) then for men
called Ministers, to meddle too much with, whose wisdom lies more (if not in
forgetting) yet at least in forgoing frivolosities, that are so Remote to the
Souls Redemption, then to fight so fiercely and foolishly for them, as J. Owen
does, whom (neither For, nor Against, but About them only) I have much to do
with, so that bear with me in it (if it must be deemed my Folly) the Ground of
which piece of Folly is as follows.

In His Threefold Thing I found J. O. 1st. in the Theses of his Latin
Thoughts, Glorying not a little in being (on behalf of the Collegians, among
whom he was then a Chieftane) intru^ted, as he talks, with the Task of
contending for the Text of Scripture (not so much against the Foes, as, under
that name, against the Truest Friends of both the Text and Truth) as the Word
of God properly, as to Name and Thing, and not only consequently, but most
expressly also both there and in the 1st. of his two English Treatises, the only
most perfect Rule of all Belief and Holy Life, Stable Standard, True
Touchstone for Trial of all Truth, Doctrines, Spirits, Speeches, yea its own
also, and the Sole sure Foundation for all True Faith to stand on, and be
discerned by, from Falsehood, Fable, and mere Fancy; and not only so but also
Tiring himself, in his Taedious second Treatise, to evince the Entireness and
Integrity of the said Text, to every Apex and Tittle, as at first it was given
out, without Addition, Ablation, or Alteration in the least ^ota or Syllable,
p. 153. in the Trans-scripts of it in the Original Languages (how ever
confessed by him to be Corrupted, and Egregiously Adulterated in all
Translations) and insisting so uncessantly, eagerly and earnestly in proof of
the said Integrity of the outward Text, as for have to outrun all his own
Reason, and to Reject also the Uncontrolable Reasons of All others to the
contrary, putting also so great a stresse upon that poor Punctilio of the
Hebrew Punctation, as, from a self-conceived Imagination, and dangerlesse
Affrightment, to stickle for its Antiquity, against those that on better
grounds Judge it to be Novelty, and not Coaevous with the Consonants, with such
stric^ness as to deem all Divine, Saving Truth lies at stake, and is Eternally
Liable and likely to be lost, if it be not, as he conceives in these
particulars: for (as is seen at larg in the book ensuing) he Trembles to think
what will be the Is^ue, how desperate will be the con^equences of such a
conclusion, that the Text-mens Hebrew and Greek Transcripts, are by mistake
Mis-transcrbed in a Tittle, and that the Points, Vowells, and Accents were
added to the Hebrew Text by the Tyberian Mastorites;

A Firebrand is brought into the Churches Bread Corn (quoth he) All Is utterly
undon for ever as to any true Distinct, Sound, Certain, Saving Knowledge of
God, or understanding of his Mind and Will, without either Remedy or hope of
Recovery, (...), There Is No firm footing nor Foundation to stand on, No abiding
Bottom at all to build on, No Right Rule for the Faith and Obedience of the
Church to be Regulated by, No Word of God remaining uncorrupted, No more means
to be seen of being delivered from utter uncertainty in and about all Sacred
Truth, Epi^t. p. 25. Nay though it be yielded by his Antagonists, that howbeit
the Copies are Corrupted, Altered, and found Various in their Lections, as to
the mere Letter, nevertheless the saving Doctrine, as to the Substance of it,
Remains Sound and Entire, in the Copies of the Original, and the Translations
that remain, yet this is no Satisfaction to him, he deems that the Saving
Doctrine cannot continue entire and incorrupt, and that their is no Relief
against the Absolute Perishing of All Truth one of the World, without any Rule
or Measure of Judging and Determining any more of it, or Principle of
Discovery; or Medium of its Rectification or Recovery, if every Tittle, and
Iota be not Preserved Entire, or on supposition of any Corruption to have
befallen the outward Writing, p. 17. 18, 19. Yea upon such Supposition, that we
have not every Letter, Tittle, Point, Iota, Syllable, Accent, etc. as 'twas in
the Beginning of its Writing, without Alteration by Ablation of any Apex, or
Addition of the Hebrew Punctation, Gods Promise, Isa. 59.21. Mat* 5.18. Fails,
his Care of his Word and Church Fails, he leaves it in uncertainties about the
things that are the Foundation of all that Faith and Obedience he requires at
our Hands, so that we know not where to lay ^ Sure Foundation of Believing, yea
it is impossible we should come to any certainty almost of any Individual Word
or Expression, whether it be of God or no, p. 55. Yea p. 212. out of Jo. Isaac,
He that Reads the Scripture without Points (and so must they Read it, ^oho did
Read it before Points were (say I) as they did before Ezraes days, if the
Points were not from Moses) is like a man that Rides a Horse without a Bridle,
and p. 214. 215. on this Hypothesis that the Points are added I know not (
says J. O.) how Bellarmines Inference can be avoided, then which I know
nothing in all his opposition to the Truth, more Pernitiously spoken, that
partly by their Addition, and partly by the Negligence and Ignorance of the
Transcribers, the Hebrew Scriptures, which are not Uuniversally Corrupted by
the Malicious Work of the Jews, are not yet so Wholly Pure, and Entire, but
that Errors are Crept into them; Yea they that are otherwise minded then those
are, who Maintain the Antiquity of the Vowels, and Accents, and with Radulph
Cevallerius (whose Opinion he says is his own) that the Hebrew Language was
written with them from the Beginning, do not only make doubtful the Authority
of the Scriptures, but even pluck it up by the Roots, for without the Vowells,
and Notes of Distinction it has nothing firm and certain, p. 213. Yea so
dangerous in the Consequence^ of contending for Various Readings (though not
false nor pernicious) that there is nothing remai^ning upon that account firm
and unshaken, p. 219. Without the owning of these Points to be of Divine
Original, we shall be left unto great uncertainty in all Translations and
Expositions of the Scripture, p. 292. Yea the distemper that there are
cor^uptions befallen, the Text, and Varieties from the first Copies is
dreadful, and such as may well prove mortal to the Sacred Truth of the
Scripture.

These Cuen multis aliis, etc. are the Extremities J. O. Asserts his Position
in, insomuch that, if is hold not in this light, he confesses himself, and all
such as side (...) him to be Confounded, and at a loss as to all their Faith,
and unquestionable knowledge of any Saving Truth to this day.

For as much then as I saw the S^^rs so Blind as not only not to distinguish
over (which yet sometimes J. O. does, but that is to the further discovery of
his own Confusion, and Self-contradiction, when at other times he does not)
between the Word or Truth it self (which was in men's hearts before the Text,
which Truth is by the Quakers not denied to be properly Gods Word, The
Foundation, and what ever else J. O. falsely affirms the Text to be, and the
Text it self which in time came from it, and does but te^l of the Word and
Truth to be nigh in the heart; but also Extolling those Externalls with such
Extreme Rigidity as aforesaid Since also the fight is about no less then the
very Fundamentalls of the very Clergy, and University men's Faith it self, which
is the most Immediate Foundation of the Faith of most other man, who Pin their
Faith on their Sleeves and believe Implicitly at a venture as their Ghostly
Fathers and Holy Mothers believe and so miscarry and drop into the ditch with
them, if those their Blind Guides happen to be out; I was much Pressed in Spirit,
in words at length and not in Figures, As to she^^ both the Faultiness of the
One, and the Falseness of the Other, that I might ^^mind them of the only True
Foundation of All Truth, which in the 3d. Exerei^^tion is proved to be, not the
Text or Letter (which yet is owned as useful in its place) but that Inward
Light, Word, and Spirit, I. O. jeers at, and does all the despite to, that
almost is possible to be done to it, by any that do not (as be says Falsely the
Quakers do, Ex. I. S. I.) delight in doing the Devils Work of Defiance to the
Word of God; So not to leave him wholly Unanswered, nor yet Answered only by
the halves (though in Answering him, I should make my self more like him
therein then I am) in his Flood of Folly, and Absurd Assertion of the
necessity of every Tittle of the Greek and Hebrew Text, to the being and
abiding among men of all Sacred, Saving Truth: This is the Respect in which
(though else my Life and Delight, lies not at all in Penning and Printing,
ought about such Impertinencies as these) I had not only a Liberty lent me, but
also a certain Load laid on me from the Lord, which Led me into so large an
Examination of J. O's. Lost Labor about the Letter, and to become a Fool among
Fools at this time, so far, as to Busy my self with them in their Bawbles, if
by any means I might gain some of them to a Sight of their Vanity, Madness, and
Folly, and to a Sober, Solid Seeking after the more Sure and Serious Things of
the True Wisdom it self, viz. The Fear of the Lord; Which is to depart from all
that his Light in their Own Hearts makes manife^t to be evil, and to dwell not
so much in the Seeing, Knowing, and Talking of Trivial, Temporal Tittles, as
in Walking in the Eternal Truth; Which is the beginning of that Wisdom, which
is Folly to the Fools, that yet walk in Darkness, but does in Truth Excel their
University Wisdom, or Science (falsely so called) as far as Light, Excels
Darkness.

And as to the Bigness of the Book, which calls for so much the more Cost from
him that Buys it, and so much the more Pains from him that is willing to Busy
himself in it; If that trouble any one, it shall not trouble me, who have now
gone through the Toil of that Attendance to it, which (were it not freely for
Truths sake alone) I should in no wise take again upon me, though to gain much
more then the whole Impression of it amounts hitherto to the Charge of such as
have carried it throw the Press: The Truth is, I once intended no more, then
to have set out some single Sheets to J. O's Anti-Quakerism only, but it so
falling out, that before I was well warm in that Work, after two or three
Public Disputes at Sandwich, held by Three of us called Quakers ( viz. R. H.
G. W. My self) with Tho. Danson, and sundry of his Associates, there crept out
two Quarrels of T.D. against Quakerism (as he calls it) much what to the same
Truthlesse Tune, as J. O's was; and by and by another piece Patcht up t^ the
same purpose, from Those Two Brethren, J. T. and R. Baxter, that were once
beating each other for some Years together about Infant Baptism, but are now
both as One Man Biting the Quakers as 't^ere) with their Teeth, which are as
Spears, and their Tongue, which is as a sharp Sword, and Baiting at that Truth
that is Testified by them, and finding that these Four (however often
contradicting each other) were All carried about in the same Cloudy Circuit,
and Whirlwind of Doctrine, and did all Center in the same Sinck, of
Absurdities in their own Sayings, and of Abominable Abuses of the Quakers, and
among them all so fuly, in one Synod, Sounding out the whole Sense, and Leven
of the whole Lump, That (Nil^ fere dicendum est, quod non dictum prius) there
can s^arcely any Thing henceforth be said against Us and Truth, which is not
said before by them: Instead of setting my self to enter the Lists with J. O.
in a Single Conflict, I saw it more serviceable to single out these Four, as
Four of their Choi^est Champions from among their Fel^owes, and under the Form
of a Reply, directed, by Name, more Particularly to These Four, to give This
ou^ as a General Account of our Own Principles, and Con^u^ative Answer to the
Contrary Principles of a^ Men's: And this occasioned what was (in my Intent) set
ou^ at First, and smaller Systeme, to swell out at last into so large a Size.
Besides, As it is the very Life of Collegians, and Clergymen, to busy
themselves most in their Musing Places, where they may have most Book-room,
being apt to think al^ Lesser Pa^^ers Pedling, and unfit for Them to find ought
in, that may be Answerable to the Vast Voluminousness of their Invention^^ So
J.O. Judges the Quakers to be (as it were) but in Jest, and to Trifle with Him,
when they take him in Hand, and Talk of his Long Tales, in two or three Words
^nely, and would not have his Matters meddled with, unless more fully: Witness
Epist. p. 28. 29. Where (quoth he) One of ^ate; not understanding Me, nor the
Thing he Writes about, his mind for Opposition was to be satisfied: I wish I
could Prevail with those, whose Interest compells them to choose rather to be
Ignorant, than to be Ta^gin by me, to let my Books a one. Another in Answer to
a Book of an^ 140 Sheets of Paper, Returns a Reply, (quoth he) to ^o much of it
as was written in a quarter of an Hour. This is the manner of not a Few in
their Writings; I am therefore minded (quoth ^he) to Abstain from such
Engagements. Upon such Considerations was I enticed on the Enter, ^ and Trace
further and farther After Him; so that This may satisfy such as would have had
it shorter: But (to be short with such) If the Authors Pains and Pay, in
Fenning and Printing, be not worth the Readers Patience, in Perusing and
Purchasing, who will may let it wholly alone for me* He that lik^s not the
length of it has enough of the same to make it shorter to himself however, and
may look upon as little of it as he lists.

Thirdly, Now, O ye Priests, and Universally Erring University Leaders of All
other People in Things of the Soul, and its Salvation, I shall say the less to
you here, by how much the whole following Fabric Relates to you more
Particularly then to any; Though it har^ no^ only a General Respect to you All,
in Regard of your Brotherly Relation to those more Specially spoken to, but a
General Respect in some sort also unto All men: Whether I am in more Opposition
to your Principles, or Pity to your Persons, I ^an scarcely say, since I seek
the Destruction of Nothing but what Destroys you, whose Souls I am sure I
Love, as much as I Loath those Light-lesse Laborinths of your Learning ( falsely
so called) in which you Loose you selves and Perish: Marvel not that My Self,
and other man, of more mean as count then your selves, Meddle so much with the
Ma^ty Matters of your Ministry, who have so long Excluded all Mechanics, and
Plain Country Creatures, from the Close Conclave of your Clerical and Collegian
Counsels; But know assuredly that the Day of God is Dawned upon the Earth,
Wherein, from his Own Light, which ye Labor against in the Fir^ of your
Furious Minds, Wearying your selves for very Vanity to Blow it Out, It shall be
Filled with the Knowledge of his Own Image and Glory, as the Waters Cover the
Sea, Wherein, as ye have Fought his Fear after your Own Precepts and
Traditions, whereby ye have Turned his ^^uth upside down, so he is (as he
Threatened in that kind, Isa. 29.) bringing the Wisdom of you Wise Men, and the
Understanding of you Prudent Ones to naught, so that your Turning of Things
upside down shall be Esteemed, as the Potters Clay.

Wherein, as ye have Divided Jacob from his God, and Scattered Gods Israel from
their Dwelling, which is the Light itself in the hearts of men, in which God
is, and Dwells with Those, who there Dwell with him; which Light Christ and his
Ministers seek to Draw All to, and by it unto God, and which it is the Devils
Work from the beginning to Separate men from, in your Anger, which is Fierce,
and in your Wrath, which is Cruel, like that of Levi, after whom you are
called; So he will ^i^i^e you in Jacob, and scatter you in Israel: Wherein, as
ye are become Brutish Pastor's, and have not Sought the Lord, so ye shall not
Prosper, but All your Flocks shall be Scattered from you; Wherein the Lord of
Hosts is coming Down to Fight for Mount Sion, to fetch his Flock from between
your (...), and like as a Lion Pe^^ring on his Prey, when a Multitude of
Shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of your Voice,
nor Abase himself in the ^ost of his Holy Ones, wherein he appears against you,
for the Noyses ye make against his Holy Truth; But as ye have Provoked him to
Wrath, by your own Inventions and False Worships; so he will Provoke you to
Iealousy by a Foolish Nation, and Weary you by such as are no People in your
eyes, and, by (...), Mean, Weak, Foolish Nothings, Confound your Mighty Things
that Are; So that it shall be (...) of the Learned Linguists and Greeks that
see^ after Wisdom, where^ the Scribe, where is the Disputer of this World^ (...)
not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World, who by ^s Wisdom knew not God,
and this by that Foolishness of Preaching, whereby he Saves th^^ that believe^
How are the hidden things of Esau searched (...) no more in Tema^, and (...) is
(...) up Thy son^ O Sion, against Thy Sons O Gr^^^d, and ^aking them against
thee (O Greece) as the Sword of a Mighty Man in his Hand, and (...) the
Foundations of thy Fa^ed Faith, and Shaking all thy Supertitious (...) i^ the
Ground.

And as to the E^postulations, that are hold hereafter with you (O
Scholasticks) Bo^be i^ i^^ in pave about the Body, yet its Principally about
the pre^ended Bottom of all your Babyloni^^ Buildings, in which if your Basis
were not so Brittle as it is, and must be (being, by your own Confession, but
the outward Te^^ of that ^^ward Truth, which you Te^^ me^, while you talk of
it, (...) To^^ly out of) must needs be by so much an Unstable Standard, by how
much by your selves, by the Pens of your University Doctors, in their Choicest
Divinity Disputes, undertakings and fencing for the Fum^ess of it, it is yielded
to be as Alterable in the very Greek, and Hebrew Copies of it, as the Letters,
Vowells, Accents, and lotaes of it, are Liable to be Changed in Sound or Shape,
at the wills of Critics: Witness the Acknowledgements of J.O. that Lately
Choice Oxo^ian Champion, and Latin Labourer Pro Scripturis against the
Quakers, whose Scribbling so much on behalf of the Scriptures, and the Integrity
of the outward Text, and the Word of God, against us, who are Truer Friends to
Both then himself, which was the first Occasion of this Rescription, and is
very largly Replied to, in the 2d. and 3d. of these 4. Ensuing Exercitations.

Concerning whose Work tos^ many of you Rabbis, whom he Reasons for, and
Represents, I shall here Subject only these Three things, which (Consideratis
Considerandis) will show, that by your own Concessions to Us, about the Outward
Transcripts, or Texts of the Scripture, if they (^^ they are P^ofess'd to be)
bent ^e Only Rule and Roo^ of All that ye call your Religion) ye grant your
Rule to be not Infallibly Right, and your Root, which is but a Mouldring, and
Mouldred Writing to be but Rottenesse, and so Consesequently, that at last your
Blossom must go up as the Dust.

1. Let it be ^eeded how J. O. (as is aforesaid, and hereafter (...) at large)
Pleads the Absolute Necessity of the Integrity of the present Text to be in the
Hebrew and Greek Transcriptions ( though Translations, which are the Peoples
Scriptural Rule, himself proves to be most exceedingly Corrupted) Entire to
every Tittle, as at (...) giving out, without any loss, so Strictly, that if
it be not so, but it appear to have been Altered by Ablation, or Addition, of
the Points by the Tiberians, (...) Cessarum ^eft, he utterly gives up for Gone
All Gospel-Godliness, Cries (...)? Where shall we Stand. And sees no way to be
Delivered from utter Uncertainty in and about all Sacred Truth.

2. Let it be Considered, that Ye, who Plead such a Necess^y of such Integrity
of your Foundation of Faith, had need be sure of your hand, yea, Infallibly
certain in your selves, and in your Proof of it to others, or else ye make your
own Graves with your own Hands, and pluck up your own Religion by the very
Roots: Ye stand Eminently concerned, upon the Concession of your Faiths
Foundation not to be firm, in case one Tittle of the Text, ye frame all upon,
be found wanting, or Points added since its giving out, to make it not probably
only ( as incertum aut ignotum, per incertius aut ignotius) but Unquestionably
clear, that the Text has every Tittle, and that no Points are superadded since
its first Penning, or else to begin again with the Qakers, at your A.B.C. in
the things of God, and lay a better Bottom for your Building, and surer Ground
for your Faith, then ere ye have done; for (as J. O. says in another case) its
but meet that men should be called to Account upon their own Principles; and
such as suppose Salvation to sink, if every Syllable be not seen, and Repose
so Eternal a Trust upon a Temporal, External Text, as to assert All Saving
Truth to Fail for Ever, if its Transcripts be not as Entire Now, as they were
some Thousands of Years ago, and ^in the Everlasting Gospel of God on so
Ticklish a Point, as Men's Mistaking, or Not Mistaking, in Writing out the Bare
Letter of it, had need to be Not so Suppositive, ( as J. O. is) but Positive in
Their Proof, and Uncontrolably Demonstrative of Their Principal Proposition,
and Not Impositive of Their Own Thoughts, Imaginations, Apprehensions,
Uncertain Conjectures, and Pretended Probabilities only, Since the Stresse of a
Case of such Dangerous Consequence Stands upon it, that All Souls ( as J. O.
says at least) so Depend on it, as to have No Means of Their Salvation, if
Their Proposition prove False, and They happen to be Out, or Miscarry in it: Or
else in Case Ye cannot so Clear it, then Confess ( as J. O. seems to do
sometimes, but that He is loath to stand Long to the Honor of such a
Confession) that Ye well Know Not Where Ye are, nor What to Say about the
Various Lections Ye find to be Crept into Your Text; nor What may be the Cause
of its Being so; and that Ye have Nothing to Blame, but Your Own Ignorance of
the Scriptures, and other Cases; And of the True Foundation, which is the WORD
it self, and Not the Scripture, or Writing of it; And that Ye have Never with
Your Shallow Comprehensions and Understandings, Ye have Hitherto lean't to,
reached yet the Vtmo^t Depth of Truth, and so think it Meet, since Ye can make
No Demonstration of Your Position, to lay it Down Altogether, and, of Learned
Men become mere Worms, not Captivating Others to Your Own Thoughts, but
Captivating Your Own Thoughts to the Truth, and to the Authority of God in his
Word nigh in the Heart, and Not leaning Alone to the Lesbian Rule of a Naked
Letter Without You (See J. O. p. 303. 347.) For as Error Minimus in Principio
fit Major in Medio, Maximus in Fine; So, there being but some Errors in Your
Bottom ( O Ye Builders!) Your Building must needs stand Awry, and be most
crooked at the Top.

Yea, this is a most Undeniable Truth, That the Faith about that, which is
Believed to Be the Foundation of All Saving, and Divine Faith in other Things,
must be Built upon an Undoubtedly Divine Basis, and stand in a Ground that
Cannot be Shaken, and on an Infallibly Sure, and Unquestionable Foundation, and
Not on such A Flexible Thing as Man's Conjectures, Thoughts, Apprehensions,
Opinions. This Way, or That, Nor on Mere Humane Fallible Persuasions, Reports,
Writings, Testimonies, Traditions of Authors, either on One side or Other: Or
else (as J. O. says) So say I, We shall Quickly see (and because of This, See
it We do Already) what Woeful Estate and Condition the Truth, that the
Scripture Talks of, will be brought Unto, And how Brittle the Belief is: If the
Foundation, that any Fabric Stands on, should be Stone, and the Ground, that
Foundation stands in, should be but Sand, That Building will not Abide; when
the Storms and Waves come: If the Foundation of Your Faith in other Things be
the Integrity of the Text to a Tittle, as at first Given Out (for so it is with
J. O. or else He gives All up for Gone) and Your Faith about that Entireness to
a Tittle of the Text be Founded no where but in Fancy, Conceits, Thoughts, or
in the Opinions of Your Selves, and other Men Ye Side with, Opposing as Learned
as Your selves that Side Against You; I here Affirm in Sober Sadness, and in
the Fear of God, not Derisorily, that All Your Faith is of No more Force, then
a Fiddle-^tick is of to Fight withal, as to the Effecting of that full Freedom
from Sin and Salvation, which Comes by Christ, which is the End of his Coming,
to All those that Unfainedly Believe in his Name.

3dly. Let it be We^l and Wisely Weighed, how Wonderfully far Short of
Scientificall Syllogismes, and Clear Demonstrations, or of so much as True
Topical Evidences either, Your Arguments are, in Proof of That Entirenesse and
Integrity of Your Text in Every Tittle, if there be No Better to be Urged by
You (as in Truth there are Not) then what are Urged by J. O. in that Case, on
Behalf of the University and Clergy.

For after J. O. had stood out as long as He well could with Sticks and Straws
against the Novelty of the Points, and the Variety of Lections in the Texts of
your Transcripts, He plainly Yields and Confesses both, as is showed hereafter.

1st. Urging His false Conceits about Gods Promise, and Providence, and Loving,
and careful Aspect over the Transcribers and such like Fancies of His own, yea
all along His own and others Thoughts against them, and concluding thence thus,
Shall We think this and that? Is it not very Improbable? Shall We imagine so or
so? And then at last clearly confessing the same He before contended against.

Which Grants, though, when they are gone from him, He would gather in again,
fearing He has lost a^^, if He do not a little qualify them; Yet in what a
poor way He puts on to Reduce and Recover what He had given by His Yieldings
and Acknowledgments, and how they are of as little force, and to as little
purpose, as Pharoahs endeavor was to bring Israel back, when he had once let
them go from him, A very Fool may feel, by the following Examination of what He
utters toward the Regaining of His Ground again.

His Maxim or Main Proposition, He fights for all along, from first to last,
being that the Now Copies of the Original Text are Entire to a Tittle, without
any loss, by the Mistakes of the Transcribers, or change, by Addition of the
Points.

His Main Medium of proof is the Promise, Providence and Care of God concerning
the entire Preservation of your Original Texts to a Tittle: the Foolishness,
Falseness, Weakness and Absurdity of which, together with many other Mediums
used by Him, not one of which is Ta^tamount to so much as a Topicall Argument,
I have sufficiently hereunder discovered.

One of his Main Subordinate Mediums is (not the Infallible Guidance, Direction
or Assistance of God, for that's denied by Him, to all the Transcribers, the
first, as well as the last, p. 197.) But only the Religious Care, Diligence and
Consideration of their Work in Hand, and with whom they had to do in it, and
Gods Loving Aspect over them in it, and this is all He does, or dares Ascribe
to the best of them, from whence He inferres no more (which yet is not half
enough to His purpose) then a Probability that they might not be Mistaken at
all in a Tittle, or at least not so much, as the Transcribers of Heathen
Authors: Concluding in such like Terms as Shall we think? Can we Imagine?
Surely its very Improbable: It seems to border on Atheism to Imagine they were
mistaken so, as that the same fate attended them, and the Text in their
Transcribing it, as has done other Books, and much more such like Trifling
Stuff.

After this His Arguing to which Probability that they were not so mistaken,
lea^t He should seem to have over-shot Himself in going but so far, He begins
to fall again by Degrees, and Confess, 1 st. That, though it were very
Improbable, yet 'twas not Impossible for them in any thing to mistake; and then
2 dly. a little farther yet, He falls a Confessing and Granting, a Potentia ad
Actum, that they did mistake, and that failings have fell out and been found
among them, and that from thence Various Lections are risen, sundry of which He
also instances in:

Notwithstanding all which Concessions and Grants, whereby He lays himself and
his Arch-Assertion Level with the Ground, He yet seeks to Scramble it up again,
and to save Himself from sinking quite down, by catching hold on many weak
Twigs, and to Lick Himself whole with a Legion of little Worths, which (as is
showed hereafter) do not heal him of the Wounds, which Himself gives to His Own
Arch-Assertion.

Thus, while Wisdom builds Her own House, The Foolish Woman pulls Hers down
with her Own Hands:

Moreover how Ye Ministers Unminister your selves Every Way, who cannot but see?
Ye deny the only True Foundation the Letter lays, which is the Light, and lay
the Letter in its stead, yet what a slender kind of honor, ye give to the
Letter too (for all your so Loud Laudings of it in Words) is showed Exer. 2. p.
51, 52, 53. Ye deny any Infallible Guidance of your selves, as well as others
at this Day, by the Infallible Spirit, which Holy Men of God ever spoke by (as
they now do) in days of old; Ye deny the only Way of Justification by Christ,
and his Righteousness Revealed in your selves; Ye deny the Light that leads to
Life, as very Darkness it self; Ye deny Perfection here, the very End of all
Ministry; Ye Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and have beguiled People
into a Love to have it so, what will become of you, and what will ye do when
the End of all this comes upon you? Ye are such Turners to and fro with the
Times, Turning and Tempering your Tenets thereunto, that there is no Generation
of men (unless That of Those, who, with their Traditions, and Empty
Formalities, make void the End and Equity of the Law, as ye, with Yours, make
void the very Power and Perfection of the Gospel) can so Generally, or so
Truly say, as ye may of your selves, Tempora Mutantur, and nos Mutamur in
illis: Witness All Vicissitudes of the Times, from Henry the 8 th. to this Day,
wherein (Exceptis Excipiendis, some Few only, in each Turn, to be Excepted, who
rather then Turn would Burn, and bear the spoil of both Persons and
Possessions) the Two Nurseries of this Nation, and their Respective National
Nephews and Children (viz. That Noun-Adjective Priesthood, which could never
stand yet alone by the Sword of the Spirit, without the Sword of Secular
Powers, to Secure and Support them in their Spiritual Maintenances and
Ministrations) have for the most part, as to their Forms of Religion, like
Reeds shaken with the Wind, and Yielding with the Tide, Leaned all along (for
Livings sake) which Way so ^re the Powers in Present being (per force) would
Form or Frame them to and fro, viz. from Popery to Prelacy, from that to Popery
back again, from thence to Prelacy again, from thence onward to the Scotch
Presbitery, from thence on to a more moderate, mixed kind of
Presbiterian-Independency, and (after so many Oaths, or Vows, and Covenants to
Endeavor the Extirpation, Root and Branch, of that, which may (as well as any
of the other for ought I know) serve the Turns of such Turncoat-Teachers, as
make an External-Temporall Trade of Talking on, more then of Walking in the
Eternal, Spiritual Truth) how many are now minded (if the Word should be, As
you were) to face about again to the O^ning of that late Episcopal Hierarchy,
I cannot determine; yet I can Divine, by the doings of some Divines, that not a
few of those who were not long since so devoted against it, that (had not the
Tide Turned upon them, contrary to the Common Course of Presbiterian
Expectation) one may safely say they would never have said so much for it, as
they now begin to do, will ere long (if not comply with it Simpliciter) yet, by
some Simple Secundum Quid or other, distinguish themselves into an Union and
Compliance with it, and dispute themselves into some Share and Division with
its Children in their Spiritual Dignities, and Preferments, Alias, Confound
themselves into some Common Communion with them therein, rather then (for non
Conformity to their Form and Government) be wholly Excommunicated (Ipso facto)
from All Communication with them in those their Carnal Clericalities: If their
Episcopal Brethren (as they have of late began to call them) be but as free to
entertain them thereinto, in this Day of their Dominion, as some of the
Presbyterian Brethren ( who Dein'd the other no leave, nor liberty to live in
their dead Form under them, in the day of their (as undue) Domination, seem
forward to intrude themselves into a dwelling with them in their Tents, it
seems to me at least that they may yet Cott'n well enough together with them
for their own Ends: Witness not only some Words of R.Bs. Book about the
Visibility of the Church very newly extant, which intimate his owning, in some
sort, a Superintendency of Bps over Presbiters, but also in his Preface to that
very Book of ^. T. I have here to do with, which are these, viz. I have already
told the Episcopall-Brethren that Bishop V^her and I did fully agree in half an
hour, and therefore it is not long of us, that Our Wound is yet unhealed; (And
though I never treated with Mr. Tombs about such a matter) I am confident he
and I should agree in one days Treaty upon Terms of Communion, etc.

Thus we see how ready these men are to Creep into a Correspondency with the
Metrapolitans themselves of that lately Exploded Hierarchy: And whether an
Exaltation to that Honor of (...), Lords over the Clergy, 1 Pet. 5. And such a
Benefice as a Bishopric may not be so Swallowed without straining, as to stop
the once open Mouths of SMECTYMNUUS his own Sides-men, is shrewdly suspected by
many, whose Eyes are strictly set to see what some will do, who seem to sit
next door to it: What Edm. Calamy, and such, as with him seemed to be Pillars (
like Jachin and Boaz) before the now Tottering Temple of the late Presbitery,
will do in such a Time, if ever Temptation by such a Tender shall happen to
attend them, will be not a little Observed by their old Brethren, who were once
not a little Observant toward them: A little Time to such as Doubt them may
now Discover it.

Ye Clash against each other, as Eagerly as ye are able in your Blind Zeal,
about many mere Accessaries, yet Close as Cordially as Men of one Heart, and
one Soul ( under pretense of Love to it) in Enmity against Christ's true Light
in all Men, which is that Main, and one Thing Necessary; witness both Tomb's
and Baxer's Epistles to that very Book of theirs against the Q^a. herein
reckoned with, wherein all their former fightings What Works, Wagings of War
and Fallings out have formerly been between R. B. and J. T. may be seen no
farther off then in that self same foresaid Book of R. B's. own putting forth
(to the slashing of his own Back soundly (in that particular) with that Rod of
hi^ own making) wherein these Two Foes Fall into such Fraternall Fellowship, as
to knit themselves into One Foe-ship against us, to the Contents of which Book
(after all those Denominations of Reverend Brother that pass between them in
the Epistles of it) is (...) not only a Catalogue of J. T's Books against that
foresaid Tradition, which R. B. B^angles For, but among the rest, that of Felo
de se, being J.T's Collection of 20. Arguments Against Infant Baptism out of R.
B's. own disputations For it.
for and against Infant Baptism seem to be swallowed up in the Gulf of their
Ghostly Agreement against us, and Unanimous Gainsayings of that saving Grace of
God (i.e. His Light) which Tit. 2. 11.12. Appears inwardly to All Men, from
appearing (if it might be) in its outward Ministry unto Any at all. The Lord
open your Eyes, that some of you at least may yet see, in this Day, wherein ye
are much Benighted, what makes for your Peace, before it be hid Eternally from
your Eyes, that Hell, which is Enlarging her self to receive all your Pomp and
present Glory, may not open Her Mouth and Gape so wide upon you ere ye are
aware, that ye sink All down, as uncircumcised ones into the sides of that
infernal Lake, and so the Pit shut her Mouth upon you All for ever.

4ly. And Finally, O Ye the Present Rulers in this English Nation, and the rest
hereto pertaining, whether Supreme, or but Subordinate, Though I neither do,
nor may put what herein is put forth under Yours, or any mere Men's Patronage
whatever, but under Christ's alone, by whose Power only, in a Weak Earthen
Vessel, this Work was thus far Performed, to whom only, as it came through Me
from Him, so I Dedicate it back in Service to his Own Truth, together with all
the Honor, Praise, and Glory thereof, which is due alone to his Own Name, yet
I both may and do hereby Present it unto You also, as of no small Concernment
to Your selves; And more Peculiarly unto Thee (O King) Since As Thy Personal
Interest, as to Outward, is now under God, and Christ the Highest; So Thy
Personal Influence into all Temporal, and Civil Affairs, wherein Thou art
Concerned to see to the Common Wealth of all People, in This Thy Native Nation,
that own Thy Supremacy therein, and in All, but Truly Spirituals, and mere
Conscience Cases, Relating Immediately to the Soul between which and God, in
matters of Faith, Worship, and Religion, Christ himself by his Light, and no
Man, much less the Pope, is the only Judge) is seen at present to be the
Greatest upon Peoples Affections; That Thou with Them, may have the more
Perfect Understanding of the Principles of those People, against whom ye are
often much Misinformed. It Is a Ticklish Time with Thee (O King) and Thy
Government, in the Nick of which, Thou may saon do That, which may be the
Making, or the Marring of both thy Self, and It for Ever: It lies on me from
the Lord, herein to clear my Conscience toward Thee, and those under Thee, in
Bowels of Compassion to Your Precious, and Immortal Souls, In His Name, whom
I serve in Humility of Mind, to Warn you to take Good Heed what ye do, le^t by
Tampering beyond the Line the Lord has ^ent you in the Matters of Religion,
and so by Leaning to some one Form thereof, that may seem the Truest to some
men, whose minds, merely for their own Ends, are Molded into the Image of it,
ye Lead all the Rest away Captive after that, and so not only Over-load the
Seed of God in all his Saints, but Over-charge your selves also so far, as to
Lay Wast, not only that Religion, which, among all the Rest ye Ruinate, is the
Truest, but your Own also, which ye would Set up to Stand alone in the Ruins
of the Rest; Which said True Religion God has Decreed so to Stand, that all
those that are peaceable toward it, and let it alone shall stand the more
Prosperously by it, and all that rise up against it, in their Vain hopes to
Ruin it, shall assuredly fall before it for its sake: Caution is not
Condemnation: What ever cause there is for it at this time, yet my Call is not
in this Place to Complain of what Abuses Honest Men pass under, both in City
and Country, as Contrary to what has been Declared by the KING, as they are
without his Personal Cognizance thereof: My Hearts Desire and Prayer to God yet
for this, though Divided, English Israel is that its People may not Perish, but
yet be Saved; for I Bear them Record, they have a Zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, if it were, they would all come down to that One Light
of God in every of their Own Hearts, in which God is, in which alone (as the
Letter it came from Speaks, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7.) All True Union and Firm
Fellowship, both between God and Men, and between men one with another stands;
Yet this I say, as one that has Obtained the Mercy from God in his Light to
see it (to my present Grief for them, if they see not timely to it) that there
can be no Long Lasting Peace in these Latter Days, to this, or any Nation in
the World of Christendom, nor Beating back again of those Swords into
Plowshares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks, which from Plowshares, and Pruning
Hooks have been of late beaten into Swords and Spears, Till Secular Princes
become so Prudent, as by Blind Guides in Spiritualls, to be no more beguiled
into a Building up of some Babel or other, with the Blood of all other
Christians, that cannot Bless it, and so Pollitick for themselves at least (if
not so Pitiful to others, and Patiently Pious toward the Lord) as, according
to Gods Will therein, to let Tares and Wheat stand still together (though not
in the one Floor i. e. the Church) yet at least in one Field i. e. the World,
or Civil States thereof, until the Harvest; and to let Religion alone (which
is that alone that Crushes them to Pieces, while they Meddle much to Make it,
and Cumber themselves more with it then God Requires) to Stand or Fall (as True
or False) by its own Power and Evidence, which is that of the Spirit, without
the Interposition of any External Arm of Flesh s^retcht out in Persecution of
any to Establish it (For not by Might nor Power, but by My Spirit says the
Lord) and leave All People ( who if his Word Alone may not Winn them, have
leave so to do from God Himself, so they will take from Him what comes on it at
last) to Walk Every One in the Name of his God, and Leave Gods Own People ( who
have no leave from Him to do otherwise) to walk in the Name of the Lord their
God, from henceforth and for ever.

If ye go about to make Religion a mee^ Engine, whereby in Policy to Establish
your selves, and make it not rather your own Main Design to Establish It (and
that ye can never do Positively, by making Laws for the bringing of All to
such, or such a Particular Form of it, but Permissively only, by suffering all
People to be of what Faith toward God they find Evidence for in the Light of
God within themselves, while they Live in Peace and Faithfulness in their
Civil Dealings and Demeanor one by another, which is the Pleasure of the Lord,
concerning You in that Particular, your Work of Settlement shall never Prosper
long, as theirs has not done, who have lately gone before You, for the Mouth
of the Lord has spoken it.

O my Bowels, my Bowels! How have I been Pained at my Heart to see each of
those Three Several Churches of Christians, that Sit still under the Shadow of
their Selfish Shepherds, under the Cloudy Conceits of their Several Clergies
(so called) viz. Papal, Prelatick, Presbyterial, each of which will be
National, or Not at All, Wearying themselves, and their Poor Christ'n
Creatures, with no other then the Greatness of their own Way, and each, as it
were, no less then Mo^e Ruentem Sua, Suis ut Ipsa Roma Viribus Ruit: That they
All, and All others also, walking in Love and Peace, might stand so long as
they are able by Arguments, without Arms to uphold them, or any Armor to
Shield them, but only the Armor of Light, by the Evidence of their Own Words,
without the Edge of either the Civil Shepherds, or the Soldiers Swords
Swaying to any side, any more then to see that the Civil Peace be Preserved by
them all, is my Desire; It would then in Coolness soon be seen clearly, whose
God it is that is the Lord, and by each Single Searcher, that the Lord alone is
God, and such as are for him, would also follow him, and such as (seeing no
other God then Baal) are for him, would also follow him, and each man be well
Contented to Live and Dye in the Service of, and Receive his Reward from his
Own God: And they whose Dagon cannot Stand, but Fall before the Ark of the
Living God, would be seen to be but of that Wretched Race; And if yet any are
so Devoted to their Own False God ( though they see He cannot stand in the
Presence of the True God) that they will Set Him up Again, rather then they will Own
the True One; let the Philistines Erect their Dagons, after they are down, as
often as they will, even till they fall again and Break to Pieces, they shall
have Liberty, withal my heart, to Set them up for themselves to Worship, but
shall never Set them Up again any more for me; who know that what ever is pure
Religion in the Sight of that Generation, who are Pure in their Own Eyes, and
yet are neither Washed from their Filthiness, nor have Faith they shall be,
while they Live in this World, whether they Own or Own not a Purgatory in that
to Come, Yet that pure Religion, that is Undefiled before God, is to Visit the
Fatherless, and Widow in their Aflictions, and to keep a Man's Self Unspotted of
the World: Those Men who abide Steadfast, Unmovable, abounding in such works of
God, as the Light Leads to, Find their Labor not in Vain in the Lord; But
whoever seem to be Religious, and are Unbridled, and not Ruled, and Ordered by
Gods Own Spirit, in their Spirits, Speeches, and Conversations ( and much of
that sort of Religion there is among Christians, as was once among Jews, and
is in all men, whom God made Upright, but that they seek out many Inventions,
which the Scripture calls Vain Oblation, Isa. 1.13. Vain Conversation, 1 Pet.
1.18. Vain Customs, Jer. 10.3. Vain Worship, Matthew. 15. Vain Faith, 1 Cor. 15.
Jam. 2. Vain Show, Psalm. 39.4. Vain Thoughts, Jer. 4.14.) These men's Religion
is all but Vain; As it is all but Novel, and Narrow to the Oldest, which is most
True, and most Catholic, or Universal.

As true as is that there are many Religions in the World, so it is that each
Religion Pleads it Self to be the Truest, and from no less then it is own
greater Antiquity and Universality then all the Rest; and I as truly know both
That Church and it is Religion, to be both the Eldest and the Largest, which is
by blind Men judged to be the Least, Last, and Newest, as I willingly yield the
Eldest, and Largest, to be the Truest: And if that of the Quakers so called,
which is counted to be the most Small and Upstart, be not the most Catholic
and Ancient that is in the World (however now Disguised by the Serpents
Subtilty, under the Newest of those Nicknames, which the World never wanted in
any Age, wherewith to Render the Right Religion Odious) I here profess my
Readiness to Renounce it; But if it be [And there needs not much to do to prove
it so to be, Since to Tremble at Gods Word, and Walk in his Light, and in an
Innocent, Honest, Humble, Harmless, Holy Life ( the very End of all Outward
Observations ( in which Gods Kingdom nor Stands, nor comes, but in Power, and a
more Hidden, and Inward Righteousness, Peace, and Joy) Required once by God,
and now by men practiced pretendedly to the self same End) and to do as we
would have others to do to us, which (says Christ) is the Law, and the
Prophets, the Sum and Substance of all their Doctrine, the Hight of which is
that Love, that Loves Enemies, does Good against Evil, and Works no Ill to the
Neighbor, and so Fulfills the Royal Law (which is the whole of the Quakers
work, as to God, and of their Message from him to the World) is no other then
the same that was Universal ( as to time) from the beginning, even from Abel,
Enoch, Noah, who walked with God in this Life by the Light, which only leads to
it, long before any at all of that Letter, which came from the Light, and leads
to it, ever was to Walk by, and not so Particular (as to place) as any of those
are, which Falsely call themselves Catholic, and yet are not only Thousands of
Years Younger then this, but also Contained (as even all Christendom it self
is) in some Narrow Corner of the World, into the Whole of which the Light has
gone out, and brought forth Fruit, to the begetting of that General or
Catholic Assembly, and Church of the First Born, whose Names are Written in
Heaven, to which, as the Hebrews then Heb. 10. so the Quakers now are come]
Then let all those Religions, who now Renounce it, as merely New and Nothing,
beware lest they Reject Gods Council, which is his Light in their own
Consciences, against themselves to their own Perdition.

This is that True Religion, which where it is not, all Outward Observation of
what God Himself Requires, is now, as under the Law it was, but Irreligion, and
Iniquity in the Account of God: This is the Good Way, Jer. 6. The Ancient
Paths, which Israel, ever busied in many lesser matters of Tith, Mint, Annis
and Cummin, neglecting the Weighty, and the Main, would never be persuaded by
Her Prophets to walk therein; Which way, and who so walk in it are the True
Way, and Holy Seed, which, as the Substance of the Oak, or Flourishing Tree of
Religion, when the Leaf of all Outward Form shall Fall off, and Perish, shall
Stand and abide for ever.

This Way is He, who is the Way, Truth, and Life, and This is the Church, and
People of God, who Walk in him, of both whom (though they seem to the Blind
Seers, to come after all other ways and people) it may be said in Reference to
them all, as John said of the same, This is he who comes from Above, and is
Above All, who comes after me, yet is prefered before me, for he was before
me, whose Seed or Church, which is One ( As He said before Abraham was, I Am)
may say of all outward Priesthoods and their Churches, before any of these
were, I am: Be ye therefore (O All ye Powers of the Earth) Tender of Touching
the Tender Lambs of Him, who is the Ancient of days, by whom the Judgment is
now Set, and the Books are Opening: I know while Satan that Old Serpent is
Alive, his Ancient wonted Work will not be Dead, of moving you by his
Ministers, whom be Transforms, as the Ministers of Christ, and Righteousness,
to make Havoc of both that Despised Ministry, and that Little Flook of Christ,
that hear his Voice; But be ye Advised, if not by us, yet at least by Gamaliels
good Council, Acts 5.38. in your Counsels, who said to them then, as I to
you, whom I wish not to Afflict any for the Quakers sakes, but to take heed of
Afflicting them at the wills of others, whom they Torment and Trouble, with
nothing, but (as they think at least) with too much Truth: Refrain from these
Men and let them alone, for if this their Council and their Work be of Men, it
will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily
ye be found to fight against God; And its hard for you to kick against the
Pricks: No Powers nor people did ever Harden themselves against God and
Prosper: Subtle Sanballats, Talebearing Tobiah's, and Haughty Hamans ( who
never had that Honor, from the Honest Mordecaies or Seed of the Jews, they
Hungered after, being themselves that Seed of Evil doers, which are never to be
Renowned) were ever Insinuating to Kings and Rulers against the Saints in all
Ages, as a certain odd People Dispersed about the Provinces and Kingdoms,
whose Laws are Diverse from all People, neither keep they the Kings Laws, but
intend to Rebel, Est. 3.8, 9. Neb. 4.2, 6.6. So that it cannot be for the Kings
profit to suffer them, and so Sugge^ting (as those Ministers, who though they
Swear to the Kings Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Cases, yet
in Effect take themselves to be Supreme Directive, in point of appointing
what is the Faith, what is Heresy, who Heretics, owning the Magistrates as
Supreme, only Corrective in point of punishing Heretics, when they have
Censured and Sentenced them as such, do at this day) Witness Blomes Book of
Sundry Slanders and Calumnies against the Qua. (Stolen out of T. D's. Story
Books and some others) Answered already by R. H. Dedicated by Blome to the
King; with as Strong Desires of our Suppression, as there are in it long False
Tales of our Transgression.
That if it please the King they may be Destroyed: Yet I say to Thee (O King)
and to All thy Counsels, and Subordinate Powers, as Ye Tender your Internal,
External, and Eternal Welfare, proceed not upon Account of their Proposition of
it to you, to Persecution of that Seed, which it is so much for the Kings Profit
to Suffer to Live quietly under Him, that ye cannot Prosper to any purpose, but
must rather Perish in all your other Purposes for their sakes, while your hands
are Stretched out against them, and till ye come to let them stand Peaceably by
you (at least) while you have your own, if yet ye will not stand as one with
them in their Right Religion: And if ye mean more lastingly to enjoy your Own
Forms of it (which are not Everlasting, as the other is) be not found Fighters
against the Power of Godliness where it appears, for that hastens the Fall of
the Forms before it, which else would be longer Lived, then so they will be:
But if you build anything at all that shall stand much longer then while ye are
Building it, return to him, who not long since Smote you, or else his Hand will
be Stretched out against you still, and begin upon the Right Basis, the Light,
and Spirit, which leads only into that Life, and Divine Nature, the Letter
talks on: What ever Forms of Government, Civil or Ecclesiastical, Grow not up
from the Ground of that True Righteousness, Peace and Joy in a Holy Spirit, in
which, and not in words, shows, Forms, nor Observations, Christ's Kingdom
Stands, which is now at hand, must give way to it, as that comes on, no
Building of man being able to stand, where the Lord begins to show his
Building, Esdr. 2.10.54. And though the Builders think they make as sure work
as Those, Isa. 8.8, 9, 10, etc. That say in the Pride and Stoutness of their
Heart, the Bricks are fallen down, but we will build with Hewn Stone, the
Sicamores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars; Yet they shall
Build, but I will Throw down (says the Lord) Yea every House that is not so
Built, is not on the Real Rock, but the Slippery Sands, and when the Rain
Descends, the Floods Arise, the Storms and Winds begin to Blow, and Beat upon
the house, it will Fall, and Great will be the Fall thereof.

According to the Liberty by you yet lent us (who are in their desires sold not
only for Bondmen, and Bondwomen, for then we should the better Bear it, but
even as very Sheep for the Slaughter) It Is no Treason to you, for us to Reason
with them, and with You about them, by Reason of whom, so many Souls are made
to Perish; and it is no less then to betray your own Souls to Slaughter, and
Eternal Slavery, for you not to Try their Talk.

First, Who tell it you for Truth, that there is now no Guidance of Christ's Own
Ministers by Christ's Own Infallible Spirit: They that Teach, that their own
Teaching is but Falible, may easily draw all their Implicit Followers together
with themselves into the Ditch.

Secondly, Talk for Liberty of Conscience, while they are under the Lash of
others, and for Persecution, as soon as they can Climb to be Lords over all.

Thirdly, That Affirm Christ's Righteousness, Wrought in his Saints Persons, by
his Power and Spirit ( Serving to Sanctify them too, and to fit them for
Heaven) to be of no other worth, and worth no better Name ( and worse they
cannot give it) then that of unclean Dung, Loss, and Filthy Rags, which
Doctrine is Necessarily Deducible from T. D's. Writing against the Quakers, who
yet says, David, even while Guilty of Adultery and Murder, was not in a
Condemned, but in a Justified Estate,

Fourthly, That where and while God Tenders Salvation Openly and Universally to
All Men, He Secretly Intends it, but Particularly only, to a Few.

Fifthly, That that Light the Quakers Testify to, which in Truth is no other
then the True Light, which the Life is, which their own Rule of Scripture
says, John 1.9. Enlightens every man that comes into the World, Enlightens
not every one, but very few, And is an Horrible Figment of the Quakers, an
Imaginary Christ, as to Salvation in all Divine Matters, Darkness, Blindness it
self, and many more sayings of that sort, under which they Scorn it (as J. O.
does Who is not Inferior in Flouting as it, to that their Creature of the
Clergyes Creating, into those Course Conceits, and Scur^ilous Scoffings at it,
viz. Francis Duke, Master of that Ordinary or House, Ordinarily called Hell,
Next to West-Minster Hall in the Palace Yard, who in his very dately Extant
Pl^ce of Prate against the Quakers, Styles the Light within, An Antichrist in
Villainies Surmounting All Antichrists, that have done Villanously, p. 40. A
Lousie Christ, A Vermin Bread of an Addle Brain, p. 19. and the Quakers being
Led by the Light into the Lords Rest, so as not so much as to think their own
Thoughts, nor Speak their Own Words, A Stinking Idol (Forsooth) p 62. and
Store more of such Sordid Stuff, as Stinks among Sober Men, which I f^bear to
Name, Geo. Whitehe^^ having already so Soberly Answered it.
) and other Divines, viz. R. B. and J. T. little less.

Sixthly, 1. That the Letter of the Scripture, is the only Sure Foundation, and
Rule of all Faith. 2. That the said Letter is Variable and Varied, and yet. 3.
That A thing that is Variable can be no Rule neither, which is one of the many
Rounds the Rabbis Run in.

Seventhly, That Preaching of Perfect Purging, and full Freedom from Sin in
this world, is a Doctrine of Devils (so T. D.) and Punishable With Prisons,
and other Pains (so I. O.) and that there is no Purgatory, for purging away the
Remnants of it (as the Pope Falsely says there is) in the world to come
neither; which Perfection of Holiness ( so far as to deny of all Unholiness)
and Salvation of Souls from Sinning, is the mere End of Christ's coming, Matthew.
1.21. the end of all Ministry that is of his giving, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. the end
of all the Apostles Writing, and willings of men to walk in the Light, 2 Cor.
7, 1. 1 John 1.6, 7, 8. 1 John 2.1. and of all true Faith or Beleiving, 1 Pet.
1.5.

And, as it is no Treachery in us to you nor others, nor yet in you, and us, and
all men to our selves, to Try what is Truth, before we Trust, Take, and Talk for
it, much more Obtrude it, as that Truth, which must Subpaena ( as so) be
believed by Ali: So it is no less then time for us to Ask, and put it to the
Question among you (Since both cannot be so, who are so Contradictory, and if
they be Right, weel own our selves to be wrong, when once they prove it)
whether those, who in Christ's Name Minister the abovesaid Messes for Truth, or
the Qua. who in their Ministry Minister the very contrary, and no less then the
Infallible Truth it self, be Christ's Ministers: So having in my time, Born my
Testimony, as a Friend to the Truth, against such as Tread, and Trample it
under Feet, and A^k'^ an Answer from that of God in All Consciences ( to which
I Appeal, to Judge between the Clergy, and the Quakers, who are in Truth) I Sit
down Satisfied in my Own Conscience in the Sight of God, holding Love to All
Men's Persons, and War with nothing, but Men's Wicked Works, not knowing whether
this may be the Last Time of Asking; After which (as to this way of Appearing
in Print against the Pervertures of the Parish Priesthood) I may, for ought I
know, for Ever possibly hold my Peace.

Sam. Fisher.

A Lamentation over Lost-Souls: With a Word of Warning to All Kings, Princes,
Parliaments, Powers, And People to Beware of Such Priests, a^ Uphold the Devils
Kingdom, by Pleading (Contrary to the Scriptures of Truth) A Continuance of
Iniquity for Term of this Life, and A Necessity of Men's Transgressing of Gods
Law while they Li^e in the World, Or have any Abode in the Body.
IN the Snare You Are ( Dear Souls) I truly Know it,
And, Wot I't Not, yet there is. That does Show it;
For First, that is Worst, You are Beset with Sin;
Next Those are Foes without, (for That Is With- in)
Who Preach, yea Teach, Ye cannot Live with- out it;
Who Hint, Live In It, yet shall Ye Live, never Doubt it*
Such Watchmen Catch men in Sins Snares, not Out,
By Such, how Much to take Sin lies at Scout
Y^u In its Gin, You Will know when the Light is Heeded:
Know'^ Now, and How Christ Jesus is not Needed,
To Win from Sin, if in it Souls can Thrive,
To Save from the Grave, if there Souls are Alive.
I Trow, You Will Know, You Cannot Live in Sin,
When All Die Shall, who Live, and Die there- in:
Wherefore, before you Live You ought to Eschew it;
Then Must (I Trust) even whilst you Live, or Rue it.
Read This (for it is a Ridd^e else) in the Light;
Heart Read, for the Head herein obtains no Sight:
Its Wis-dom Is too Dim this Depth to Enter,
Un- less you Guess by the Spirit, which Dives to the Center.
Give Ore, no More your selves with Vain Hopes Cherish,
For Lie, and Die in Sin who does does Perish.
But Lay Away all Weights, Sins, which be- set you
Abandon, And shake off such Priests, as Let you,
And Shun, that Run you may, with Saints, that Race,
Which Brings with Wings from Sin, to the Holy Place.
To the Place, where Grace is Perfect, Holy Sion;
The Mount, where ( Count upon it) there comes no Lion,
Nor Man that Can work Evil, where the Pure
In Heart leave Part Alone, and their Right's Sure:
For While You Style those Saints, who plead for Evil,
And Them Christ's Members, who still Serve the Devil,
Nor Leave, but Cleave to Them, the Light ye Flee,
And Sure, ye Pure (as Christ is) cannot Be.
For Hire They Tire You out with Talk, ^ut Know
Their Words are Swords, which will Souls Over- throw.
Their Eyes toward Lies are set, Truth They Be- spatter;
Time- Serving, Swerving still from God They Scatter.
They Sooth, speak Smooth, Charm, Dawb, Sow Pillowes, Flatter,
Cry Peace, where Peace is Not; So ends this Matter.
Sam Fisher.

A List of some of the Typographicall Mistakes.
THough (in I. O's. blind judgment) it seems to Border on Atheism to say the
same Fate (as to Mistakes) has attended the Hebrew and Greek Text of Scripture
in it is Transcribing, as has done other Books, yet it seems to me, upon that
but Running Review I have yet taken thereof, that the same Fate, in that kind,
has attended this of mine; which has ever yet attended both the Scripture,
and His, and I.T's. and all other Books too (of any Bulk) in their passage
through the Press.

As for the Faults that have befallen this, as they are not very many
(considering the greatness of the Impression, and the smalness of the Print) so
they are too many to pass altogether Unmended, Unminded and Unmentioned also:
Whereupon (excepting such as (being more gross) are with a Pen already
rectified to the Readers hand) of such as are not mended, I shall mention some,
wishing Him to mend the rest in his own mind: Yet some of these hereunder noted
were espied, and amended before they were wrought off wholly at the Press.

In the 1. Exercitation page 24. line 13. read Kings p. 28. l. 18. r. stout
standing p. 70. in the Margent r. (...) p. 80. l. 10. r. there, p. 90. l. 3. r.
life p. 116. l. 31. r. if all p. 144. l. 15. 16. r. more then good ones evil
once for more the good ones evil, which is set twice ore.

In Exerc. 2. p. 12. l. 30. r. thou shootest, p. 66. l. 11. 12. r. live in sin
p. 137. l. 21. r. Rounds p. 164. l. 33. r. and l. 35. r. such silly.

In Ex. 3. p. 5. M. for emul^ate ^enucl^ate p. 35. l. 7. r. stirs and strifes
M. r. (...) p. 64. M. for ut r. at p. 37. mar. r. divinus p. 312. mar. r.
Scripturae Author p. 132. l. 19. r. (...) p. 136. l. 12. r. (...) l. 13. r.
upholder p. 141. l. 5. r. for the Scriptures l. 14. r. malicious p. 154. mar.
r. Synonimous p. 174. l. 8. r. more then th^se p. 187. l. 17. r. streining.

In Exerc. 4. p. 3. 1. 12. blot out we p. 9. 1. 20. blot out of p. 13. 1. 17.
r. no indirect l. 39. r. but by p. 133. l. r4. r. [ Apage] p. 16. l. 18. r. and
in p. 205. l. 9. r. denomination p. 221. mar. r. Israel, Midian, Ahaz.

In the Appendix p. 24. l. 13. r. (...)

In the two sheets at the end p. 1. l. 18. for have have r. have.

Sundry more Typ^graphical Errors prob^bly there are uncorrected, then I can on
a sudden cast my eyes on, by some of which possibly the sense is interrupted,
but of all that are, I may safely Say [with I. O. in his Vindication of the
Entireness to a Tittle of the Original Texts] bate all such as are Evident
mista^es, consisting only in superfluity and redundancy of unnecessary ^
deficiency of words necessary to the sense of the place, that is to say A^ of
what sort soever, and then there will be few or none at all.

In a word, Let Every Reader do the Printers that [wonted] Right of Winking at
their [wonted] doing Wrong: And as I, by their Failing, have fallen under the
Common Fate, so I ask no more but that Common Favor, of Non-Imputation of
their Faults to Me, ^ as Mine.

Typographi ^e Reputentur Amici.

S. F.

THE PREFACE. John Owen, who have been styled Doctor in Divinity, and Dean of
Christ-Church Coll. Oxon. and Thomas Danson, styled M. A. Minister of the
Gospel, at Sandwich in Kent, and late Fellow of Magdalen Coll. Oxon.
I Have taken a view of three books of you two lately extant, against the
People commonly called Quakers; namely, of thy threefold Thing, I. O. or
double-tongu'd piece of Divinity doings about the Letter and the Light, lyingly
relating in other parts of it (partly) and in its Latin part ( principally) to
the Quakers. Also T. D. of thy two little fard^es of much falsehood, generally
superscribed with these two untrue Titles, viz.

1 The Qua. folly made manifest to all men, in Auswer to R. Hub. 2 The Qua.
Wisdom descends not from above, in Answer to G. Whit. replying to the other.
For the Truths sake, which now lies at stake openly between you two, and them,
I am minded, as moved in way of Reply, to say something to both your Books, and
to your selves, and the world also about them. I intend not a total Translation
of that foreign Language, wherein that foresaid Latin part of thine I. O. in
which thou fight st most fiercely with thy fore-nam'd Friends, was written (so
much of that shall serve, as will serve the turn of such Truths as I h^ve plead
against thee in the service of) nor a total transcription of either of your
books (they are not worth it) not yet an Answer to every falsity that is found
therein ( Hoc opus, luc labor est, they are more then my measure of Arithmetic
can easily reach to reckon up) But a due Expostulation with you both, on the
Quakers and the Truths behalf; an Animadversion of some at least of those many
absolute absurdities, follies, confusions, false doctrines, flat contradictions
to yourselves, which are eve^ and anon therein uttered by you; a Subversion of
your Topsie-Turvies, who set the chief things ye have to do, withal
A^chi-podialiter (as it were) with the heels upwards; a Blowing away of those
blasphemies, lies, calumnies, opprobrious titles, disdainful subsannations,
unjust accusations, spiteful aspersions, abominable abuses breat^d out by you
against the people abovesaid, whom, all that curse, shall once see and say, are
a Seed, whom God has blessed; and (to be short) an Examination of many such
matters in every part of both your Books, how scamblingly soever they lie, here
some, and there some in them, as I find bear any reference to the Qua. or to
those Doctrines, viz. 1 Of Justification by the Righteousness of Christ in us:
2 Of the Letters not being the only Foundation and Rule of Faith and holy life:
3 Of the Infallible Spirits Inspiration, and Infallible direction of his
Ministry at this day: 4 Of the Universal love and grace of God to all men: 5 Of
the True saving Light of Christ, enlightening every man in the world: 6 Of the
Attainableness of perfect purity, or freedom from sin in this life, in each of
which ye differ from them, and which against you both, and your Adherents, are
held forth by them.

Sundry false and grossly absurd businesses against the Light, and its Children,
may not improbably be briefly noted, as they lie most notably obvious to every
common capacity, in the nine Sermons of John Tombs, B.D. which came piping hot
from the Press, while this of mine to you two, is coming to it, put out by R.
Baxter; which pair of blind Brethren, as much enmity, threatening, and Thunder
without Lightning, as has been between them hitherto against each other, are
it seems, like Herod and Pilate, now made friends together against Christ's
Light, so as to make one Head, though two Horns, wherewith to thrust it down if
they could, for which a Rod, a Rod in the Lords hand, is already ready for the
back of Baxter, who, and his once Heretical and Heterodox, but now Reverend and
Orthodox Brother Tombs, as two Twins that tumbled both out of one Belly, even
one and the same Womb of that Babylonish Bawd, are both to be tumbled into one
and the same Tomb, or Grave, that (as your two I. O. T. D.) so their pair of
pratings may go together into the earth, whence they came, as like to like,
earth to earth, ashes to ashes, for dust, which is the Serpents meat, all your
Divinity doings are, and unto dust must they all return.

Now as little method as thy Book I. O. has in it, yet is it as capable to be
divided into parts, as it is in each part, in one thing or another, most
palpably divided against it self.

1 As to the subject matter thereof, it is in general twofold, ( viz.) The
Outward Letter, and the Inward Light; that External writing, or legible form of
words, commonly called the Scripture, the Holy Scriptures, which are (ad extra,
but ab intra) only and merely without, though from within; together with that
Internal Law, Spirit, Power, or Word, which is (ad intra) by all that know the
Truth, as it is in Jesus, both seen, felt, heard, understood, and witnessed to
be within, not more cried up by the men called Quakers, who live both according
to it, and the Scripture, then decryed by the men that are but supposed to be
Christ's Ministers, who are utterly erring besides them both, knowing truly
neither the one, nor yet the other.

Sund^y touches there are given by thee, as thou go along, at other things;
( viz.) Universal Grace, Perfection, Persecution, Modern Inspiration by the
Spirit of God, Revelation, and such like, about which thine and the Quakers
Doctrine differs, by which (as ex pede Herculem) thy Pulse is felt, and it is
spied out how thy Spirit blows against Christ's; thy truthless talk, of which
may (the Lord leading to it) not unlikely be talked with by the way, before I
have done: But those two abovesaid, being well nigh the Totum in Toto, and the
Totum in qualibet part, the matters thou mainly medlest with, and most
miserably mudlest thy self about, thoroughout the whole Body of thy Book, and
every part thereof, making little less then a very God of the one, i. e. Of the
Letter, which is the last and the least, and the lowest of the two; and little
better then a very Devil of the other, i. e. the Light, which is the first, and
the highest, and the greatest; so that all others are but touched upon, as in
subserviency either to the Deifying, or defying (respectively) of one of these,
to clear away that fog and smoke which thou raisest about them, both to the
thickning and darkning of the Sun and Air, so that none can see either of them
clearly, through thy cloudy collation thereupon, is the chief intent, and
likely to be the chief and utmost extent of this present Answer.

2 As to the Tongue wherein it treats, (excepting here and there a little
Hebrew, and (for show sometimes more then service) a penful or two of Greek
interlin'd in both parts, and now and then two or three licks of Latin among
the English) thy Book stands divided into two parts, ( viz.) Latin, and
English (a Cloven Tongue of another nature then those that sat upon the
Apostles) and these are as the two Horns of that second double-fac'd Beast,
that is as the Lamb, and yet speaks like the Dragon, wherewith thou pushest at
thy Opposers on the right hand, as well as on the left, even not only at thy
own Brethren, the Protestant Divines, when they please thee not by Divining the
contrary to thy peremptory peculiar Positions, and preheminent pratings,
together with that blind Brood of the first ten-horn'd Beast of Rome, to whom
both thou and all thy Brethren (though in many things ye justly band against
them) are Brothers in nature still, and of nearer Kin then ye well ken or wot
of, but also against the true People of God.

These two general parts (each of which is prefaced with an Epistle also in
language like it self) stand divided and subdivided more particularly within
themselves, ( viz.) the English into two Treatises, which subdivide themselves,
the one into six Chapters, the other (though falsely figured) into eight, the
Latin into four Apologetical Exercitations (as thou call'st them) for the Holy
Scriptures, against (as thou call'st the Quakers) the Fanatical Ones of these
Times.

Which forenamed divisions and subdivisions, that are scarcely more divided
from then against each other, do all split themselves yet fu^ther into a new
needless number of smaller Sections and Th^ses.

The two English Treatises which arise mostly from one and the same Spring or
Head, together with the other (not God, nor his Spirit, nor yet the Scriptures,
but the Head of the Serpent which is to be bruised, thy own brain, vain
invention, and imagination) run along treating to and fro in two distinct
streams, or Torrents awhile, and at last, having (as thou say) Arctissimum
materiae and doctrine consortium, a near coincidence of their matter with it,
and affinity in their subject, by which the whole Trinity of them is drawn into
that Unity to complete thy double Doctrine (far) from the Scriptures, for the
Scriptures, fall into one with the Latin Sourse, or Lake of Lies, that burns
more hotly then the rest in wrath against the Quakers.

And having there lodged and centered thy two English Discourses, and drawn
them into one with this, (verifying herein that old true saying, Vis unita
fortior) thou ventest that venom in stronger streams, and spittest out that
spite more fluently, and in fuller floods against the Qua. which was in some
few places only sprinkled out upon them before, and filling up what was behind
of thy flattering false Applauses of the naked Letter, which with some of the
same that were used before, and some new super-eminent undue Titles thou^ here
also magnifiest, beyond the bounds and measure of all modesty and truth, hoping
belike to appear approved of Christ, as one of note in his service, (what
disservice soever thou do him otherwise) so long as thou art found saying
something (though Hoc aliquid nihil est, as good thou had said just nothing
as no more to the purpose) and raking, and skimming, and scraping out of thy
own thoughts some ample Apologies for the Scriptures, thou fillest up thy
measure of mad mirth against that true inward Light of God, and its Children,
that testify unto it, as that which is to be preferred before the Letter, and
was before it, as that which the Letter was given forth from, despising these,
as in thy English Epistle, p. 28. p. 30. under the (as false as foul) terms of
poor deluded Fanatical Qua. pretending to be guided by an Infallible Spirit,
that oppose the whole truth about the Word of God, so there under the abusive
clamours against, and charges of them (even by wholesale) as Fanatical ones,
that are notoriously known by their errors and foolishness, who are driven by
the power of an Evil Spirit, and depressing the Light (which is the Name of
Christ exalted above all Names) without any color of light, or tolerable
evidence of Scripture, or Reason, that it is by ten thousand degrees so bad a
business as thou make of it, into so low a condition, as wherein to stand in
need (so far as a thing that needs no such thing, but infallibly evidenceth its
own Innocence and Excellency, may be said to need it) of such Apology, as at
the end of this work thou will find me making for it, and so as to put it under
every name that is named, not only of things in Heaven, or pertaining any way
to the Kingdom thereof, but of things in earth too; and (if ens be better then
non ens, as ye count it, and a being, though a bad one, be better then none at
all) under things that are under the earth also, setting it at naught, so as to
render it worse then naught, till (what in thee is) thou quite annihilatest,
and make just ^ought or nothing of it at all: Having made unto thy self a
Graven Image, and Golden God, of that mere Image thou have by thee, of the old
Original Copies of the Scriptures, in thy frothy, vain, light, and yet dark and
lightless mind, thou do, Hos omnes naso suspendere adunco, ironically fall a
scoffing at the Qua. and the true Light of the true God, and consequently at
the true God from whom it comes, puffing at it, as if thou would puff it out
at a blast, making thy self merry over it among thy Academical Admirers,
laughing both it, and all that own it, and so him that gives it out, even to
very scorn, terming it, (as if thou knewst not what to call it that is bad
enough for it) I know not what Light, that has no community or correspondency
with the Scriptures, and (jeeringly) the Infa^lible D^ct^r, that counterfeited
Light, or Word within, the feigned Imaginary Christ, I know not what God, or
plen^iful Horn of the Heavenly Goat, better then any God, ^ h^rrible figment, a
certain Imaginary Christ they lyingly devise, which is a Light within common to
all, I know not what spiritual every thing, that is truly nothing, the mere
imaginary and fancied Christ of a s^rt of Fanatical men, I know not what Divine
Quality, or Soul of the World, mingled into all things, which may be every
thing, and in very need is just nothing.

Thus when thou have made thy self sport enough with vilifying the Light of
Christ, and Christ, who is the Light, thou art pleased to end thy Play with a
nullifying of it, and so de nihilo nihilum, nihil in nil, etc. out of this
nothing there can come nothing; and thou having done thy do with it, hopest to
hear no more of it, away it must without more ado, having nothing to do, in
rerum natura, but to make I. O. merry a while, and at his will to become
nothing again. But I. O. -- Hoc ego opertum,
Hoc Ridere meum(tam nil)nulla tibi vendo
Scriptura vel inane tua quacunque vel ipsa.


As very nothing as this Light of Christ, and Word within is with thee and
thine, whose thin somethings, and empty every things, in which you yet bless
your selves, are wearing out; and mouldring to nothing, yet such as know the
true worth thereof, will not so undervalue it, as to sell it for any of thy
vain Scripture for the Scripture, nor for the best of that best Scripture,
which thy vain Scripture for it prefers before it, which Scripture yet, as to
its own proper place and use, they are far before thy self in preferring.

And howbeit, thou deemest that the Light thou so damn'st down to nothing, has
done with thee, thou having thus done with it, and done it away as far from
thee, as a man of thy Cloth can likely fling it; yet there is an hour thou art
not ware of, wherein thy self and it must meet again, in which it will find
thee out for all thy floutings of it, and come nigh to thee to Judgment, as a
swift Witness against thee, for more things then that, which thou have
forgotten, and set all that thou have done in thy vile body in remembrance, and
in order before thee; and unless thou repent thee in the time, wherein in the
goodness of God its given men to lead them to repentance, damn thee for ever,
far further from any sight (as to enjoyment) of it self and God, then ever thou
by all thy Judgment past against it, can condemn it from thy self, or
possibly judge it out of thy sight.

As for thy pair of Pamphlets, T.D. they consist more particularly as follows;
viz. The first (which, besides its piece of Preface, is a mere fivefold
fiction) of a treble Tale, untrue Relation, or cursory, crooked, crude, and
decrepid Account of the Three Disputations, that were held at Sandwich, on the
twelf, thirteenth, nineteenth days of the second Month, 1659. between thy
self, and three of us called Quakers, viz. R. Hubberthorn, G. Whitehead, and my
self; together with a short Answer, as (to the saving me that labor, who
should else have so entitled it) thy self most truly superscribedst it, p. 34.
(for indeed thy Devils Bow shoots too short, either to hit the mark thou
shootest at, or hurt that innocent Lamblike Spirit, that speaks in that, or any
other, of R. H. his writings) to a trifling Pamphlet put forth by R. H. as thou
triflingly termst it: And lastly, A brief Narrative (so thou nam'st that last
and most Remarkable part thereof) of some Remarkable Passages.

The second, which, besides thy Epistle and Preface, is but as it were a lesser
Chump of the same old Wooden Block with the other, subdividing and cleaving it
self out also into five smaller chips, fit for little else but fuel for the
same fire, by which (as by the day that now declares the Workman, and his Work,
of what sort it is) they are all to be both revealed, consumed, and burnt up,
among the rest of those briars and thorns that are setting themselves to battle
against the Lord, and of those buildings of wood, hay and stubble, which the
Scornets of the Cornerstone are erecting to their own ruin; viz. a kind of
Epitomical repetition of what was shufflingly said by thy self in thy first
Tritie, concerning the four Heads, or rather and indeed against these four
points of Doctrine, viz. 1 The Light of Christ. 2 Perfection. 3 Justification.
4 The Scriptures; with frequent references to thy (so called) Qua. folly, for
the rest of thy Replies to us, who had replied to them all ore and ore again
before.

And lastly, another Narrative; (not so called by thee) yet for the lies and
naughtiness thereof, and nothing else, much more Remarkable then the former, as
will be seen in my Animadversion of it.

Having said this little to you both, I.O. and T. D. about your Books, by way
of Preface, or Dedication, of what hereafter follows, to your selves, and all
your Followers and Fellow Laborers in the like lame cause, who belabouring
your selves in talk about the Letter against the Light, live and walk more by
the false fire, and twinkling flash of your own threadbare thoughts and
infatuated imaginations, then either by the Letter, or the Light. I come now
(...) without much Preamble, or more ado, ad rem substratam, to the business
and work it self, as it lies before me.

And howbeit, I shall not regard any External form, order, or methodical manner
of proceeding with you, so much as words and matter of profit and truth it
self, yet as there is a Quaternity of you, or rather a Fraternity of four angry
Fighters or Quarrellers with the Quakers, and the truths told by them, viz. I.
O. T. D. I. T. R. Baxter, all whom, first or last, one where or other, more or
less, I shall have to do with: So (though not therefore) I shall divide my
ensuing undertakings against you, in the Name and Power of God on their behalf,
in such wise, as thou I. O. do thy Doctorlike Divinity Disputations, or
Latine-labours against them, viz. into four Apologetical Exercitations, or
Earnest Expostulations with you.

The first whereof is to be more down-rightly directed to thee T.D. (the rest,
who are of the same misty mind with thee, not excluded) in way of Examination
of that Legend of Lies, which thou, like some great Benefactor to it, bestowest
on the Clergies Cause, against the Truth, and its Children; and as concerning
the point of Justification in special, which thou make thy self a main
Mannager of against us for all the rest, who say little of it, and in which
thou, by thy lies about it, in both Doctrine and matter of fact, most basely
abusest both thy self, and the Truth, and my self in particular, and all the
Qua. in general also.

The second is to be most peculiarly directed to thee I. O. in Examination of
sundry of thy base belyings and misreportings of the Qua. as to their
mis-behaviour toward the Scripture; about which T. D. who sides with three
therein, does but give us a short snap and away; and as concerning the very
formal being, nature, Text, or Letter or the Scripture it self, ye call your
Canon, the B^unds or measure of that your supposed Canon, the Hebrew
Puncta^ion, Integrity of the Text to a Tittle without Various ^ection, and such
like passages, which thou more preheminently pratest on, then all thy Fellows.

The third is to relate (though partly to T. D. and partly to I. T. and R. B.
al^o, as being all three in some sort tampering together with thee in the same
muddy manner, about (at least) some of the same mistaken matters, yet)
principally to thee I. O. who, in the dark dream of thy night Vision, drivest
on more down rightly, as the Prime Promoter of these Principles, viz. that the
Scripture, and every syl^^^le and Iota thereof, is the Word of the Great God,
the most efficacious, powerful, all-sufficient, all-perfecting,
heart-searching, soul-saving, living, life-giving Word of the living God; that
it, even that outward writing, Letter, External Text, and not any such thing as
an Internal Word of God, Spirit, or Light within, is the only Infallible Guide,
Incorruptible Canon, perfect Rule of all Faith, holy life, saving Spiritual
Knowledge, or Worship; the most certain Sanctuary for the preservation of all
Sacred Truth, the most sure Touchstone, stable standard, firm Foundation, true
Witness of God, the most invariable, inviolable way of safety and security to
all Divine Verity, the most absolutely necessary means of Spiritual and Eternal
life, cum multis aliis quae nunc praescribere longum est, with much more (id
genus) of the same sour leven too long to be reckoned up here, since they are
all to be elsewhere reckoned with in due time and place.

The fourth will be promiscuously and interchangeably carried on by way of
intercourse with you both, ( I. O. and T. D.) which two only were intended to
be by me so much as meddled with, when I first was thoroughly resolved on some
Reply to your rude reproachings of the Truth, As concerning your denial of the
universality and sufficiency to save such as heed it, of the Light and Grace of
God in all men's hearts, of modern, immediate, Divine Inspiration of Perfection,
as to the purging away of sin in this life, and as concerning your Dream of a
peremptory Election and Reprobation of persons unborn, viz. of very few to
life, and of many to one as unchangeably to damnation, without respect to their
doing good or evil in their life; about all which, as occasion is, I must have,
in a few words, a round reckoning with you both, ( I. T. R. B. and all the rest
of that self-reverencing black-mouthed Brotherhood, as blindly banding in one
body in the self-same mist of darkness, not excluded) for the Rounds ye run in,
as to those particulars at the latter end, i. e. in the said fourth and last
part of these foresaid Presents, in which, as occasion is, ye four aforesaid
Fellow-Fighters for your own follies against Gods Wisdom, are likely, little
or more, to be all bespoken, in one or other of the Chapters, into which also I
shall subdivide the fore named four divisions.

If ye four Foxes, that spoil the Vine and her tender Grapes, whereof (
inter-scribendum) one successively still started out afresh upon me, as I was
pursuing the sent, and chasing the other, had like those of Sampsons* turned
tail to tail in all points, (as in some ye do) and took several ways, ye could
not so well have been caught altogether, as now ye may, notwithstanding all
your Majestical craft; but since ye face all one way, and jointly steer your
course in general to one Cave running parallel into the same Wood of your own
wisdom, there housing your selves in the same hole^, dreaming altogether of no
danger near you, in one Den of Darkness, there needs no more, but to set
something to the Mouth of that bottomless Pit ye all belong to, out of which
the Fox-like strong sent, and stinking savor of your erroneous Tenets vents it
self, to the poisoning of poor peoples Souls throughout the whole Countries
where your respective beings are, and so digging you out of your foresaid Dens,
put you altogether into a Bag.

S.F.

The First Apologetical, and Expostulatory Exercitation. CHAP. I.
FIrst then, though they came out last, and began to fly abroad some while
after I. Owens, yet I shall begin with thy two Butterflyes, T.D. which have
flown up and down the World, not only upon the wind of their own wings, but
also, as fast and far as they could carry them, upon the light chaffy leaves of
the whiffling News-books, for some few months together, to the frightning of
all such folk as are befooled into an Implicit Faith of thy folly to be
wisdom, out of that little wisdom they have, by that fearful flutter they
have made thorowout as well the Cities, as Universities and Countries, with
that fal^e, flashy and fair-flourishing Title of the Quakers Folly, under a
mere empty seeming show of manifesting whereof to all men, thou have more truly
in the eyes of wise men, and more fully manifested thy own, and that so
egregiously, that Petulanti spleen Cachinno, some man of a light spirit, and
ticklish spleen, so much concerned in the all manner of ridiculosities thereof,
as I and my two Friends of Truth, Rich. Hubberthorn, and Geo. Whitehead, who
together with me, who am very much, are not a little belyed therein, would have
sent them home to their Author long since with no other Rod at their backs,
then some loud laughter thereat before the world, they being worthy of little
better Reply: Howbeit, I have answered them hitherto with no other then sober
silence, partly because the first is captivated already from doing so much
mischief as it was designed to, and both before and behind too well besieged to
do any great Execution against the Truth, being, a Priori, beset by a Book of
R. Hubberthorns, which it gives (as it faith it self, p. 34.) a short Answer
to, and a Posteriori, by a Book of G. Whiteheads, in which it is as soberly and
^ufficiently replayed to, and partly (if not principally) because, as I.Os.
three Treatises have one with another, as he says, Arctissimum materiae seu
Doctrinae consortium, so thy two books have with his, as to the Doctrinal
parts, such an affinity in subject, and co-incidence of matter (being both di
putatory, more or less, against the self-same truths the Qua. tell) that in
answering the one, the other remains not unanswered; and as to the Narrative
parts of both, which are full of false Narrations (if two false tongues of two
lying Linguists be like one another) haud Linguae dissidium, scarce more
difference in Language then thus, that as I.Os. book tells tales in some, so
both thine do in some other particulars against the Qua., insomuch that I saw I
might, as also I accordingly do, though the bulk hereof thereby become bigger,
and the time of its coming out to public view a little later then was once
intended, in replying to I.O. in many places, wherein he and thou T. Danson
(who, eodem horrendo ^ercussi scotomate, dance the R^unds often together in the
dark) do meet in one, easily interpose such a general Answer, and render such a
round Reply to thee and thine, together with him and his, as by which the
Truth, I singly seek to vindicate, may be truly served, though what I do is
scarce so smarting a Rod, as by thy two abusive businesses is truly deserved;
and that what is fit to be said, by way of Answer to thee, that is so
over-p'us, that it can conveniently come in neither direct, nor
collateraliter, as miscellaneous among the matter that mainly relates to I.O.
might (as it is here, and as it is but meet) be clapped on as additional at the
beginning.

I shall begin with the Wings of thy two Pamphlets, each of which has two
waxen ones a piece, viz. an Epistle, and a Narrative, which by the help of
those lies, and false tales, they are, as with so many Peacocks tails, behung
with, they fly so high at the face of the Sun itself, even the Light and Truth
of the living God, that they melt of themselves before the heat thereof, and
must, at last, lie as low (though they sore aloft for a while) as the very Pit
of Perdition, the smoke of which, together with their Fellow- Locusts, they
first came out from.

These their two respective wings, whereof I know not which to call the left,
and which the right (so sinister are they all, and so little dexterity is
therein any of them) being a little cropped, or closely clipped, the barebodies of
both T.Ds. Divinity books, as they will never soundly recover of those wounds
that each of them has had already from the hands of of G.W. and L.H.
respectively replying to them, so of the further bruises which they, together
with I.Os. Academical Ousets, and hasty Assaults of the same Generation of Just
ones, are like to meet with in this ensuing encounter, they will be disinabled
from flying abroad so fast, as to do any mischief where the night spends, and
the day dawns, though they may possibly live so, as to crawl and creep about a
while in some Collegian Cells, and other such like dark corners of the earth.

My Entrance shall be at thy Epistles, in the first of which thou T.D. say,
Perhaps the Reader will wonder that thou should meddle with such a Generation
as the Quakers, and think thy time hangs on the lug, and will not off at any
considerable rate.

Rep. I confe^s I am one of those Readers, that more then think thou might
have spent thy time far more considerably, and to better purpose, to have fully
fell on with the Qua. in that good work, then to fall upon them for it so foully
as thou do, of calling thy rude people to repentance from all sin, into
perfect purity and holiness, the very thing thou pretendest to have thy wages
for.

But when I consider the old Proverb, that all Trades must live, and that
thine, as well as that of the Lawyers, is no longer lived, then while people
live and die in trespasses and sins, I wonder no more then at Demetrius, and
his fellow Silver-Smiths, of like occupation, who, by that cast of keeping men
in sinful blindness, having their wealth, throw dust into the air against the
Light, that would lead them out, that thou and thy muddy Generation meddle so
much as ye do, to muddle men's minds against such an Enlightening and Purifying
a Generation as the Qua. are; and besides, Prove. 20.3. Every fool will be
meddling, as Iannes and Iambres were, as thou and I.O. Fanatici sunt erroribus
and stultitia hisce diebus notissimi, quos in primis hic aggredimur: J.O. ad
lectorem.

The Qua. are in th^se days most notoriously known by their errors, and
foolishness, whom we here (that is in his Latin Labors) do principa^ly
encounter.


are, to manifest the Qua. notorious folly in these days, till they most
notoriously manifest their own.

T. D. Thou tellest, 'Twas never thy ambiti^on to appear so publicly as in
print.

Rep. It had not need, unless thou had better ware then thou have, the
darkness, which vents it in thee, is the likeliest place to put it off in, it
being not vendible in the light.

T. D. That had thou considered the likelihood of the Qua. printing, which
would necessitate thine, thou should likely have waved any discourse with
them.

Rep. Insipient is est dicere non pura^om: Its as much Innocencies ambition to
appear openly in the service of Truth, as it is the guise of Guilt to hide its
head: Thou may well think the Qua. who are in the truth it self, which thou
art not yet so much as (truly) in the words of, will not be out-weigh'd by the
wind of one that (as thou say thou did) chooses rather to out-word them; and
whether thou appear any more publicly for thy lies and doctrines of vanities
yea or nay, yet the truth, which may be a while oppressed, never sapprest, Non
quaerit angulos, premi haud supprimi potest.
will now lie no more hidden under the black dawb of darkning
School-distinctions, but will appear, and shine forth more and more, as the
morning light to the perfect day, so that ye may to as much purpose forbid the
Sun from rising in its time, as busy your selves as ye do, to blind
honest-minded men as ye have done.

T. D. That Repentance is now too late, and perhaps unmeet, for God can serve
himself by the meanest Instruments, among which thou rankest thy self.

Rep. Not too late yet, much less unmeet, so be thou come back by a true
Repentance, as is most meet thou should, not only for, but from thy
inconsiderate opposition; for the Lord will receive thee, through Judgment
done upon thy lies, to mercy, for all that is past, in and by the same Light
thou art yet an hater of, if yet thou will unfeignedly look back to it, and
follow on to know him in it, while he strives with thee by it in thy own
conscience, and convinces thee of all thy evil deeds thou have done, and that
he requires thee to depart from, who can and does serve himself by meaner
Instruments then thou may be made (as meanly as thou, truly enough,
confessest thou have served him hitherto) in case thou quit thy old Master the
Devil, whose now falling Kingdom thou art helping hard to uphold, while thou
Pleadst so strictly, as thou do to little purpose, the necessity of all men's
sinning while they live, and serve the Lord as strictly, and sincerely against
sin and Satan in thy self first, and then in others, otherwise Repentance it
self may prove too late indeed, and will too, if thou turn not at the reproof
of Wisdom, that, as far as thou art from it, is nigh thee in thy heart, till
it scorneth the scorners of it: In love therefore to thy Soul, the sin whereof
I hate, as it is the Enemy of it, as late as it is, be advi^ed in time; qui non
ante cavet post dolebit, better late then never.

T. D. Thou say, Thou hopest thy Reader will see the Qua. out of their
disguise.

Rep. I hope so too, out of that wherewith T.D. and I.O. have both disguised
and disfigured them, by then he has read what R.H.G.W. L.H. have written to
thee before, and what hereafter follows, or el^e he is one of those Readers of
us, I.O. complains of, P. 29. of his Epistle, whose interest compels him to
choose rather to be ignorant of Truth and us, then to be taught truth by us; and
if any will either let our books alone, or rejectingly read them, and will
needs be ignorant, let him be ignorant; as we cannot make such a one better,
so, what ere he does, we are never the worse.

T. D. That he will find cause to speak of the Qua. with pity and compassion.

Rep. So I hope too, when he shall see how miserably the men, called Ministers,
do misrepresent them, and by their lies abuse and wrong them to the world.

T. D. And of their Opinions with hatred and detestation.

Rep. With hatred and detestation of those Opinionists, who, being but in their
mere thoughts of the things of God themselves, deem the Qua. (who are past
Opinions, and know him that is true, and are in him that is true, and the Truth
it self, knowing also themselves to be of God, and that the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5.19, 20.) to be but where themselves are, namely, in their
own vain Imaginations and Opinions, and damn down also to hell it self those
our Opinions (as they call them) which are the only plain, pure, infallible way
to Eternal life, as that deformed Monster (so he calls it too) which T.D. in
the next page of this Epistle, and in his first Narrative, sprinkles into the
name of Quakerisme; and I.O. ore, and ore, and ore again, in his Contra
Fanaticos, into those of Enthusiasme Fanaticisme, nescio quid, and as many more
as come at last to vere nihil, or truly nothing.

T. D. Next thou promisest thy Reader (and no more then thou say also shall
be performed) viz. A true Account of the Discourses (so much of them as was
Argumentative, and pertinent to the Questions under Debate) or, as it is in thy
Title page, A true Relation of what passed in three Disputations, Apr. 12. 13.
19. 1659. between thy self and three Qua. G.W.R.H. S.F.

Rep. Had thou entitled thy True Account, True Relation, thus, viz. A false
Account, A false Relation, thou had saved thy self the labor of one lie at
least, for then thy Title had been as true an Account of thy Book, as thy Book
is not a True, but a mere counterfeit Account of the Disputations; but as it is,
thou have told a lie more then ordinary, which has its being (as a lie) from
no other clause so much, as from that term of ( True) thy work being (as will
appear) not only a very broken and decrepid, but also a very untrue and false
Relation of those affairs it pretends to relate to; so that by saying ( True)
here, thou have spoken falsely; whereas, had thou in stead of ( True) said (
False) thou had in so doing said no other then the very truth.

In which true Relation of those Discourses (as thou falsely call it) how
well thou have quitted thy self, as to such an honest and true Account, as is
here so faithfully promised, any honest man that was then present may see: When
as 1. Set aside thy own large and lax So thou stilest them thy self in this
Epistle, and that as fitly as may be; for howbeit thou barest as broad sails as
thou could, yet thy Tackling was so lax and loosed, that thou could not
well strengthen thy Mast, nor arrive at the Cape of thy vain hope, without
shrewd shipwreck, as to that false Faith thou d^fendest, or else the Qua. would
not have so increased there ever since.
Answers. 2. Set aside thy own confessed Enlargements of the said Lax, and
still as moldy, though new-mouled Answers, with thy often long ( let me Add's)
p. 5. 14. 17. 19. 23. 27. the whole of what passed from all us three, in all
three of the Discourses, which lasted about seven or eight hours apiece, is
Anatomized well nigh all away, or at least Epitomized into so small a pittance,
as may be read over, if set close together, in less space then the seventh or
eighth part of one.

And howbeit, thou wast dealt with, and measured back to from us, more by
weight then by multitude of words, wherewith, for the ignorance sake of common
people (as thou say, whereby thou may see what a people thou have, whose
life lies more in thy words, then in Christ's works) thou chosest to out-word
us, as seeing thou must say somewhat (as thou say, and no matter what say I)
or let us have all the talk, to the prejudice of the cause thou defendest; yet
were we not so far behind thee; as to number, as thou seem to set us in thy
curtailed Account (or else the more shame still to thy self and thine, who
cried out so often to us, that we had all the talk, and took up all the time)
nevertheless, thou therein take about nine parts of talk to thy self, and
allowest us the Tithe, then which thou know the Qua. had rather have just
nothing; insomuch, that such as are more ready to believe thee, then Truth, may
well think by thy crowding us all up into such a corner of thy Account, thy
other Tales to be true thou so often tellest for thy Credits sake, concerning
our mouths being stopped, our being silenced, our having nothing to say, our
sitting down as astonished, and p. 8. 13. 18. as if it had been with T.D. as
'twas with Christ, when the Scribes were silenced by him; So that from that
time forward none durst ask him any more Questions, being so astonished at his
Understanding and Answers, Matthew. 22.46.

Whereas I, who was as likely to have seen it as T.D. discerned no such thing
among any of us, as being silenced, and having our mouths stopped from having any
thing to say, save only that we were often silenced, and stopped from uttering
that we ever had to say, by the wicked ragings of thy turbulent spirited
people, who were ever foaming out their own shame, and casting up mire and dirt
in a restle's manner till we were silent, when uttering any thing whereby they
perceived thee likely to be hampered. Witness one juncture, more notable then
the rest, in the second days work, wherein G.W. had the Serpents Head in such
a string, as would have led him away captive, but that the whole Seed, and
Generation of Vipers then present, with one joint consent, would have violently
broke up the Meeting, rather then G.W. should proceed to utter a word more, and
so rescued T.D. at that time from his hands.
Nor know I any of us that were astonished at any thing that was seen in T.Ds.
Disputes, more then ordinary, save the brutish stupidity of some of his
D^ctrinal Assertion^, which though, he says, he blushes not at himself, in his
Epistle to the second Pamphlet, but is so far from being ashamed of that, as he
two or three times owned them audaciously before, so he there professes, if all
the World could hear his voice, he would confess as his Faith to this day; Yet
I know some ashamed and astonished at his un-Saint-like sottishness therein,
more especially those two or three, which I shall name only here, being
el^ewhere to examine them; viz. his holding it with T.R. that it is a Doctrine
of Devils, to preach a possibility of men's freedom from sin in this life, p.
47. 2 His saying, that David, when he was guilty of Adultery and Murder, was
not in a condemned state, but in a justified estate: 3 That Paul's own
righteousness, and so all the Saints righteousnesses inherent, are Christ's, and
no other then what they receive from him, and he works in them, and serve,
though not for Justification, and right to the Inheritance, yet for
Sanctification, and to make meet for possession of it, and yet are no other
then dung and filthy rags, p. 15.22. As for any Astonishment, unless it were at
the grossness of these and other of thy absurd Doctrines, and thy own impudent
persistance in them, I know none in any of us.

But it is like T.D. thou wast concerned on the account of thy prayer, thus to
relate our mouths to be stopped: Thou tellst the world, p. 1. That after a
brief Which as brief as 'twas, was t^o long by one loud lie that was told in
it, viz. that I was engaged for by L.H. to be there, which was not so, for L.H.
only did me word of it, and laid it before me, but laid nothing on me, so much
as by way of desire of me to be there, nor did I engage any way at all to him
that I would.
Account of the occasion of the Dispute, and after a short prayer thou made
for a blessing on the Meeting (which, as short as it was, will be long enough
ere it be heard, considering first, that God hears not sinners; and secondly,
that the things asked were not according to the Will of God; for as one of the
two grand Petitions of it was, That we poor wretches might be made to
acknowledge the Light in us to be darkness, which we never have done, nor shall
do, I trust, any more then its utterly unfit we should, for we know its the
Eternal Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the only true Light that leads to
Eternal Life; so the other was, that our mouths might be so stopped, that we
might not say any thing: Which two Petitions, as we did not join with thee in
thy putting up, so since thou sawst thou purst up in vain, there being no
answer to them from God, 'twas as vain for thee, in the Account of thy Prayer,
to set them down; whereupon, or else upon some other occasion, thou forbearst
it) which that it might not seem altogether unanswered (as I hear say it was)
we have now and then such a shower as this sprinkled up and down, here and
there, in thy Account of the Dispute, that we were silent, had nothing to say,
sat down astonished, and had our mouths stopped.

And as I said above, if there were all we said, that thou sent down, (though,
as it stands in that cursory way thou renderst it in, it stands strong enough
against thy pitteous Pot-gun Pellets, and poor Replies it might also seem true,
that as thou prayedst, and made intercession against us, so it fell out
indeed, viz. that we were sometimes silent, having well nigh nothing to say;
for of about twenty hours conference that was held between us three, and T.D.
in those three days, nine or ten whereof may well be supposed to be ours, thou
(...) down to us as much as may be spoken over in about half one half hour, or
in half a quarter; and yet entitlest this thy diminutive doings, A true Account
of those Discourses, A true Relation of what passed; and yet in all this, thou
art so far from blushing, or being ashamed, that though G.W. truly and justly
charged it on thee in his book, how thou wrongedst us, by laying down things in
our names, which we never spoke, and diminishing from our words, and making
false ^o^structions: In the Epistle of this Second part to the same tune, thou
impudently declarest, that howbeit thou art come upon the Stage once more, not
without a blush, yet it is not as one ashamed The more (...) for thee, that thou
art no more ashamed at them, considering the whole score of dirty rank ones,
ranked, and reckoned up, and laid at thy door, as Brats of thy own Patronizing,
at the end of G.Ws. book.
of thy Doctrines, nor yet as one conscious to thy self of wronging the Qua. in
thy Relation of the Disputes between thee and them, either by laying down
things in their Names, they never sp^ke, ^r diminishing from their words, or
making false constructions of them, which is enough well nigh, to make a modest
man blush to hear thee say, in Answer to G.Ws. Charge, and yet not blush at it,
since its most notoriously evident to all that will see, when they may, thou
have both added to, and altered, by false construction, and diminisht from our
words, to the absolute abusing of us to the World.

1 Altered thou have, and faultred fonly in that very thing, wherein G.W.
instances, as concerning Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, and his
Spirits working in us, which the Spirit calls Ours, which thou const^uest, and
so represent'st it to the world, as if I had said, we are justified by such
Works of Ours, as are filthy rags, as we confess all Our Righteousnesses
wrought one of Christ are, but not any of those of the Church, which Christ
works in them, as he did in Paul after his Conversion, which thou may blush
at thy blasphemy, in calling filthy rags, as if Christ wrought a righteousness
in his people, which is no better then an unclean thing* ^ung, and filthy rags
(of which more anon) Whereas I said only, by those good works which are
wrought by him in us, and we work in his Power and Spirit: Did I say T.D.
we stand just before God by any unclean thing, by dung, and filthy rags? (...)
indeed the Righteousness of Christ, which is imparted to the Saints, and
Inherent in them, by which they stand pure in Gods sight, truly, and not
suppositively only, dung, an unclean thing, and filthy rags; but that is thy
Blasphemy who so rendredst it, but we know no such rotten, stinking, filthy
righteousness that Christ has, either in himself, or in his Saints.

Also thou falsely construest and misrepresentest, both G.W. and all of us, as
if we asserted all men to have the knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, for we say not that all know them (and we know that thou know them
not) but that the Kingdom, or Light, that only shows them, is in all men, so
that thereby they may know the mysteries of it, though they do not.

Also thou most miserably misrepresentest my saying there are degrees among
Believer* p. 18. as if I had meant by it (according to thy own muddy, misty
manner of meaning, and supposing in that, and many other matters) that
Believers have a mixture of sin with their grace, and so ex falso suppositis,
proceedest to make another meaning of thine own, which is none of mine, that
some persons be justified, which never did fulfill the Law personally, and
rakest up an absurdity, and fatherest it on me, when it is thine own, for I deny
thy imagined mixture of sin with the Saints Graces, as a mere non-sensical
saying of thy own, for Grace and Sin can no more mix together, then iron and
miry clay, then light and darkness, then Christ's true righteousness, and the
dung and filthy rags (which thou supposest to be his also) which can have no
communion together, 2 Cor. 6.

And I deny any men to be justified, or any of thy uncessantly ever-sinning
Saints, in whose persons the Law is not fulfilled by the Power of Christ.

Also, how guilty, or not guilty thou art found of laying down things in our
names which were never spoken by us, in such wise as thou ventest them, and so
of wronging us, by adding to our words (to be-speak thee in thy own words of
thy Epist. to the second Pamphlet) let any understanding man peruse thy first,
which occasioned G.Ws. Reply, and he will find, viz. that thou art charged not
in falsehood, but truly and justly by G.W. charged of falsehood, in such passages
as have many and credible Witnesses (if thou count thy own Witnesses credible)
attesting them; for I shall bring them against thee, even as thou thy self have
ranked them in thy own book, and stand to that very testimony they therein
give, as to the trial of this matter between thy self and me, which if it may
be heeded more then thy own single testimony, against both thy self, and all
them also, I shall do well enough, as to one of the Archest Accusations thou
make against me. To this purpose, consider all people, that T.D. on his bare
head accuses me S.F. p. 14. 15. of his first Pamp. of affirming and disputing
it against him, that OUR good works, viz. OUR own righteousnesses, of which it
was of old said, and we say the same now (not intending by that term OURS, any
that Christ works in us (as T.D. does) but those we have wrought out of him)
that they are filthy rags, are the meritorious cause of our Justification: And
in the same place asserts the third Question to be stated, affirmed, and
prosecuted by me in those very terms, viz. that OUR good works are the
meritorious cause, etc. nevertheless the self-fame T.D. (if it be one and the
same T.D. who wrote the Trifle called, A True Relation of the Disputes, and
that Remarkable Narrative at the end thereof) in p. 58. of the same foresaid
Pamphlet, to the Confutation of himself, and in Proof of his falsification of
things in that other place, not only affirms it himself, but also proves it by
his many credible Witnesses (of whom he says in his Epistle to his second Toy,
they attest the truth, and in the Epistle to his first thus, viz. The Gentlemen
Ministers, and others in the Margin, are a few (of very many) Witnesses of the
terms of the Questions agreed to by the Qua. and of other remarkable passages
and matters of fact, who will free me from the suspicion of a partial Relator)
that the terms of the third Question were these, viz. Whether good works be the
meritorious cause of our Justification, which (quoth T.D.) was expressly
affirmed by them, witness in the Margin, Hen. Oxenden, Job. Boys, Esquire Nath.
Barry, Tho. Seyliard, Chapter Nichols, Ministers, which terms, say I, are quite
diffeferent from the other: Good works, which are only Christ's, without that
term of ( OUR) added to them, being one thing, and OUR good works clearly
another especially OURS that are filthy Rags: So what need further witness to
prove T.D. to have added to, and altered our terms, and wronged us by
misconstructions? for the world has it under his own hand, which evinces him to
have done so, yet he says to his Reader.

T. D. As to false construction of their words: If thou think it worth while
to compare my false and this man's (G.W.) true construction, either thou see
not with mine eyes, or thou will see they have no occasion to complain.

Rep. To which say I, If he see with thy eyes indeed, then its like he may see
no cause we have to complain of thee, for thy eyes are set the wrong way to see
any evil in thy self, while they are not Zach. 9 as all Israells, as one man,
are toward the Lord in his light, which only shows to the evil doer his evil
Deeds, but are set rather to watch against the Children of it for evil, thy
eyes are in tuts talpae, in alienis linces, blind at home, and quicksighted
(the contrary way) abroad: if they were not, thou could never spy so many
spots among them that walk in the Spirit, and so few of those foul faults, that
are found among thy fellow walkers after the Flesh; but if any Readers be
minded to see with their own eyes, and not thine, they will quickly see thee to be
what thou art, with whose weak, sore, and sorry eyes, some of Sandwich, whose
Seer thou art, do see more then with their own, so that if thou once say
thou see what thou but surmisest, and supposest, they (as I.Os. Juniors are
respectively to himward) are Extempore stupefied into a Satisfaction, that they
^ee the same, whether they see it yea or nay, so as to become Iurats into thy
Rasn Judgment, and to sit down with no more then nil ultra quaero plebejus, our
Minister, Teacher, or Doctor says so, or so. But indeed as the Papists have
been long accustomed to drink all the Wine they drink in their Sacrament with
their Priests mouths, who impropriate that Element wholly to themselves, so
that when Christ said drink ye all of this, they drink it all off, giving the
poor people none, so our Protestants have been so long accustomed to see with
their Priests eyes, that they have well nigh utterly lost their own, or at
least the true fight and right use of their own; and T. D. I perceive takes it
for granted (or else why says he thou see not with my eyes) that his people
should see with his eyes, understand with his understanding, take things in his
sense, be of his mind, be molded in their meanings after the Image of his vain
Imagination; but I say to you all (O ye people of Sandwich) you must see with
your own eyes, as the Just must live by his own Faith, or else ye will fall
with your blind Guide into the Ditch, and if ye come to see with your own,
you will see we have cause to Complain of T. D.'s. both altering our words and
adding to them: and though it be, as to quantity, but little thou have added,
yet as to quality it is so much as egregiously wrongs us; howbest I must needs
say so much for thee T. D. (and that is the best I can say to help thee with)
thy Additions to our words are not by far so Voluminous as thy Ablations from
them are; thy Rendition of our Argaments is Rude, Ragged, and wrong enough in
all Reason, yet it is not so much by way of Additanent as Ablation and
detraction, (as I showed above) our discourses to thee, whilst thy. own to us
are repeated generally by the Dative, are Rendered mostly by the Abla^iu^ Case,
being rehearsed well nigh totally all away.

I know thou say thou have not diminish^d from our words, but that thy
dimination of thy deceitful doings, is but an Addition to thy falsehood, and no
little Aggravation of thy lies, for which thy unfaithful dealings with us, and
misrepresentation of those matters, as well as for many more misreports, into
which the lying spirit has spawned itself forth over ^undry pages of thy whole
trifling Pamphlet, and especially throughout thy Narratives Annexed at the ends
of both thy Babbles, so far will thy pretended fence of a few Gentlemen, and
(false) Ministers be from freeing thee from the suspicion thereof, that all
faithful hearers of those discourses, and Impartial Readers of thy Ragged
Relation of them, will lay thee under the Condemnation of not only a partial
Relator, but of a very Lya^ also against the truth, as to matters of Account,
and not a few matters of fact, about which thou abusest and be^yest the
Quakers, both in thy cart Accountative, and in thy much more notorious
Narrative pieces of business, which for several Remarkable follies of thy own
therein expressed, are as much as any that I know ( ej^^dem farraginis)
meritoriously to be marked for a pair of white ones (nigro carbone) while they
have a being under the Sun, which after a few more brief Animadversions on thy
Epistles, I am yet in hand with, I shall address to take some Remarkable notice
of.

T. D. Thou say thou have followed thy Antagonisi G. W. step by step, and
omitted nothing that has the least color or show of Reason (unless where thou
make a reference to thy former Book to avoid Repetition) lest he should say
that like a Child, thou skippest what thou can not Read. Only thou confessest
thou art not able to match him at his Belinsgate Rhetoric, nor would thou
with Jonah ^e as hot as the Sun that Scalds thee.

Rep. Thou may well say indeed in one or two senses thou followest him, for
I with all the have thou make, and the best Legs of Reason thy Ridiculously
short Reply to him stands and runs on; thou neither reachest nor overtakest G.
W. much less (...) get before or go beyond him, but art found as far behind
him, in the understanding of the mysteries of the Gospel, the Spirit and the
world ^o come, as the wild bruit Beast of the Forest is behind the natural
m^n, in the knowledge of the things of nature and this world* Poor vain man,
thou would be wise, and taking upon thee to teach those at whose feet'^would
be thy wisdom much more to sit down and learn; and so thou say to G. W. ^.3.
seeing you do not understand i will teach you^ in a matter wherein any, but the
blind, may see by thy Raw delivery of thy self in it, thou have not half learnt
thy lesson thy self, and wherein, as thou have not a little need of it, so thou
may thy self possibly be taught a little otherwise by and by, in its proper
place; and thou are yet but as the wild Asses Colt Ranging in the Wilderness,
snuffing up the Wind of thy own Wisdom; yet there is a time werein thou must be
taken, tamed and brought to bear, and made to see thy self to be as far short
of G. W. as one in the fall is of him, that is risen again into the innocence.

Thou followest G. W. and the Quakers, as the Egyptians did Israel, and as the
Dragon does the Woman Clothed with the Sun, that bears the manchild Christ
Jesus, breathing our malice, flinging out a stood of falsehood, wherewith to
cause her to be carried away; but thy Chariot Wheels drive on so heavily, that
though thou persuest at the heels, yet thou will never reach further then the
heel, which is all that the Serpents Head, which is to be bruised by her,
avails to hurt, yea the very earth it self shall be made to help the woman, and
to swallow up thy flood of Lies and Blasphemies, rather then they shall ere be
of force for the fut^re, as they have been formerly, to overwhelm her. As for
thy step by step, alas poor man G. W. makes such steps to his feet as are much
too strict and streit for thine to tread and stand in; where he is thou, in
that nature and Wisdom thou yet abidest in, can not come; there is a Gulf
between; whether he goes thou can not follow him, unless thou loose thy life,
as thou art loath to do, and dye with him, and Christ, and all Saints that
death of the Cross to thy own Carnal will, which while in little better then
that Wooden way, wherein the Papists prate of the Cross of Christ, thou in thy
vain mind art prating about, thou know the power of not so much perhaps, as
many, or at best little more as yet then the most of them; so far art thou
from following G. W. who (as Paul did) follows Christ, not in an outward,
empty, Apish way of imitation, or setting himself to do what he reads or hears
Christ did (in which yet thou art far short of following Christ too) but
acting, speaking, moving, living, worshipping, walking in, by, and from the
same Light and Spirit as Christ did, which thou art ^o far from walking by,
that with I. O. and others, thou, for the letters sake, which yet thou errest
from, rejectest it as no Rule for thee to walk by. And as for that very kind of
following him step by step thou meanest, who talk, as if thou had traced
thy Antagonist to a tittle, and left nothing of his book unanswered, thou have
rather an^wered little or nothing of it at all; for as in thy second part to
the same tune, there is fere nil dictum, quod non dictum prius, scarce ought
said of that, which is set down, that is not in thy f^rst, and that is not
already answered by G. W. so that T^y of a Sheet and half, under which thou
seek to shroud thy self from the force of his Reply, consists so much of
References to thy Q^. folly (the folly of which foolish piece is by it self, as
well as by us manifested to all well meaning men) that thou might as well
have spared thy pains of putting out any thing under that name of a Book at
all, and have said no more but so, viz. for a Reply to G. W. I referr the wo^ld
to the book of mine which G. W.'s^ Book is a Reply to; insomuch that, for all
thy pretended care to prevent it, every one that is truly a man will judge that
like a Child, thou have skipped what thou could not Read, so as to make any
Reasonable Reply to.

As for Billingsgate Rhetoric its more found among the Scribes that are
Scolding, Scuffling, and Scrambling for such petty Businesses as Muscles and
Cockels-shells, mere mouldring writings, External Texts, tritling Transcrips,
Letters, pedl^ng points, Syllables, Trivial Tittles and Iota's, then^to the
Qua. qui nucibus faciunt quaecunque relictis, who if they do earnestly contend,
it is for more substantial matters, the faith, that was once delivered to the
Saints, the Light, Truth and Spirit it self, ye Priests despise, which were
long before your letter, Text and Scripture ye, so scrabble for, was at all in
being.

And whereas thou say,, thou would not; I say, that whether thou would
or no, thou can not be so hot as that light of the Sun which now scalds thee,
and thy fellow- scolders about the Scriptures; for the more ye foam, fret,
fume, fight and labor in the fire of your own fury against it, the more the
Sun of Righteousness arises daily, and shines out to the tormenting of you
Inhabitants of the earth, that have, in the dark night of your Apostasy from
the truth, slain, made merry over the witnesses of God, both within and without
you: and the earth is filling more and more with the knowledge of the glory of
the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, and the Angels who have the Vials full
of the wrath of God, are pouring forth of the same; not only upon the Earth,
Sea, Fountains, and seat of the beast, and the River Euphrates, which has been
hitherto the chief fence of the great Whore^ of Babylon, but also on the Sun it
self; so that men, and ye men called Ministers above all others, are to be
scorched as with fire, by the great heat thereof, till ye rather kn^w your
tongues for pain, and blaspheme the Name of God (as ye now daily do) who has
power over these plagues, then repent from your deeds to give him glory: and
though all ye, impenitent brood of the Babylonish Harlot, band your selves
together as it were with one mouth to blow out the light, yet is it to as
little purpose as if ye should go about to forbid the morning light from
appearing, when it begins to spread it self upon the mountains.

T. D. thou say, That which Job speaks of the Thief, Job 24.17. Is true of
the Qua. If one know them they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.

Rep. That Is false of us, but true of your selves; there is one knows both you
and us, before whom your faces will wax pale, and gather blackness ere long,
while we stand with boldness in his presence, our hearts not condemning us of
such wicked designs and deceits, as are found among your selves.

T. D. That we endeavor to hide our meaning by doubtful words.

Rep. I. O. Ex. 3. S. 17. Lays the same falsely to our charge; but no wonder
that thou T. D. accusest us of that, when as Christ himself cannot escape thy
censure in that kind, for as thou blamest and belyest us here, as endeavoring
to hide our meaning in doubtful words; so page 7.1. Pamp. thou say, It was
an usual thing with Christ to speak words of a doubtful fense, and that his
meaning may be mistaken, when his words a^e taken in the most ordinary and
literal sense, and so it would be if by (every man) we should understand him
meaning, as he says, of every individual man indeed: how can we look thou
should clear us, who accusest him? But if thou acquit him, cease from thy
accusing us as guilty for that, which if 'twere as surely, as it is sure it is
neither Christ's nor ours at all, but your own common course, and evil guise,
must needs (as thou T. D. handlest the matter) conclude Christ himself under
the same guilt together with us; but in truth, so far as Cum turpis and
inhonesta sit hominum sententia dubiae ac incertae significationis vocibus
ludere, strophis ac fucis imp^sturam facere, ipsam non palam verbis consutis,
and consareloqui, eam mangonizare, ^^n^scicinatis silium sermonitus obtente
connihil magis cavere, quamebrare, telligant, nec^intelligant ne inu^.
to peddle about the things of God, with words of an uncertain and doubtful
signification, and when men's opinion is shameful and dishonest to dawb it over
with deceitful covers and colors, not to speak it out ^penly and plainly, to
mangonize it in speeches, sewed and patcht together on purpose, to darken their
Council by words without knowledge, to beware of nothing more then, least they
should understand and be understood, so far as to hide their Council by
doubtful words, so far as to speak one thing and mean another, to make a show
in words, and intend no such matter as they make a show of, so far as not to
mean as men say, is a matter justly liable to the censure of hypocrisy and
dissimulation, we not only clear God and Christ, and the Spirit, whom thou
chargest as so doing; while thou say, p. 6. 1. Pamph. the the meaning of
their words cannot be as the Letter does report, it was usual with Christ to
speak words of a doubtful sense, p. 7. Salvation is offered or tendered by God
to such as he never intends it to, etc. p. 40. 1. Pamph. But also are ourselves
as clear from the guilt of it in the sight of God, as capable to make it good
out of your own handy-works that your selves are the men, who are most deeply
faulty in that particular.

T. D. Thou say, Thou hopest the Reader will not be biased by our seeming
humility, since pride may be the root that bears that branch; voluntary humility
is the effect of being puffed up by a fleshly mind.

Rep. True enough that pride bears the branch of mere seeming humility; but
among no men more then such as are used in Rhyme, as the Priest or Clark reads a
line at once to them, to sing to the Tune of, O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I
have no scornful eye; when yet, for all that profession of humility, they are
puffed up, more proud and haughty scorners, and dealing in more proud wrath
against the Righteous, then such as never heard of such a thing as humility
from a Letter without (as many Heathens have not) save what they have seen from
the light of God and Christ within themselves; and among them that, under the
lowly titles of Ministers or Servants; mount up into the Lordly titles of
Masters, Reverend Sirs, etc. under the disguise of Servi Servorum-Dei, are
indeed no less then Masters of all mis-rule, and Domini Dominorum Terrae.

T. D. Thou tellest us (alluding to a saying of the Bishop of Al^f, concerning
the Protestants) that if the Qua. have Orthodoxos mores, an Orthodox
conversation, yet they have Haereticam fidem, an Heretrodox or Heretical belief.

Rep. Herein thou show thy self to be as well as in other things one of the
blind Grand Children of that blind Papistical Bishop, who can not discern
how impossible it is that an Orthodox true, right or good Gospel conversation
should proceed from an Heretical or false faith: Silly man, Does not true Faith
purify the heart, and life, work by that love which works no evil, give
victory over the world with the lust thereof, etc? And does any perfect purity
of heart or life, any true love that works no ill, any victory over the world,
any truly good manners, righteous works, holy actions, honest or godly
conversation flow from an Heterodox, unsound, untrue, dead, Heretical, false
faith? Is not that a dead and unprofitable faith (and such is yours, who deny
any perfect purging from sin in this life) which does not avail to the purging
of the heart and life? Which overcomes not the world? And is not all purity,
and love, and victory over the worldly lust, etc. the necessary effect of a
true Faith, and of that only and no other? and can there possibly be a bad,
false faith, where there are truly good works, and an holy life? In thy
yielding here that the Qua. have a right conversation, thou not only give
thy self the lie in other places, where thou accusest them as wanting, not
having so much as moral honesty (as p. 11.2. Pamp. and p. 5. of the Narrative)
but also (to the proving thy own faith consequently to be false) evincest the
Qua. Faith to be true and not Heretical, for good manners and a righteous
wel-ordered conversation cannot flow from a false, or from any but a true,
living, justifying, Soul-saving Faith or Belief within; and if the Heretical
faith (for so ye will needs call the true one) bring forth the right life, and
the Orthodox (for so ye will call your own fruitless one) be seconded with, and
showed by a profane conversation, then give me our Heretical, and take you
your Orthodox belief unto your selves; give me the Faith that purifies, works
no ill, gives victory over sin, and is both proved and perfected by good works;
show me T. D. thy faith without thy good works, I will show thee my Faith by my
works; for where the life is right, the Faith cannot be amiss, and while the
life is crooked, corrupt and rotten, the Faith is not pure, right nor sound:
yet I know the Clergy will needs count the Qua. Faith Heretical, let their life
be never so innocent, being themselves most in love with that Faith in Christ,
if they could find it our once, that can allow and assure them of not only
Salvation from wrath, when they dye, but while they live also a vain
conversation, and no little liberty to sin.

T. D. Thou say G. W. lays the most innocent truths under the odious
Imputation of Antichrists deceits.

Rep. If those 20 of thy Antichristian deceitful Doctrines with G. W. sees
down, as thine, at the end of his Reply to thee, That God offers Salvation to
those he intends it not. That David was not in a condemned but justified Esta^e
when guilty of Adultery and Murder, etc.
are the most innocent truths with thee, that we may be delivered for ever from
embracing those as Truths, shall be my earnest desire, and Prayer to God, for
myself and all men, to whom I wish deliverance from darkness and deceit it
self, and from del^^sion and damnation: for sure I am the contrary to those
(however own^^ by thee, because of the blindness of thy heart) are the most
innocent soul-^^ving Truths of Christ.

T. D. Thou tel'st thy Reader thou trustest he will be confirmed in his bad
opinion of the Quakers.

Rep. Here thou confessest thy opinion of the Qua which thou seek in thy
first book to beget men to, and in thy second to confirm them in, is a bad
opinion: out of thy own mouth, from thy own pen art thou judged as no Minister
of Christ but an evil doer (oh thou improfitable Servant) art thou sent of
God? are not all that are indeed sent of him (as thou in word pretendest only
to be) sent to turn men from bad to good, and to confirm them in those good
opinions? yet behold T. D. Trusts that the people to whom he Ministers will
being by his writings converted thereunto, be confirmed in their bad opinions
of the Qua. Can more be done by any man in discovery of his own folly and
nakedness (not to say iniquity and wickedness) to all men then is here by T.
D.? Was there ever the like seen (save among such Ministers as are like to T.
D. himself) that a Minister should confess to all the world the end of his
endeavors to be the converting of his Hearers and Readers to Bad, and the
confirming them in their Bad opinions? yet T. D. thus writes to his Reader; I
trust thou will be confirmed in thy bad opinion of the Qua. Herein T. D. thou
justifiest the Qua. as no such Bad people as thou would Render them to be at
other times, for if they were so indeed it were not a Bad but a Good, because
not a false but a true, and just opinion to think so Badly as thou speak of
them: but since thy own self stilest it a Bad opinion of the Qua. which thy
care is to confirm men in, to think ill of them, it evinces them not to be such
evil ones: for if men be bad indeed, its a good opinion to deem them to be Bad,
and to think of them as they are; yea because the Devil is Bad, A Liar, A
deceiver, he gives the Devil but his due, and does well, speaks and thinks
well, who has that good and true opinion, that he is a wicked Liar and
Deceiver, and who speaks and thinks no better of him then he is: But if it be a
Bad opinion to think ill of a man, and to be of opinion that he is Bad and
Naught, it must needs be that that man is Good, else 'twere not Bad but Good
and just to judge him Bad: the Goodness and Badness of every opinion,
consisting in no other thing then in the truth and falsehood of it respectively,
and the Badness of a man's opinion about another man arising ever from the
goodness or innocence of that other man lie thinks Badly of.

Indeed were the Qua. such Bad men as thou belyest them to be, and had thou
said I tr^st thou will be confirmed in thy opinion of the badness of the Qua.
thou had then spoken according to what thou now evilly and falsely think
of them, and also the opinion, thou seek to confirm men in about their
Badness, would be as Good, and thy endeavors to confirm them in it as Good as
ours are, who, because the Priests are generally vile and naught, do endeavor
to bring people, who are beg^iled into the false and bad opinion of them, that
they are good, and men of God, Ministers of Christ, and such like, when its
nothing less, to that good true and right opinion of them, that they are but
Ministers of men's making, and men of Sin, and not of God.

But ^^th the Qua. are (excepting such as are so named for coming among them,
who are no more of them, nor owned by them, then all they are Israel,that are
called Israel) an Innocent, Honest, True^, Just, Righteous, Pure, Peaceable
people, and thou say its a Bad Opinion of them to think of them as ill as
thou would have men, in that (as Caiphas the Priest of old, not of himself,
but as he was ordered unawars to speak more truth of Christ then he himself was
aware of) thou have said truly, and judged thy self as an unjust, and evil
doer, in begetting in peoples minds Bad Opinions of Good men, and justified the
Qua. as a generation of Just Ones against thy will.

T. D. Thou say thou shall blow away the dust the Qua. raise with their Feet.

Rep. Throwing Dust in the Air, casting mists* and thereby blinding men from
seeing the Light and Gospel, that is the work of Demetrius the Silver Smith,
and his Companions, who by the craft of holding up false Worships had their
wealth, and not of Paul, and the Qua. who are men of like occupation with him,
these make no Trade of Preaching, much less of hiding the Gospel, as ye do,
but seek to publish it freely, and what in them lies to make it without charge.

T. D. Thou shuttest up thy Epistles to thy Reader, with thy short Prayers to
this purpose, that th^se men (the Qua.) may proceed no further, but that their
folly may be manifested to all men, 2 Timothy 3.9. And that we henceforth be no
more Children, tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, but
speaking the Truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the
Head, even Christ, is the earnest Prayer of,

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, T. D.

That thou may not know the depths of Satan as they speak, Rev. 2.24. But
may hold fast that Doctrine which thou have already, v. 25. is the Prayer of

Thy Servant in the work of the Gospel, T. D.

Rep. Thou art very full of these ejaculatory supplications, but thy
ejaculations against the Qua. be ever too short to enter into the Ears of the
Lord of Hosts, to obtain ought of that thou desire: thou may save thy
breath, and keep thy Darts to thy self, they do but reflect back upon thee,
dream what thou will in the dark, as to thy audience and acceptance, we know,
as well as he who e eyes Christ opened heretofore, Ioh. 9.24 to 32. that God
hears not sinners, much less such as thou art, who not only beleivest thou
may, but even must sin also while thou live, and so regard'st iniquity as
to plead against those as broaching of the Devils Doctrine, who plead a perfect
purging and freedom from it in this world. Were thou a Worshipper of God, and
doer of his will (which none does while he sins, though thou dreamest men may
be in a justified Estate while Committing of Adultery and Murder) he would
hear thee, for his spirit would then guide thee to ask according to his will,
and such things only as are well pleasing in his sight, and to make
intercession for his Saints, and not against them, as thou often do; and thou
should know also as they do, that thou have the things thou desire of him,
1 Ioh. 5.14, 15. but poor wretched man that thou art, its now quite otherwise,
thy sins lie at the door, and shut out thy Cains Sacrifices from coming up as
incense in the sight of God, so that thou fallest and loosest daily more and
more for all thy Prayers: the Qua. both have and will proceed yet further, and
by the Wisdom of God in them will both the Liars and the Ly^ns mouths be
stopped at la^^, and thine and thy fellows folly be manifested to all men, as
that of old Iannes and Iamb^s was, who in their corrupt minds withstood and
resisted M^ses and the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.9. and while thy self, and all that heed
the wind of thy Doctrine, unless ye take more heed to the light within, shall
be henceforth, as ye have been hitherto, as Children tossed too and fro, and
driven, like the Weathercock, which way so ere the wind blows, and turned
about (as the Priest and his Parish ever has been) into what posture, mould,
or moldy Religion soever the times happen to settle in, the Qua. who are
stated on that Corner Stone ye builders refuse, on the su^^ (...), the R^^^^f
ag^s, Christ the Light of the world, and Life of all that hear his Voice, will
stand upright, and not fall, nor be wi^d^d about any more by the ^light of the
Shepherds, that have driven them from Mountain to Hill in the dark and gloomy
day, nor caught by the cunning Craftiness, whereby the Clergy lie in wait to
deceive, but know (not so as to own or approv^, yet so as to ^ Sc^^n and
disprove) the depths of Satan (as they speak) and when thou and thine shall be
forced to let go what ye have and hold^ and hold forth for the Doctrine of God
by tradition from men, the Qua. shall hold fast what Doctrine they have already
learnt from God himself, and shall, not in that thy Complementall form of
words, who (as the old Servus Servorum D^i does, when that he may be D^m^rus
D^mi^orum is that he more desires) subscribest thy self thy Servaut in the work
of the Gospel for Jesus sake, while thou art indeed one of those Master
Ministers that serve for filthy Lucres sake against both Jesus and his Gospel,
but, denying your usurped Mastership, be made able Ministers of the Gospel or
New Testament, not of your dead Letter, but of the Life and Spirit, and
speaking the truth in Love, (and not lies in Envy and Hypocrisy as ye do) grow
up into him in all things, even into his likeness, and the Image, measure, and
Stature of the fullness of him, who is the Head, even Christ; into whose
likeness, though ye live like the Devil here, ye look to grow in the world to
come only, and not before.

Thus far as to thy petty pair of painted Prologues, and as ( really) pite^s,
as (seemingly) pious Apologies, or Epistolary Prefaces to thy two Paultry
Pieces.

CHAP. II.
Now as to thy two more Notorious Narratives, whereby, as by the Epistles on
the one, so thy two Butterflies are on the other side, as with so many wings
born up and furnished to fly apace through the world, that is in love with
lies. I shall need to say the less to them, by how much some of the many lves
that are laid down the^ein are already laid open to the view of all in his
Reply thereunto, styled the Devil; (...)i g^d by L.H. who together with my self
and others by name, as well as all the people called Qua. are most Egregiously
abused and belied therein.

Nevertheless since thou art so impudently obstinate in that course of prating,
printing out of lies, as to this day rather to justify thy self, then (which
would far more become thee) to judge thy self as an evil doer in so doing,
that all such as have not devo^ed themselves to be deluded by thy deceitful
doings, rather then to know the truth concerning the Qua. in such matters,
wherein thou as falsely as f^wly accusest them, may beware of beleiving thee any
more, as many do, by implicit Faith; I shall give the world a further taste of
that Light, Treacherous and lying Spirit which speaks in thee, as it did in the
false Prophets of old, who blinded the peoples eyes with their many mis-reports
from receiving the truth the true Prophets told them, which lying Spirit proves
them sufficiently in whom it is (how ere they may style themselves so, as thou
T. D. do) to be no true Ministers of the Gospel. Report (said the old liars
of Jeremy) and we will Report it, raise but a lie, and we will send it abroad
far and near; So T. D. fee p. 1. of his second Narrative, appears to have
certain Emissaries, and Earewigs, that go out and gather what unsavory
materiall's they can rake out of the Excrements of the Qua. and such dunghilly
stuff, and lies, and bad Constructions of good actions, etc: as are either made
by himself, or made ready to his hand by his Agents, he lays by him, and
trussing his tales together into two Tractacles or nasty Narratives, as
Antickly Annexes them as Appendicular at the fagg-end of his other fancies;
Bagg and Baggage fit for nothing more indeed then to sollow in the Rear of
such pitiful Polemicalls, as the two pieces are they are annexed to.

T. D. Thou stil'st the materials of thy two Narratives Remarkable passages
and matters of undoubted Credit.

Rep. Remarkable they are indeed, and so much the more by how much they are for
the most part either apparently foolish, or flatly false, and where true (as
some few of them are) either miserably misrepresented, wrested and perverted
to wicked ends, or untruly used as premises, from whence to infer thy most
abominably false Conclusions, and to confirm other men in bad opinions of the
Qua, whereupon for the truths sake, which thouseekest thereby to bring into
contempt, I shall here Remarke the most Remarkable of them: and the rather
first because in thy second title page thou so malepertly Challengest any to
disprove thee in the words of Job, saying if it be not so now, who will make me
a Liar, and make my speech nothing worth. 2. Because even in this very (...) or
nick of time, wherein my Enervation, or discovery of the Nakedness of thy two
Narratives is but now newly come under my hand and pen, in order to its passage
through the press, whereat I write this, I am presented with a third printed
Toy of thine T.D. to the same Tone, styled the Lie Returned to Luke H^ward, or
a Vindication of Thomas Danson Minister of Sand^i^h, from the Imputation of
belying the Quakers, wherein thou say L. H. in his, called the Devils Bow
unstringed, is impudent in denying several matters of fact charged upon
himself, and others of his persuasion, in thy two Naratives, and in
representing thee the Publisher thereof as a Forger of Lies: in which shuffling
Trifle, or sorry shift of half a sheet (for it is nor more, nor better) of
(mere wast) paper, as closely as thou conceivest thou have lapt and laid thy
self up as in a bed of Lavender, and in thy Vipe^ous hissings, and Lyings
against the Light Lie hid (velut Anguis in herba) among such silly Seers as
See with thy eyes, yet thy new Bed of Lies is too short for thee to Lie long at
ease upon, and that half sheet of thine is a covering too narrow for thee to
wrap thy self in from the wrath of God, as well as too ragged, and tottered,
and torn, and thin (if 'twere a whole one) to shelter thy shame from the sight
of such as see by the Light of Christ, who view thee in all thy venomous
ventings of thy malice through the thickest Vail thou seek to shroud thy
self under: nor will thy certificates obtained, and procured by thy self and
published under the hands of thy pair of (John's) viz. Io. Laigneile, and Io.
Davis of Dover, one of which I love so well as to tell him that if (as the
Proverb is) he play not Jack on both sides 'twill be the better for him; nor of
thy pair of Unminister like, Mr. Williams, Russel^ and Wingfield, who will
never Win the Field with lies against the Children of the Truth; nor often other
Thomas, viz. thy part-Taker T^omas Morris, who is as very an Infidel toward
Christ Disciples, till he see and feel our Testimonies to be undeniably true,
as thy self, and all the three other Thomasses, that are so ready to swear,
what ere thou say; nor the self contradicting Testimony of thy Trustee Mr.
Vinter Minister of Couewold; nor any other of thy despicable disproofs so
moderate the matter, but that thou will appear to be a Foster-Father to those
Forgers of Lies, who have brought thee into the praemunire of publishing, to
thy own shame, what their heads have hatched, and their pates prepared for thy
pen, and put upon thee to p^int and publsh in thy folly to all the world, as
will by and by appear in the examination of each of thy Lies, as thy Lie laid
down in thy last Narrative.

T. D. As to thy Tale of L. Hs. Sending his Horse and Man for me to be a^ a
d^scou^se appointed between him and W. Russell a Priest, and that his man was
seen to come out of Dover on his Horse overnight, and myself s^^n to Ride into
the Town the next morning upon the same Horse; which story thou tellest for
truth, with such Confidence too, that besides that forementioned common
Epethite thou give to all thy lies, viz: they are of undoubted Credit, thou
here addest that it was manifest I was sent for on purpose, and that in denying
it we Ly^ and have not so much moral honesty as to speak Truth in matters of
Fact, and such like.

Rep. I here as L. H. has also done, declare against that manifold piece of
Na^ra^ive so P^mpu^ly predicated, as a most A^rand manifest Lie in every inch
of it, as having no truth in it from the Head to the T^yl, that I can find,
from one end thereof even to the other; for neither did L. H. send his Horse or
Man at all for me over night; nor did I ^ide into D^ver on L. Hs. Horse next
morning, but on a Black H^^se, plain enough (if these Lya^s had not been blind)
to be di^cerned from L. Hs. White one, and that in the afternoon too; neither
was the discourse between, or appointed between L. H. and W. R. but E. B. and
W. R. nor did E.B. send for me, but a letter to me only, not knowing of my
coming, but desiring my answer only; neither did I know at all that any
discour^e at all was to be till I came into the Town; nor was there such a word
spoken by L. H. (in my hea^ing) that he would now leave the discourse to me;
nor did L. H. so much as by desire engage me in that di^course (though some few
things I said in it) any more then he engaged me to come to those disputes at
Sandwich, which (saving thy lies in that particular ore and ore again
repeated) was just no way at all, though hearing of a dispute to be there, I
was there with other friends: By all which Remarkable Passages, whether thou
have not marked out thy self, and thy Tal^-bearers more then the Qua. to be men
that have not so much moral honesty or to speak truth in matters of fact, let
all true men Judge; nor is all that in thy last half sheet of any Validity to
disprove this, which I say and averr to be the truth as in the sight of God,
who will Judge between you Lya^^ and us, who as little Con^cience as thou say
we make of Lying, have herein said the very Truth, and shall be believed
against thy Tattle, notwithstanding the sleeveless Testimonies of W^lliam
Russell and Th^mas Morris, whose Certificate, which thou ^ettest to put an end
to the contest, conclude nothing to the contradicting of what is here said by me.
And thus into the pit of thy own digging for us art thou fallen thy self, and
in the same Labo i^uh of lies, wherein he lay turking for the Innocent, has
the Liar lost, and left him elf not a little in the Lurch.

T. D. Thou tellest a Tale that a dying Qua. at Dover, said, He exp^cted
Salvation only by his good works, and not from Christ: in witness of which
thou bring Io. Davis Minister of Dover.

Rep. Thou had abused Io. Davis, as grossly as thou do thy self (but that I
see by his Underhand Testimony inserted in thy half sheet, and his
non-complaining of thee, he is willing enough to be so abused by thee, and so I
am the less willing to vindicate him, since volenti non fi^ i^i^^ia) by offering
in thy Narrative to Summon him in Print, as a witness of that, which he himself
had no otherwise than by hearsay from another; for hereby thou expo^est I. Da.
together with thy self, to the just censure of Ignoramus, whilst its well known
to all (save such as either are, or else, in enmity to the Truth, are free to
be counted Idiots) that as in f^o Dei and verae Ecclesiae, he is no true
Minister, or Witness of the Word of God, who stealing his Testimony, and the
words he speaks out of the writings of the true Prophets, declares what himself
never saw, felt, nor handled of the word of life, so vel in foro hominum, even
before men in their earthly Courts of Judicature, that man would be deservedly
cast forth with shame, as no lawful Witness against a living man there
p^esent, much less against a dead man not capable to speak for himself, who
should testify it as an undoubted truth that he spoke Treason, and from thence
accuse all that man's Kindred also to be Traitors, and yet confess he was no
Ea^ewitness of his words, but only heard a Third man say somewhat to such a
purpose: And how John Davis can be such a competent witness to the world of the
words spoken by the dying Quaker, as thou set'st him down for, or any more then
a presumptuous Intruder into, or Talker of what he has not heard, but only
heard of, my eyes, which are not so dim, but that I can Divine the Divines to
be in the dark, and to Divine lies to each other, do not fee; howbeit let every
one see not with my eyes, but with his own, as to the case in hand. But I. D,
when he was backbiting the Qua. to thee in that Tale, and tickling, and
scratching thy Itching ears, which (as false tongues do) love lying words, and
feed on mere Fables more then truth, thought (perhaps) as little as thou did
of the likeliness of the Quakers Printing, to be brought so openly on the Stage
about it, as now he is, and that with so much the more shame, by how much he
seems to have played B^-peep between both parties, and by that his second hand
Testimony to have ^erved two contrary turns at once, viz. L. Hs. and thine too;
or else its like he would have kept his hea^ say to himself; but now he is
justly left of the Lord to manifest himself to be one, that would fain seem to
hold with the Hare, though he runs with the H^und open mouth at her to devour
her, having (since he seemed to side with L. H. against thee) in his last
testimony obtained by thee, and obtruded upon the world, made himself obvious
to the view, of all to be a Sidesman with thee in thy viperous spirit against
us, and one who would ( Balaam-like) Divine us into the denomination of
Papists, if he could tell how; but as such Concurr^rs as show their teeth much;
Seldom bite very deep, so it is now; the cursed Cow's have short Horns, and
your uncertain Certificate can stand but for a Cipher at most, that signifies
nothing, but that ye would ^ay something in disparagement of the Qua. if ye
could tell what. Something it seems was affirmed by some body, yea by the Qua.
Brother, who (as their own-Brethren usually do, Isa. 66. for Christ's name
sake). hated those that hear Gods word, and tremble at it, and are therefore in
scorn called Qua. to such an effect, as if the dying Qua. had said he looked
for Sa^vation by his own works, and not by Christ; wherein, if he does not (as
many in D^ve^ and Sandwich have done as bad) pu^posely belly his Decreased
Brother for the sake of his own malice to the Qua. yet I know he did (at best)
as much mistake him, as T. D. mistakes, and either blindly or maliciously mis
epr^sents me to the world as a looker for Justification without Christ by my
own works, which I have long since denied as dung for those that Christ works
in me; for howbeit I shall not here meddle point blank to prove a Negative; yet
thus much I can say in disproof of your hasty Affirma^ve; I my self, who know
his principles to have been no other then to expect Salvation by Christ's works
in him only, and not his own, was with that said dying Qua. in the time of that
sickness, whereof he died, and in as deep d^scourse with him (I believe) as
that his mere fleshly Brother was, who has so abused him; yet I heard him
utter as nothing at all to that effect, so not a little to the contrary: and so
I leave this your Tale of a Tub (as I found it) with the Bottom out, to take
place in such hearts as are given ore to strong delusion to believe your lies
that they may be damned, for no entertainment will it find among such as
receive the ^^ve of the Truth that they may be saved: yea, as thou say, in p.
3. of thy half shee^, of that figment of your own, viz. that I was sent for t^
Dover by L.H. to the dispute with W. Russell, That I came on other business
will hardly be believed on the word of a Qua. and: so say I in thy own words of
both this, and that non entity of your own Creating, and of William Wingfields
m^srep^^sentation of L. Hs. words also, viz. that those words were spoken by
L.H. as W.W. says (confdering the three Testimonies that his words were
otherwise) and those also by the dying Qua. as thou ^et'st them down, upon the
best evidence thou giv'st of it, from either the Qua. fleshly Brother, or thy
Spiritual Brother I. D. will hardly be believed upon the word of such an
envious Quareller with the Qua. as thou art, by them that know how little
Conscience that sort of men (among whom thou art not the least) make of lying
against them, and against the truth.

T. D. Another story thou tellest of a Qua. that came into the Savoy Church and
made such a dreadful noise, as seemed to be of the Devil in him, and so sadly
afrighted the people, that some ran one way, some another to secure themselves
from the danger they apprehended was near them, and necessitated the Minister
then Preaching, whom thou call Mr. Hook to hold his peace as Witnesses, of
which the said Mr. and Mrs. Hook are cited.

Rep. A palpable evidence (if the Devil had been in him as truly as ye suppose
it) how little of God is in your Christian Congregations, and in your Churches
and Ministers, that the Devils bellowing out of the mouth of one unarmed man
could make the Minister hold his peace, and affright and put to flight his
whole Church before his face: Who so hearkens unto Christ dwells safely, and is
quiet from fear of evil; he is not afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed
trusting in the Lord; he is kept in perfect peace, his mind is stand on the
Lord; he keeps himself that the wicked one touches him not; he resists the
Devil, and makes him flee, and gives not place to the evil one: but a token
rather it is that the Power of God was of a truth, in the man, who ere he was,
in that the D^vils trembled in the wicked, whom he possesses, and were so
astonished at his presence, for hic murus Abaeneus -- nil conscire sibi
nullapallescere culpa; as this is the Brazen Bulwark, and impregnable fort that
true Saints have such Rejoicing in, as all the Devils in Hell cannot impeach,
the Testimony of their Conscience, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity they
have their Conversation toward God and all men, so the Sinners in Sion are
afraid, and fearfulnes^ surprises the Hypocrites, and being conscious to
themselves, that no good belongs to them, they wax pale at the sense of their
own iniquities, as if the Devil were coming to fetch his own; the name of the
Lord is a Terror to them, a dreadful sound of danger is always in their
ea^es, and they are Magor-Misabib fear round about, and a terror eternally to
themselves, so that they are in great fear where no fear is, as to any outward
appearance, or occasion of it, much more when the Lord himself begins to roar
out against them, and thunder upon them out of Sion, who^e ^o^ce is as terrible
among the Sinners, as the Devils is contemptible among the Saints, yea their
own evils per^uing the wicked, they flee some^imes when no man persues, but
God being in the midst of the Congregation of the R^ghteous, they are ever as
bold as a Lyn.

T. D. Thou tellest of a woman, one Mary Todde a Qua. that at the Bull and
Mouth, while her friends were speaking, pulled up all her clothes above her
middle exposing her Nakedness to the view of all in the Room.

Rep. I see if thou can not get it by Hook, thou will get it by Crook, if
thou can, but thou gettest nothing against us by either; for as the Tale that
is testified by thy Master and Mistress (...) makes as little against us to thy
purpose, were it as perfectly true, as its probably false in some part of it at
least (for I cannot learn that there is at Lord. such a one as Will: (...)*
that is owned as a friend among the Qua.) So this (...) thou (...) the Qua. in
above, was done by one that was a Rom^^ (and not a Qua.) whose R^nting
abominable practi^es the Qua. whom thou call her friends, are more at e^mity
with then thy self; nor will thy (...) in the Margin thy Eyewitness T. Cresset
(C^^rurgion) Cure and S^^v^ thee from the ^ust censure of a false Accuser of
the Qua. to whose score thou w^^nes^ down all the Rudeness, that by the Rabble
of their and the Truths enemies is, in absolute hatred of both them and it,
acted ever and (...) in their Assemblies.

And albeit thou ^^innest over this thy (...), and (...) business in thy last
(...) piece of work of half a (...), by the Certificate of John (...), as thou
did bolster it up before by Th. Cressets Testimony in thy Narrative, which I.
Lag^ (as far as his envious assertion will assure) assures thee, who very
con^^dently ^akest on thee to assure the world thereupon, that the Quak. at
Land. acknowledge the said M. (...) to be one owned and (...) by them, I here
contrariwise affirm (whatsoever some certain Qua. that under that name
shrowding themselves to do mischief to the truth, as the false brethren did of
old, by whom Paul was in peril, might say to I. L.) that the Qua. in London do
disown and deny both M. T. and her ill carriage in that particular: so that
instead of mending thy ill matter, thou have but made it worse, and redoubled
the lie, thou would have lickt the liars whole of.

T. D. Thou tellest of a Qua. that at Alderman-Bury, on a Lords day, while the
Psalm was singing, gat up into the Pulpit with his Hat on his head, and serting
his breech upon the Cushion, fell to sewing.

Rep. A great piece of business, for a man to be so sharply censured for as he
was who did that. Our Princes and Priests in these days have forgot that the
Lords Prophets of old were moved to do as strange matters as that, or any other
thing that is done in the Spirits motion in these days by the Qua. as a sign
to a wicked and adulterous generation, when the Lord, being wearied with the
multitude of their sins, began once to loath their most solemn sacrifices, and
to defile all the coverings of their Idols, and to slain the pride of all their
fleshly performances, and to (...) no pleasure on their best observations and
oblation^s, and to snuff at their sacred services as at a stinking smeak coming
up into his nose, and to turn the songs of their Temples into howlings, and to
cause children to oppress them, and very women to rule over them, and to stir
up the babes and the base ones, to behave themselves boldly against the
honorable and ancient, and to cut off both the head and the tail of a people,
even the ancient and honorable Rulers, which are the head, and the Prophet
that teaches lies, which is the tail, and to spread^dung upon their faces (and
that is more than a man's breech upon a Pulpit Pillow) even the dung of their
s^lemn meetings, and to sweep both one and the other away together, and (in
short) to throw no less then shameful spuing upon all their glory.

Does this offend you, that the servants of the Lord are now made signs so far
as to sit covered in your Mass-houses, in reproof of your singing David's Psalm
with S^uls spirit, in such Meeter as I. H.T.S. Q. Elizabeth's Fiddlers have
molded them into, and in ^uch manner as some Priest, Clark or Sexton says
them lineatim, by a line at a time before you, O Lord I am not puffed in mind, I
have no scornful^ye, all ^he night long wash I my Bed, and much more to the
same Tune; wherein most of your people mock God, and sing more lies to him than
t^uths, whilst they are as hough^y and sc^r^ful as ere they can look, and o
far from making their Beds swim, and their eyes gush out with tears for sin,
that they rather are both full of daily Adulteries, and defiled with nocturnal
uncessant uncleanness and pollutions? Does this offend you, that a man should
sit and few upon a Cushion, in rebuke of you^ sottish igno^ance, who limit the
Lords day (which is an everlasting holy Sabbath or ce^ation from all man's own
words, works, thoughts and pleasures, typi^ed by the seventh day, which ye now
confe^s is no more holy than another) within the narrow lists of one day of the
seven, and not the seventh neither, which God instituted for a time, but the
first only, as if ye were then only, and on the fasts of your own appointment
for a day bound to serve God in some certain outward shows, and then at
liberty to serve lust, self, flesh, sin and the Devil all the week beside?

Does this offend you, that as an Ecce signum, any true Prophets Tail should
come near the s^ft Cushion, over which the Prophets that teach lies who are the
Tail, lean and lie, talk for money, and do their business in order to the
getting in of their gain from their quarters, and follow their calling twice o^
thrice a week, and work upon their T^ade, which (unless they would come freely
to give what freely they have received, and speak more truth than they do) is
not half so honest as that of a Taylour sewing of a garment?

Do these small matters (which yet as despicable as they are in your own eyes,
are of more moment to you than ye are aware of) offend and occasion you to
stumble? (O ye Priests) what if ye should ^ee men made to go naked, and sit
naked upon your Plush-Pulpit-Cushion? and annoy them with very Dung before you,
for a Sign to a seemingly Saint-like seed of Serpents, whose own righteou^ne^s,
which they count gain, is as very dung in the sight of God? such a one would be
a greater stumbling-stone in thy eyes T.D. and of thy offended fellows; yea,
behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, such works and strange acts as
these is the Lord working in your days, the mystery of which ye can in ^^wise
believe, though ever and anon done in the sight of 100ds; yea, how have many
been pressed in Spirit to pass naked into your Mass-houses, and streets in
Cities and Towns, and to do what ye deem defilement, as signs from the Lord, to
show the nakedness and stark-stinking shamelesness of this most impiously
impudent and impenitent generation of professing Priests and People, who are
apparently as rich^, Landic^a her^self in letter, and increased with goods, and
needing nothing of Christ's own council and light in their own consciences, not
knowing th^mselves to be poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind and
naked: And yet all this and much more no more than was done at the Lords
command of old by the Prophet, which was a fool, and the spiritual man, that
was mad, in the eyes of the blind Priesthood of that age, wherein he lived;
witness Isaiah, who went naked and barefoot three years, for a sign and wonder
to Egypt and Aethiopia, Isa. 20. And Jeremy, who brake a Bottle in Tophet, in
token that the Lord would make Judah as Tophet, Jer. 19. 1, 10, 12. and put
bands and yoaks on his own neck, and sent yoaks to several Kings, as a sign of
the slavery they should come into, Jer. 27. And Ezekiel, who was dumb, and bid
to eat and drink with quaking and trembling, to mingle his Bread with Man's
Dung, and made to mingle it with Cow Dung in the sight of Israel, as a sign of
that defiled polluted bread they should eat among the Gentiles, and to burn a
third part of his Hair, and smite a third part of it with a Knife, and scatter
a third part of it with the Wind, and bind a small part of it in his skirts, to
show the famine, sword and dispersion of Israel, and salvation only of a few,
Ezekiel. 3, c. 4. c. 5. and dig a hole in his house, and remove his stuff in their
sight, Eze. 12. And Hosea, that was bid to love an Adulteress, and a Harlot.

T. D. Another example (as thou call it) as Remarkable as this, Thou say
was in Christ-Church, October. 6. 1659. where on a Day of public Thanksgiving
the Parliament, L. Major, Aldermen, Common Council, and Officers of the Army
being met together to hear Dr. Homes and Mr. Caryl, appointed by the Parliament
to preach before them; two Qua. made a great disturbance in the very presence
of Authority.

Rep. By the humane Autho^ity (it seems) of the Parliament themselves two
Ministers, of man's making, were appointed to preach before them, and by the
Divine Authority and Power of God himself, two of his sending were appointed
and pressed in Spirit, to bespeak them in his Name to another purpose then that
of those of their own choosing; for whereas they had chosen to themselves such
as should Prophecy to them not Truth, nor right things, but deceits, and such
smooth things, as were pleasing and suitable to their dainty Dreams,
thanksgiving-thoughts, sweet sacred solemnities, fained festivities, vainly
hoped, self-promised unities of that joyful day, the Lord had chosen Seers, who
saw beyond all this, and divined a storm through all the^e their Idol-coverings
draw near upon them: but to these Seers and Prophets they said (as the same
Seed did to the same sort of Seers, whom God sent of old to a Rebellious
people, lying children that would not hearken to the Law of the Lord) See not,
Prophecy not; Soft and Gentle, and not Right and Rough things are agreeable to
to the duty of this day: the Qua. speech, the words whereof I have set down in
the Margin, Hear, hear, hear the Word of the Lord O ye mountains and
inhabitants of the earth, The day, even the day of his Visitation is upon your
heads, for ye have chosen the way which is not good; Wherefore Assemble your
selves together (O ye strong Oaks) that the Lord might pour upon your heads
his indignation, for deceit and hypocrisy the Lords Soul abhors. As sure as
the Lord overturned them that went before you, so sure will the Lord overturn
you.
referring both thee T.D. and the Sandwich doters on thy dowby-doings, to a
Printed sheet ^old by Tho. Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, styled, the Prophet
approved by the words of his Prophecy coming to ^ass, where ye may read the
residue of the Message from the Lord, in that place of the Popish Priests
consecrating, falsely called Christ-Church in London on that day, was deemed
such a disturbance as was punished with an orderless Newgate imprisonment by
the multitude at the present, and ratified by the Rulers order, when they were
more at leisure from their voluptuous feasting; which iniquity of appointing
men to preach to them in their own wills and time, whether God appoint them,
yea or nay, of despising the true Prophets true Words, and trusting in the
fraud of the fulse ones, and in their own perverseness and staying thereon, Isa.
30.9, 10, 15. was then unto them, as it ever was to the same generation, as a
breach swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking came suddenly as at an
instant; for by the 13th of the same month they, who were so hand in hand
against Righteousness, were turned tail to tail against each other for their
wickedness; yea, the Lord spared them not, but brake them as the breaking of a
Potters vessel that is broken in pieces; so that in the bursting of those
brittle Potsheards of the earth, there is scarce found a sheard of so much u^e
as to take fire from the hearth, 'or water withal from the pit.

Now as to the very great distu^bance thou say they made, this is but the
old Tone of the Tithe-taking, Tide-turning, Tune-serving, Truth-belying
Teachers, and the wonted outcry of that Noun-Adjective Ministry thou belongest
to, that cannot stand, nor subsist of themselves, without leaning for
encouragement, defense, assistance and maintenance to mee^ humane Laws, to prop
them up in the propagating of their mere humane Gospel; who, like the
loud-lying women, that having no better shift than to cry whore first, are ever
hideously bellowing out against the Qua. to the tune of Heresy, Heresy,
disturbance of the Ministers, to the Magistrates; so that if any Qua. come
quietly in, and speak, or do but ask that Reason, which every Christian is
bound to be ready to give of his hope to every one that asks him in meekness
and fear, they strait call out to have them Punished, as the Jews neither did,
Act. 13. nor do at this day; which said Ministers being in propriis Talpae, in
alien is linces, are more sharp-fighted toward the good behavior of one Qua.
quietly questioning with them, or saying any thing to them soberly that is of
God, then the misdemeanour and tumultuousness of twenty of their own unquiet
Spirits, stirred up by the Devil to call us R^gues-Faces, Quaking Dogs, to
break Windows, and bring in D^ggs to fight, and such like beastly and Bear-like
behavior in our solemn Assemblies, till they are wearied with their own Pains
toward us, and our Patience toward them under it, as well while we are
speaking, as we are moved of the Lord, in our own allowed meetings, as in
theirs: witness their leading a Bear through the place, where the Qua. were
Preaching publicly at Hith: and also the rudeness of some of those that are
under thy own Tuition T.D. at Sandwich, and belonging to the Flock thou there
feedest, or rather feedest on; who when G. F. E. B. my self and many others
were publicly met in quiet in a place of our friends procuring, shrew Stones
and Gunpowder squibs that fired among us, not so as to move us to cry out to
the Rulers of Disturbance, yet so as to give good occasion to the Lord to
permit (though ye forget it) a sad fire to fall out within the Town, no longer
after, then the next morning. Thus ye men of Sin make men of God offenders for
a word, and hate them, as of old they did, that reprove sin within the Gate; so
that when any such stirrs arise upon occasion of the Gospels preaching, as did
in the Prophets and Apostles days, which the Lords Messengers now are no more
accessory to, as causes, then they then were, its still laid to the door, and
put on the score of Truth, and the Tellers of it, which, because none else will
own it, must hear it, till against the foul mouthed Beast the Lambs innocence
be cleared as the light, which till then may truly say of all mischief that
falls out, where he utters his voice, Cum nemini obtrudi potest itur ad me: The
Lambs cause is better then the Wolfs, when charged by him for troubling the
water with only drinking at the Fountain, but the Wolfs Teeth are sharper then
his, and therefore the Innocent must be devoured. And whereas to such like
tales as thou have told, as abovesaid, thou prefixest the conclusion thou
inferrest in these words, viz.

T. D. What affronts these wretches offer to the Worship of God is notoriously
known.

Rep. I ^ay your Parish Worship is not so truly the Worship of God, as it is
true that ye so call it; but that of the Qua. who Worship him in Spirit and
Truth in the inner parts, which ye are out of, which those poor Wretches your
Parish people are, by your lies, instigated to offer such abominable affronts
to, as Bea^ings, Buffetings of men in, and draggings of them o^ their own
meetings (as are notoriously known all the Land over) is the true Worship of
God indeed, which (except ye repent in time O ye Priests and Parish-people, and
own the truth) 'twere better for you and them that ye had never been born, then
offer such affronts to, as ye do: but full well may ye offer affronts to our
Worship when ye stick not to do the like to your own Rule of all worship, even
to that ye call the Word of God, for if the Scripture, which is a true writing
of it, were as truly the Word of God, as ye say it is, ye bawlk not, as
occasion is, to do despite to that, witness the ungodly guise of those Giddy
Heads about Westminster, who when by G. F. holding out the Bible to them, they
were asked in the midst of their mad hurlings of Mud and Kennell dirt (as they
mostly do upon the Qua. in their meeting there) to this purpo^e, whether they
would do such despite unto the Scripture, which they say is their Rule and the
Word of God? ceased not to be dirt that their Word of God, any more then they
did from dirting him, who held it out to thorn.

T.D. Another of thy Remarkable passages, in the first Narrative, is of one of
our friends, who by a mere mistake, charged one of your Ministers, Peter
Domsell, who was clear, instead of another, who was guilty of it, as
slandering me falsely with taking pay from the Pope.

Rep. Which mistake of one man for another, though confessed freely and
publicly by our friend (which is more then for your many flat lies against us,
we can expect ever to extract from you) and thereupon (with much ado) professed
by you all fit to be never more mentioned to him, yet is not only reckoned up
by thee in print, p. 56.57. to the shaming of him, if thou could, but also
to thy own shame of a single slip ^gregiously multiylyed by thy lies about it,
into several unsingle ^ordid shifts, and double dealings which thou falsely
fatherest, and fainedly fast'nest on him and me too.

T.D. First thou say he pretended to say that he said (from the Lord) as one
immediately sent of him so to speak, and yet was mistaken as to the right man:
whereupon thou concludest the Qua. as far from infallability in Doctrine, as in
matter of fact.

Rep. Which is but a silly conclusion of thine, if it had so been, and contrary
to thy own principles; for if Christ knew not Judas to be a Devil, and so cho^e
him for his Minister upon that mistake, as thou (little less then Bla^phemously
(intimatest p. 36. for in truth Judas was no Devil when Christ chose him, and
yet Christ was infallible in Doctrine, though ( Secundum te, who ignorantly so
fanciest) ignorant in that fact, why may not a mistake in a matter of fact
stand now with infallibility in Doctrine?

T.D. Thou say I holp him with a ly^, saying he said not (from the Lord) but
(in the fear of the Lord) so that the people then Houted at me.

Rep. For all the then (...), and the still stout standing of thy Rout of rude
ones to the contrary, I still say the same ( viz) that he said not in thy
pretended phrases of ( from the Lord) or (as imm^d^ately sent of him) but (in
the fear of the Lord) which may be consistent with the mistake of one Person
for another, or else tell me T.D. (for ad hominem I now urge) how Isaac mistook
Jacob for Esau, and Paul wot not that was the High Priest, when he termed him a
whited Wall? Yet what a stir, what a ditty, what a deal of Do make thou in
aggravating that diminitive business, till, by the rash Rendition of it, thou
Render thy self as Ridiculous, as P. D^msell himself, whom it most concerned,
then did, who (like one that to kill a Gnat, which makes his Nose Itch, strikes
so hard as to make it bleed) was so over obstreperous and frivolously fervent
in his own defense from the offense of that Fly (and more would have been, if
for sham^ ye had not stopped him) that he offended himself more otherwise, by
stirring up thy light-spirited people to Laugh more at that folly, which then
fell from himself, then to Lament the innocent injury, which befell him as from
us.

T.D. Thou say, that the Reader may see how great a stress we lay upon small
matters, thou will tell him a true story (which perhaps may move his Laughter)
that a Kinsman of D G. offering to salute her, she went two or three steps back
with these words. I have renounced the Devil and the flesh long since,
prithee, forbear that custom of the world: and that these things thou
thought good to add (at the desire of some worthy persons) that the world
may take notice not only of the wickedness, but of the absu^dity of these
peoples (the Qua.) principles.

Rep. This last part of thy first Narrative is not a more true, then strange
story, and as Ridiculously Related, as it is a Ridiculous Relation: What if thy
Kinswoman D. G. refused thy offer to salute her at thy hou^e, because she could
not conscientiously close with thee For de te fabu^a, thou art the said
(unkind) Kinsman thou tel'st this Remarkable Tale on.
in the Carnal course of that Customary Complement, which in the world it self
wears out now too, and begins to Savor (^o far is it from the Christian) plus
Coloni, quam Aulici, more of the Clown, then of the Courtier? must thou needs
be so obstreperous in Print against her for it? Thou do it to show how great
a stress we lay on small matters, but thou show indeed how great a stress
thou lay'st upon the small matters, and how bad a Construction thou put
upon the good intentions of thy own Kinsfolks, when they are (as thou
Ironically Term'st it p. 56.) of that persuasion of Quakerisme: Thou do it to
move thy Reader to Laughter at her and our Wickedness and Absurdity, but if he
be one whose heart is not among the Wise in the House of Mourning, but among
the Fools in the House of Mirth, he will, with Laughter thereat, take much more
notice of thy own. Thou thoughtest good (though thy thoughts in it were not
good) at the desire of some worthy friends to do it; A worthy piece of business
indeed, like thy self, and those worthy persons, who desired thee so to do, to
add at the end of thy Renowned Narrative of Remarkables, as it were to Pin the
Basket to bring up the Rear, and, as some weighty substantial matter, to add
weight to the rest of that Windy, Frothy, Husky, Chaffy stuff, and matter of
Story, with which thy Book is abundantly Stored.

Had thou been wise, thou might have learnt of thy Kinswoman to do the
same that was undertaken for thee long since ( viz.) to forsake the Devil and
all his Works, the Vain Pomp; and Glories of the world, so as no more to
follow, nor be led by them; but now in this thy Printed Publication, and so
Iack-Pudding-like a Passage at the very Tail of all thy merry matters and lying
Tales of the Qua. to move thy lewd, more Risible, then R^asonable Animals to
Laughter at them, thou have rather vented thy own vanity to the advantage of
the truth, thou treatest against, then disparaged it, having acted herein much
below that Gentility, Civility, Courtesy, Common humanity and ingenuity, that
becomes one that calls himself a Kinsman, and would be counted more then a
common Christian, by not so much finding a great fault where there is none at
all, as a wrong rendering of that to the Reader, as some gross v^ll in D. G.
which he, to whom Christ's Cross is not yet a Riddle, will Read to be as great a
good, as thou make a gross evil of it. Of so slender Credit is Truth among
its foes, that if the least fault be among its friends, it shall be sooner
found, then find forgiveness on Confession; if it be but a weakness, or mistake
of one man for another by night, its magnified into some impardonable
wickedness, or mighty mischief; if it be but a Mole hill, that every wise man
would step over, and none but blind Guides, and their Giddy guided ones, who
strein at the Saints Gnats, and swallow their own Camells, can well stumble at,
its made a Mountain, which they cant see over; if but a Mot its sooner seen in
a Brothers ey, then a Beam by them in their own; if it be but some pitiful
passage not fit to be Printed, a Narrative must be made of it, as of some
Remarkable Passage, that cannot be omitted; if but as Ridiculous a thing to
Relate as Serious in it self, it must be related to move Fools to Laugh at it;
but Wise men will Laugh most at its Relator.

T.D. As to thy Conclusion of thy second Narrative, which is a desire of thy
Reader to peruse the Qua. Answer to the Questions thereto annexed, which were
proposed to, and Answered by Joseph Fuce, whereto thou set both his name,
and answers to them.

Rep. I say thus much to thee, that howbeit thou have set down so much of I.
Fs. return, as neither thy silly self nor Io. Corbet the Priest (who put forth
the Queries, and was accordingly answered above two years ago by Io. F.) will
ever be able to render any Reasonable Reply to, (for if ye could have refuted
them, the Press was as open for your Reply to them, as your bare Narration of
them) and so much as will stand over your heads for ever, as a Testimony of the
Duncicall Darkness, and Groa^able Blindness of you both in the Mysteries of the
Gospel, of which, for silthy lucres sake, ye do but fancy your selves to be
the Ministers; yet either one, or both of you two V pers have done the best, or
rather the worst ye could to abuse both Io. F. and the Qua. and the truth by
that Cut-short, Counterfeit Account, thou T.D. give the world of those
Queries and Answers, that passed between Priest Corbet and Joseph Fuce.

For there were 17 Queries put by (thy Cousen) Corbet, every one of which were
at large, and (as to any likelihood of their being answered by you)
unanswerably Replied to by Io.F. of which 17 thou bring'st out but eight.

2. As thou bring out not one half of Corbets Queries, so, I judge I may
safely say, not so much as the 20th part of I.F. his Answers, but only here and
there some such broken bits and pieces of them, as ye thought would represent
them, as weak and naked, to men's aspect, though indeed as piecemeal as ye have
rendered them, they may well be left to stand against all your Priestly Prate,
and pedling pelting* at them.

Why did ye not, seeing ye had a Quarrel at them, publish every inch of all I.
F. his Answers to the 8 Queries ye have set down? yea why not all the 17
Queries, and the whole of his returns to each of them, together with your own
Replies to those his Returns, that men might be undeceived by you that call
your selves their Ministers, and take on you to be their Masters, so as to
teach them truth, since ye deem them to be deceived by I.F. his Doctrines? and
then ye had saved your selves from the guilt and censure of that guile and
deceit, that now ye are found in, while ye are found shuffling and cutting,
picking and culling out here and there a ^aying, leaving out such adjoining
sentences, yea sometimes that half of the same sentence, which, being set down,
would have showed his true sense of the whole, which ye scrue and wrest, as far
as ye can tell how, into another then that intended by him: Expertus loquor, I
speak what I know, having (whether I shall Print it or no, I yet know not) the
whole entire Copy by me of those Queries and Answers amounting in all to two
sheets, thy Cutted Account whereof comes not near to the 8th part of one.

Surely either one or both of you two Brethren in iniquity T.D. I.Corb. saw ye
could not Reply to them, and so had made a swinging Rod for your Tayls, and
slasht your selves as foundly therewith also, had ye put forth the whole truth,
which ye have not told the Tithe of, whereupon ye have thrust out only some
mere fragments of it, with as much manglement of them too, as ye well durst
make, and with no other then this dribling answer of thine T.D. p. 6, of thy
second Narrative, viz, Surely by these Principles, in Conjunction with the rest
in the Book, to which this Narrative is annexed (though the said Principles
remain as unrefuted, as impossible to be refuted by T.D.) the Qua. have for
ever forfeited the name of Christians, and are to be reputed Heathens.

T.D. Thou tel'st and that twice over, viz. in thy Narrative, and in thy
Witness W. W's reinforcing Reply to L. H. a Tale of L. H s saying, The Priests
shall be destroyed by the people called Qua.

Rep. But L. H. has already so sufficiently disproved that in his Reply to thy
(...), styled, the Devils how unstringed, by three persons, who, as I laid
above, testify his words to have been otherwise, and so proved thy Witness
Will, Win^field Minister of Word, to be no Minister of the Word of truth, nor
such a Godly Minister as thou printest him out for, who can join so cordially
with thee in printing lies, that I need say nothing: yet that the Priests shall
be destroyed by the Qua. though L. H's words were not so, is true enough, I
here affirm it, yet not by outward Began, Sword, or carnal Weapon, but by the
Sword of the Spirit, or Word of God in their mouths: Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit says the Lord, Zach. 3.

T. D. Thou say in the second page of E. B's Book, or word of Advice to the
Soldiers, he bids them give the Ministers, or Priests blood to drink, for they
are worthy.

Rep. True enough, that the Priests will have as much blood as they are worthy
of from the Lord, though the Qua. desire the salvation of their souls and
bodies too, if yet it may be, and the destruction of nothing, but that sin,
blindness and darkness, which destroys them in both: Howbeit in the second
page of E Bill's. book (unless there be another of his, or of E. Bur's. so
styled) I find no such words as thou arts est to be there on thy own personal
knowledge: and so all thy proofs of thy Grand Lie, for ought I see, fail thee,
and Lie in the Lake together with it.

Many more absurd and foolish frivolous tales thou tellest, that ^ omit; but
two more of thy lying accusations of the Qua. more Remarkable, then all the
rest of those Remarkable passages of thy two (for nothing more then the many
lies thereof) most Renowned Narratives, remain yet to be Remarked, that all may
see how thou and thy heard of hearers, and drove of ear-wigs have not so much
me al honesty as to speak truth in matters of fact, which is the very fault
thou chargest us with, and the worse in thee, since Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa
red arguit ipsum. And then I shall be at liberty to take a view of the many
Lies of thy Doctrine.

Those two, one whereof is prosecuted in thy last Narrative only, and the other
more wickedly then wisely made, and drove on very devoutly in both, but
especially in thy first, without either care or good counc^l, consideration or
conscience, Truth or Righteousness, sense or reason, fear or wit, are these.

T. D. That the Qua. intend to prosecute the promotion of their Principles by
that bloody way of persecution with the outward sword.

2. That the Qua. are doubtlesly acted by the Antichristian, or Romish faction,
and do drive on the Popish work and Papistical design, and of Qua. become
Papists: and further (for this Lie splits it self into two parts, one
concerning the Qua. in general, the other concerning my self in particular)
that I.S.F. am probably, and appear to be not only a Rank Papist, but also
(...) Jesuit holding compliance with the Pope, serving the Sea of Rome, and
such like, of which more at large by and by.

Rep. As to the first of these thy two Lies of the Qua. it lies thus palpably
ayerred in thy own words.

T. D. The truth is, the Qua. now declare their intentions to propagate their
persuasions by the sword, whereas they were want to pretend to so much
meekness, or peaceableness, that they would hold neither spea^, nor sword.

Rep. Here Is the charge; An Arrand Lie, yet a Truth, if four or five more Lies
will Serve to prove it; if not, men must take it for truth on no other Acconu^,
then this, because T.D. who tells so many Lies, that he deserves not to be
believed, when he speaks the truth, does falsely Say so: for thy pieces of
proof, which are too piteous to prove thy main false Charge, were they all
true, are, as to the truest information that I can get thereof, every of them
false Charges, and a pack of Ly^s, like to that they are brought in proof of.

The first Proof is this slender Story. At a Late Meeting of the Qua. in Hurst
Pierpoint in Suffex, He that undertook to be Speaker, called out to the Priest,
who accidentally pasled by, saying, we will have you all down; for now our day
is come.

The second, this Tale. And a other Qua. in the Parish ^f Nuthurst, in the same
Coun^y, did say to a Godly person of good quality in that Parish, that he no
more cared to kill one of the Priests, as he styled the Ministers, then he
would to kill a Dog.

The Third, This Wicked Lie. And another Qua. Waylaid the Minister of
Covehould (a very worthy Reverend man at his return from a Fast) and justled
him upon the high way, (as he kept it havi^g his Wife behind him) and drew out
his Sword, which he had by his side, about half way, which was a shrewd
presumption that he intended the Minister mischi^f, but that some neighbors
that came from the Fast, Coming up to them, prevented it; and they do usually
give o^t threatening speeches against the Ministry, and their Friends.

Rep. In answer to these three, I here subscribe such information, as came from
the mouths, or hands of sundry S^ssex men, living in and about these Parishes
or Places; T.D. Relates these matters of a truth to have been done, and spoken
in, three or four of which are it seems, members of those two Parishes of
Nuthurst, and Covewold, in such wi^e as follows.

These three Charges or slanderous Accusations (as they appear to us) Coming to
our hands, we, who are Inhabitants in the County of Sussex, near adjoining to
these places, where the Author says these things were done, one of us dwelling
in one of these Parishes, which he makes mention of, have a good and perfect
knowledge of these men, who are called Quakers, and that They are men of better
Qualifications, then to offer such violence, or to give out such terms as is
here Charged upon them. Therefore for better satisfaction to ourselves, as also
for the sake of others, who may be deceived in believing such things, by giving
Credit unto them, without a surer ground, then because they are come forth in
Print to a public view, also from such A hand, whom they might think would not
be so dishonest, as to be the Author of things that are not true. Upon these
Considerations and others, which might be mentioned, we undertook to search out
the matter with some diligence, that all who desire may be truly informed, and
who have prejudice in themselves, neither against one sort of people nor
another, because of names or differing in judgment (as we have not our selves)
who are now about to satisfy of this matter that truth may appear, and that
every action may be tried by it in and among all sorts of people.

Bryan Wilkinson. Humphery Killingbeck.

So for the first accusation, which the Author makes mention to be spoken at
Hurst, he has caused a lie to be printed, as also the other two, for there
were no such words spoke, nonly the friend, that did speak some words, from
whence this report might arise, might ask the Priest of Hurst what they would
do if the powers of the earth should for sake them, these words its like were
spoken.

And as for the second accusation and slanderous lie, which he says was spoken
by a Quake^s in the Parish of Nuthurst, we whose names are here under written,
did go unto the man whom the Author calls godly and of good quality (unto whom
he said these words were spoken) to know the truth of this thing: And his
answer to us was, as he and some others were drinking together, there was one
amongst them did say, that it was no more sin for to kill a wicked man, then a
Swine.

Thomas Wyly. Nicolas Manard.

Though there was one, who went under the name of a Quaker, who did dwell in
Nuthurst Parish, whom the man, which the Author calls godly and of good
quality, did say was the man, that spoke these words above mentioned; which
are otherwi^e then what is Printed: Yet this man he ca^ls Quaker, that should
say these words, has not dwelt in the Parish of Nuthurst, neither in the
County of Sussex this two year and half and above, neither has he been in
these parts of so long time, as can be sufficiently proved, and the cause of
this might arise above a year before he went a way.

And as for the third slanderous accusation: the Minister of Cavehold, which
the Author of this scandalous Book calls a very reverend man, we whose names
are here under mentioned, did go unto this Minister of Cavehold in Sussex the
16th day of this eleventh month. 59. For to have him to set his hand against
this Scandal; Because we knew that there was no such thing offered by them,
from which this slander might arise: And his Answer to us was, that there was
three Caveholds in England, and that it might be at some of them: But he said
that he knew the man ( T.D.) that set forth the Book, and that he had one of
them himself, and he said he would send to the man to enquire of him, and if he
meant Cavehold in Sussex he would give it under his hand that he was
misinformed, for there was no such thing done there: Neither to him.

Humphery Killingbeck. Robert Thornden.

But we have great Cause to believe, that this slanderous Accusation did arise
at the first from the Priest of Cavehod in Sussex, or by his means, as you
shall hear; for upon the 29 day of the 4th month, this present year 1659. at
Horsam in Sussex this Priest of Cavehold in Sussex, with some other Priests
besides of Sussex, did meet at the Steeple-House in H^^sam aforesaid in Sussex,
where many of their Members, and other people besides were gathered together,
as they said, to keep it as a day of Humiliation on Fasting day: Among which
Robert Adams and some other Friends, who are called Quakers had freedom to go
into the Steeple-House among them, and when the Priest of Caveh^ld of Sussex
had done, and come out of the Pulpit, one friend did speak something in way of
desire to the Priests to give the people called Qua. a public dispute
concerning Tithes, and other things, that people might come to understand who
were most in the truth, whether Priests, or we called Qua. So upon our return
homewards, after that we had Rid about a Mile, one William Field ove^took us,
one of the Priests Members, which Rid along with us on the Rode, about a Mile
and a half, in which time Priest Vinter, the Priest of Cavehold in Sussex, (for
so his name is, George Vinter, and he had his Wife behind him) did overtake us
as we Rid together, being in some discourse, and this Priest did bid Robert
Adams called Qua. Ride out of the way, and R.A. said, the way might be as free
for me as for thee, yet nevertheless in regard thou have one behind thee, I
will: and so he did Ride by the way: upon which the Priest did answer, if I had
not one behind me, I would have the way of thee, or one of us should lie in the
dust, and other threatening terms was given to R.A. by one who was in the same
Company of the (...), who Rid up to us, and this man did justle R.A. on the
way, and did lay his hand, or hands upon him, justling him as he Rid along. But
after this we Rid together in discourse about his laying violent hands upon
R.A. and other things, till we came within about half a Mile of their
dwellings, where we parted. But as for a Sword R.A. had none, neither did he
offer any abuse, nor give occasion of any such thing as they have Printed.

This is the substance of the ri^e of this scandal, as I had it from Humphery
Killinbeck, who was the friend, that was with Robert Adams at that time.

Bryan Wilkinson.

Something of one of the Priests Chiefest Members taken by us B. W. Humphery
Killinbeck from his own hand writing. A true Copy.

Coming from a fast kept at Horsam, I overtook two men that had been at Horsam
called Qua. about a Mile from the Town, and Rid about a Mile with them, and
then the Minister of Caveh^ld and his Wife, and other Neighbors overtook them
also; But I saw no Sword any of them had, nor I think none of them, nor the
Minister, neither will he say that he offered him any vio^ence, I did not see
they did, and it is easy to know whether they did or not.

William Field.

Another Copy from under the hand of another of the Priests Members.

These are to certify whom it may Concern that I did hear the Minister of
Cavehold say that Robert Adams a Qua. did Ride from Horsam, and that he did
overtake him as he went from a Fast, and that Robert Adams did fall upon him in
Railing terms, and did justle him with his Wife behind him; But he did not draw
a Sword, neither had he any with him; Given under my hand, Cavehould 17th of
January, 1660.

By me Thomas Ward.

Another of Priest Vinters Members, a Copy subscribed with his own hand.

I Thomas Parsons one of the Parish of Cav^hould in Sussex, not being above
five miles from Horsam did not hear of it, neither by Mr. Vinter, nor by any
other Neighbor, and do think it very strange that any such things were, but I
should have known it.

By me Thomas Parson.

See T.D. how your own Parish people, the very Earth, helps the Church, the
Woman that bears the manchild against your slanderons Tongues and Pens, and
opens her mouth, and swallows up the flood of lies and falsehood, which that
great R^d D^agon, that Old Serpent, called the D^vill, and Satan casts out of
his own mouth, and the mouths of you his Angels, who fight under him against
Michaell and his Angels against her, that he might cause her (if he could) to
be carried away with that flood of wrath, which ye are ever warring against her
withal.

Thou tellest of Way-laying, when thy very Worthy and Reverend man, or Waylaid
Minister overtook the Qua. and swelled in high and Lordly words against him, in
his Lordly return from his L^^ly Fast, wherein (hower'e he might hang down his
head like a Bul-rush for a few hours yet) the bands of his wick^dness were not
loos^d, nor his haughty heart so well humbled as it should have been: thou
talk of justling and threatening speeches the Qua gave, when that was the
gesture used by others toward him; thou tell of a Qua. drawing his Sword,
and intending mischief, if Neighbors coming from the Fast had not prevented
it by coming up to them, whereas the man himself says there was no such thing
done there, nor to him, and the very Neigbours that came from the Fast, witness
against thee that the Qua. had no sword at all.

Blush therefore (as well thou may) thou that say thou are upon the Stage
not without a blush (but at what thou say not) and be ashamed of thy
abominable abuses, as one that must once be Conscious to thy self, if any light
be yet left in thy Con^cience, of wronging thy Qua. not only in thy Relation of
the disputes between thee and them, but also in thy naughty, nasty Narratives
of so many lies and false matters of fact concerning them; left the Lord give
thee over at last to stronger and stronger delusion yet, both to believe lies
thy self, that thou may be damned, and to belly the only true Beleivers of the
truth.

Now whereas in thy half sheet in answer to L. Hw. thou T.D. say thus: it may
suffice to let the world know thou have the (...) under the hand of Mr. Vinter
(as thou call'st him) Minister of Cavehould in Sussex, a very worthy and
Reverend man, who asserts the Assaults made upon himself by the Qua. and can
produce witnesses Credible of that Action, and of the words therein reported,
and that they that know him can inform those, who are ignorant, that his word
may be taken for matters of greater moment.

Rep. Much more might be said, but (as thou say) the Press being likely to
make the business more public then the Market place, what is above Printed may
(for more I have by me) suffice to let the world know (if yet thou have such
Relations under the Ministers hand) what kind of Creatures thy Credible
Witnesses are, and how unworthy thy very worthy and Reverend men are to be
called Ministers of the Gospel, and to have their words taken in matters of
Doctrine, and Soul conce^nment, who are found saying lies to thee in secret of
the Qua. and unsaying them to their faces, and not having so much moral
honesty as to speak truth in matters of Fact, nor yet so much trustiness
neither to their own Father of lies, as to keep his and their own Council,
without be wraying it, when they have done, as this Cavehold Reverend Clergy
man seems to have done by that Testimony of his I have here inserted, and that
contrary one to himself, which thou say thou have under his own hand; and
this may suffice also to let all men see, who are not wilfully blinded, what
fruits follow the most solemn Fasts of this Generation of Blind guides, when
they gather together after their devouring of Widows Houses, and sp^yling of
poor P^oples Goods for Tyths, for a pretense to make long Prayers; So that I
shall do no more, as to that last piece of Patch of T.D's. putting forth
(having returned the ^ye upon him again, which he thinks he has returned to
L.H) then, having plucked its wings, turn the Sting, that stands at the tail of
that Bawbling Butterfly, back upon himself, and in short shut up this my return
(as to that) in the very last words ( mutatis mutandis, additis addendis)
wherein thou T.D. concludest that thy, as Impudent, as Impotent Rejoinder to
L.H. viz.

So that upon the Whole, the Publisher hereof (S.F.) doubts not but that the
Wise will be able to discern between truth and falsehood, and will in their own
thoughts be as far from acquitting T.D. and his Companions, whom L.H. Charges
with Lying, as they would a Thief at the Bar, merely because he pleads not
guilty to his Indictment, which is an usual thing, let the evidence be what it
will. And he doubts not but if they should revile in Print again, he may be
excused, if he make no other return, then Inhonestum est honestam matronam cum
me^etrice litigare, i.e. It is unseemly for an honest Matron to stand brawling
with a Whore.

London, 2. d. 2. m. 1660.

Sam. Fisher.

And whether the Qua. or the Parish Priests are (respectively) the Loyal
Spouse, the Lambs Wife, Rev. 21. or that great Whore, which makes the Earth
Drunk with the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornications, Rev. 17. if the Night is
not yet spent far enough for all to see; yet Dies Declarabit (though this is
your hour and the power of Darkness) the day is at hand, that will declar^ it
to all that yet know it not.

And now as to thy General false charge of the Qua. as complying with the
Papists and Antichristian Faction, which is not thine alone, but that of Will.
Prinn, I. O. I. Tomb's, R. Baxte^ also, and of the Priest of Kendall, W.
Brownsword answered in that particular by E. Bur. I. Story, and in a manner of
the whole Covent of co-contenders against the Quakers.

Rep. I should blush and be Ashamed were I in thy case, to make such a
confident Narrative of it, and such an undoubted Profession of my faith
thereof, as thou do of thine, and produce no more then two such pitiful
proofs for it as thou do; and to send it abroad in Print on two such lame
legs, as can help it are the style.

Little more then a bare Repetition of thy Reasons after thee, is enough to a
Right Reader to Render the urger of them Reasonless and Ridiculous enough in
all Reason.

T. D. I am out of doubt, (say thou) they are Acted by the Antichristian
Faction.

Rep. Why so?

T. D. A Gentleman of good credit assured me that be met with an English Jesuit
in London, the first Lords day in June last; one who was bred in Cambridge, and
had been formerly of his acquaintance, who after some shyness to be known, at
length confessed that he came over to propagate the Romish Faith, and told him
that there was a good honest people called Quakers, whom we jeered at, that did
their work at the second hand; and he boasted much of the numbers that turned
Catholics immediately, or mediatly, by becoming Quakers.

Rep. Both thou and thy men of credit will come to be out of credit ere long,
if thou crack thy own and their credit but a little longer, so much as thou
have done hitherto.

But 1. Suppose it true, that he assured thee so. 2. Suppose that true he
assured thee of: what then? The Papists dote, as our Priests often do in other
cases, that that will make for them, which to any, but such as discern not the
signs of this season, does undoubtedly work toward their utter ruin, therefore
doubtlesly the Qua. either are or will turn Papists.

Object. But many by becoming Qua. turn Catholics.

Rep. The Qua. are of the Catholic Church, if thou will know, as thou do,
what Catholic is, but so are not the Papists, that are of no Church, but that
of Rome: the Church of Rome is but a Particular Church as that of England, or
another National one may be: but the Catholic Church is general and universal;
a Church that was before Rome was a Church or a City either, as some Qua. have
often asserted to Friars and Jesuits, to the stopping of their mouths: a Church
that had its Being (though the world sees it not, nor knows it) from Abel to
this day: to which General Assembly and Church of the firstborn, whose names
are written in heaven, and to the spirits of Just men made perfect, the Qua.
are come, as the Saints were of old, Heb. 12. and so (while Romanists are but,
as ye are, a Bastard brood) the Qua. are the truest Catholic Church, that is
in the world.

T. D. Another Gentleman, that came this Spring from St. Omars, did avouth that
he saw the Jesuits there, about four a Clock every evening throw off their
Gowns, and put on aprons, and betake themselves to the exercise of Handycraft
callings; some played the Shoomakers, others sa^e at the Loom, others killed and
dressed sheep, and they did not stick to boast, that under the disguise of such
callings (working as Iou^nymen, and changing place as they listed) they served
the Romish Church. And the Head of the College told him, that England never
was in so fair a way of return to the Romish Sea, since it broke off, as now.
And what hopes the Papists can have, unless from the increase of Qua. I leave
Reader to thy determination.

Rep. What news is this to any but Nevices, that Jesuits in craft use
handicraft callings, that under that disguise they may serve Rome? but what
follows hence?

T. D. Nempe similium similis ratio: the Qua. are mostly handicrafts men, and
in that the Jesuits and Qua. are alike: the one can outwardly work with their
hands, (a thing that our Priests will never do till they must needs) so can the
other; the one can make sh^os, so can the other; the one can handle the Loom,
kill and dress sheep, so can the other; therefore the Qua. and Jesuits are all
one.

Rep. And so are All things as they have a being; but as nullum simile est
Idem, so nullum simile currit quatuor, was a lesson that I once learned, and
T.D. too; but he can forget it for his own ends, and so argue as accurately a
comparatis, to prove the Qua. to be as like the Jesuits, as ever they can look,
as the Franciscan Friar in his Sermon a simili and comparatis comparandis,
proved his beloved St. Francis to be as exactly like to Christ, as could be, in
this manner; Christ was born, and so was St. Francis; Christ lived, and so did
St. Francis; Christ was on earth, and so was St. Francis; Christ died, and so
did St. Francis; Christ went to hell, and so did St. Fr. in all which the man
was very right; but when he stretched his simile so far in love to St. Francis,
as to say Christ came back again, and so did St. Fr. nay now thou lie (quoth
one of his hearers) for though Christ descended into hell, as did also Saint
Fr. yet he came out again, and so did not St. Fr. but he is there still, and
ever will be.

In like manner I Will yield to T. D's comparison of the Qua. and Jesuits as far
as is fit; the Jesuits are men, and so are the Qua. Jesuits are in Christendom,
and so are the Qua. Jesuits are Preachers, and so are the Qua. Jesuits can work
with their hands and preach too, and so can the Qua. (the more shame for our
lazy Lord Beggars that are ashamed to dig, but to beg are nor ashamed) but if
T.D. strein his stuff so far upon the Tenters, as (whereas the Jesuits do also
this to serve the Rom^sh Church) and in the height of his servent hatred to
the Qua. to say the Qua. do so too, I shall leave him Lying there, as the
fellow did the foresaid Friar, saying no more but thus; that what work with
their own hands preaching Qua do, they do it as Paul did, who (otherwise) had a
power to cease from working, that they may make the Gospel (which our Parish
Priests have long made such a gainful Trade of, to the cost of these Nations)
without charge to the Nations that yet own it not: as those did of old, 1 Ioh.
3. Ep. who went forth freely for his names sake, taking nothing of the Nations,

CHAP. III.
AND now as to thy second Part to the same tune, wherein thou Cantest i^ out
aloud concerning my self, who am not only more pers^nally and immediately
concerned in it, but concerned also for the Go^pels sake I hold forth to clear
my self.

Thou green-headedly go about to insinuate it into all people, that his not
groundlesly to be su'pected, that I Comply, as one with them, with the Pope or
Cardinals at Rome, as from some others, more simple, then it self, so chiefly
from that ( sa^is superque) simple Antecedent, viz. my (...) some Doctrines
which are theirs.

Now since I am one against whom there is such prejudice among all manner of
people, through the subtle, sinister, and sinful suggestions of the Priests,
both Prating, and Preaching and Printing me to be in likelihood a Papist, a
Jesuit, etc. So that I can go no where among those of my own Nation, in any
service to the Gospel,, where I am not so hit in the Teeth with Rome, and kissing
the Popes (...), and such like Toys, that Equity itself from my mouth, cannot
enter into many minds, by Reason of the Iniquity of Levi's lies, which are in
love with lies: bear with me yet a little longer in that folly of An^we^ing a
few Fools according to their Folly, though in so doing, I make my self for a
while more like them, then (through mercy) I Really am, left being (as else I
myself had much rather be in this case) wholly silent, they grow so wise in
their own conceits, as to take my total silence (as T.D. is very hasty to do in
other cases, p. 2.) for con^ent, that all the lies they broach, and for the
truths sake load me with, are Truths indeed.

The Capital Crime, then which I am by many Priests charged with, and which my
holding some Truths, they hold at Rome, is by T.D. made the Cardinal Proof of,
is that of Popery, of Receiving a Pension from the Pope, of Complying with the
Antichristian faction, with the Pope and Cardinals at Rome: The whole Parcel of
Proof, which that aforesaid is a Prime Part of, is made up of many more
particular Ingredients, and Compounded of several other Simples, whereof some
are urged not only in proof of the main Point, or Accusation, but as
Accusations themselves, of which some are true, some false, others urgd only as
proofs of that grand crime I am accused of.

I would willingly (much Printing being as burdensome to men's purses, as much
Writing is to their persons) to save the Charge of Printing that over again,
which was never worth the thousandth part of its first Impression, have briefly
hin^ed only at the heads of that fardell of falsehood, and cut them off as fast
as I had named them, but that I may be free from all suspicion of doing him
wrong, and be sure to do him no more then Right, who so grossly wrongs me, it
lies the more on me to se^ them down in his own words, wherein they Lie
altogether in one lake, p. 56, 57, 58. of T.D's. Paper, Only he shall give me,
or (if not) I shall take leave (as of^ as I see occasion) to leave out M^.
wherever it stands before my name, and set S. only in its stead, or any other
man's name, whether in this, or any other part of his book, when I have occasion
to mention any of those, to whose names he sets it (as he does to some, and not
to some, to show his partiality and respect of persons, which stands not with
the faith of God) and being on good grounds free neither to stand Mastering up
of them, into whose service I have never hired my self, nor (if they please to
forbear it to me wards) to own that Title of Mr. to my self, which some use so
much to each other, till it stinks, and T.D's book so much to me, that I am
ashamed on it, from any of them that were never any of my hired Servants: And
howbeit I once (Iure Academico) by as much Right, as such men, as choose to have
it still done so to themselves, in token of their Mastership of Arts, had that
Half penny piece of Honor of M.A. Printed to my name, as T.D. now has, in
Title-pages, (and that that past in times of ignorance, let it pass without
more mention, or finding fault with it, from my self and others) yet if my
self, or any shall henceforth write, or cause himself by Pen or Press, to be
inscribed either M.A. or D.D. or B.D. and any Reader in his ignorance, not
knowing well how to Cipher or cast Account, shall happen to Read Mr. Ass, or
Dr. Dunce, or Blind Divine, the Affecter of those Trifling Titles of Mr. of
Arts, Doctor in Divinity, and Batchelour in Divinity, who is not more
Baccalaureus, then Laurus sine baccis, shall in no wise be Laughed at, and as
little Lamented at all by me.

And since I am thus casually fallen upon this Theme, about Respect to men's
Persons, and using Titles of Honor to them; Its not much amiss (I minding Gods
matters more then Men's manners, and plain-ness more then that our Masters of
Art call Method) before I proceed in Examination of T.D's false charge of me,
as to matter of Popery, left I find no fitter Place for it in the after part of
this Book, to take notice here of another inordinate Charge of T.D. in which
(it concerning all the Qua.) my self also am not a little concerned, which, in
p. 47. of his first Pamph. upon occasion of R.H. his calling Thomas Rumsey by
his own name: is on this wise.

T. D. You Qua. are an unmannerly Generation, you might have given a Magistrate
the Title of Master.

Rep. How Contrary are these Teachers, Ministers, alias Servants of our times,
who (with the rest of their fellow Rabbis, painted Sepulchers, whited Walls,
outside cleansers, Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, blind Guides, strainers at
Gnats and swallowers of Camels) Love uppermost Rooms at Feasts, Chief Seats in
Synagogues, greetings in Markets, and affect to have men called, and to be
called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, Master, Master, Reverend Sir, and such like, to the
only One Master Christ, who condemns all this, and cries Woe against those, that
are found in it, Mat. 23. ^r^t otum?

How contrary are they to his Apostles, who forbade this respect to men's
Persons, which these Master Ministers are ever and anon pleading for against
the Qua. as a clownish, unmannerly Generation for not giving it: James says,
James 2.1. to 10. My Brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus with
respect of Persons: telling the Saints that if they have respect to Rich men
that wear gold Rings and goodly Apparel, and set them up on high, and despise
the Poor in vile Raiment, setting them at their heels, and putting them under
feet, as the footstool; they are Partial within themselves, Commit sin, and are
Convinced of the Law as Transgressors: Elihu, when he was to speak for God to
Job, and his great Friends, said Job 32.21, 22. Let me not accept any man's
Person, neither let me give fla^tering T^tl^s unto man; for I know not to give
fla^tering Titles: in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away: and so goes
on, using no other Titles to him beside his Name, and that plain (but now
disdained) Thee and (...), as his words are most truly and properly Translated
out of the O^ig^^al into Right English: thus did the Saints and Ministers of
God of old, even like to Christ himself, of whom it was said by the Pharisees,
Mat. 22.16, 17. that took notice of it (and perhaps disgusted it as much as our
Modern Ministers now do, some of which though they say little, yet think the
more) Master, we know thou art true, and Teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man, for thou rega^d^st not the Person of men, even
Caesar's mere Person more then another, yet he gave Caesar his due too and
(though he was free) gave him Tribute, Mat. 17.24, 25, 26, 27. and so did his
Saints then, and we now, give Tribute to whom Tribute, custom to whom custom,
honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear, obedience to wh^m obedience is due;
and with that honor of yielding Tribute and Subjection to, as we have the due
Benefit of Protection by their Laws while Just, and Enacted according to the
Law and Light of Christ in Every Conscience, which is holy, just and good, and
while as justly executed by Rulers, do we honor them: yet then only are their
Laws justly Enacted and Executed (nevertheless) when these outward Swordbearers
and their Laws are a Terror to Evil Works, and a Praise and Encouragement to
the good, and to them that do well; for else they act more Might then Right,
and (as the Devil does, who is the Prince of the Power of the air, the God of
this world and Ruler of the darkness of it) (...), according to mere will and
lust, not according to Law itself, by permission for a time, but not by any
true Commission from God himself, by whom the Law, which we own in its place,
was added because of transgression, and is not for the righteous, but for the
unrighteous, for murderers, thieves, and whatever is contrary to sound Doctrine
and Godliness.

And this truly divine Honor of subjection and obedience to Magistrates just
Laws, as justly Executed as Enacted, is it, and not the mere Humane H^mage of
high flattering Titles, as You and Sir, and complements, and cringings, and
outward worships, and genu-flexions, and bodily Bowings to men's persons, which
in the second Commandment (by whom ever used, as in the Typical shado^y time,
they were by Jacob to Esau himself, by ^ David and others, whose practice is
not our Rule, but Gods praecept) are prohibited to be given to the Image or
likeness of any thing in heaven, earth, or under the earth, is that God calls
for, and we give for conscience sake.

And thus we honor all men, owing nothing to any but love, which works no ill
to the neighbor, and fulfils the Law, and so children are bid by Paul to obey
their, Parents as it is fit in the Lord, in which obedience, though they make
not Idols of them, kneel not down, and ask them blessing, as in Popish days
they foolishly did to their Godfathers and Godmothers, when they meet them,
they are said according to that Commandment to Honor the Father and the
Mother, Ehh. 6.1, 2.

And so Servants in their Relation honor their own Masters, when, not with
eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, as fearing God the
great Master in heaven, they are faithful in the business they are entrusted
with by them, though they never stand cap in hand to them, and should never
call them by that name of Master, which yet we allow as the Scripture it self
does, as well that of Father, Mother, King, Ruler, Magistrate, when used, not
as a flattering Title, but as a Note, or Term of distinction between the
Relatum and the Correlatum in that Relation, that is between Princes and
Subjects, Parents and Children, Masters and the Servants, that have hired
themselves to them: and thus only ought things to-be among the Saints.

Howbeit such a Generation of Parasites are all sorts of Professors now become,
that (without exception of any but the Qua. who come to that beginning, which
is also the end of all things, and is now at hand) they all more or less have
Men's Persons in Admiration, because of Advantage, and are found sluttering and
falling down at the feet of the great Lords of the earth, little less then
adoring the Earthly Tabernacles of those that can climb highest in Authority,
and painting and trimming them out (as the rest of the Birds, did the naked
Iack-daw in the fable, with every one a new fine feather) till every one
plucking away his own again, as anon they do, they leave their Lords, who knew
not their old friends, nor themselves neither, while their honor lasted, which
is ( plus in honorante ever, then in honorato) and stands more in his fickle
will, that gives, then his, that has the honor, as naked laughing stocks in
the midst of their fellow creatures, and in more fullness of shame and confusion
of face, then could have befell them possibly, had they never been so
preheminently exalted.

Yea so odious are the cronchings of Christians to each other, according as
they are higher or lower in their Gentile Preferments, and Gentilelike
Lordliness that they (contrary to Christ, who said to his Disciples, Mat.
20.25, 26, 27. it shall not be so among you) exercise over one another, and
that not only in Italy, France, and Spain, but even in these, so ever and anon
besworn (not to say forsworn) Nations, that are ever reforming, and yet
deformed, that it loads and loathes the life of God in his Saints, while in the
light it looks upon those Antic Adorations, that pass between man and man,
Christian and Christian, Brother and Brother in the same Church, when one
clambers but a little higher then another in places of earthly command, not
only in such words, as may it please your Highness, your Excellency, my Lord,
etc. but also such Gestures and Postures of standing ^^re, and putting off, and
bending to the very soles of one another feet in token of respect, and that
sometimes when in heart they could with each other hanged, and holding up one
another Trains, cum multis aliis quae nauc, etc. as if they would do honor
to the shadow of one another shoo-strings, and tie themselves eternally to
attend upon the very Tails one of another, for the lease of such perishing
pieces of outward honor, as are entailed (as they dream) on such and such
places (as persons can procure them) for no less then from henceforth world
without end Amen.

Besides oh the shamefully mis-attributed Titles that are now entaild as Badges
of Honor by men one to another, from Generation to Generation, as may it
please your Holiness, which is that Flattering Title Blasphemously and
Profanely attributed to his Wickedness the Pope, your Majesty, your Highness,
your Grace, your Eminency, your Excellency, your Honor, your Worship, etc:
Honored Sir, Reverend Sir, Worthy Sir, Segnior, Mounsieur, Master, etc: which
are ( Respectively) attributed to Emperors, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Generals,
Marquesses, Earls, Vizcounts, Barons, Baronets, Knights, Esquire. Judges,
Sergeants, Doctors at Law, Councellers, Governors and Commanders, Civil and
Millitary, Cardinals, Mountseniors, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Arch
Deacons, Deanes, and their Officialls, Doctors, Batchelors in Divinity, and
other Sciences, Masters and Batchelors of Arts, and such Academicall Admirers
of men's persons for Advantage, Rectors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and other
such Spiritual Persons, and Clericall, Classical, and Conventionall
Creatures, and all these little less abominaably, and profanely, then that of
Holiness to the Pope, forasmuch as the men (called Christians) who now give and
take all these, do, to their own further Confusion make Confession to God
himself through their Priests Lips, and Ministers mouths in their daily
Prayers, that all Honor, Glory, Praise, Power, Blessing, Dignity, Dominion,
Worship, Worth, Reverence, Thanksgiving and Obedience belongs to God alone; and
do to him only (but that they mock him while they Pray) seem to ascribe it all;
and if all belong to him only, then none to Man, whose breath is in his
Nostrills, who is to be ceased from, and not at all to be accounted on, at
least while he bears (as in the fall he does) no other then the Dishonorable
Image of Satan, and till he come back by the Light into that Image, and Glory
of God, which now by sin (saving the few that are Regenerated from that
Degeneracy) Mankind universally comes short of; which Image, Power, and Glory
of God alone in man, which Image is Christ Jesus, the Righteousness and Wisdom
of God, the express Image of the Father, we Respect, Reverence and Honor,
where even it appears, let the person in which be elsewise never so mean among
mistaken men; so daily honoring all men ( in the Lord) as enjoined by him, 1
Pet. 2. and as he does that dwells in Gods Holy Hill, in whose eyes as its
said, Psalm. 15. a Vile person is contemned (not estimated, or counted on the
more for his outward greatness) but he Honors them that fear the Lord, whom
men in the fall, that regard wordly Goods and earthly Greatness, more then
Real and Heavenly Goodness, for the most part are found despising.

And further yet, so gros is the greediness after this destruction, of the
Faith of God by the fore^aid Respect to men's Persons in this English Nation,
that for the sake thereof they are, as few or no Nations besides them are,
become more ignorant in one thing, then the poor unlearned Qua. (as they call
them) are in their own mother Tongue: for as little as the Qua. do ultra
linguam vernaculam sapers, and as little La ine as they understand, as I. O.
says in his Latin Labors against them, yet they both ken and keep to the
proper Idiom of the English Language, in using that of Thee and Thou, when they
speak to what ever single Person without respect, but our M^ngrill Seed, or
Canaanitish Ashdodites, speak half one way, and half another, often Thee-ing
and Thou-ing their inferiors, but so ^are of offending great Mecenasses, and
men of place and Power (^ho in eodem cum illis harent lut^) they ^peak by the
Plural (You) as if they were talking to more, while they are bespeaking no
more then one: an absurd abuse of their Native National Tongue.

In Hebrew, Greek and Latin there is not such a gross perverting of the
pronoune of the 2d. person Plural, as Slavish fear and flattery, and fawning,
and pride, and men pleasing, and Ambition; and affectation of the Honor from
beneath, and respect to the persons of men, and having them in admiration
because of advantage and such like dirt and filth as is tit for naught, but the
Dunghill, from whence it came, has brought into our English Nation, where the
filth aforesaid has blinded, and besotted the Foolish folk thereof, so far
that it has in a manner forced them universally to forget and forsake that
form of speech that is most proper to the English tongue, and utterly to loose
their own Native Language and the right use of the aforesaid Pronoune, so as to
wrest it besides its own due, true, special, prime, and genuine signification
into a sense that is (in truth) no less then false, silly, and non sensicall.

For in Hebrew, (...) Attah ((...), if it be the Faeminine) not only signifies
Thou or Thee, as likewise (...) Attem and Atten in the Plural You and Ye, but
also the Jewish Nation in their writings and talkings one to another (as they
ever did) so do at this day usually keep thereunto, saying continually, when
they speak to a single per on only, though never so great, as well as when to
the meanest, Attah (or At, if to a woman) that is ( being Englished) Thou or
Thee, but never Attem or Atten, that is (being Englished) You or Ye, but when
they speak to more then one; the truth whereof, as some of them called Qua.
have been Ear Witnesses, who have been in discourse with many of those
thousands of the Jews they have been amongst, so all that know ought of the
Hebrew Tongue, may be eye Witness thereof, if they will but peruse the
Scriptures, or any other writings in that Language.

Also in Greek (...), su, sou, soi, se, which are the same pronoune of the 2d
Person Singular, varied only as to the Case, signifying Thou or Thee, are
universally used among the Gracians, both in Orall discourses, and Writings,
when a single person only is spoken to, and the words in the Plural, (...),
humeu, humon, humin, humas, which in English are you or ye used only when more
then one are spoken to.

Also in Latin every one that is learned no farther then the Accidence has
learnt so much that Tu, tui, tibi, te, which are Thou or Thee, in the singular
number only, a^e used, and never vos, vestrium, vobis, which in sense and
signification are You and Ye, when a single person only is written or spoken
to, and it would be counted false Latin and Ridiculous, and such a thing as
deserves hissing at among very School-Boyes, to use the Terms vos or vobis to
express one single person by.

And yet such is the Folly and Apishness of our English Nation, that when they
speak to one person only, specially if it be a Superior (for when they speak
to Inferiors, they often times keep to Thee and Thou, and Thy or Thine, which
is the pronoune possessive, derived from its primitive Thou: E. G. Thou shall
have this or that, I will give this or that to Thee, get Thee hence, go Thy
why, this book is Thine and such like) but when a Superior (I say) is spoken
to as a Matter, a Father, a Landlord, a Knight, a Gentleman, as they call
them, a Magistrate, a Governor, or some great ^ne, then out of that
Reverentiall respect they have to men's Persons, (which cannot stand with the
true faith of God, and without transgression of the Law Iam. 2.) they use the
words You and Ye, and Your and Yours etc: which in the propriety of the
English speech, are only for the Plural number, and to be used only when more
persons then one are spoken to: which gross digression and degeneration from
the truth of their own mother Tongue in saying You Sir, may it please you, your
Worship, your Excellency or the like, is as abominably absurd, as it would be,
if in any of the three Languages abovesaid, men should use words of the Plural
number to a particular person, and the absolute absurdity of that every A B
C-darian only in any of those Tongues is able to discover, and would Abandon:
yea to say in English, you Sir, to one man, be he never so Eminent, is as false
English, as its false Latin to say to one in Latin, vos domine, and that is as
false, as to expre^s these words (Thou love) by the Latin words vos amas,
which is no better then nos am^, or ego aman^^us, or tu ama^is, or ^ille amant,
and all this the very Accidence does cry shame on: Finally, as the Hebrew,
Greek and Latin Testaments, as well as all other writings in those several
Languages, do so clearly witness it (besides what evidence comes into this
matter from other Tongues ( viz) Italian, Dutch, Spanish, etc) that as we may
safely summon all men to show us so much as one instance, where any of the
words of the Plural number are ever used to a verb of the second person
singular, or used to express one single individual person, so as to say in
Hebrew, (...) Abavia Attem, or in Greek, (...) or in Latin vos amas, which are
all, being Englished, Thou Levest, so (excepting the writings of modern men
only; or their modern Translations of other Ancient, Humane writings, which all
makes nothing against us in this case) so rightly, properly, and truly, both
have and still daily do our very Adversaries fall in with us, and favor us,
whether they will or no, in this point in the Translation of all our English
Bible, which for shame they will not say, but they have Translated into the
most proper, and not improper English, that we can challenge all English men in
the world to show us any one Translation, or any place in any one Translation
of the Bible, out of Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, into the English Tongue, wherein
the word You (which is now so used in their Common discourses one to another,
but especially when proud personages are bespoken) or any other term then that
of Thou or Thee is used to speak to a single person by, as well when God
himself, or the greatest King or proudest Prince, as when the poorest Peasant,
or simplest Servant is spoken to, and we will yield further to them that
stomach it to be Thee'd and Thou Would by us, then yet we can, or if they will help
themselves by such a helpless shift, as to say the Bibles are not Translated so
properly and truly as they should be, as to those words of Thou or Thee, let
such as snuff at Thou and Thee from us, put out the words Thou and Thee, and
instead thereof, put in the words you or ye, when God and great men are spoken
to, so as where its said to God, Thou O Lord made the Heavens, and they are
the work of Thine Hands, all Thy works praise Thee, and Thy Saints bless Thee,
to read thus, ( viz) You O God made the Heavens, they are the works of Your
Hands, all Your works praise You, and Your Saints bless You, etc: and in that
place where Paul says to Agrippa, do Thou believe O King Agrippa? yea I know
Thou beleivest, to Read, do Ye believe O King Agrippa, yea I know You
beleivest, and they will see what a palpable piece of nonsense it would amount
to, like to which yet they utter and sound forth in their ordinary locution,
but feel it not; And last of all, if Thou and Thee be not to be used to a
single person only, it has no place, nor use at all in the English-Tongue, for
it cannot possibly be properly used when we speak to more, it being (saving when
we speak to them as a Collective body, and as one, and so sometimes the Prophets
spoke to whole Nations under the Term of Thou and Thee) no less unsound and
unsavory to say Thou or Thee to 20 men, as You or Ye to one, and alike foolish
to say to two several men, Thou shale both dye, i will kill Thee both, as to say
to one of them only, You alone shall dye, I will kill You; which are two Bulls
that deserve both to be soundly baited.

To conclude this then, we see how our Chief Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and
Hypocrites of these days, as they did of old Love the Praise of men, more then
the Praise of God; have that Faith, they have in God, with respect to the
Persons of men, which who so has is a Sinner, and Transgressor of the Law, and
though their mouths speak great swelling words of Faith, Religion, Reformation,
God, Christ, Church, Ministry, Maintenanc^, yet they are but walkers after
their own Lusts and, Sensual, or mere Animal as Jude says, verse 16.19. not
having the Spirit, while they have men's persons in admiration, because of
advantage; and believe not, though they deem themselves (every one in his own
form) to be the true beleivers, so long as they are thus busied in begging and
buying, giving and taking this honor that is from beneath only: for not
seeking the honor that is only from above, which all the Saints have Psalm.
149.9. let them say what they will, ye says Christ, Ioh. 5.44. How can ye
believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the Honor that
comes from God only? As unmannerly a Generation then as T.D. faith the Qua.
are, in not using that flattering Title of Mr. to T. Rumsey the Magistrate, I
say if T. Rs. carriage were more like a Magistrates, then it is, according to
the Proverb, it is better of the two, if that were unmannerliness, to be a
little unmannerly, then so much troublesome as men in the fall are one to
another with their Tedious Attendances, Antic Adoratious of each other, and
supersluous Complements, bu^ indeed (...) good manners to use it by none, but
that people, whose evil Communications corrupt good manners, the Heathen whose
Customs are vain: and as for us, if any man list to be contentious about our
manners in such matters, he must know that, as there is no Law of God or man
that hinds us from Keeping on our hats, from thee or thou, to Cap and Congee,
and you Sir, and Master, and such like flatteries, not to say mere fooleries,
which are all in the fall; so we have no such manner of manners, nor customs
among us, nor any of the true Churches of God. And hereby we appear to any,
save such as will needs mistake us, to be neither Papists, nor Popish Priests;
for they have as much of that kind of ill manners of honoring each others
persons, as is to be found among your selves, nevertheless, who so blind as he
that will not see, thou T. D. wilt needs so befool thy self as to make it
pro^abl^ that I am one of them, whose words (excepting as in the proviso
abovesaid, ^re now Verbatim to be Rehearsed; who having hinted it in p. 55. how
Rob. Wilkinson Minister of Staple had accused me to have been at Rome, and
received a Pension from the Pope go on as follows.

T. D. As to the matter whereof Samuel Fisher was accused, part of it he denied
not, namely, that he has been at Rome, but that he received a Pension from the
Pope, he utterly denied, which yet that is probably as true, for I have it from
very good hands, that in his late travail to Constantinople, and thence to
Rome, he had as good Bills of Exchange, as most Gentlemen that travail, and
yet it is well known that he has no visible Estate. And the Qua. who came to
hear the dispute (who I suppose would not belly him) did report, that he did
bear his witness against the Pope and Cardinals at Rome, and yet suffered them
not to meddle with him, which how unprobable it is, let all men judge, but how
much more probable, that the true cause of his safety was his compliance with
them, the Doctrines which he broaches among us, and (as he says) in all other
places, being theirs, and a fair inlet to their Bag and Baggage. And to assure
the Reader of the likelihood of his compliance with the Antichristian Faction,
Mr. Tho. Foxton Iurate, ^ Tho. Barber, Cooper. Mr. Tho. Foxton, Iurate, Tho.
Barber, Cooper. John Boys Esquire Mr. Chapter Nichols, Mr. Th. Foxton, etc.
thou may please to know, that the 12th instant (English account) two honest,
and credible men of Sandwich had some discourse with S. Fisher at Dunkirk, and
he told them that he looked upon the Jesuits and Friars there, to be founder in
Doctrine, then those we call the Reformed Churches. This they are ready to
testify at any time upon call.

Another passage I have to acquaint thee with, viz. that the aforesaid S.
Fisher, in Conference with the abovenamed Sandwich men at Dunkirk, May 12.
English style, did affirm that he himself is above Ordinances, and that there
is no more use of them in this life, to many portions, then there is of a
Candlelight, when the Sun shines, and he gave instance in the uselessness of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

And the same witnesses were credibly informed at Dunkirk, that S. Fisher has
great Bills of Exchange from a Quaking London Merchant, and may take up four
hundred pound if he will.

And hundreds of people can testify how light he made of the charge of Pope^^,
on the first day of the Dispute, when I plucked Amesus 4th Tome against
Bellarmine, and offered to read part of it out of the Latin into English; and
with a gesture of derision he replied, that Bellarmine held many Truths, which
must not be rejected because he held them, and he gave for instance, that
Christ is the Son of God.

Moreover in p. 14. Thou writest thus (viz) the third Question debated on was
(though with much ado) at length stated in these Terms; wheth^^ OUR good works
are the meritorious cause of our justification? and S. F. held it in the
affirmative. S. F. T^us I prove it: to these words T. D. now you show your self
a Rank Papist indeed.

Rep. Monstrum, Hor^endum, Inform, Ingens, cui lumen ademptum! what a Horrible
bundle of blindness is here? what a hidden heap of Hocus p^cus? this nasty
piece of Na^^ative is, of itself, a little Lake of Lies, and the whole is
little better: under this Hedge are many Hedg-Hogs hidden, many Cockatrices
hatched up, whose fruit is as a fiery (...) Serpent, many false Tongues fed
with fuel fit for them, many Fools fenced in their folly, as with a Thicket of
Thorns, many Sons of Beli^^ bolstred up in their Blasphemies, and emboldened
to throw about in their madness Firebrands, Arrows and Death: Among these
Nettles of thy planting T.D. do the Seed of the Serpent, the Generation of
Vipers breed, make their nests, nourish up one another, and so securely shelter
themselves under the shadow thereof, that like Adders and Scorpions they sting
(cum privilegio) with their Tongues, and with their Tails, not only shooting
out misreports from their mouths, but leaving behind them, where ere they come,
the fiery Darts of their Lying Tales, the deadly Poison of which sets on fire
the course of nature in virulent Spirits, and whole households on fire of Hell
against the truth; in which work, but that Truth is strong enough to stop, as
well the Liars, as the Lions mouths, these Creatures of thy Creating could not
quickly be controlled, having now the Authority of thy Printed (...) to show
for their Abomination, and to back them in it, which, (...) like some
Benefactor to their lying lips, thou have, as a certain Legend of Lies,
bestowed upon them.

Its but meet therefore, and more then time that some Reply be from me Returned
to these and other particulars of thy Legend for Truths sake, though else (so
far as my person alone, and abstract from that, is interessed therein) I should
(God knows) in whom I am hid as in a-Pavillion from the strife of tongues,
please my self much more to sit down in silence (as I have hitherto done under
many other men's misreports of another nature) under the Tumultuousness of the
wicked, who are like troubled Raging Waves of the Sea, never at rest, but ever
casting up Mire and Dirt, and foaming out against me their own shame, and thine
also, whilst stirred up thereto by the Stormy Wind of that malevolent Spirit,
which from this and several other Quarters of thy Book breaths out, and blows
upon them: ^ yea did I not see the Truth, though vindicated against thee to the
full by my foresaid friends R. H. G. W. suffering among some, where their
writings have not come, for want of somewhat from my self, I should assuredly
sit still, drinking in contentedly every dram of thy drassy discourse, under
this thy Tempestuous shower, whilst it shatters it self down from thy black
Inky Pen in such dirty droppings upon my head, or at most saying, as one
dribling disputant used to say, no more then Quid tum? to all that is True, and
Negatur id, to all that is false, which (though it be but a Ridiculous Reply)
yet would Rout it all, and were an Answer answerable enough to thy Ridiculous
Reports, for that of thine, that is True has nothing in it so much as probably
to prove what thou inferr'st from it, and that which is false in itself, as to
the thing asserted, is fit for nothing but to be denied, for from it much less
can there either probably or possibly be inferred any truth; For whereas they
say of Propositions and premises, according as they regularly and legitimately,
or Irregularly are disposed as to the outward form thereof, thus (viz) Ex
falsis falsum verum ^aliquando sequetur, Ex veris possit ^il nisi vera sequi;
So inverting the order say I of prepositions or premises according as they are
true or false in their subject matter. Ex, veris verum falsum q^aliquando
Sequetur, Exfalsis possi^ nil nisi falsa sequi.

Now therefore that Honest well meaning men and simple hearted people may be no
more Guld and misguided by thy gilded Glosses in these particulars, as many
have been, as well in these particulars concerning my single self, as in those
aforesaid concerning both me and the Qua. in general, and that the mouth of
the Horse and Mule, ( ^cupiunt placere Magistro, utuntur diligentia, nec sunt
tanti cessatores ut calcaribus indigeant) which are forward enough and to fall
on, and open in lies, do not need thy Spur, may be held in from any more
harming, as with Bit and Bridle; in the Name of the Lord, though he that
removes the Stones, and breaks the Hedge wh^re Serpents lodge, may look not
only to be Hissed at for his pains, but also to be hurt, and bitten therewith,
I shall bring down this Slight Wall, which thou have built, and other diviners
of Lies dawb with their untempered Mortar, Glorying therein as in some strong
Tower, though it is but Rudis indigestaque moles, a Rock of mere Rubbish, and
no more then a refuge of Lies, that the foundation thereof may be discovered;
and, not bawlking for the bawlings, barkings and brabbles of any owners
thereof, I shall break in upon this bushy brake of briars and Brambles, and lay
the Axe to the Root of it, which is no better than Rottenesse it self, that its
blossom may go up as the dust; but I confess were I not guided by a
manifestation of that Spirit of God, of which thou lyingly say ver. 53. R.
H. and G. W. had little of (for it was by a plentiful measure of that Spirit of
God, which Blasphemously thou call a Spirit of Error and Contradiction, by
which they so hampered thee, that thou wast able with all thy R^ason to Resist
it no otherwise their those, who resisted the same in Steven, Acts 6.9.10.11.
and not by that mother wit, to which thou a cribest it) I should have been much
to seek how to behave my self in the handling of these thy unhearn businesses,
I mean thy two Narratives (of which this parcel about the Qua. being probably
Papists, and my self probably A Jesuit is a most remarka^le passage) yea so
over grown are they with lying words, and all manner of evil weeds, that as
the bungling Barber for want of skill never left handling the deformed,
overgrown Beard of a new Customer, of which he should have left some standing,
till he had handled it all away; so I should hardly have found any thing at all
in them that's worth sparing, the very truths that are therein, being told to as
bad an end as the very Lies: but wisdom is profitable to direct; in that
measure of which, that I, who am else ^a very fool, have received from above,
and from him alone, out of whose mouth it comes to all them, and them only,
who wait for it thereat, I reject no more then that which is Refuse, and deal
with these thy two Excrementitious matters, as men do with the most
unprofitable and useless hair of Hogs and Swine, when they have to do with it;
viz. make use of so many of the best Bristles as will fit their own use, and
singe the rest in the fire, or else sweep it all away into the Sink; for that
little of thy superfluous stories, which must be granted for true and
serviceable, serves not thee, who re. latest it so well against me, as it
serves me, against whom thou relatest it, against thy self.

In disproof then of the Truth of thy A^ch-Assertion, or Accusation of me to be
a Rank Papist, a Complyer with the Pope and Cardinals, and one that receive a
Pension from him, which is the Top-stone of thy brittle building that I am to
take down, and the Conclusion in proof of the probability whereof at least all
the rest is alleged, I shall not (as much Countryfied as I am) be so Dunsical
as to begin with the denial of the Conclusion, nor would my nay prevail against
thy yea among thy Creditors, if I should; but discover first the falseness,
weakness, nakedness and inconsequences of the Premises, that every indifferent
Reader may conclude the utter improbability of the truth of thy confident
conclusion within himself, and remove the under stones, which thou lay'st for
thy foundation, and among the rest, that of my holding some Doctrines held at
Rome, which thou make the very head of the Corner, that so the fore^aid
Topstone may tumble down of it self.

What is true among thy Premises, I shall own the Truth of, but deny the
consequence thereof, as to that which by thee is from thence deduced: and what
is false not only deny, but also deny the consequence of it if it were true.

1. That I have been at Rome, and there born my Testimony against the Pope and
Cardinals (in such wise ^as was required of me by the Lord who sent me) who
only (and not I my self, as thou ( quippingly) recitest that passage) suffered
them not to meddle with me, that I made light of thy charging me with Popery,
and that I was at Dunkirk, and in discourse with the two men of Sandwich, T.
Foxton and T. Barber at the time thou speak of; and that somewhat by me was
spoken about Friars and Jesuits, holding some sound Doctrines, which some
Protestant Priests deny, and somewhat about the non-necessity, or indifferency
of the use of the things ye call Ordinances, where the substance, of which they
were shadows, and to which as figures they pointed, was come in place, like as
of a Candle where the Sun shines: and that I said, good Works (intending
Christ's) are the meritorious cause of our Justification, and argued a
contrariis to this effect, (viz.) Evil works are the meritorious cause of our
condemnation, therefore good Works are the meritorious cause of our
non-condemnation or Justification; all these Premises are owned and thy elf
also, Asserting thus far only of me, artown'd as standering me of no more then
Truth: but quid hoc ad Rh^mbum? all this yet is of no consequence as to thy
deduction.

And 2. As to all the Rest, (viz.) my having Bills of Exchange to and from
Constantinople to Rome, and my Broaching Doctrines that are not only theirs,
but a fair inlet to their Bag and Baggage, and my saying to T. F. and T. B. at
Dunkirk, in those very Terms thou set down ( v^z.) that I looked upon the
Jesuits and Friars there, to be sounder in Doctrine, then those ye call the
Reformed Churches, and that I my self am above Ordinances, and that I have
great Bills of Exchange, from a Quaking LondonMerchant (as thou quippest it out
again) and that the Terms of the third Question, which I held in the
Affirmative, were whether OUR good Works (viz.) done by us only, and not by
Christ in us) are the meritorious cause of our Justification, and that I
undertook to prove it under those Terms of OUR Good Works (in thy sense) its
all as false to the full, as the other is tru^, but if it were every whit as
true, as it is utterly false, yet would not thy Conclusion (viz. that I have a
Pension, or am in pay from the Pope) follow from it so much as probably, as
thou dotest, much less so necessarily, as throw their dotage upon thy Do-little
Disputings, many Ignorant ones, of thy instructing, do as ordinarily, as
ignorantly infer it; the falsehood of that which is false, and the
inconsequence of both that which is true, and that which is false, and the
utter invalidity of what is false, in case it were never so true, to prove thy
Charge against me of complying with, or having pay from the Pope, I shall yet a
little more particularly explain.

1. Then that I have been at Rome, and that in a double sense, is true enough:
first spiritually, and mystically, when I was but a Protestant at large, and so
born and bred, as English people for the most part still are, I then dwelt
together with them and you National Ministers and Parishpay-Preachers, in the
Suburbs and outworks of that Great City Rome, or Mystery Babylon the Great,
the Papacy, the Arch-Whore, and Mother of her Daughters, the two younger
Harlots, Prelacy and Presbytery, that are both separated from her bowels, and
as like her in many matters (viz.) persecution for conscience, sucking Saints
blood, greediness of gain, Lording it, by a Lordly Clergy, over the true Clergy
or Heritage of God, Parish-pay of the Popes first Imposing, Parish Church
Posture of his Constituting, Traditional Infant-Sprinkling, and sundry other
Romish Remnants, and Relics of Romes Religion yet abiding unabandoned, and
al^o pleaded for) as one kind of Christ'n Creatures, that are unlike to Christ
himself, can be to each other; and as a Pair of young smooth-faced Sisters, --
Qu^bus facies non omnibus una est, nec diversa tamen, can well look like so old
and wither-fac'd a Mother; in the said Suburbs and outworks of which said
Great City, which once was in one Room, but before its Ruin stands divided into
three P.P. Parts, canina utentes facundia, barking and concar^ing together by
the ears with one another, and like some old Bawd and her two B^ats B^awling
and breaking each other to pieces about their Bastardy, ye dwell to this day,
not only being in the same inward, but in somethings also in the same outward
form and Image, while ye hold your Pontifical Orders, by virtue of which you so
Pope it in your Parishes, from such Presbyters, as had theirs from the Prelate,
who had theirs from the Arch-Prelates, who had theirs from the Pope by lineal
succession, who had his, as the great Whore has, Rev. 17. from the Beast that
bears her, who Rev. 13. had his from the Devil or Dragon, who whether he had
his Power, Seat, and great Authority from Peter or no, Credat Apella.

2. That I have been bodily in Rome literally, so called, Where also other Qu.
have been in the service of Truth, as J. Lough who died in Prison there; J.
Parrot who is in Prison therestill; and John Stubs with whom I went thither.
as I did not, so I do not deny, and that (as its evident, by what of mine is
extant against the C.C. Clergy, I have done here) so I bore my witness against
the Pope and Cardinals there, in such wi^e as I was called to do, I might make
manifest here, were I so minded, but need not fo^asmuch as (though
We^^hercock-like, thou pre^ently upon it go about to deny, and disprove it
again, as unprobable) yet thou seem first both to believe and prove it to be
probable thy self, for thou say, the Qua, did Report it of me, and thou
supposest they would not belly me; and that I am since in safety from their
hands, thy self have seen, i^ thou can believe thine own eyes; but what of
all this? does all or any of this Minister to you Ministers, who make so much
of it that way, any Just matter of crime, whereupon to accuse me at all, or any
matter of probable proof of so high a crime, as ye and your self-like people
are ever charging me with, of complying with, and of being in orders and pay
from the Pope?

Among many hundreds of Jews, the Truth has been Testified to openly in their
Synagogues and streets of their Cities, in Rome, and el^ewhere, and yet being
in safety from them has been witnessed; the Truth has been Testified in
Turkey, yea by the Power of God to some great Bashaws, and to the very Grand
Seg^ior himself, and his Council, by some of the Servants and Handmaids of
the Lord, on whom, in these days he pours out of his Spirit, who by the same
Power of God have with such re^pectful usage, as will shame England Old and New
especially, if it look not to it in time, been dismissed peaceably from their
presence; does this prove the Qua. compliance in their several Superstitions
with either the Jews or Turks Respectively? I trow not: yet Heu quam facile est
invenire baculum ad caedendum canem? when men have once an ill name (as the
Proverb is) they are half hanged, so that evil shall be ever charged upon them
for doing good; when for being Christ friends, they become enemies to the
world, who hates him, and for his sake are hated as a dog, how easy is it for
the worlds own children, not only to find a quarrel against them, but a cudgel
also to beat them at their pleasure?

For mark how matter of Accusation it self is made by our Priests of our having
been at Rome, and declaring there against Popery, and under that Protection, we
went out in, returning safe again into England, which is now laid to me as a
Crime, witness thy words, ( viz.)

T.D. As to the matter of which S.F. was accused, part of it he denied not,
namely tha he had been at Rome.

Rep. Had I been executed there, as I might have been, if the Lord had not kept
me, it had satisfied some Parish Preachers and others here very well, who
though they seemed to congratulate my well coming home, yet were more merry
when they heard I was hanged or hewed to pieces; but now I am as well, as some
smooth tongues seem to wish me, it is hardly well with them, while its well with
me; so that if they had advantage would not be slack to make use thereof to
have execution against me here: so that I may safely say, Lord, where should
the Witnesses of thy Truth be safe, or have a quiet Being if not in thee; who
when they go into other Nations, are in danger to lose their lives as Heretics
and Church-wasters, and when they return, if the malice of their own Counmen
might be permitted to prevail, are in perils of being hanged nearer home, as
I^suits or such as are in pay and orders from the Pope; while 'twas both heard
and hoped, I were never likely to come safe back again from out of the paw of
that Romish Ro^r^ng Lion, 'twas counted no crime by the Clergy, even at Rome it
self, to bear Testimony against it, but since its seen I had no harm there, it
must be thence granted that I did some, and that a man's being there only, is
Crime enough to be accus^d on, and not only so, but some eminent evidence of
such another high crime as by the Law, as it yet stands, were it made good
against me, calls for no less then handling with an English halter: so (in
Sum) say some of our English Seminaries, whose voice is smooth as Jacobs, but
their hands ever rough as the hands of Esau.

2. But be it as high a Crime as it will for such as here protest against the
Pope to visit Rome, I can do so much good at least against their Evil, as to
excuse my chief accusers, and as heartily to clear our Clergy of it, as several
of them continually are charging me therewith; yea I am persuaded, that our
English Clergy are as Clear in their consciences from the guilt of that Crime,
and as fearful of that fault, and as free from the thoughts of Committing such
a thing as traveling to Rome to tell the Truth, as they are far from it in
their Persons, while they are preaching against it in their Parishes: and as
they are far from consenting to it, and calling for it that the Jews may come
into England, in order to their coming to the Truth, for whose coming to it,
they are always calling upon God.

There is little posting to preach abroad by these fixed Stars, the stand stiff
like Posts in their own places: let those wandering Stars say they (not
considering that the Vagabonds and wandering Stars to whom the mist of darkness
is reserved for ever, are such as wander with Cain from the light of God, and
not to and fro to preach the Gospel) let the Qua. gad about and gang to Rome,
or where they will, we will be none of their gang; and as for money there is
little need for them to Run so far as Rome for pay, to receive his pensions
from the Pope himself, having it nearer home.

It is enough for our Parochial Priesthood to Receive the Romish pay of
Parsonages, Vicaradges, Curateships, Glebe-lands, Tithes, add other of Romes
Bonifaces Benefices, and Benedictus's Blessings in their native Nation, and
have the Popes Pensions and their part of Peter's Patrimony for preaching
against the Pope, and Peter too in the Popes old moldy Mass-houses to his own
Parochially molded Churches.

Its enough for them to abide here, praying down Antichrist, and praying home
the Jews, and preaching against the Qua. while they go out against him, as
siders with, and upholders of him as much as against Antichrist himself, and
cry out against those that go out (as the Lord moves) to cry in the Jews, as
one with the I^ws (for so I. O. says the Qua. are) in enmity to the Scripture,
and as wor^e then the very Jews themselves.

O Lord God forgive, cease this I bessech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for
he is yet small, by whom shall the Roman Antichrist fall, for he is yet great;
when such as call themselves, thy Messengers, will neither go on thy errand or
message themselves, nor quietly suffer those Messengers of thine, that are made
willing to it by thy power, but are still-crying out to thee to bring down
Antichrist, and bring in the Jews, and yet crying out against those, that go
out, as from thee, to bring in the one, and bring down the other?

But by this time I suppose, that as the true Israel and Clergy that is of God,
do little less then abhor to see it, so some of their own folds do smile more
then they will seem to do, to hear their Clergy calling and sounding out to God in
their sundry Synagogues, Lord discover the Skirts of that Scarlet Whore of
Rome, and yet not renouncing, but reverencing the Reliks, and doing homage to
the very hem of it to this day, and hating those as her friends, and their
enemies, that seek to Rent it all along as far as from Rome it self to the very
scarlet Rags and Remnants thereof, that are yet remaining in their own Nation
and Universities. Gather in thy ancient people the Jews, and yet neither going
out to gather the Jews; nor giving way to the Jews, when they would, to gather
so much as into England, that they might be gathered to the Lord; Let thy
Gospel run and be glorified, when yet it may run far enough, before these
lovers to sleep in a whole skin are free to follow in the service of it, any
further then they can serve their own interest by it, and make more gain of it
to themselves.

Though then such as viam vel invenient, vel facient, and Flectere fi nequeunt
superos, Acheronta movebunt. If they cannot fairly find it, as from God, will
rather Rake H^ll and Skim the Devil (as the Proverb is) then want wherewith to
accuse the Servants of the Lord, do make it a matter of Accusation for them to
have been at Rome, and matter of Argumentation to that greater evil of
complying with, and receiving Pension from the Pope, to bear any witness safely
against him there, yet is there no Just ground whereon to make either a matter
of fault of the one, or a matter of faith of the other: and howbeit that
faithless generation of men called Ministers, who fear to follow Christ any
further then he feeds them aforehand with full assurance of life, and outward
livelihood, believe it well nigh impossi^le, at least improbable to come safe
from Rome, without complying with the Antichristian Faction, and I my self, who
know more then they of this, will yield thus much to them, that to such as
consult with flesh and blood in themselves, or in fleshly friends (whose
council had we heeded, when we were more then half way toward Rome, we had
certainly either not gone thither, or not Returned without that compliance) its
not a little unlikely; whereupon we were all the way delivered up unto death
within ourselves, and by our selves Counted as sheep for the slaughter, that
were marching into the very month of the Lion, yet so far is this from being of
force to infer what thou in thy fleshly fancy fetcheft from it, ( viz.) a
probability of our Compliance with that Popish faction, that to a true
spiritual understanding an evident Argument it is rather of a more then
ordinary hand of providence held over us, and of another kind of presence,
protection and powers being with and upon us in our obedience to God, who sent
us in that service ( to whose Name only, and not at all to us, for ever be the
glory of it) then that which you witness in your self-saving, self-serving, and
easy exercise, since in his Name, Spirit, light Power, dread and fear, we not
only undertook, but were kept safe'in the undertaking of that, which your
selves neither dare, nor can believe, ye can likely do without your own ruin
and destruction; and some of this I declared openly at the dispute to thee, T.
D. and all the rest, and much more would I have declared in satisfaction to
that Auditory, when the foresaid Accusation was under consideration, but that,
to the shame of your small Patience in a thing that so nearly concerned thy
self and them, ye utterly refused to hear me clear my self, and the truth to
the full in that particular; which had ye heard me out in, ye had hindered that
your hasty stumbling at me, whereby ye also are fallen into your printed folly,
which is now making manifest to all men; but now ye have judged neither
Rightly, because rashly without hearing all that was to be heard on either
side, nor yet the right thing, but a very lie; for I am no Sidesman with the
Papists, and if I were, yet you judging me, after you had refused to to hear
me, are unjust nevertheless in so doing: for Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita
altera,
Aequum licet statuerit, ^aud ^quus fuerit.


But alas as thou T. D. say p. 53. not more proverbially, then improperly of
R. H. I must say properly of thee and thine, who so bold as blind Byard? in a
land of uprightness, ye will judge and deal unjustly, and will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord; when the hand of the Lord is lifted up, ye will not see,
but ye shall see and be ashamed of your envy at his people, the fire of your
own envy shall devour you: But thou O Lord wilt ordain peace for us, for thou
also have wrought all our works in us, Isa. 26.10, 10, 11, 12. Glory, Glory be
to thy holy Name therefore for Ever.

Thus far as to the inconsequence of one of T. D's. Arguments, to prove me to
be a Pensioner to the Pope, and a Complyer with him, and his Cardinals at
Rome, the Antecedent of which ( viz.) that first, I was at Rome, secondly bare
my witness against them there, thirdly came away safe, is not only true, but
trebble, yet not strong enough to draw on his heavy lead'n conclusion.

But T. D. being loath to venture the whole stresse of his cause upon so
slender a Trebble string as that, has many more strings yet to his bow, with
all which notwithstanding he shoots too short to hit the mark; though, if that
will do him any advantage, I shall strengthen his weak and brittle Fidling
strings, as well as I can by twisting two or three more of them together.

Next then I shall try what can be made of these concurrences, ( viz.) first,
my having no vissible estate. secondly my having as good Bills of Exchange as
most Gentlemen (as he calls them, though I call all men so that are so Gentle
as not to backbite, and no more so save such as will not) that travail, in my
late travail to Constantinople, and from thence to Rome. Thirdly, My now having
great Bills of Exchange from a Quaking London Merchant, so that I may take up
400 l. if I will.

That this Triune Antecedent may be of the more Credible uncontroleaable and
unconquerable force to draw men into a belief of the conclusion, there is not
T. D.'s bare ipse D^xit only for it, b^t each thread of it is backed ore again
from breaking by the Credibility of the Testimony that attends it; the first
(quote he) is well known, as if it needed no proof, being of it self obvious to
all men; the second he has from very good hands; the third, the two Credible
men of Sandwich (who yet have cracked their Credit so with me, that I shall
hardly heed them again in have) were Credibly informed of it as Dunki^k; this
looks like some threefold Cord that is not easy to be broken; yet for all
this, all this will be found but as Toe toward T.D.'s business for to say the
Truth, its but a mere Trinity of Tales, and not of Truths.

1. (whether it be better or worse the more honor, or the more shame for me
that I so have, it best concerns my self to examine; for, as it was best of all
with him, who while the Foxes had holes, and fowls of the Air nests, had not
where to lay his head; so it was well enough with them that had, and may be with
such as now have (if they find their call is so, to leave all and follow
Christ) neither scrip nor sh^s, nor money in their purses, and no more then the
Clothes to their backs, for they lacked nothing, yet so it is and well known to
my self, and some (as well known as it is to T.D. and his Earewigs that I have
none) that, though my estate lies much more in invisibles, then in visibles, I
have some visible estate; and that to the full as much for my self and mine, as
I either need or much desire; and how beit I have not perhaps so much as T.D.
nor as I.O. who besides that rich possession he counts upon in his Hebrew
Punctation (of which more anon) had lately (but now I hear he is turned out of
it) a Deanery of many hundreds, per annum, yet est mihi far modicum purum et
sine labe Salinum: humilique loco sed certa cedet sordida parvae fortunae domus.

And that I have no more then I have, it is (under God) at my own choice,
having long since, for a good Conscience sake, laid down twice more then that
which comes in to thee T.D. by preaching, and refufed the profer of much more
since, both of that and of another nature, and, if I had none at all, I need
not run to Rome, having, were I so mindful of such outward estate as I came
out of, an opportunity still to return, and being, if I could make shipwreck of
the Faith for it, as many do, and were as much given to Climbing and
Clambering, as most of you are, as capable to receive in England, either that
Popish pay, and preferment ye still stand in, and I freely fell from, as ye yet
are, or as my self ever have been in days of old, or that of another sort,
that is in no wise of the Pope, which yet I trust I shall choose pulse and water
rather then forgo the truth, as some self-seekers do, to partake in

Secondly, How Credible ^oever it is here asserted by thee for truth, as a
thing received from very go^d H^rds, yet it is not true that is here related,
for I had no Bill of Exchange at all with me when I went out of England,
neither had I ever any Bill of Exchange from any place at all to
Constantinople, nor any at all from Constantinople to Rome, and this I leave to
those very good hands, from whence thou had it this false report, to make it
good I partly guess what ground this guilty goodly geere grew up from, but I am
not minded at this time to help Liars in their Lies, while ^^ee they love them,
let them help one another, and wrestle themselves out from the mists of their
own misreporting, and from the f^gge of this piece of f^lshood, if they can; I
f^nd no more to do at pre^ent, then to deny it to be truth, as its told by them.

Thirdly, How credibly soever the same witnesses, T. F. T. B. whom thou call
Honest and Credible men, were Credibly inf^rmed at Dunkirk, that I have, yet I
neither had at D^nkirk, nor have had since, nor yet have (what I may have,
lawfully enough, if need be, is another case, but nothing to thee nor thy ill
cause, nor to any man el^e but those, that, as little Estate as I have, being
con^^dent of my faithfullness, dare trust me so far) any bill of Exchange at
all, by which to ^ake up 400 ^ or 400 pence either at my will: which faltering
of thy so G^^d, Honest, and Credible Witness^s in each Tittle of their
Testimony, that is exhibited to the world in this Tripple piece of Tittle
Tartle, from which yet thou concludest the things they testify to be ipso
facto) well known, I notify to the world so much the rather, as I have done
here (or else I should for my own part have paid it with thinking only, and
let it pass) that men may know the better how to believe thee and them in other
things, when ye shall happen with lies to wrong the truth another time.

But since I have taken on me to take ^o much notice of it, let us examine what
to the utmost can be made thereof; which is just nothing at all toward T. Ds.
purpose in propounding it; in omuch that I may truly say of this his Treble
conference, of which his confidence is, that its so credible, that it gives
neither le^s nor more, then almost an incredible and inconceiveable influence
toward the inference of his most confident, and almost as incredible
conclusion, so that no wise men can, yea the most wise men are, the le^s they
can from T. Ds. premi^es give credit to it, or conceive it, or not conceive
rather the contrary to be true; for as from such matters as are false (as I
said above) no thing that is true can be concluded, in which respect alone
these lies and lying Fables can be of no possible force to infer my living
upon the P^pes P^ns^on to be a Truth, so if they were all as undoubted and
certain Truths, as it is most certain they are all but sigm^nts, or at the best
but, m^s^ eports, they could none of them at all infer that, but some of them
would infer the very contrary to that, which T.D. with so much confidence
concludes from them, to the deluding of all people, that are given over to
delusion to believe lies, to believe that lie of me, that I am, in pay from the
Pope, as the Jews by the like unlikely and silly inference of the Soldiers,
whom the Priests so to Argue against it, were deluded from believing that Truth
concerning Christ ( viz) that he arose from the dead.

Oh how Wonderfully Michievous are misreports unto the Truth, when men, who
receive not the love of it, that they may be ^aved, are given over of God to
give heed to them, that they may be damned, because they take pleasure in
unrighteousness, and have no pleasure in the Truth?

His Di^ciples say they came and stole him away while we slept, here is the
fictitious and forcible Antecedent, therefore he arose not from the dead, here
is the crooked conclusion, which that other was so cogent to make the people
close with in their Consciences, and take for Truth.

Piteous Premis^^, plain enough to be ^een by men, whose eyes were not out, to
be merely forged and of little force;

For if they were awake, and on their watch, as 'twas fit for a Court of Guard
to be, they might have rescued him from his Disciple, that were unarmed men,
but if they were asleep, as they say they were, is the Testimony of those men
fit to be entertaind for Truth, or of force among any but such infatuated
fancies, as every ignis fatuus befooles into a following of it self,
wheresoever it goes before them, that stand up to bear witness of what was
done while they were asleep? yet how strongly and strangely did this filly
shift work upon the misbeleiving faculty of that foolish Nation, to the final
falsifying of their Faith, in so high an Article of it? insomuch that as that
Saying is commonly Reported, so that Article of Christ's Resurrection is
thereupon not believed to this day, said the Evangelists 16 hundred years ago,
and say I, who have been an Ear Witness of the same, to this very day, wherein
we live.

The like effectual operation upon the prejudicate opinions and Imaginations of
such people, to whom there is deceptio visus, and in whose visible faculty
there is a deep defect through their living in the Night, and not loving the
Light, has T. D's. mis-reports, and mis-representations of the Qua. going to
Rome, which as little or no truth as they are of, yet (if less then none can
be) are of less consequence to prove that he intends by them to be Truth, since
of force to prove the very contrary.

S. F. Quoth he, has no visible Estate, has Bills of Exchange to take up 400
l. if he will, had to and from Constantinople to Rome Bills of Exchange to take
up money there.

Therefore it is probably as true that he there received a Pension from the Pope.

His Tripartite Antecedent is as false, as the Popes Tripple Crown is foolish,
but suppose it were all as True, as it is false, I know no hurt in it, if it
were, for such as Travail, whether to Rome, or elsewhere, to have Bills to take
up money if they need it; and what I had, or where, or from whence, or from
whom, let him that lies go look, yet ^ile tell the truth to him so far at
least, as will tell his Tale to be a Lie; I had none to Constantinople, nor
from thence to Rome, neither Received I any money by any Bill at Rome, much
less any Pension from the Pope, which is that he makes the consequent of the
other; so that T. D.'s. Consequence is utterly inconsequent, and a most
non-sensicall non sequitur. Some wise man, that had been willing to know the
Truth, would have argued thus ad Contrarium (viz.) He went with coals from
New Castle to London, therefore it is very probable he went not to London to
fetch or to get any there.

He carried great Bills with him to Rome, to take up money there, therefore it is
utterly unlikely that he had any Pension of his own to Receive there from the
Pope, for then he might have saved his labor in the other.

For verily it had been as silly and superfluous for me to have Merchants Bills
to take up money by at Rome, had I had a Pension to Receive there from the Pope
as it is (as the Proverb is) to carry coals to New Castle, which what fool does,
may carry them home again, when he has done.

So then this Text of T.D's Trivial Talk, as threefold a Cord, as it may seem
to him, that is not quickly broken, is indeed, though strong enough to conclude
the clean contrary way, yet, as to his purpose, but a threefold thread of Toe
so ill spun, that it fails like flax, when it feels the fire.

Nevertheless Note one Point of Doctrine more, before I quit it, that arises
from it more against, then for T. D. and his fellow forgers, and foul
falsifiers of the truth, i.e. that whereas the National Ministry dare trust to
the benevolence of their own people for outward means and maintenance, no
further then they have the Magistrates Mittimusses to take it from their
people, and raise it for them, for we may have little enough, and do full ill
(cry they) if we stand to the good will and affections of our Parishes, being
it seems (for all the shallow shows, and Love Tokens, and fair words that pass
between them, which buy no lands) as little affected by their people, as their
people are trusted by them, for each of them love money, much more then they
love each other; yet such love, credit, and confidence in each others
faithfulness, there is among the Ministers of Truth, and the children of it;
that they, that for the Gospels sake, choose to have little of their own in
their Ministry to it, need not lack, but serving it for its own sake, and not
for hire, nor by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, may, not by force of Arms, but freely, not by the greedy distraint
of Tythe-mongers and Bumbayliffs, but willingly, have what is needed (which is
not so many 100's by the year as the Priests, that, stirring not far from their
own fires, need it not, are ever needing) in the service of the truth; and
rather then it shall want promoting for lack of so much, no less then 400 li at
once, if they please.

T. D. Another of T.D's Antic Autecedents from whence he endeavors (as by the
rest he does tooth and nail) to evidence me to be of the Popish faction, is,
that I affirmed my self to be above Ordinances, saying, there is no more use of
them in this life to some, then of a Candle, when the Sun shines, instancing in
Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Rep. In which Antecedent, this is utterly false at least, (though affirmed by
T. D. and his Sides-men) (viz.) that I said of my self, that I am above
Ordinances: I use not to bear Testimony to my self, but to the Truth, unless
where the Truth is so much concerned (as it is in my clearing of my self from
the clouds, that not only I, but that also comes under through your Lies that
are told, and attend me in the service of it, in the case in hand) neither in
the point of perfection (which if I be but moved to speak the Truth in,
presently cry the blind leaders, and the blind whom they lead, he faith he is
perfect) did I ever say of my self, that I am perfect, but of myself and alme^,
that so we should be, even in this life, and may be too, if we be not wanting
to our selves, and must be also, or else shall never be, as our heavenly Father
is perfect; and as for my self by the grace of God, I am what I am, and what
ere I am, where I am, you are not, though what, and where you are, both as to
this wo^ld, and that to come, I have been now long ago: Neither as to
Ordinances, did I ever say I was above them, I should not a little belly my self
in so ^aying, and that I have little need at all to do, being bely^d mo^e then
enough already both by your selves, and others; for to meet and wait with his
Saints on the Lord, to stand in his Council, and receive his word from his
mouth, to learn of Christ in silence with all subjection, to hear his voice,
which his sheep only hear, though swinish Scribes may search the Scriptures, to
enter by him, who is the Door, to bear hi^ Cu^^^, and follow him, to pray,
preach, write, dispute, and do all, that I am called to, in the l^ght, in the
movings of his Spirit, the^e all, and an hund^ed more, that might be named, are
Ordinances of God, which I am under, and yourselves above, who are clambering
up another way in your own thoughts, counc^ls, wisd^m, and understanding above
his light in the conscience, that is the Door, which till Ye lofty over-lookers
of it, the flying fowls of the air, the h^gh-flown Climbers above, vouchsafe to
stoop, and come down to, ye shall never enter into the Sheepfold; finally a
holy life, and that pare Religion, that is undefiled before God (while all the
Religion of imture unbridled Lya^s, Wantons, Wordlings, etc stinks before him,
and is defiled) which is to keep a man's self unspotted of the world, also to do
Good works, to be zealous of Good Works, to be rich in good works, to be w^ll
reported of for good works, to show our selves Paterns of good works, to learn
to maintain, be careful to maintain good works, as necessary, which ^ome
(because O V R works, none of which are good, the best of which are all evil,
further then wrought in Christ the light, and by Christ in us, are of none)
would make of none effect, as to our acceptance with God, and to walk in the
good works, which in Christ Jesus, who^e workma^sh^p we are, we are created
unto, which God has before Ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10.
the^e are Ordinance of God, which 'twere well for you all, if you were as much
under the observance of, as ye are under the obliui^n of, which I neither did,
nor do, nor dare say I am above, though as I desire I never may, so by the
grace and power of Christ to me ward, I do not live so far below them, as
Thousands do, who are both above, and below them also, too proud of their fine
forms to be brought down to the plain power, and too much sunk down over head
and ears in earth, lust, luxury, love of money, pleasure, wordly-mindedness,
and buried in blindness, brutishness, and sensuality to be brought up, and
raised into any heavenliness of conversation, yet all crying out of them as
denyers of Gods Ordinances, that live in the very life and substance of those
lifeless Images and shadowy parts thereof, which they only call so.

I affirm therefore here before God, and all men, that I never affirmd of my
self in these Terms, in which its here Testifi^d (viz.) that I was above
Ordinances; and for thy self T.D. and thy two witnesses to it, T.F. and T.B.
who are three Thomas'es, very fa^thl^^^, and hard to believe the truth, and for
your faithlesness, as hardly to be believed, whether you will believe me, yea
or nay, as its false that you here witne^s, so the witness of all three of you
against me in this, will be of no more force to fright any friends of Truth
into the faith or belief of what you say, then so many leaps of a louse, since
ye are found deceiving, or at best deceived in your other so credible
information.

And as for the things (viz.) Baptism and the Supper, which yourselves call
Ordinances, and keep such a quarter for, as if they were the main matters which
God has O^dained, which only can lay true claim to the foresaid Title, I might
possibly say then, as I shall plainly now, not in any way of (...) whate^er is
of God, though but as a Type and shadow in its time and season, that to such as
are grown throw those Elementary institutions, into the Life of God, which is
the end, and substances they Relate to, they may be usele^s, as to their own
particulars, as the light of a Candle, is where the Sun shines; yet I deny not
the use of them to such, as are not satisfied as to the Lord, unless they use
them: But most people either I abu^e them and themselves in the use of them,
who neither knowing their right end, nor use, nor manner of administration, do
either chan^e and alter them into Images of their own making, both in their
Subject and their form; and thus all Rantizers of Infants do, and all feeders
of Dogs and Swine with that bread and wine, which they call the Supper, for
these things are not that outwa^d washing and supping, which were used of old,
as mere figures and Images of the true, but sigments and fooleries, and Images
of their own Imagining, not ^o much as the Bodily Baptism, which John baptizeth
with, but a trashy T^adition of man, which who so teach for a Doctrine or
Ordinance of God, do worship God but in vain, not the true outside or shadow of
the Supper (for that is not a coming together into one place) which is to
decrease and vanish before the internal and ^ternal, which increa^eth, and is
to stand; nor the external sign of the True Cup and Table of the Lord, but in
Truth the very Cup and Table of Devils, where drunkards and Swerers,
Lustfulness, and all sorts of sinners, and walkers beside the light, who say
they have fellowship with God, but lie. and have none, sit in fellowship with
their Father the Devil.

Or else secondly, dote upon and Idolize those graven Images of their own,
which if they were as truly the things in use of old, as it is true, they are
but new inventions of their own, yet, as the brazen Serpent, they must be but
Nehush^an, when once men's hearts go a whoring after them, from that, which is
the end of them all, and come not to Christ Jesus the Image, and rigteousness
of God, and to witness that wrought, and even him, who is that Image, brought
forth and formed in them; but continue poring upon those Rudiments, or, like
one that falls in love with his own Image in the water, and for love thereof
goes down under it, and drownes himself therein, run down so deep into them,
as to lose themselves from the other, and draw such a thick veil over their
hearts (as the Jews) so as not to look, much less enter into the end of the
law of, which is to be abolished, that is of carnal Commandments, contained in
Ordinances, which are not of the new, but of the old Covenant which is long
since ready to vanish, which stood in earings and drinkings, and diverse
Baptismes, carnal Ordinances, bodily exercises, outward Observations, in which
the Kingdom of God stands not, which is in righteousness, peace, and joy in
the holy Spirit, so that he who in these things serves Christ is acceptable to
God and approved of men. For those mere Rites and Rudiments of washing, eating,
drinking had their first being, beginning, rise, and institution (as
Circumcision, Passover, sacrifices and such like had) before Christ was
crucified, though in regard of inability to bear the sudden abol^tion thereof
by permission more then commission practiced after, as circumcision, and vows,
and shavings, and some other Rite; and Ceremonies were, in which case if any
now will needs u^e them, I meddle not to forbid, And so I said to T.F. and T.B.
if any, who was writing by a Candle in the night, will needs have his Candle
burning by him, when the Sun is risen on him, and write by that, though there
were no need of it, I would not blow it out.
though he that is in the spirit and substance and not the letter of them is
not out of them, but in them more truly, then he that is in them outwardly
according to the letter, and not in the spirit: for they are the Jews, the
circumcision, the Christians, the baptized ones, the Suppers with the Lord, the
partakers of his Table, who open when Christ knocks, and let him in, that he
may Sup with them, and they with him, who rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh and worship God in the spirit, and are Jews in heart
and spirit, not letter only, when they of the letter are but the Concision,
that say they are Jews, Christians, Baptists, Communicants with God, children
of God, but lie and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: the end of which
foresaid outward Commandments is love out of a pure heart, a good conscience,
faith unfeigned, which who serve in are the servants of God, and who swerve
from, and turn aside into ^angling about the other, and are zealous in teaching
up the Law, understand neither themselves, nor what they say, nor do, nor
whereof they affirm, and are but of the Gentiles, that dwell in the outward
Court, which is given to them, who tread down the holy City; nor in the inward
Temple, nor of them that worship therein, not to be counted thereunto, but left
out, and not measured, when the measuring line goes out upon it to build, and
rear it up again in the latter days.

So then though I deny all the Ordinances, Traditions, and Doctrines, Ways,
and Worships of men, innovated, and imposed at their wills, as praecepts of
God, yet I deny not the due use of any thing, that ever was in mere outside
service required and appointed of God himself, when performed in its proper
place, and season, from a right Principle of inward power, to the right end,
which they lead, and tend to (viz.) Christ Jesus the head, the body of those
shadows, the Image of God, begotten and born, not after the Law of a Carnal
Commandment, but after the Power of an endless life; after which Image when men
witness themselves to be truly created in righteousness, and holiness of truth,
they will see how these pass away, as to the use thereof, as the Moon in a
morning waxes pale, and dies out, as to its shining any more before the Sun; as
the lesser which must give way to the greater glory, which lesser things, while
men busy themselves in, and boast of, crying the Temple of the Lord, are
these, the Tithes, Offerings, New Mons, the Sabbaths, the solemn Assemblies,
the Sacrifices, the Circumcision, the Passover the Baptism, the Supper, the
Services, the Ordinances of the Lord are these, neglecting the weightier
matters, the washing, and circumcising their hearts to the Lord, the putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh, putting away the evil of their doings
from before Gods eyes; not minding, but forgetting, breaking the everlasting,
visible life, way, righteousness, kingdom, House, Temple, Gospel, Glory,
Covenant, which the Letter lays down, as that which all these Ceremonies (so
called of (...) from their standing but for a time) and all these mere
Temporals do but tend to, the Lord loathes all that, which was even of his own
requiring, the more men load him with it, that love not-the other, and says he
required it not, he spoke not of it, he would have none of it, he could not
away with it, his delight is not so much in it, as in obeying, his saul hates
it, he is weary to bear it, it is the offering of Swines blood, it is the cutting
off a Dogs neck it is as acceptable to him, as if one slew a man, it is the
blessing of an Idol, it is but a trusting in lying words, when trusted in, it is
an apron of fig leaves, it is a covering of Idols, it is a righteousness that
shall not profit him, it is a refuge of lies, which the hail shall sweep away,
it is a hiding place which the storm shall overflow, by which shall be trodden
down even all you that are hidden in it, it is a Covenant and agreement with
death and hell, the Drunkards of Ephraim make, which must be disannul'd, and
not stand, it is a bed shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it, it is a
covering too narrow for a man to wrap himself in it, it is a House on the sand,
and not on the Rock of Ages, the fall of which on the head of the builders will
be great, when the wind of the Lords Spirit comes to blow upon it, it is flesh
that must wither then as the grass and the flower of it, it is Ashur and Jareb
that cannot cure Isreal's wounds, it is Pharaoh the broken reed that runs into the
hand of the leaners thereon, it is the Egyptians and their horses, which are men
and flesh, not God nor Spirit; it is the many mountains in which salvation is
hoped for in vain, it is not the right Rest to the soul, it is the polluted rest,
which, who ever is in, and first or last arises not above, and departs not out
of, it will destroy him with a sore destruction; it is iniquity, it is dung,
which God will spread upon men's faces, who live like Swine, yet will wallow in
it, even the dung and iniquity of their solemn meetings.

How untrue then thy Testimony is, of my saying I was above Ordinances, who am
one that am under Water Baptism, being once baptized, as the Sprinklers of
Infants never were, if there were any ground of glorying in, or any stress to
be put upon that, and have also used Bread and wine, (till Christ, who now
comes (...) in myriads of his Saints, came in me) as few Parish Preachers do,
that prattle for that Supper, though Christ be not yet come in them, as he will
ere long come nigh to judgment; I suppose all (save such Simplerous as either
will see, or at least seem to see nothing save what their Seers see) may more
easily discern then be ignorant: But suppose it were all as true that's here
told by you three Thomasses, would it follow at all from hence that I probably
comply with the Pope, and his faction, or would it not rather free me among all
(save such as if they cannot by Hook, will needs have it so by Crook) from
all suspicion of such compliance, more then such as cry out for Ordinances with
the Pope? yea more for mere man's Ordinances too, then for Gods (viz.) that of
sprinkling, and Ordinances for Tribes, and maintenance, as his Priests do? Is
't not a far clearer consequence to urge thus (viz.) the Parish Priestshood of
England pleads for Ordinances, yea for the Parliments Ordinances, the Popes
Ordinances for Tribes, and other things pertaining to their divine service, and
their worldly Sanctuary, as the Pope and his Priesthood does, therefore they
smell so much of Popery still, that its suspicious they side too much with them
still.

As for me and the Quakers, if any but mere partial and unreasonable minded
men, who had thought we had utterly denied Ordinances (as ye judge we do)
would have argued any thing at all from those thoughts of his concerning us, he
would (however minded to belly us in other matters) have cleared us from that
censure of Popery at least, by concluding from T.D's. premises the very
contrary to what he infers: and instead of urging with him, he ^aith he is
above Ordinances, and denies the use of them, therefore I can assure the Reader
of the likelihood of his compliance with the Antichristian saection, For thus
T. D. argues of me, or else what makes this passage about Ordinances amongst
and in the very midst of his Argument^tive matter, by which he would prove
against me the charg of Popery?
would have urged thus (viz.) he says he is above Ordinances; denies the use
of them, (viz.) Baptism and the Supper; therefore I may assure the Reader,
that there is little or no likelihood at all of his Compliance with the Pope, and
his Antichristian faction, for they are not above those Ordinances, but under
the use of them.

Yea (I add) they are so far under indeed, that is below and beneath, the true
use of Gods Ordinances, that they are not yet (as neither are ye) got above
the traditionary Ordinances of man, but are all groping together in the dark
for the wall, like them that have no eyes, and tumbling to and fro in that fogg
of forefathers figments, walking and wandering to weariness in that, as
supersti^ous, as superfluous and mere unprofitable usefulness of your own.

And as to that other piece of thy s^anty Scripture, which, as thou say p.
12, of my urging a proof that was to purpose out of the Scriptures of truth, o
I of that, methinks T.D. thou usherest and bring it in with Pomp and
Ceremony, attended with the Testimony of hundreds of people, as if it would be
irresistible and would not only hit the nail, but knock it up in the head;
Io. Boys Ch Nicol; T. Focton (an Esquire a Minister, a Magistrate, one of a sort
set down with an, etc. As representatives of the rest) may wave their witness,
if, they will in this, for I freely subscribe to every whit of it, as a truth,
since its told, yet will it not do at all, as to T.D's. design, which he there
drives on against me, but will do not a little as to my defense.

It Is true when at the dispute thou offeredst to read something out of Amesius
against Bellarmine, I replied, as sleighting such a contemptible piece of
business, and since thou will so set it down (for thy reasoning is ridiculous
enough in all reason, and conscience) with a gesture of derision (such as that
of him who sits in heaven, and smiles to see the silly shifts, and vain
imaginations of those that plot, and set themselves against him, and his
anointed, or that of him that said, Cry aloud for he is God, perhaps he is
asleep, and must be awakened; or that of Sion, who shook her head, at hers and
(...) preachers) that (...) held many truths, which must not be rejected (...)
of God; at which thou wast ( ut Bellarminus enervatus, as one that had no more
to say (as to that matter) for thy mouth was stopped from reading what thou
intendedst, as well it might, for it would have been of as little effect to
convict me of Popery, with which thou confessest I was then charged, as it is for
me to say No, when liars and unbeleivers charge me with it, which avails no
more (as the Proverb is) then for one to ^ay Bo to a Goose. And now thou have
after thy silence, by which it was then taken for granted that thou had
quitted me thereupon from thy rash charging me with Popery, here raked it up
again among thy rest of thy remarkable folly, what meanst thou by thy new
mention thereof? Have thou any more then before thou had? Did not Cardinal
Bellarmine hold some truths which thou hold, as well as some that I hold
against thee, and that Christ is the Son God, which we both hold? where lies
the consequence of thy Argument to mine, more then to thy own compliance with
that Popish Cardinal? Thou ownst some false Apostaticall Tenets that he owned,
namely that of Tithes, when I own no other then his Apostolical truths; is he
not, so far, thy Brother Bellarmine, more then mine?

Moreover as light, and little as I made of thy charge of Popery, I shall make
so much of my making little of it then, as now to make a weighty argument
against thee from it, and conclude contrarily to thy conclusion of me from
thence to bein pay from the Pope, for that is not so light a matter, as the
case stands here in England, that any man that's well in his wits, and knows
himself to be guilty thereof, had need make light, and little of, seeing his
neck lies at stake, and his life is not a little concerned in it, if it can be
proved.

Whereas therefore T. D. concludes thus of me, (viz.)

S.F. before hundreds of people made light of the charge of Popery; Therefore
in all likelihood he is guilty of what he is charged with (viz.) complying with
and receiving a Pension from the Pope.

I conclude thus (viz.)

S. F. Before hundreds of people made light of his being charged of complying
with and taking pay from the Pope, which were a matter of very dangerous
consequence, if he were conse^ous to himself of it, that any one of those
hundreds, who wanted no will to it, could possibly prove it; therefore in all
likelihood there is no such matter.

And as to two others of the mean Mediums which T. D. makes what use he can of,
to make men mistake me, to be such a complyer with the Roman Antichrist, (viz.)
that I said at Dunkirk, I looked upon the Jesuits and Friars there to be
sounder in Doctrine then those, he and his call the reformed Churchen:^. that
the doctrines which I broach are theirs and a fair Inlet to their Bag and
Baggage; for this last of which (as I here express it) T.D. affords the world
no more proof then his own single say so; but for the other, to advance the
faith of his saint hearted Reader into a full assurance of the truth thereof,
that thick and threefold Testimony (viz.) that of his single folded self, and
his old pair of Double (...) 'd Trustees. T. Fox's ton, T. Bur^^^^, who (saving
T.D's. commendation of their honesty and credibility, which that single hearted
friend of truth E. Borough, with whom I went and was at Dunkirk, has seen as
little of as my self) have dealt more Fox-like and Barbarian like, then like
honest and credible men, or conscientious Christians with ^e, whom yet as I
look for no more satisfaction from, then their subm^ssion to God, nor amends,
then their amendment; so I wish no worse to the worst of them, for the worst
evil they have done to me, and the truth, then that God would grant them both
true repentance to the acknowledgement thereof, that the lake of judgment, and
condemnation, which must come upon all lies and all deceit, may not, throw
their continuance in impenitency therein, be the portion of their persons for
ever: I say as to the two Assertions above, whence he infers the foresaid
charge, I deny them both as false, for I did not tell it in those terms, that
the Jesuits and Friars are ^ounder in Doctrine in gross and in the lump, as is
here falsely witnessed and related, then the reformed Churches (as ye call
them) but to this effect ( viz.) that (setting aside their ^ordid and ^ottish
superstitions in matters of their outward worship and service, in which I
acknowledged them (though T.F. and T.B. or else thy self being minded to wrong
me, would not vouchsafe the world an acknowledgment of all my words) to be far
more full of manifest foolery and manifold Idolatry then the other) the Jesuits
and Friars were sounder in some doctrines, then some of the men called Ministers
in the said reformed, but in many things still too much d^formed Churches, and
now with the nominations of thy self, T.D. whom I then named not, as one of
those Ministers, then whom (excepting ever their gross superstition) some
Jesuits and Friars, in some points of doctrine, are more Reformed, I here give
thee the advantage of my saying the same ore' again, and make the best use of
it thou can, to draw from hence an assurance to thy self, and others of my
probable compliance with the Popish Faction: I am sure thou can draw no more
then this with the best piece of twist that the best of thy Brain-pan affords,
that in some points I agree with them, wherein thou dissentest from them,
though in most things I differ from them, and to their faces appear more
against them, then thy self, See Edward Burrowes Book.
and if thou will have no nay, but that this must be compliance, then shake ye
hands with them, and be friends, who in Tithes, and twenty things more
pertaining to the Parish Churches, wherein we contradict you both, do comply
with them; and if they that renounce them in twenty things to one, shall be
counted one with them, if they agree in any thing at all, then according to the
Rule of Quae convenient in aliquo Tertio, etc. by my consent, Qui convenient in
aliquo uno erunt Idem; such as are disjoined in a thousand things, and yet
happen to jump together in some one, shall not only in that one respect be
counted one, but in all respects whatsoever be joined and jumbled together as
all one.

As to the other saying, if by Broaching thou mean no other than Preaching;
some doctrines I so B^oach are owned by them; though if by Broaching, thou mean
bringing any new Doctrine, that was not held or heard of hitherto, or in these
days till I declared it de novo, I deny thy talk of my Broaching, it is
untrue; for as I declare no other message or doctrine, then what was from the
beginning, before the Letter was, about the Light and some other things, which
the Letter tells of, even the good old way, wherein the Saints walked with God
from Abell, Enoch, Noah, and so downwards unto this day; which way has been
much Ecclipsed by the dark divinity of Divines in ages past; so the first and
new venting of that old way of the Light, which is new, as, by the passing of
the darkness, it begins anew to shine, was not from this Earthen vessel of
mine, but other vessels of Honor Sanctified, and fitted for the masters use,
and chosen to bear his Name, from whom I received it, through Gods mercy in
their Ministry, which thou de pisest: the new wine of Gods wisdom, which now
vents it self, and flows forth of the new bottles, into which God puts it,
which only are capable of it (for ye old bottles cannot contain, nor
comprehend it in the blindness of your hearts, as the darkness comprehends
not the true light, that shines in it, nor bear the infusion of any of it into
your souls without bursting to pieces at the very lent thereof) was both
broach't and tapr, and tasted of by others, who came into the Vinyard before
me: it is enough for me, who am less, then the least among the lovers of it,
and was once not the least of the Drunkards of Ephraim, that are overcharged,
intoxicated, and infatuated with that strong drink, and old wine of their own
w^sdome, till they know neither where they are, nor what they say, that I have
tasted it from the first hands, that in these days have filled it forth, much
more, that to me this grace should be given to follow, in the free filling it
forth to others, and to preach out among the Gentiles in such measure, as I am
enrich't therewith by the free gift of God, the unsearchable riches of Christ
Jesus; And if this be to Breach, I Breach not only many true Doctrines, but
some true ones, which peradventure the Papists do not deny, yet I deny my
Broaching of any any where, that are a fair Inlet to their Bag and Baggage, or
any part of their dark and dead Devotions, Trumpical Traditions, and Total
Transformations of themselves and all things (as to the outward form of
Religion) from the truth it self into (at best) a mear empty Apish imitation of
it. But the doctrines ye teach in contradiction to what the Qua. preach in most
things, are not only a fair In let to it, but also so fairly and fully bearing
the very likeness of it, that howbeit they that are of the night see it not,
yet the Children of the Light, and of the day see them to be no other then some
broken bits, and parts of that Popery, that stood here more perfectly, and in
gross once, which our Priests, being loath to part with more of then they are
forced to, have since parcelled for their own ends among themselves; some Chips
that flew off that Old Block, which fled beyond Sea, when 'twas hewed away
hence, some Stumps of the old Tree, under the shadow of which all England fate,
as other people yet do, out of the sight of the Sun of Righteousness; some
Fragments of the Friars faith, some shreds, odd ends, old Remnants, Rotten
Rags and Re ikes of the old Whores Skirts, which Rome left behind her for have,
when she ran a way hence, which our English Princes, Priests and People so ran
a whoring after, that they could never find in their hearts to send them away
after her to this very day; and in a word no other then the very Fag end of her
Bag and Baggage.

First, our Doctrine of perfect purging from Sin in this life, is no Inlet to
it, for the Papists are far enough (as ye are) from the belief of that, upon
the non-belief of which in this life they build that piece of Baggage viz. a
Purgatory in the life to come; which though ye cry out of as Popish, yet while
you hold with them, against us, no perfect purging from sin, in this world, and
say worse then they do in defiance of that holy truth, which we stand in
defense of (for so ye do while ye call it a doctrine of Devils) ye unavoidably
usher in that of Purgatory in the world to come; unless ye will fain another
world wherein the perfect Purgation must be, which is neither this world nor
that to come, which were a Chimera as bad as Purgatory, or say there is no
perfect purging at all, which were worse, you must by your denial of the
perfection of it here, establish a Basis for that Baggage to abide firm upon,
and open a door so wide, for its entrance and entertainment as to let in the
Popes Purgatory whether ye will or no.

2. Our Doctrine of Freely ye have received Freely give, and of Preaching the
Gospel without money and without price, and going forth for Christ's names sake
taking nothing of the Nations, our crying out as the true Pastors and Prophets
did against the Hireling Shepherds, that like greedy dumb dogs, that cannot
bark, unless it be against the truth, but bite shrewdly, when they are not fed,
and yet never have enough, but are ever seeking every one his gain from his
quarter, and our talking against Tithes, and the pay of Parish Priests, which
is originally of the Pope and not after Christ and such like, this is no fair
Inlet to the Popish Priesthoods Bag, nor yet any of his Baggage, but much
rather a shutting out of them both, for sure enough no more wages, no more work
for a Mass Priest here, nor any where else; no means, none of the Popes
Ministries; nor Ministrations; no money no men, that will preach without it; no
Popish Parish pay, no more Popish: Parish Pasture, nor Parish Formal Prayer; no
reaping the clear Tenth of Corn, without a farthing charge, more then it costs
to carry in (which is the sixth of the Nations grain at that rate) and the
Cream and Quintessence of all other Carnal things, no Seminary seeds men, of
that Sort, to sow such Earthen Heavenly things, such mere fleshly
Spirituallities, as the Spirits of that Spiritually are fully fraught with: No
Room for the rest of Romes Religion, where taking of Tithes, and Raking in the
Revennue may not be a prime part thereof; keep out the wide mouthed Bag of all
the lord Beggars, and they will never Burden England, so much as these have done,
with their far fetched dear bought Baggage: But the English Priesthood Preaching
for hire, and Divining for money, and taking of Tithes as aforesaid; and
talking for them, and gaping after the gain thereof, and Augmenting their
Arguments, and hideous outcryes for Augmentations out of the Antichristian
Treasury of Deans and Chapters Lands, and powerful pleadings for the Popish
Pensions of Parsonages, Vicaradges and Curat-ships, etc. and seeking, and suing
for such Superstitious emoluments, and uncessant, and unfatiable callings out
more maintenance, more maintenance, this is not only a fair Inlet to the
Popes Bag, but also no small part of his Baggage, whereby his Bag is upheld,
which receiprocally upholds his Baggage; for these two are the mutual [In-lets
and upholders of each other, and as 'twas said of old, two good livings, which
some mongril Presbyterian-Independants can digest yet, are a good step toward a
Lord Bishop, which is not far from an Arch-Prelate, so how an Archbishop at
Canterbury is next to the Arch Bishop at Rome, may be seen by such as have read
how that Heavenly Pope Calestine set Anselm, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, at his
right foot in a General Council, saying Includamus hunc in orb nostro tanquam
alter us Orbis Papam, we must in our world count upon him, as a certain Pope of
another world.

3 Our Doctrine against Infant Sprinkling is no fair Inlet thereto, for that
is another part of his Baggage, that supports several other parts of it, which
together with it support his Bag; which take away, and his National and
Parochial Churches fall, in the fall of which much more Rubbish and Baggage of
his false with it, which wont to fill the Bag; yea and much money fails, and goes
beside the mouth of it, which was paid for mortuaries, dirgis deprofundis, etc.
in the dismal days of his darkest Dominion here, besides the refuse of the
Cross, and the Gossips, with whom at their Gossippings the Priests had many
good Sippings, their wonted Fees for Christnings, Churchings, etc. in the late
time of the font and Canonical Coat and the white Surplice; and not a little
might be better spared, then so ill spent, as it has been, since the Basin
began and the white Surplices are left off, among the men that are yet too much
for their black Superfluities, whose University Superstitious Snapsacks bear a
great portion of, and not a little proportion to the forenamed Baggage: But
such a practice as pleading for sprinkling of Babes, which is a tradition
little better than their Sprinkling of Bells (in their works) gives a fair
Inlet, or at least forbids the Outlet of not a little of the Antichristian
Bag and Baggage; though (in their words) they would fain seem wholly to
Renounce it.

4. Our doctrine against persecution is no Inlet thereto; for the Bloody
Tenets of Inquisitions, Burnings, Headings, Hangings, Quarterings, etc. In that
case of Conscience, are (as Iachin and Boaz were before the True Temple of God,
(that is by interpretation) establishment and strength the most proper props of
the Popes Temple, and all its Trumpery, the' most Principal Pillars that all
his stuff stands on; the Bottom of his Babilonish building, by which poor
people are so frightened into a blind obedience, and conformity thereunto, that
whatever appears of truth to them within, they dare not appear to obey, nor so
much as peep forth into any prosession thereof, without, but before there is
any thing born up to suffer for it, they are quickly cut off, and, as Hernicks,
soon handled to dust and ashes, which most Beastly part of it all the rest of
his Babilonish Baggage, when ever it shall happen to be removed, all the rest
runs immediately to Ruin.

But the doctrine and practice of hating and hunting the Saints to and fro as
Harmless Hares, hauking after them (as Saul after David) as Partridges about
the mountains, from Court to Court, from Commitee to Commitee, for their flesh
and their eggs, that the Tithe, or else the price of the Tith of their eggs,
and geese, and hens, and piggs, and lambs, and calves, and their other
commodities also (viz.) corn, and hemp, and hey, and hops, and pears, and
plums, and apples, and other fruits of their lands, in which their Ministers
labor not, may take a trebble turn through their Teeth, and that of laughing,
mocking, scoffing, scorning, ^^uring, houting, holding, haling, beating,
kicking, di^ring, stocking, stoning, pumping, prisoning, Bocardo^ng, Fining,
banishing, bridling, bridewelling, branding, boring, pilloring, ga^ging, ear
marking, nose flitting, scourging, cutting, slashing, hanging, and such like,
which have been used of late, yet I must needs say not altogether so much
connived at, and countenanced by the Magistracy, that is supreme corrective, as
caused and encouraged to by the Ministry, which takes upon it still in such
matters to be supreme directive in these, which ye call the Reformed Churches,
I say the doctrine and practice of such inhumanity as this, which some Teachers
and Doctors in Divinity, the dark places of whose earthly hearts are too full
of the habitations of Cruelty, as well in Old, and specially New England, as in
Italy, France, and Spain, both have and yet do plead, and in some part practice
against the truly tender conscientious Lambs of Christ, whereby we may ( as ex
pede Herculem, ex ungue leonem Fanaticos non esse perfectos neque ad Christum
in gloria adductos nobis Testimonio sunt illorum me^dacia, f^audes, selera,
hypoctisis; ijs vero qui immunes se^esse ab his omnibus alisque peccaris, vel
levissunis, impudenter glorian^ur, punitiones et incarcerationes, quas (...)
sua sibi ultro accersunt, de quibus muli britur quiritantux, esse debeant. I.
O. Exer. 3. Sect. 29.
) ee what kind of wild Beasts of the Forest they yet are, that love Christ's
little Flock, (not to feed, but to feed on) with all their hearts, are a fair
inlet to the Marian Baggage of Fire and Faggot, for not owning the Roman Faith,
if the Magistrates do not save their longing, and forbid the Marching of it in,
more then the Ministers, that are ever and anon facing about and Marching the
old way; being indeed but the Dragons Tail, the S^ing whereof reaches still as
far as England, though his head he as far off as Rome; a little of Levia^han,
that crooked Serpent, which he left when he went away to let in himself by into
these Nations at his return again; and the Tail, or some gentle shatterings of
that sharp shour, and sturdy storm, which fell down in greater drops of blood,
and Flakes of Fi^e in the days of her dominion here, and not only so, but a
fair pretense for Papists to bolster themselves up by, in their persecutings of
such as go now to tell the Truth to them in their own Countries: for to my
knowledge its none of the least Pleas, they now have in other Nations, both
Protestant and Popish, for the groslest abuses they can do to the Qua. in whom
else they see no harm, but as from hence they are made to suspect it, to say,
Thus and Thus they do to you in your own Country of England, where you are well
known, therefore no marveil if we do thus unto you here.

And that the Divines old and young, not only have been in the darker, but are
even in these brighter times of Protestanism it self, so deeply accessory to,
and guilty of the aforesaid sufferings, witness the Barbarous, Baseness Acted
and Inflicted on the witnesses to the Lords Truth, not only in all other
quarters of this Nation (to say nothing of New England, Scotland, Ireland) but
also at the two Eyes, and Well heads of divinity, and Nurseries of learning and
true Religion, (as they are called) as well Oxford, as Cambridge, as they stand
extant to the view of all the world, (as most of that of other places and
Cities do) in sundry printed Relations, and Testimonies thereof, the reading
whereof may well take hold on all tender hearts, and draw Tears from their
eyes, to see the lamentable injuries, and abominable iniquities done to the
Saints, by those painted Sepulchers, in a land of such godliness as this
pretends to.

Witness also that Divine Doctrine of that Divine Doctor Owen, with whom I
have here to do, in the days of whose Vice Chancellorship, what influence was
given by him toward the Oxford persecutions, he knows as well as others; and
what influence his doctrine might have upon the Powers, to whom he often
preached, to the stirring them up to more persecution then they were free for,
if God had not made them wiser then their Teachers, all may see, that can read
it from his hand in his Latin Divine d^sputation, which I am to talk with,
where p. 89. (his own words in the margin above truly Englished) he Teaches
thus though no men could ever yet Tax them with stirring against the State.
(viz) that the Qua. are not perfect, nor come to Christ in Glory, their lies,
deceits, wickednesses, hypocrisy, are evident Testimony unto us; But indeed
those punishments, and imprisonments, which they voluntarily pull upon
themselves by their tumultuousnesse, of which they ^^manishly complain, ought
of right to be inflicted upon them, who impudently glory that they are free
from all these, and other sins, even the least-

So far forth as this piece contains I. O's. false accusation of the Qua. and
pertaines to the point of perfection it may possibly come to account again in
other places, more proper for it then this: its here related, as to that
relation that it bears only to the point of persecution: in which capacity,
who so is capable to see it, may perceive by the Paw he here puts forth, what
prey I. Owen lack and how (like them of old who cloathd Christians with wild
Beasts skins, that they might seem to the dogs to be such, and so expos'd-them
to dogs to be baited; or covered them all ore with draff and swillings, and
then threw them to the Swine to be devoured) so he first ( fortiter accuset)
loads the Quakers with calumny, and lays ( lyingly) heavy things to their
charge, and then (Magistraliter satis, Ministerialiter magis) as
Authoritatively as that whole Tribe which must ever be in such Supremacy, as to
direct, till they come to correction themselves, gives out what ought to be
done with them, by such as were only used to correct Heretics at their
appointment.

The Doctrine then of persecution as taught and learnt, too much, to this day
by our English Reformadoes from Ramish Rubbish, is not only a retaining of
much of, but an open door for the rest of the Popes Baggage to return by as the
times turn; but our innocent tender Tenet of liberty of conscience Which I have
written more largely of some years since in the last part of my, book of
Baby-Baptisme stild An i-Sacerdotisme.
is so averse to, and inconsistent with it, as that it turns it all up by the
very Roots.

And whereas it may be objected, that a pleading the universality of liberty
may seem to be an Inlet to Popery very much, for if you would have Toleration
for all, then how will you keep out the Papists Bag and Baggage?

Rep. I answer not with the carnal weapons of your warfare, but with a sharper
Sword then that, whereby you and they seek to keep out the truth, even that
with 2 edges, the light, and spirit of the living God, which goes out of his
mouth, who is called the Word of God, who will go on conquering and to conquer
all the vain imaginations in the hearts and consciences of men, to cast down
the strong hold of the Prince of darkness, in the might and power of God, and
captivate every high thing that exalts in self against the knowledge of God,
and every thought to the obedience of himself, and avenge all that
disobedience of his Adversaries, whose Ministry further then by his own
permission its born down by that extrinsecall force of the beasts putting
forth, and interposing for a time, will make its own way, and clear the truth,
as the light, both amongst and against all false ones, without either
maintenance or defense, or so much as good countenance (if that may not be had)
from the higher powers of the earth; being such a Substantive, as is well able,
if let alone, and in the midst of not a little interruption, to stand by it
self in reason before any, and not such a Noun-Adjective, as the national^ C
Clergy is, which cannot stand by itself to show one glass full of its own
sense, and meaning on the Scripture, without some Constable or Officer joining
with it to take that honest man or woman to the Stocks or Cage, that by two or
three good words shall disturb them; nor stand by it self to show its reason or
signification to such as soberly reason with it, but must require another force
then that of words to resist, and sometimes the rude ones to run with stones,
and stop the mouths of its opponents.

Not by might nor power of this sort, but by my spirit, says the Lord. That
Dagon, that cannot stand unless its worshippers hold it up in this manner
before the Ark, undoutedly will fall, and let it fall if it will, and never
rise any more for me.

And if Papists, Jews, and Turks, being obedient to the civil power in civil
matters between man and man, shall come in and u^e their blind consciences, in
their respective blind Religions, they shall deceive not one of the Elect, and
none but such as are disobedient to what they know ^for which to stumbling they
are appointed: That Protestanism that cannot stand if Popery, Indaism, and
Turcism have liberty, till it fall by the pure power of God, and not mere man,
to stand peaceably by it in one Nation, for fear it should dye out before them,
let it dye out with them all, when the Lord will, for me, that truth, which is
to outshine, and outlive them all, may stand up alone in its proper power and
native luster when they are gone; as for such Protestants as would run to hell
with them, if Papists, Turks and Jews should come among them, they are only
such as would never come near to heaven, if these should never come near them
at all.

5. Our Doctrine of the true lights enlightening every man, (the truth of which
is to be proved against I. O. and T. D. in its proper place) and our calling
every man to attend to the shining of it in his own conscience, can be no fair
Inlet to the Popish Bag and Baggage, for all that arises and springs from the
cloudinesse of their consciences, the blindness of their hearts, the darkness
that is in their understandings, in which darkness, or dark places, which are
in the heart, the true light shines, though the darkness comprehends it not,
and the da^k minds of men consider it not, which if they would once do so well
as to take heed to, the day would dawn, the day Star arise at last in their
hearts, the light shine forth, the shadows fly away, the clouds scatter, the
veil that overspreads them vanish, the face of the covering be removed, the
da^knesse of this world, in which the devil, who is the Prince and Ruler of
it, dwells, diggs, deceives, devoures, destroys, udoes, does all he has to
do, who has nothing in Christ the light, nor ought to do in them, that dwell
out of his reach under Christ's Protection in the l^ght, would be dispeld, and
the b^^ghtness^ of a better Religion, Worship, Gospel, Faith, Knowledge,
Righteousn^sse, Holiness, Salvation, Redemption, Kingdom, then any power and
glory they yet are aware off, or your selves either, would break forth upon
them.

But such as your Tenet is, who rebel against the light, not knowing the pa^hs
the^e^f Job. 24.6. and band yourselves together against the blowers of it up in
men, to blow it out what ye can, denying it to be, in any measure at all, in
any but very few, quarrelling with the Quakers for calling any, much more all
to take heed to it, that they might walk up in singleness, to to what of God
by it is made known in them, does both River England into a resolution to
retain so much of Romes Bag and Baggage as is yet remaining, and into their and
the Priests wonted readiness to receive more or all of it again, if it shall
so return, as in Ma^yes day^s, and be handed out to them by the threatening
helping hand of those, that have the highest handling of the Helm.

6. Our Doctrine of the infallibility of the true Ministry of Christ, which we
say is that, which is among them called Quakers in these days, as in those of
old, can be no fair Inlet to the Antichristian Bag and Baggage or to those
Ministries or Ministrations; for to teach (which is not more taught by me, then
shall be proved against I. O. and T. D. who both deny it, more at large in its
proper place) (viz.) that the infa^^ible spirit continues his infallible
direction, guidance and divi^e inspirations to the true minist^y and Church,
which waits upon him now in such wise as heretofore, is so far from leting in,
that it shuts out for ever, their M^nist^y, and all its A coutrements, as false
and fictitious, and yours also, who, as to your confessed fallibility, are
Bi^ds of the same feather with them, who as in that ye flock, so must flee and
fall, and fail all together; seeing (saving only that they ascribe
infalibility to their Vice-God the Pope, as ye do not, and Ch^ists spirits
inspirations to his single sacred soul) they count it Egregi^us blasph^my for
any Minister or other to say they have the holy spirit, so only as to assure
them of Gods love and acceptance, much more to make them infallible in their
ministry; and though you hold men may have it to assure them of salvation, yet
as to its assumed and infallible guidance of your selves in yours, or any men
at all in their ministrings now, you count it little less then the same, and
differing so as to the matter of the Ministry, no further from them, then thus
(viz.) that whereas they hold infallibility ^omewhere (but falsely enough
fixing it to that false subject, the breast of their Arch-Bish^p, Vicar^ of
Christ and supreme Master-Minister) here on earth, ye deny it to be in an^
Ministers at all now, to the utter u^m^nistring of your selves, and evincing it
ye are none of Christ's, any more then they.

But so to teach that all Ministries, that pretend to Christ, are fallible in
these days, and not one Christian Ministry infallible throw-out the earth, Nor
any one of all them, that are in England at this day, no nor yet so much as
that of your own, is a Doctrine and a piece of news, which, if it were not a
little more strange then true (for one here is, though it be not yours is a
very fair Inlet to, and by my con^ent might, without much scruple, usher in
that old Antichristian Ministry, and its pertenances here again, as that which
may stand welny with as much safety to peoples souls, and give as good security
and infallible assurance of its guiding and conducting them infallibly to
salvation, as your own can do; since that, at the worst, is little worse then
fallible, and your own by your own consent, at the best, is little better: for
its much at one to me and other poor people of it what Mnistry stands here in
England, if, in a case of such main moment and eternal concernment, there
stands none that by the Spirit of God are made in their ministrations
infallible: if there be no guides to be had, save such as are fain to confess
they are but fallibly guided themselves, or if in this case there be no other
(as the Proverb is) then Hobsons Choice to be made, which is choose whether you
will have this or none, One blind guide being to me little better then another,
if others would be ruled by me, I would choose none of that sort at all; but
cleave to the light and Spirit it self, which is infallible, and leads all
that follow it into all truth; for if the blind lead the blind, whether
Papists or Protestants, they must all at last into the ditch: and if England
must have an outward ministry, and by no means will be made to own that
ministry of the Qua. now among them, which is of God, seeing it is so that none
of all those other she takes hold on in this day of her breaches, saying thou
have clothing, be thou our Ruler in things of God, Let this ruin be made up
under thy hand, that answer her any other then so, as Isa. 2.6.7. I will not be
an healer, for in my house is neither bread nor clothing; I am not guided
infallibly my self, I am a deceivable erring man, I dare not say my ministry
is unerring, make me not a Ruler of the people; seeing I say there is none to
guide her assuredly among all her own Sons she ha^h brought forth, Isa. 15.18.
Neither any that takes her by the hand infallibly to direct her among all the
Sons she has brought up with great care, cost and charge at her own
Universities here at home; but they are all at a loss within themselves,
m^ping up, and down in a mist, their Divinest Doctors confessing and declaring
that to be justly come upon them, which God aid should, Isa. 29.9. to 15.
(viz.) that its night to them, they cannot infallibly divine, the vision of all
is become as a book sealed to them, they cannot read, etc. (Though I advise her
not to give way to any of those guides yet) she could have neither more nor
less said to her, if she should send for some of her own native Sons to come
home, and guide her, that are brought up in the English College at the Popes
own charge at Rome it self* But if she be resolved no more to be foold with a
fallible ministry, but will have one that is infallible (as I would or none at
all) then if she mean never to bear the Popes Bag and Baggage in truth, as she
talks she will not, let her take the infallible Spirit within for her guide and
no man without but such as are guided infallibly by it, which guides none
fallibly, that unfainedly follow it, as thousands of Quakers do; and if any
seem to do it and do not, they in so doing undo themselves; but I know no other
men called Ministers in all the world beside the Qua. that so much as pretend
to infallibility, but he that s^ts in the infallible chair.

7. Neither is our Doctrine of the light and spirits being the rule of the true
faith and good life, and not the external Text or letter of the Scripture
only, any fair Inlet for the P^pish Bag and Baggage; for howbeit they take
not the Text thereof to be their only truest Touchstone, most certain Standard
and measure of Truth and Doctrines, as we do not, yet that they take for their
sure and certain Rule (which we say with you, is a manifold more fallible
matter, yea by an hundred degrees more fallible then the most falsified Copy
of the Scripture, that ever yet came forth) is something that stands more at
Staves end, and at a far wider distance from that aforesaid Rule of ours, then
from yours, who for your Rule and Standa^d do own no other then the Scripture;
by how much, two things, whereof the one is fallible, the other infallible, are
further off each other by far, then two things are, both which are at most no
more then fallible: for the Light and Spirit of Christ, which we only do, and
all Christians ought to own, for their standing Rule and trusty Teacher, are
i^fallible, and will hereafter in the proper place for that, be proud to be to;
But your professed Standard, which is no other then that outward Text, and the
Papists, which is no other then Tradition taken from that dark, and worse then
dubious Oracle (viz.) the erring mi^d and mouth of their great Grand Ghostly
Father (excepting ever that this is far more fallible then the former ( i.e.)
then the letter) are both but fallible.

Your Doctrine, then who teach the mere Text, which is but fallible (as must
anon be showed) to be the most true Touchstone, comes nearer to the Papists
Doctrine, who teach another thing to be the most true Touchstone, which (what
ere you say of the infallibility of yours, and they of the infallibility of
theirs) is at best but fallible, and at worst but more fallible, then yours is,
then ours possibly can do, which is on all hands owned to be infallible. And
howbeit the Scripture (which lies in the midway between us, and Papists, so
that till they March so far toward us, as to own it better then they do, they
and we are never likely to meet in one, unless they can come, ab extrem^ ad
extremum from their ill extreme to our true extreme, and miss the m^dium as
they cannot,) howbeit, I ^a^ the Scripture and its honest owners are really
nearer and dearer to us then they, and their most trusty traditions are, which
they take from their sore aid O^^cle; yet is there not so vast a disproportion
and di^agreement between ^uch owners as ye are of the Scripture for the only
Rule, and such as own that Treasury of Traditions, that lies locked up in the
Pope; Breast, as the only Rule, as is between these Tradition-Truster^ and us,
who own as our only Rule, the true light of Christ and the holy Spirit; the
inconsistency being not so much between your mere fallible l^tter and their
more fallible chair, as it is between the most assuredly infall^ble holy
spirit, and their most assuredly fallible, though supposed infallible holy
chair.

8. Our Doctrine of the fallibility of the bare na^ed letter of the Scripture,
and of its lyablenesse to corruption, and its being corrupted, and falsified by
mistranscriptions, so as to have various Lections in the most Original Copyes
of it, that are extant in Greek and Hebrew at this day (which remains to be in
its proper place proved against I. O. who pleads that kind of purity of it to
every tittle, and (...) ad nauseam us^u^) is no fair Inlet to the Pop^sh Bag
and Baggage, though I find I. O. So supposing, and giving us out his sole
suppositions and thoughts, that it is but a supposition, that it is corrupted,
and such a one, as by which P^pe^y is supported, speaking in at least three
places of his English piece to this same purpose, ( viz.) p. 147. What use ha^h
been made, and is as yet in the World ^f this supposition, that corruptions
have befallen the O^iginals of the Scripture, which those various Lection
(meaning those that the Pr^l^gam^na to the Biblia polyglotta do declare) at
first view seem to intimate, I need not d^clare. It is in brief, the
foundation of M^humetisme the chi^f^^t and principal prop of Popery, the only
pretense of Fanaticall Anti^cripturists, and the Root of much h^dden Atheism
in the World. also p. 196. Now if this course be taken and every S^igma^ized
c^ppy may be sea^ched for differences and these presently Pinted for various
Lections, there is no doubt but we may have enough of them to f^ighten poor
unstable souls into the A^mes of the pretended in^allible Judge; also (to say
nothing here of the hideous affrightments, dangers, fears of I. O. Who is often
mo^e afraid then hurt, and other of the dreadful and desperate consequences of
this Imagination^ (as he calls it, though a real truth) that corruptions and
various Lections are crept into his Original Text of the Scripture, and that
Protestants begin now to sent it, as well as Papists, and to be infected with
the Leprosy of that Opinion, which he trembles, think of, as an i^convenience,
which he knows no whither it will grow, and fears whether many will not be
ready to question the foundati- of the letter, as dubious and uncertain, and
not fit to be the Rule (as sure enough they will when they begin to see, what
some have felt, and cry out with him (...) seeing that their supposed firm
foundation to be fallible and falsified as it is) having no more yet to relieve
himself against this uncertainty of his standing, then that mi^erable comfort
( viz.) that the generality of lea^ned men among Protestants are not yet (but
how soon they may be, he is not aware) i^fected with this leven, which hurries
and pitiful Puthers and dreadful deal ado, that the Doct^ makes in his
D^eam about this up and down in the 13.14.15.20.25. and other pages of his
preface and throw out the 4th little Chapter of his 2d. Treatise, which is so
falsely figured that the pages cannot easily be coted, are enough to make some
wise men smile that never meant it) I say to let pass all that at present,
among other mischiefs, that he conceives will accrue, if men conceive the
Scripture to have had, by mis-transcriptions, the fate of other books, and that
in their Original Copyes, this must needs be one, that they have no where else
to betake themselves for a Rule, but to run back to Rome, witness his last
words of that forecited Chap. which are these (viz.) and if this change of
judgment which has been long insinuating it self by the curiosity and
boldness of Critics should break in also upon the Protestant world and be
avowed in public works, it is easy to conjecture what the end will be. We
went from Rome under the conduct of the Purity of the Originalls, I wish none
have a mind to return thither under the pretense of their corruption.

But stay a while, I. O. is there for such as are lost, no way out of the Wood,
but that one of thy own fancying, or else that other of the Papists, which is
worse then none? Is there naught for men to do, but either they must stare
with thee, or else, for fear of they know not what, run stark mad with them?
either fall in with thy mere figments about the Scripture, or else if they find
it not as infallible in every Apex of it, as thou foolishly fainest, be
frightend strait into the more fallible fantasmes of that fantastical holy
Father?

Sure if that judgment, that the same fate; as to the creeping of corrupttions
into it, has befallen that writing, as has done other Scripture, be a Pr^p to
Pope^y, where Popery at pre^ent stands, yet thou will find some, who are of the
Papists mind about the Scripture (as far as to the variety of Lections, which
are found in the very Origina^l Text thereof) who yet have betaken themselves
to, and do stand on such a sure foundation, as will s^and when Popery, and
Common P^otestanism too shall fail for ever, with whom neither one nor the
other of these, wh^ are in the same nature still, though fighting for their
different outward^faulty foundations, and foolish forms, so standing, can have
any fellowship; who, instead of returning to R^me, under a pretense of
Corruption in your Originalls, under the conduct of your conceited purity of
which ye came from thence, are running further, and faster, then ever from Rome
and you too, that live within her lines of Communication still, and feed upon
the Tail of her traditions, more then on the true word of God, for all your
wording it so much against them and for the word, under the infallible conduct
of the pure, Original it self, even the pure light living, Word and Spirit of
God, by which Abell, Enoch, Noah walked with God of o^d before your (but
pretended) Rule was written, in respect of which the eldest of your Originalls
are but upstarts, and from which the best of your Originalls had their being.

Nevertheless, who has believed our report? to whom is this Arm of the Lord
Revealed, etc. O nugas h^minvm! O quantum est in R^bus inane! quis legit haec?
vel duo vel neimo. I. O. cannot see this, and few or none of our skilful Scribs
and Scripturists can read this, though the Scripture sends them from it self to
that it came from; nor yet how by raking so unreasonably to make men believe
that of the Scripture, which it is unposible for any that can truly read them to
believe of them, or find from themselves, himself frightens honest souls, from
any further giving of much heed to his own judgment, when by a serious search
they shall find the falsehood of it in so plain and palpable a case as that is,
he so miserably miscarries in: but whether they will give most heed to Christ
himself or no, and to his Light in the Conscience, and word in the heart, or to
the bare Letter of the Scripture, which only Testifies of him, without ever
coming to him that they may have the life, or to the Pope. I leave it; A little
time will now detect it, howbeit some may go one way, some another, and like to
like, and each to what, and to whom he best loves and likes, but Christ's Sheep,
to whom he only gives Eternal Life, they will assuredly hear his voice, which
who does not, must be cut off from among his people.

9. Our Doctrine of the Universal grace, and general love of God to all
mankind, in giving Christ Intentionally to be a Savior to all, that all that
are lost in the fall of the first man, may be in possibility and true
capability of Redemption and Salvation by him, without a bolt by any personal
Reprobation of the most therefrom, with no reference to their acting any evil,
and that unchangeably before they had a being, (unless themselves p^nendo
obicem debarr themselves from the benefit thereof, by Rejecting the council of
God against themselves, by an obstinate resisting the strivings of his Spirit
with them to bring them to it, and a wilful putting away of the word of eternal
life, when by Christ its brought nigh even in their hearts and mouths, that
they may hear and do it) this is no fair Inlet to their Bag and Baggage: This
perhaps is assented to as truth by the Papists, the more shame for the most of
our hypocritical Churles that gainsay it, who would be, but must be no more
called liberal and bountiful, while they are bold to utter error against the
Lords large love, as if he were such a niggard as themselves, who care not how
few men be saved, provided that their ever-sinning-selves be not damned, but
elected to be saved in their sins, without being perfectly purged from them
before they die, by Christ, of whom they must yet once know what yet they will
not, that he came to save all people from all sin, who a^e willing to be saved,
and not to give any such darlings of his, as they darkly deem themselves to be,
an allowance in the least, or a dispensation to sin throw infirmity till they
die, and then to save them from the desert thereof after death; the Instruments
of which vile Chu^l^ also are evil to destroy the poor people of God with their
lying words, when they speak no other then right things.

But what if the Romish Clergy do hold such a general grace of God? they are by
so much the more of a noble spirit then your selves, who deny it, in the owning
of that most precious truth, if they were not far worse then yourselves in
other mattters: And as for us called Qua. who preach it here for Truth (as
against I. O. and T. D. it must anon be proved to be in the proper place) as we
take neither it nor ought else to be truth by tradition from Papists, or e^e
the more because they own it, but as our selves have received it from the muoth
of God, so I hope you wise men will grow wiser by then I have done, then to
judge we must either reject truth it self, if their Church once hold it, or else
be judged to be of them while we hold it with them: and as in holding it out
freely, (as we do other Truths) we neither fill nor feed, (as you do your own,
by holding In the Truth) their as Hypocritical as Hydropical Bag, so it being
no worse then that Golden Gospel Truth, which ye Divines darken so much by your
dirty distinctions, and mere gilded glosses, could we make such ^a fair Inlet
for it, that it might shine forth in its brightness, as it once will do, from
one end of England to another, we should in so doing usher in no part of their
Baggage; But indeed your selves in standing against it have not only stored
your Bag more then is fit for men to do, that make a Trade of treading down the
Truth, But have brought in a piece of Babylonish Baggage of your own, as bad,
if not worse then all the Popes, for its all one to me what outward Religion
men be of, true or false, Papism or Protestanism, or whether they have any at
all among them yea, or nay if it be so as our personal Electionists ( absit
blasphemia) breath it forth verbatim, or at least, doctrinally and in effect,
that the mercy of the Almighty, which is said to abound to and over all, and
extend beyond all his other works, and his infinite large, and incomprehensible
love to all men, is yet no larger then may be comprehended in that little
corner, whereinto they crowd it, so as to say that one of a thousand only are
decreed to be saved, and a thousand to one of the Sons, and Daughters of men,
without respect to any evil foreseen in their proper persons to be acted in
time, are from all eternity decreed by God himself, and that unchangeably and
everlastingly to be damned: For then that one of a thousand shall assuredly be
saved, and a thousand to one as inalterably perish, and die eternally, and this
or that outward Religion is no remedy against that, which was so ordered long
before the poor Creatures had any being.

And as one said once unto me, for whom twill be better then he deserves, if
our God take him not at his word ( viz) he would not own that God that would
own a Qua. to be one of his Children; so say I (but not so desprately as he did
the other) I know, and own no other God but him, who will own all to be his
Children, who will unfainedly own him to be their Father, and save all them,
that are truly willing, in his way, to be saved from their sins by him, who
never yet declared himself willing to save any in them, who sent his Son a
light in the world not to condemn it, but to that intent that the world, which
loving darkness rather then light will needs be damned, through his Light
notwithstanding might be saved, and will show mercy upon all them, who will
have pity upon themselves, so far as not to despise the riches of his grace,
and reject his unfeigned tenders, and honest offers thereof when they are made:
neither do I own him to be my God (for my God is a God of mercy and truth to
all) who without any respect to their personal rejectings thereof in time,
wills never to have mercy upon the most; who would have any to perish, and not
have all to come to Repentance; who would not truly have all, as well as some
to be Saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth; who has any pleasure at
all that the very wicked, much more that the innocent should die; that
delights in the death of him that dies, and had not really rather, that he
should turn from his wickedness and live; that means any otherwise then he
says, or is quite contrary to what he seems to be in his speeches, to either
good or bad; that has two wills within himself, whereof one is contradictory
to the other; that reveals his will to be this, that he is no ^^specter of
persons, but all men as they do shall have, that the soul that sins shall die,
but that that turns and does righteousness shall live, that men die at their
own wills, and choice not his; and yet has a secret will within himself (which
as secret as they call it, yet our Priests will be twatling of it openly ever
and anon, as if they knew it as well as the other) wherein he wills and chooses,
that a few only shall live, and irresistably by them or ought they shall ever
do, a thousand to one shall die; that sends out his Son as a mocker of most
men, by calling them all to believe every one that he is his, and is come to be
his Savior, when yet he died not for every individual, but contrary to his
Revelation in the Scripture, gave himself a Ransom, not for all, but only for a
few; that makes an of^er of Salvation to all by Christ, but intends it only to
some few; that sends out his Ministers with a lie in their mouths, (for a truth
it is not say our M^nisters, yet they will preach it) ( viz) that G^ds love and
good will is truly toward them all, and every one may lay claim to it as well
as any one: when yet according to their doctrine at other times, there is no
such matter as this, but his love is only to some certain ones, which he
secretly Selects, and yet he cannot do it so secretly neither, but they must
tell on it to as many as they tell the other; that sends his Ministers to make
every man believe that Christ died for him in particular, which if every man
should believe (according to their other will of God, which, but that they are
Tel-tales, should be called his secret will, which is that he gave not Christ
to Taste of death for every man, but for very few) most men must believe a very
lie; and yet if every man believe it not for himself, he must be damned too,
for not believing of that, which (according to themselves still) is no Truth,
but a very notoriously^; that condemns the world of Sin, John 16. because they
believe not in Christ, as their Savior, and yet leaves the world, which (say
our preachers) Christ died not to save, for he died only for such as are not of
it, without any Savior, that is theirs, to believe in: that on pain and peril
of his eternal displeasure, Requires men like Pharaoh, whom he plagued for his
cruelty in the self same case, to make such a Tal^ of B^ick, and yet yields
them no straw wherewithal to do it, but leaves them to go look it where they
can.

He that does thus, and much more of the like nature, which the doctrine of
such, as deny the Universal grace of God, does in effect Represent their God as
doing, may be owned as a God by such as make him one, and by the Ministers of
his own making, yet is not owned by me to be the true God of Gods, but a God of
his own Ministers own making to themselves after the Image of their own vain
Imaginations; yet such a God as this are I. O. T. D. I. Tombs, R. Baxter, and
the whole Diacony of D^vines, that deny the death of Christ for all men,
devising, and Imagining to themselves, of whom till they come to know, and own
the true God, which is mine, in his mercy truth and faithfulness, a little
better then they do, or can by that dark lantern of their own understandings,
in which they are poring after him in the Letter only, besides his own light
and spirit, in which only he is seen as he is, I must say so much, and of my
self together with them, that whosoever is the father of myself or of them, we
are not yet one and the same Fathers Children.

10. Our Doctrine about good works, and our Preaching, and Maintaining, and
pleading for good works, as necessary for many good uses against T. D. or any
other, this is no fair Inlet to the P^pish Bag and Baggage, for all good works
as are so indeed, and not only so suppo^ed by such as call good evil, and evil
good, are of God and Christ Jesus, the truth and none of the Pope, nor of his
Priests, nor any other mere man that I know of, neither are there any that can
truly be so called (for what thou or the Pope or any Papists or Protestants,
falsely call good works is another case, not at all pertaining to our purpose)
to be found for ought I see in his whole Budget of Religious Implements, nor in
the whole Mass or Magazine of his Massy matters, and it is more then I shall
see, while I see you but besides, much more against that light, in which only
that is done, which goes for good in the account of God, if there be any good
works (truly good) to be found yet among the best of your own; I know you have
a whole warehouse of Religious works (such as they are) which you are accustomd
to call good, as they do theirs, but what your good works are in your own sight
is one, and what they are in the sight of God is another Question; there is a
Generation (woe to them) that are wise in their own eyes, prudent in their own
sight, yet very fools in the sight of God, there is a Generation (woe to them
also) that call evil good, and good evil; put darkness for light, and light
for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; there is a Generation (O
how lof^y are their eyes, and their eyelids lifted up, woe to them also, for
they are a stink in his nostrills, and as smoke in his nose before the Lord)
that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not, nor ever mean to be, while
they live, fully washed from their filthynesse; I have read of a Generation
that had more good works (as they count them) to count upon then all the
National Churches of either Protestants or Papists, and works more good, as to
the matter of them (if what matter God requires may be counted better, then
what is required by merely man) all whose whole Treasury of Solemn Services,
out of which they offered to him, was yet in the fight of God esteemed but
Trash, so long as it was the sinner only that so served, and sacrificed, and no
other then Cain the evil doer still, that did that good; such were all the
haughty Mincing Daughters of Zion, that walked with stretched out necks, and
bosted in the Bravery of their Tinkling Ornaments, their New Mons, Sabbaths,
burnt Offerings, Prayings, Praises, Fasts, and Feasts, in which, when they drew
near to God, they did no more then what he by Moses had appointed (as ye do,
for which you have your labor for your pains) who worship not after his own
praecepts, and doctrines in outward, but after the Commandments, and
Traditions of men, and of the Pope himself in many things still, and yet
because they did not so much as he appointed them in matters of more moment,
but were unclean, and wicked, refusing to walk in the good old way of the
Light, which was the way before Moses, and the letter was, turning away their
ear from hearing the Law in the heart, which is the light, were not only vain
but abominable in the very best of their Oblations.

In Preaching therefore in order to Gods acceptance of us, and our good works,
which are not outward worships, where the heart and life are yet defiled, but
where a new Creature, created after his own Image of God in Christ Jesus to
good works, in his nature, and by his Power, though in it is own person, does
perform them, is as an utter exclusion of all your own, so no fair Inlet to
any of the Popish Rubbish, will worship, mere self service, and unprofitable
devotion, for these being only done by man, are neither good, nor accepted of
God.

But to Teach and maintain, and plead for evil works, as necessary to be done,
while we are in this life, and Teach down the doctrine of perfecting holiness,
and perfect purging our selves from all uncleanness of flesh and Spirit, while
we are here in the body (which Paul taught up) as a doctrine of devils, and to
deny the possibility of performing this duty of not sinning, and make such a
gross state of sin as that was, which David stood in, when he was guilty of
adultery and murder, consistent with Gods acceptance of men, and their
justification before him, and that the Saints (as some call them in such a
pickle, while they are in sin up to the ears) even in such a case are not in a
condemned, but in a justified estate, and that if the Saints own heart condemn
him, and his own conscience tell him that God does not accept him, and that his
estate is bad in such a bad sinful case, and not good, it is defiled, and lies,
and testifies falsehood to him, and leads him into a wrong opinion of himself,
and that the Saints may be blessed men, as David was, having no guile in his
spirit, but sincere, upright after Gods own heart, though under, the guilt of
so gross and great sins, when the Scripture says the contrary (viz) that
David was upright before God, saving in that matter of Vriah, wherein indeed
his very heart was false and rotten, and to affirm to the encouragement of men
in their imperfections, and infirmityes, by which name they style the Saints
grossest iniquities, as T.D. does, contradictorily to himself in other places,
that the gospel gives life upon imperfect obedience, all which and more,
ejusdem Farraginis is done and uttered by T.D. and such as own him therein, in
the 11.19.45.47. pages of his 1. Pamphlet as they were by word of mouth at the
disputes: This is to strengthen the hands of the wicked, that they cannot
return from their wickedness, for how is it possible they should do it, when
it is preached and believed as impossible to be done? this is to sow soft pillows
under their elbowes, that they may sleep on securely in sin and take their
rest, for its all but infirmity, and no inpreachment to his justification, nor
to his standing accepted, and in covenant with God that a Saint does, and
theirs no condemnation to them that are Saints, and in Christ, no though they
be in transgression, in which who is (say I) is out of Christ, and not a Saint,
and though they walk not after the Spirit (as all that are Saints and in Christ
Jesus do) but after the flesh: and in a word a very fair Inlet to a very worse
matter, then that whole mare mortuum of the Popes Beggarly observations, even
no better a matter then the very whole bundle of the Devils own Bag, and
Beastly Baggage.

So then I see not hitherto, and am persuaded never shall, till I come to see,
as T.D. does in his floting fancy, many things with his eyes shut, how any
Doctrines of the Qua. even such as they and I hold with, any more then what we
hold flatly against the Popish Priesthood, do either conclude my compliance
with them, or make any way for the incoming and abiding, (without its own
speedier Ruin) of their Romish Baggage; or how our parochial Priesthoods
preaching, and practice too, does any other then uphold the Butt end thereof,
and preach their own c^mplyance with those their Brother Ravens in many matters.

But T.D's. Biggest Bolt, and weightest Bullet (as he counts at least) lies yet
behind, and that is our doctrine of good works as needful to that use of our
justification before God, here he judges that Omne tulit punctum he has fully
hit the white, and that this will do, if all the rest die, and fallen the fault
of favoring and fathering the Popish cause upon me as some I^suit, if all the
other fail: Good works for necessary uses, (viz) to manifest faith to be true,
to sanctify, to make meet for the possession, etc. T.D. and his Associates in
words, and doctrinally (more then practically) maintain as much as any; but to
maintain good works, not only to the use of our sanctification, but our
justification and to justify, not only de^laratively in the sight of men, but
also formally in the sight of God, not only to approve a beleiver, but absolve
a sinner, p. 8. not only to fit for, but to give right to the inheritance p.
22. not as concurrent and concomitant only, but as cooperative, and
constitutive together with faith, and coincident as a cause in the case of our
justification, to let good works be accounted, not only Via ad Regnum, but also
carsa Regnandi (as your Scools distinguish) yea, and further yet, to dispute it
not in these Terms barely of ( good works) but in these Terms of (OUR good
works) and lastly, higher yet, to rank them so high in order of causes, as not
only Instrumental with faith but a deserving, or meritorious cause of
justification; This is notorious, yea so gross, and Popish that we may well
Rank you (thinks he) among the Papists, p. 58. as at least a bringer in of
their Baggage, yea now (quoth T.D. of me p. 14.) you show your self a rank
Papist indeed.

Rep. Ipse dixit T.D. has said it, who of all those Seers with his eyes in
Sandwich, or else where, who, giving heed to him from the least to the
greatest, saying of him, This man is the great Power of God, have hi^ hitherto
bewitched, with his Simonical Sorceries, can do any other then believe it to a
Tittle.

This stroke enters with so deep a dint, into the thoughts, fancies, and faith
of many, that it is supposed by some, we Qua. shall never be able to lick our
selves whole of the deadly wound it brings with it, both to the doctrines that
we maintain as Truth, and to our selves also, whom we maintain to be no Rank
Papists, nor Rankers of our ^elves with them against the Truth, in our
maintaining of those Doctrines: I must therefore (since the Lord has laid it
upon me, if all the world would take me off it) take leave here to enlarge so
far as to enter the lists, in one short single duel with T.D. alone, about
these matters, desiring I. O. to have patience, and stand by a while longer,
till I can have while to handle him, and T.D. both at once, in those points
wherein they two join, and issue out together, making (as it were) but one
head (as to the doctrines wherein they oppose) against the Qua and the rather
because I find not I. O. in his book, which elsewise is Brotherly enough with
T.D. in bitterness against the Truth and Qua. intermedling much there (what
ere he thinks) in this so momentary a matter.

As for T. D. I have sundry things, to reckon and reason with him in aboutit.

1 I am to have a talking with thee, T.D. in a few words for a certain abuse or
injury done by thee in that passage of thine p. 14. wherein thou relatest that
the 3d. Question debated on by us was stated in these Terms (viz.) whether OUR
good works are the meritorious cause of our justification? that I not only
held it in the affirmative, but also disputed it in those terms, of OUR good
works, in such wise, as the Papists do, so as to show my self a rank Papist;
which injury, in regard of the extent of it to the several persons wronged, is
not more manifest then manifold; yea, verily sevenfold more then ordinary, for
as much as no less then seven persons are thereby most grossly abused and
belyed; that is to say not only my self, whom only thou intendedst should
suffer by it, but also thy self and five of thy chief friends too, (for want
of thy forecast) viz. 2 of them thou cal^t Gentlemen, Hen. Oxenden I. B^ys
and three of thy Master Ministers Na^h. Barry. Tho. Seyliard. Charles Nicols
whose witness thou appealest to, who are all more moderate and gentle Men,
then thy self it seems, as to their Testimony in this matter; for they all,
and thy self too, who bring'st them to bear witness with thee, of the truth
in this case, do, with one accord together with thee, testify another thing,
which is the very truth, and no more then the truth viz. (see p. 58. Of thine
own narrative) that the terms of the 3 d. Question were, whether good. works
be the meritorious cause of our justification? which (as it is there said truly)
was expressly affirmed by us, without that figmentitious particle [ OVR] in
the sense thou usest it in, which is of thine own forging, and foisting in, and
adding to that term good works; the adding of which in the eye of any, save
such as are not either Arrand fools, or else (as the Proverb is) more Knaves
then Fools, which yet is, in plain terms, the plain case of all that wink
against the truth, and will not seem to see it, when they do, does alter the
State of the Question, so as to make it utterly another: for who but such as
either cannot see, or, which is worse, may see, and will not, can choose but
understand, that whether OUR good works (at least in that sottish and sordid
sense, wherein the Papists hold it) do justify? Is one Question? And whether
Good works do justify? Is another? In which 1 st. sense of the Papist, when
they say OUR good works, whose Good Works (as they call them) are no better
than other men's own are, whose own merely are all stark naught, I neither do,
nor ever did affirm our Justification to come; but in the latter ( viz.) that
Good works (meaning only those of Christ's own working in and for us, by the
same power and spirit by which he did good works in that person in which he
lived and dyed at Jerusalem, then whom I know no other that can, without his
power, work any Good, I confess I both then did affirm and own, and as I then
did in the power of Christ, so I ever shall both affirm, evince and maintain.

And whether it was in this latter sense only, or in the former Popish s^nse in
which thou T.D. art impudent enough to assert I held it, he that will in no
wise believe me, if I speak in my own case, nor any that side with me in the
truth, but had rather give credit to T.D. let him believe T.D. with all my
heart, provided he do but take his Testiomy to be tru^st where its strongest,
for then he cannot but believe me to be belyed: for that T.D. who in p. 58.
Says the Question was stated in these Terms [ Good Works] (which was the
same, T.D. undoutedly that says the other) does flatly gainsay and clearly
contradict that T.D. And prove him a liar, that saves p. 14. It was stated in
these Terms [ OUR good works] and if any doubt which of these two
selfe-overturning Testimonies of T.D. may most securely be taken for truth,
seeing they are 2. contrary Testimonies of one and the same man, ( viz.) that
in p. 14. wherein he wrongs me, or that of his own in p. 58. which I appeal to
for right, and am willing to be tried by, as touching his false charge of me,
as saying [OUR good works justifie] I say unless the Reader mean to wrong
more, then himself or me either by his misbeleife, namely, not only such of my
friends, as witness truth with me, but also ^. of T.D's. own most eminent, and
credible witnesses, so as to Judge them also to be all Liars, he must believe
what T.D. says p. 58. Namely that I affirmed [ Good works justifie] and
believe that to be a lie, which T.D. says, p. 14. Namely, that I affirmed [OUR
good works justifie] for, T.D. alone, on his own head only, says this last,
but T.D. together with his 5. Witnesses assert the other.

Thus then stands this case between me and thy self, T.D. thou arraignest me
openly at the Bar before the world, p. 14. as a ra^k Papist, as saying in these
Terms that [OUR good works] are the meritorious cause of our justification, to
which Indictment, I pleading not guilty of saying [ OUR good works [but [ good
works] are the cause, etc. How will thou be tried (quoth the impartial Judge
the honest hearted Reader, that would ^ain find out the truth in the Court of
his own conscience) whether thou be guilty of affirming and disputing the said
position expressly in those Terms, or not guilty? I reply by God and the
Country: What evidence bringst thou in (quoth the righteous Reader to T.D.)
against S.F. whom thou so accusest? What were the Terms in which he and the
Qua. expressly affirmed it? The Terms of the Question were these (quoth T.D.
p. 58.) whether Good Works he the meritoricus cause of our justification,
which was expressly affirmed by them.

Thus am I cleared in the sight of God and all men from T.D's. Accusation by
the true evidence of T.D. himself my accuser; for we have not Accusatum, but
Accusantem Reum confitentem, not the falsely accused, but the falsely accusing
Malefactors own confession to his own confutation and confusion, that the
position was asserted not in the same Terms, in which at first he related it
to be asserted in: so that what need any further witness, for ye your selves
of all sorts, that read T.D's book, may read the truth in his own Testimony;
but if any, finding T.D. so fickle as to say and unsay, judge him not fit to be
heeded in what he says, whether against me or against himself, and will needs
hear what others say in the matter, whether I affirmed [OUR good works] or
[Good works] only Meritorious. I need not trouble the world with the summoning
in of more witnesses, since fas est vel ab host doceri such as T.D. has
appealed to himself shall stand for me; for as T.D. says p. 58. (to the
proving of T.D. to be a liar in what he says, p. 14.) that 'twas [Good Works]
so H. Oxenden, I. Boys, N. Barry, T. Seyliard, C. Nicols agree in their
witness with him, and for ought I find as he says p. 58. So they say all; and
he that will not believe them, does, what in him lies, make them to be liars
like him, as well as T.D. in gain-saing p. 14. that truth. which himself and
they with him do all assert p. 58. does not only make himself a liar, but
also, what in him lies, abuse, not only me and himself, but all them also, so
as to make them seem liars also together with him.

Now then T. D. Let me expostulate with thee a little on thine own and thy
friends behalf: could thou not b^ly me in some better way then that p. 14.
whereby thou give the lie (if men were such fools as to believe thy single
self before thy self and 5. witnesses) both to thy self and them all in that
truth ye all 6. testify together, p. 58? if thou would in no wise spare me,
who can expect no sparing, but rather a shooting out of your poisoned arrows
against me, even lying words, who also can and do forgive thy forgery so far as
it reaches only to the ill reputation of my self; yet thou might have been
contented to have spared thy friends; thy Gentlemen and Ministers, who, (as
thou saift of them in thy Epistle to the Reader) are Witnesses of the Terms of
the Questions agreed to by the Qua. to free thee from the suspicion of a
partial Relato^ so as not to have laid them liable to suspicion of lying, by
thy lying, p. 14. against thy own and their true Testimony, p. 58. or if not
them, yet at least have spared thy self so far as not to have stained thy
self, and thine own reputation, and not have subjected thy self in the hearts
of all, to not only a shrewd suspicion, but welny a certain censure of
forgery, so much as thou have done in handling thy ill matters no better, and
making thy invented evill-intending Tale hang no more handsomely together then
it does; for which, how far soever I forgive thee and thou in favor to thy
self may possibly give pardon to thy own self supposed Saintship, as freely
as thou do to David, and all Saints in theirs, in thy own foulest faults, and
abominations, yet every Reader, that loves the truth, which thou have wronged,
will remember, and not so readily forget, how eminently the Lord has left T.D.
in his envious undertakings to manifest the Qua. folly to all men, instead
thereof most palpably to manifest his own: neither when the Lord^ises up to
visit, and to reckon, and to enter into judgment with him for it will the
seeming Saint without confession and forsaking so easily, as he supposes, find
from him the forgiveness of his falsehood.

Henceforth therefore T.D. take heed of lying at all to thy own hurt; or if for
want of love to it, thou must needs belly the Truth and its Children, for which
woe, and no less then the Lake must be thy Portion, yet for thy credits sake a
while have a care another time of lying so directly against thy self; but
remember that Opo^te^ mendacem esse memorem, it behooves a liar to have his wits
better about him, then thou had in this business, least by going about to
wrong another a great deal, he do not only in foro Dei, but hominum also,
before men wrong himself not a little; as thou have done, who at this time
was^t not thy Crafts-Master, so much as thy Craft was thine, to catch thee in
the Snare, which thou laid'st, and to pull thee into the pit, and draw thee
down into the ditch, which thyself digg'dst for another; for though thou
travailedst with iniquity, and conceivedst mischief, and broughtest forth
false-hood against thy fained-foe but unfeigned friend S.F. yet is it in such a
foolish unsubtle manner, that the mischief of the Serpent, who was scarce like
his cunning-self in the mannaging of this matter, returns (and so it ever must
till it be bruised, let him lie never so wisely) upon his own head, and his
violent dealing, and viola^ion of the truth comes unawares upon his own pate;
So Honi Soir, qui mal perse, evil still to him, that evil thinks, and howbeit
fallere fallentim v^x est fraus (as they speak) for a man to deceive himself in
that very thing, wherein he hoped to deceive another, is one of the most honest
and harmless pieces of deceit, that I know, and the least of all to befound
fault with, yet so it has happened to T.D. in this one piece of his Arche^y
against me and the Truth, that he has (as he says he intended to do p. 50.)
beat the Devil at his own weapon, and outshot him in his bow, yea, and overshot
himself so exceedingly al^o, as that -- Not aiming right, when he bent his Bow

To shoot at a Pigeon, he killed a Crow.

That then I affirmed good works to deserve Justification, I own, and still
affirm the same; but I deny that, that I there affirmed, and here I affirm that
I then did and still do deny the Papist best works, which are not good, what
ere they call them, to deserve Justification, or OUR own best works either, who
know no good works, that we have, but what Christ, who works no evil works, by
his power works in, and by us, which, as they are done by him in us, are not
ours but distinctively from ours 2 Timothy 1.7. Tit. 3.5. called his, and as they
are done by us, throw his power in us, are called our works, Isa. 26.12. for as
he does them in us Mat. 10.20. 2 Cor. 13.3. 1 Cor. 14.25. and works in us,
both to will and do them, they are truly his, and as we work them in and by
that power he gives, may (yet not in such sense as what we do of our selves) be
called our own Phil. 2.12.13. yea if we speak of what good works Christ did in
that person only, in which he appeared at Jerusalem, while we witness not the
same done by him in our selves, we cannot call those works OURS, to
justification more truly then Papists can, who believe as well as Protestants
what he there did, though they never look to do the like:

-- Quae non fecimus ipsi, non ea nostra voco.

What he did in that person, and not OURS, is his only yet, and not OURS, but
if we speak of what we do not only in our own persons, but our own wills, power
and wisdom, abstract from him, and the leadings of his Light and Spirit, I say
Quae sic fecimus ipsi, haec ego nostra voco, these I call truly and only OURS,
and so does the Scripture Romans 10.3.4. Phil. 3.9. and as for what OUR persons
do in his light according to his will, in the true movings of his Spirit, and
by no other but his own Power, Quae nos fecimus ipsi sic, ea nostra voco,
these, being partly ours, though principally his, I have a liberty from the
Lord truly enough to denominate by that name of OURS, yet as it is fit he should
have the perheminence, as to the name, who is not the chief Actor, but the only
Author of them, I rather choose mostly to call them His, though done in and by
us, and so again, Quae nos fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco.


So there are 1. good work; which are only Christ's, and not OURS, and and by
these he deservedly stood justified in the sight of God, in his own person,
which if he had not done (and had he sinned he could not have done) he could
never have bin a high Priest able to justify others, or sufficient to save to
the uttermost, such as come to God by him; for such a high Priest it became us
to have, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners himself,
or else he could never separate sin from us, Heb. 7.26.27.28.

2. Again their are good works (so called) which are only OURS, and not
Christ's, and such are all the best that we work without him of our selves, even
all our own Righteousness and Righteousnesses, which are as an unclean thing,
as a menstru^us Rag, Isa. 64.6. as dung and loss and not gain, nor any way
profitable to save or deliver, Isa. 57.12.13. Phil. 3.4.10.10. And by these
though done in man's willings, and runnings, in a way of outward conformity to
the letter of the Law shall no flesh ever be justified any more then Paul was,
for these are not Christ's (all whose works are meritorious, and acceptable to
God, and deserving no Condemnation that I know of, and consequently deserving
justification before God; but man's own Righteousness, as that of the Jews
was, Romans 9, 32.10.3.2.3. and Paul's was, till he came to the Light (though for
want of coming to the Light, T.D. in his dark mind says Paul had no
righteousness that was not Christ's p, 22.) is meritorious of no more
acceptance then Cains Sacrifice had, which was justly and deservedly rejected,
because its the evil doer still, that does that good, which God (what ere the
sinner calls it) accounts evil.

3. Again there are good works which in different respects are called (truly
enough) both Christ's, and OURS (viz.) OURS, as done in and by Our persons,
Christ's, as done only by his power in us, and by these last (call them, as ye
will) Christ's, as done by him in OUR persons, or OURS, as done by us in his
power, is the justification of all, that ever were or shall be justified, both
deserved and effected, and not by what he did without them in that single
person that once lived and dyed at Jerusalem, while the same righteousness was
and is not by that same power of his fulfilled within themselves; and so 1 st.
detesting all that as Rotten Rags, that's done by mere man without Christ, and
disowning it utterly, as giving no influence to man's justification, both
honoring and duly owning all that righteousness, that was wrought by Christ
without man, as perfect, precious, glorious, acceptable to God, unspeakably
useful to us, and truly meritorious at least to his own justification, that he
might become (as el^e he could not) a meet Mediator for man, this 3d. and last
I own only as the meritorious, and perfectly effectual cause of man's
justification; and howbeit T.D. is so blind as to deny our satisfaction by that
righteousness whereof Christ is the Author p. 23. and to believe that he that
holds justification by this righteousness of Christ, that's wrought in the
Saints by his Spirit cannot be saved, p. 38. For he owns this sentence there
for truth ( viz.) that any man that holds that principle of being justified by
a righteousness within us, living and dying i^ that principle cannot be saved.
Yet I not only say, but see so much, and hope (as great a Malefactor as T.D. p.
54. makes me for it) to make any (save such as seeing will not see) to see the
same, that he cannot be saved, who holds it not, but looks for Salvation in
that Gospel, which T.D. Preaches, of a Justification by a Christ only without
him; and that he may fill up his floutings at it, and complete his cursing of
it, in the same Phrase he sc^^fingly renders my speaking this Truth in, at the
Dispute p. 28. I say again to all People, That Gospel, which T.D. and his
fellows Preach, of Salvation by Christ without them, without the Revelation of
Christ and his Righteousness within them, will not bring men to Heaven. Indeed
People it will not. And this is that I am to have the second Talking with T.D.
about, before I come again to I.O. (viz.) this point of Justification, whether
it, which we say is by Christ's Righteousness and Good Works alone, and not any
thing that is done by us, simply as of our selves, be by the Righteousness of
Christ without us only (as T.D. says it is) or by that, which he performs in
us also by the sam^ Power, as we affirm it.

In the Prosecution of which matter, which way soever the cause should seem to
go in the Consciences of such as are considerate, yet to the eye of every
ordinary Observer of him T.Ds. weaknesses, and absurdities are so gross and
obvious, that he that Runs may Re^d them, sundry of which I shall give the
Reader a taste of as I go along, that he may know how to Relish him in the Rest.

Hear then O ye deaf, look and see ye blind Believers and Admirers of T.D. and
his applauded Pamphlet, how he (to turn his own Terms to G. W. p. 24. upon
himself) interferes, and cuts one leg against another, and is not sensible of
it; and how he contradicts and confounds himself, and that so closely,
cunningly and curiously, that neither himself, nor any of those who look, like
himself, without their eyes, can see it, though to all others, I confess, it is
easy to be, or rather hard not to be discerned.

T. D. Tells the world, that the Terms of the Question were, whether Good Works
(Mark) be the meritorious cause of Justification p. 58. and that this was
expressly affirmed bylus: and says T.D. This being so gross and Popsh, L.
Howard one of the Qua. present at the Dispute has (witness Nath. Barry) since
denied that they did so affirm.

Rep. By the way let me tell thee Reader, as from L. Howard, that though he
denied, that we affirmed Justification by our Good Works, which assertion the
Priests falsely change us with, yet (notwithstanding N. Bar^yes bearing false
witness against him) he did not deny that we affirm Justification by Good
Works, neither is he or any of us ashamed to a^firm at this present, that
Justification is by Goo^ Works; but (Mark) this (quoth T.D.) is gross and
Popish.

So then you have T.Ds. sense on one hand thus ( viz.) its not only Rank
Popery to affirm OUR Good Works (though by OURS, if ever the Qu. affirm it,
they mean Christ's Good Works in us called OURS, Isa. 26. and not merely Our own)
but also gross and Pop^sh, to affirm Good Works to be deserving Justification:
I wot not well what works they are by which T.D. looks to be justified, seeing
he denies it to be by Good Works; for I cannot believe him (as bad as he is) to
be so bad yet, as to believe any to be justified by bad, evil or wicked works,
though he blushes not to say, that under the guilt of such bad works as
Adultery and murder David was, and so other Saints, p. 38. (but yet no wicked
ones) may be justified: And in another, p. 45. that the Gospel gives live upon
imperfect obedience, which, though he do no wickedness, is at best but an evil
work; nor worcester I well where a man shall escape T.Ds. censure of being Popish,
unless he run away from Resting and Relying on Christ, as well as on himself
for Justification; for even Christ's best Works are no more than Good, as it is
true that all OUR best, that are not done by him in us, are worse then naught.

But were it so in Truth (but I trow it is not as T.D. says, that to affirm
Good Works meritorious of Justification, is so gross and Popish, that they have
reason to be ashamed that own it) Heu quam turpe est Doctori cum culpar
edarguit ipsum? How much more reason then any other has T.D. to be ashamed of
his shameful doings, Qui alterum incusat probri, de qu^ ipsum se intueri
oportet, who condemns others as gross and Popish for the self-same Doctrine,
which he himself holds out in terminis, and yet creeps from under that
condemnation, slides his own neck out of that collar, and, dum cod^m cum illis
haret luto, condemns not himself as guilty of the same defilement, but rather
to God and all men commends himself as clear and clean?

For whoever heard T.D. say of himself (as he says of the Qua. they are) I am
gross and Popish in affirming that Good Works deserve Justification? Yet that
he affirms the same as well as the Qua. whose affirmation of it (to the
contradicting of himself) he denies; I need do no more in proof thereof, then
send the Reader to p. 14, 15. of his own 1. Paper, out of which every Puny may
fully prove it to himself, for there in Answer to my Argument a Con^a^iis,
which was to this effect, without that Term of OUR in such a sense as the
Papists use it, (viz.) Evilworks are the meritorious cause of our Condemnation,
therefore Good Works are the meritori^^s cause of our Non-Condemnation or
Justification, among several frivolous conceits, upon which he denies the
consequences of my Argument; T.D. Replies thus, granting the Rule of Contraries
will allow so to Argue (viz.) Evil works, which are the violation of the Law,
deserve danmation, Ergo Good Works, which are the fulfilling of the Law,
deserve Salvation; and we know no Good Works such but Christ's: In all which he
has said no more than the self-same, which, in substance, is uttered and
intended by our selves; for we both speak of and mean no other Good Works, when
we say, Good Works deserve Justification, then, such as are Christ's, and the
fulfilling of the Law in himself, and in us by his Power, whose works only are
Good, and all whose Works are so Good, that the Law is fulfilled by them; and
so not Condemnation, but Justification still deserved; for where no
Condemnation is deserved (as it is not by any Good Works) there
Non-condemnation or Justification is; For by every work the Law is either
fulfilled or broken, but by neither every, nor by any work that is truly good
(as every one of Christ's are, whether done in his own, or by him in our
persons, or by us in him his Power and Spirit) is the Law transgrest, violated
or broken; therefore by every Good Work obeyed, kept, fulfilled; and by every
work either Condemnation or Non-Condemnation is deserved, but Condemnation is
not by any truly good work; therefore Non-Condemnation is deserved by every
good work (Taliter) and by all, and only good works by which is fulfilled the
Royal Law, Iam. 2.8. which works no ill at all to another ( Totaliter) Yet T.D.
judges us (unjustly) as Popish, who hold no otherwise then thus, and himself
Anti-Popistical in holding the same; to whom therefore I say (to say no more of
his self-contradiction in saying of Good Works, that they do, and yet do not
deserve Justification) si in me iniqius es Iudex T.D. condemnabo e^dem ego ^e
crimine, if T.D. were as just as it is sure he is unjust in condemning us for
Popery, he is so much the more unjust in that he condemns not himself for the
same, since he that judges us so, for so holding, holds the same, and the more
justly is he to be condemned by all, for not condemning himself as Popish
together with us.

And now whereas T.D. supposes he has added much to the alteration of the
state of the Question as we hold it, and to the enervating of the force of the
Consequence of my Popish Argument (as he calls it) by that weak, short and
imperfect Reply he gave to it at the Dispute, and that more long, then strong
addition of many impertinent passages in his Accountative Repetition of it; I
shall here take them a little briefly under consideration: and likewise the
rest of that refusely stuff, which is Replied by T.D. up and down in his Book,
to my self R.H. and G.W. about this point of Justification, and such as were
touched on as pertaining to it, that being rid of the Rudeness and
Reasonlessess of T.Ds. Religion, which I.O. in his piece of Anti-Quakerism
interests not himself in, so far as I find any where, unless in p. 127. where
his words seem to sent of such a Justification in sin, as T.D. dreams of, I may
trouble I.O. no more with the Talk thereof, when I begin again to talk with him.

To my n^ging Contrarioram contraria est Ratio T.D. thou Replyest thus, p. 14,
15. there is not Par Ratio Contraria Ratio, thou should have said, for par
Ratio is not affirmed by me for the merit of true good and real evil.
for the merit of good and evil works, and that they are not abs^lute
contraries, because our evil works are perfectly evil, but our Good works
(^aist thou) are but impe^fectly good; yea, Isa. 64.6. all our Righteousnesses
(not our unrighteousnesses only) are as filthy Rags.

Rep. To this I retu^n as follows ( viz.) If by that Te^m OUR Good Works thou
intendest no other then those of your own, which ye call good, when thou say
of them, that they are but imperfectly good, I yield to it as Truth indeed,
that your good works and your evil works are not absolute contraries, one to
another, but rather both alike of one and the same sort, stamp and general
kind, that is to say, both of them evil works: for your evil works being by
your own confession perf^ctly evil, your good works (as ye style them for good
they, are not while done by the evil-doer, that hates the light) being al^o by
confession but imperfectly good; and for, so far from being truly good, that
(what ever they are in your own) in Gods Account they are no better then evil,
they are really evil too, yea^ as to the nature done in (though not as to their
mea^ure ^as realy evil as the other, and not your unrighteousnes; only, but
also your own Righteousness being by the like true concession, but filthy Rags,
they are not absolute Contra^ies, but Con-naturals, as your best good and worst
evil is; for as two evil spirits may be both Devils, though not Devils both of
one Hair, but one a little b^n^ker, the other respectively somewhat whiter then
the other, so your two sorts of works, whereof ye call one good, the other
evil, one your Righteousness, the other unrighteousness, are both alike, evil and
wickedness, though one carries a fairer face before it than the other. Neither
did I (as thou do page 54 that the Gospel gives life upon imperfect
obedience) then affirm (and so G.W. tells thee p. 20. of his Reply to thee, who
either did or would not it seems understand me so well as he and others)
that imperfect works and the Righteousness, which is as filthy Rags, do deserve
Justification; neither did I ever, nor shall I now go about to prove by the
Rule of Contraries, a contrary desert of your unrighteousness or evil works,
and of such Righteousness and Good Works as yours are, which both you and I
acknowledge are but imperfect, and so no better then evil, unrighteousness, and
filthy Rags; so as to conclude from thence that as your evil merits damnation,
so your good merits Justification: nay, in stead of Arguing about these from
Contra^iorum C^ntra^ia est Rati^, of contra^ies there is contra^y consequence. I
must say rather, Pa^ium Par est Ra^i^, Similium Similis consequentia, things
that are alike, are of a like desert; therefore your evil and your good in name
differing, yet in kind agreeing, being evil and filthy Rags, both alike, do
both alike as truly deserve condemnation from him, as they are both alike
ab^mina^ion before the Lord.

But if by that Term OUR Good W^rks, of which thou ^ayest they are but
imp^fectly good, thou intendest those of Christ^, own wo^king in and by us, and
all his Saints, of which (he being the Author, though we in and under him the
Actours thereof) I said before, Vix ea nostra voco, I deny any of these to be
as thou call them, but imperfectly good, and both affirm and shall prove
them all to be really good, and (as so) truly contrary to both your confessed
evil, and but conceited good works, which yet really are but evil; and not
only so but perfectly good also, and in that respect more absolutely contrary
to all your own both worst and best work^, the best of which though called by
you at least imperfectly g^od, are yet at best no better in kind then as
perfectly evil, as the other, saving the baldness of that Phrase (perfectly
evil) which yet being thy own thou may the better, and must however bear it
from me.

In proof of which, though it seem but a mad man's mad Divinity to you more mad
Divines, and possibly a mere Paradox to many more then mere Parish Priests, yet
let it be considered.

That every thing that can be truly ( according to God, and not after the
manner of erring men only) said to be good, or Righteousness, though so but in
part, yet is as perfectly so, as it is truly said so to be: for howbeit all
that, which is but in part, is by our Academical Rabbis, who count all plain
Country Russet-Coats but Rusticks in comparison of themselves, counted but
imperfect, and commonly so called, as if in part and imperfect were ever
Synonomous, and all one, so that in their benighted minds, they often render that
place, 1 Cor. 13. as T. D. till he was corrected, did at the Dispute, thus
(viz.) when that which is (perfect) is come, then that which is (imperfect)
whereas that which is ( in part) and but aliqualiter, not yet aequaliter or so
perfect as the other is, is opposed to that which is more perfect to its degree
only, yet as to its nature, which different degrees do never alter (for that
gradus non variant naturam Rei, is received for truth by all) that which is
truly good, Righteousness, Light, Uprightness, Holiness, Truth, though but some
part of that fuller measure that once shall be, yet is not only Really the
same, but as perfectly the same in suo genere, as that which is perfect in
degree also is in its kind; that is to say, as perfectly Good, as perfectly
Righteousn^^s, etc. as Good, Righteousness, Light, Grace, Uprightness,
Holiness, Truth is in the highest measure. Every d^am of Grace is perfectly
Grace, every degree of true Good perfectly Good, every grain of Holiness
perfectly Holiness, as every spark of fire is perfectly fire and perfect fire,
and every drop of water perfect water as well as the whole Ocean, as every Babe
(as to the nature) is perfectly a man and a perfect man, as he is that is a man
in stature: Holiness in the least measure of it, is the gift of God, and I know
no imperfect gift that he gives, who is the Giver of every good and pe^fect
gift, and every one of whose gifts is perfect: all that is perfect is of God,
and all that is perfect, which is of God, from whom no imperfect thing can
come; and all true Good and Holiness is of God, and all Sin, Unholiness,
Unrighteousness and Imperfection is of the Devil, and all, that is imperfect,
whic his of the Devil, from whom no thing that is good or truly perfect can
come; and all sin is properly nothing but (...), transgression, defect and
imperfection it self, and whoever sins is born of the Devil, and he that is
of the D^vil (while so) is not born of God, nor in a state of Salvation, nor in
the Election, but in the Reprobation and Rejection, and what is born of God, in
that state, sins not, and he that sins not is not in a state of
Condemnation, for he does Righteousness, and he that does Righteousness is
Righteous as God is Righteous, Ho^y as he is Holy, Pure at he is Pure and
Perfect as he, whose Child he is, is perfect, and is (as so) not in the
Alienation, Reprobation and Rejection, but in the Love, Acceptance or
Justification.

And whereas our Divines talk, as if that only were perfect, to which nothing
can be added, that's a false ignorant, and blind assertion, for as there is a
perfection (such is that of God) which admits of no addition, so there is a
true perfection that is without any ^mperfection sin and corruption, which is
capable of addition, and to which more maybe added, and such is that of man,
who may be truly said to be perfect and not imperfect, and yet to grow on to a
fuller measure and stature of that divine nature, grace, and holiness, which
was perfect and not imperfect before, though not so perfect, but that a greater
degree in it may be attained; as he that thrives in iniquity, which is defect
and imperfection, becomes thereby more and more imperfect: Adam in innocence
was perfect, and so perfect in righteousness that he had no unrighteousness
or imperfection, and though not without tempta^ion (as Christ was not, who
never sinned) yet clean from all transgression: Yet not so perfect as to be
utterly incapable of any addition to that glory he then stood in.

And Christ Jesus himself was a perfect child of God from the womb as to the
divine nature he was born in, yet grew in stature, and was one who did no
evil, in whom was no sin, nor was any guile found in him, nor was he in a
damnable condition, and that gift of the grace and wisdom of God, that was in
him, was perfect grace and wisdom; and the least degree of grace that any
Saint has is perfect grace, a perfect and not an imperfect gift of God,
according to the Rule and Measure of which as every one walks, he is so far
perfect, though but a Babe, and yet Saints may grow therein from Babes in
nature to young men in Stature, which of young men, though it is not the
highest stature in the Church here on earth yet obtains to so much strength as
to overcome the wicked one, and from thence to be old men of full growth and
age, more intimately acquainted with God the Father, and to the unity of the
knowledge of the Son of God, the very measure of the Stature of the fullness of
Christ himself: And therefore thy saying T.D. that Babes and young men are
imperfect p. 18. as I do not, and that true grace is imperfect, and true
obedience and good works are imperfectly good, and sin and evil perfectly
evil and such like, is such a Whim-wham, as shows thy self to be yet so
imperfect (as no Babe in Christ is) in thy understanding of the things of God;
and such a saying as has nothing in it (if I may without absurdity Tune it
back to thee in thy own imperfect Tone) but perfect imperfection flat,
falsehood, deep darkness, and mere confusion.

So that all true good is perfectly good, and all that's really evil is
properly evil, all true light of what kind soever in the least degree is in
its kind perfectly light, and all darkness properly darkness, and all that's
properly and truly termed righteousness in the meanest measure is as perfectly
righteousness, as all kind of unrighteousness, and as all sin is really the
transgression of a Law, for there is no transgression where is no Law, and the
least transgression of the Law in the least part is really or properly sin, so
every act of true obedience to the Light, or Law, is, though but in part, and
not so perfect a conformity, yet truly and properly and perfectly a^co f^^mi^y
to it, and not a violation of it; and such a perfect Act of obedience as is not
only not disobedience, but so absolutely contrary to an act of disobedience, as
that it deserves not the reward of an of act disobedience, which is
condemnation, but consequently the contrary, which is non-condemnation, which
can amount to no less then acceptance, or, which is much at one, Justification
from all guilt (for there is none contracted) and salvation from that wrath,
which is to come and which comes upon none for any obedience, but on all the
Children of disobedience, only.

Thus every thing, but sin and imperfection, is perfectly, what it is truly,
and those works are not truly good ( however falsely so called) that are not
perfectly good, and what work is truly good is perfectly good.

And of this sore are all the works of Christ's working by his Spirit in our
persons (viz.) as truly and perfectly good in genere, if not gradu, as those he
wrought in the same Spirit and Power in his own* who never yet did any work
that is evil, or but imperfectly good; Yea as truly an perfectly good, as both
the worst and the best that you do without him are really and properly evil:
and consequenly being contrary to your evil works, which merit condemnation,
meritorious of that contrary reward of acceptance, or justification.

And no less then this last, do thou T.D. to the contradicting thy self in
thy other sayings confess to us thy self in these words, evil works, which
are the violation of the Law, deserve damnation, Ergo good works which are the
fulfilling the Law deserve Salvation, and as thou saift, so say we, we know no
good works such, but Christ's; and, say I, I know no works of Christ that ^re
not such, and that deserve nor Salvation, Whether those that were wrought by
him in that single person, which was crucified (...) Jerusalem, or those that
are wrought by him in his Saints; though thou seem to thy self to be so wise
(whose folly therefore is the more manifest to all men) as to know a Christ and
as to know some operations and good works and righteousness of that Christ,
wrought by him alone in his Saints, and by them received from him, and whereof
Christ himself is the Author, which thou art so far from owning any
justification by and from esteeming so highly of as they deserve, that (as to
any such gain as justification deserved for us, or derived to us thereby) thou
disclaimst them utterly as mere dung, and loss, and filthy rags, and ( absit
Blasphemia) doom'st them down to hell as deserving no better then your
wickednesses and your own (miscal'd) righteousnesses do, the merit of which is
neither more nor less then condemnation; and all this he that is minded to
trace thee p. 15.21.22.23. in thy Meandrous talkings to and fro, in and out,
where thou dancest the Hay up and down in the Clouds of contradiction and
confusion, cannot choose but take notice of, unless he be so blind, as that his
eyes can see no farther then his nose reaches.

For (mark) p. 21. thou I fasly chargest us with the guilt of that sin of the
Jews Romans 10.3.4. ( viz.) making our own righteousness our justification. 2.
Thou relatest G.W. clearing us ofthat, saying that we do not make our own
righteousness our justification, but the righteousness of God is that we
testify, being made manifest in us, according to the Scripture, Phil. 3.9. Not
our own righteousness which is ^f the Law, (that is) any personal conformity to
the Law in that outward letter, that we can make by any ability of ours without
the power of Christ, such was that of the Jews and Paul's establishing to
himself, as his gain, and righteousness before his conversion to that of
Christ's, for that and no other is it, which Paul calls his own, and the Jews
own, and not that which Christ wrought in him, and clothed him with and enabled
him to perform (as thou blasphemously bolt'st it out) but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith: to which
though thou seem to assent in these words ( viz.) the Apostle by his own
righteousness understands [His] personal conformity to the Law, and by Christ
righteousness, that which is of Christ made his by faith, by which Term (His)
if thou intendest ( His) as abstract from Christ, his weak strivings in his own
strength to keep the Law, and not that personal conformity to it, he was at
last enabled to by the Spirit and Power of Christ intimated, Romans 8.1, 2, 3, 4.
Thou fallest in with us, who make that genuine distinction between all mere
man's righteousness and all that righteousness that is of Christ.

But now, as if thine eyes were grown too dim to discern that distinction,
thou blindly blendest these two together again into own, putting no difference
at all between O V R good works, or mere man's righteousness, which in his own
will, wisdom, strength, and vain Imagination he works beside the light, and out
of Christ, and those Good Works, or that righteousness, which is of God alone,
which by the pure Power and Spirit of Christ is wrought in and by them, and
which they by him are enabled to perform, which is specifically one and the
very same with that in Christ himself, from whom it is of God through the
faith of Christ made theirs, or made over to them that is not merely and
imaginarily (as the Priesthood prates) accounted, and imputed, but really and
truly derived and imparted to them, and revealed (as its said to be Romans 1.17.)
from faith to faith in the light of the Gospel to them that believe therein, so
that of the fullness of that righteousness of God that dwells in him, they all
receive grace for grace to the true washing, Justification, Sanctification, and
Salvation of them from all that unrighteousness by which they became guilty
before God, while they stood in no other righteousness but their own. Yea that
righteousness of Christ in his Saints, which is in kind the self same with
that in himself, thou both denyest to avail one jot to justification, and also
confoundest into one and the self same with that of mere man's own working which
from God is for ever to be confounded.

Witness thy own words who saift thus T.D. I deny justification by Christ
within us; -- we deny our justification by that righteousness in us whereof
Christ is the Author -- two things are indeed meant by the name of Christ his
person and his operations in us, and I deny the latter, but assert the former
for our righteousness to justification.

Rep. Oh gro's, horrid, hideous and fordid! Are not the Righteousness and the
operations of Christ in his Saints the same that were in his own flesh? are
they not of the same with, validity, and desert, being his own still, whether
done in himself, or in us, and as truly and perfectly good, being done by
Christ, who can work nothing but that which is truly good and perfect, whether
in his Saints or himself? And suppose every Title of thy Tattle were true,
that thou telst us p. 15. ( viz.) that those works that merit must not be due,
and his good works, who owes none (though who that is that owes none to God and
from whom to God none are due I know not, and whether it became not Christ to
be holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and whether he ought not
in all things to be like his brethren I Will not stand here to dispute, but lea^e
to Heb. 2.17.26. to determine) and yet whether all that he does in what person
so ere he does it in, does not merit, I need not prove to a wi^e man, for he
will not put me to it.

But I say, suppose it to be all true, that his good works, who owes none and
from whom none are due, and is an infinite person, do as truly deserve non
condemnation, and his e^ill works, from whom only good works are due, as from a
finite creature to an infinite Creator, do truly deserve damnation, the desert
of the obedience of the one arising from the dignity of the Subject by which
its performed, as the desert of the others disobedience from the dignity of the
Object against which it it is committed: yet what makes all this to the mending
of thy muddy matter, who would make Christ himself and his good works and
operations of righteousness in his Saints of no such moment as to merit or
effect their justification before God; is not Christ the Subject by which,
though the Saints (who are his body flesh and bones) are the Subject in which
those works of his are performed in^ them, as well as the Subject by which
those were done, that were done in his natural body in the days of his
fleshly being here on earth? yea is not he the subject in which also those in
his Saints are performed, while what ere he does by them he does in them, and
what they do by him they do in him, and the person and Subject being the same,
is not the dignity of the doer as deserving when he does good, or obeys the
will of God in one age, place and person, as well as when in another? and does
what righteousness he works in and by his, or destroy the merit thereof, body
more then that which he wrought in and by that body which was the head? and and
is not Christ Jesus, who is known to be in all them that are not Reprobates, 2
Cor. 13.5. and who is the same yesterday, to day, and forever, Heb. 13.8. as
infinite a Person now, and as infinite in all his operations as ever, and are
not his operations as good, and his Righteousness (which thou for want of his
Wisdom, being ignorant that God calls it an Everlasting Righteousness (i.e.)
that which is infinite or without end. Dan 9.24. call but finite, p. 39. and
yet, in thy wonted way of self-contradiction, infinite also, saying, we cannot
contain an infinite Righteousness in us, and the Righteousness which God works
in us, is but finite, so making either two Righteousnesses of God, whose
Righteousness is but one, or else distinguishing that one into two sorts,
finite and infinite, which is but one in kind (viz.) infinite and everlasting,
though dwelling in different degrees in God, Christ, and the Saints but well
may thou do this, whilst thou make so many Christ's as thou did at the
Dispute, and have done since, in thy crooked Account thereof] I say, is not
that Everlasting Righteousness of his working in the Saints, and bringing near
to them, Isa. 46.13. as everlasting, as infinite as of old, and of as infinite
value, every where as it is any where? in that Body of his whereof he is the
head, as in that Person which was the head of his body? Yet T.D. denies it to
be of any worth to justify, and affirms it to be but man's own Righteousness,
which is dung, loss and rags, procuring no more to him by desert then his
wickedness, which merits no more then Condemnation; and in further evidence of
this, let thy own words p. 15. and p. 22. be well considered, and compared
where thou say thus.

T. D p 22. Do you think that the Righteousness which the Apostle calls his
own, Phil. 3.9. was not Christ's? Had he any Righteousness which he had not
received? And yet that Righteousness which was in the Apostl, never was in
Christ as the subject, but was wrought in him by Christ as an efficient cause:
and Christ had an inherent Righteousness, in respect of which he was said to
know no sin, and to be a Lamb without spot or bl^mish; Are not here then two
Righteousnesses? And they serve for two different ends, the one for our
Justification, the other for our Sanctification, the one gives us a Right to
the inheritance of the Saints in Light, the other makes us meet for Possession.
And p. 15, all Our Righteousnesses (not our unrighteousnesses only) are as
filthy Rags.

Rep. Oh Rare and Base! What Whirle-pools, and Whirle-gigg, and Whimseyes, and
Gimcracks are here? Compound all this deep D^vinity of T.Ds. together. some of
which but not all (for other some the blackest of his Brethren I believe will
blush at) is that which others store themselves with by stealth out of the
Common standing-stock of Theology, which few Divines dare stir a foot from; and
here is such a manifest Mess of medly, such a heap of Hotch-potch, as scarce
ever crept out so openly upon the Stage before since the world, which should be
Christ's School, was by its Disputers and Scholars made their Fencing-School
against Christ and his Disciples.

I shall Segregate the absurdities of this absolute parcel, in which else they
may by unseen, being jumbled together among some undeniable Truths, and set
them down in their own Colors, to the view of all.

1. Mark Reader, How T. D. divides the Righteousness of Christ inherent in
himself, and imparted from him to his Saints; which who is not so Blear-eyed
that every single object seems double to him, cannot but say and see is one and
the self same, into two Righteousnesses, one of which (though he confesses they
are both Christ's and wrought, by him alone as the efficient) was
notwithstanding (as he says) never in Christ as the subject at all.

2. How these two points hang together, as well as things can do, that are all
to pieces, ( viz.) that Paul had no Righteousness, which was not Christ's, and
which he had not received from Christ, and yet that which he received from
Christ, Christ never had in himself, nor was it ever inherent in him: which if
it does not contradict the School Ma^im^, which no well- skilled Scholar
disowns of, Nil dat id quod in se prius non habet vel formaliter vel
virtualiter saltem and eminenter, nothing can give infuse or derive that to
another, which it first has not in it self, and which resides not in it self
as the Subject, wherein the same one way or other is, or formally or vertually
inherent (which I Will not spend time here so nicely or exactly to examine) yet I
am sure it expressly and egregiously disagrees with those undeniable Testimonies
of the Scripture, which faith not only John 3.27. A man can receive nothing
(that is of God, Grace, Righteousness, etc.) except it be given him from above;
but also that in Christ are bid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, that
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.3, 9. That the
Spirit of Grace, a manifestation of which is given to every man to profit
withal, according to the measure of the gift of Christ, who takes of his own
Glory, Grace, etc. and gives to his Saints, distributing to everyone severally
as he will, is by the Father given first to him not by measure, that his
Disciples may also, as they do, of that fullness which dwells first in him
receive of the same in some measure Grace for Grace, John 7.16. and 3.34. And
this stops that creep-hole whereby T. D. wots he winds himself out p. 37. where
he says, Christ's Righteousness in the Saints was never formally existent in
him as the spirits are in the brain: for as the spirits are in the brain, and
communicated thence to other parts of the body, so the Graces of the Spirit are
all in Christ the head, and communicated to all the Members of his body, as
truly and formally as the Typical ointment that was poured on Aarons head, was
communicated from thence to his beard; and ran down to the skirts of his
clothing.

3. Note well, how that very Righteousness which was wrought in the Apostle,
after his Convertion, by Christ and received from Christ, and so by T. Ds. own
confession, was Christ's, is by T. D. first divided off from that Righteousness,
which was inherent in Christ, though it be Christ's as well as the other, and
indeed as undivided from it as Christ, who is indivisible, is within himself;
and set apart and aloof from it as quite another, us if it were scarce any kin
to that that dwelt in Christ the head; and not only so, but secondly pacht and
packt up into one with Paul's own Righteousness, which he gloried in before his
Convertion (for what Paul calls his own, was that he had of old, and had left
and lost too as dung and loss (as much as he once thought it gain) before ere
he received any from Christ and disgraced and digraded so far below it self,
and its own true worth and dignity, as to be Ranks with Paul's own, yea to be
made and counted on as no other but his own, the self same as he and the wicked
Jews, as T.D. says p. 21. who were as ignorant as our Priests are of Gods
Righteousness, went about to establish to their Justification: he makes that
Righteousness, those good works which by Christ we are enabled to perform, no
other then Our own good works, Our own Righteousness, all which as well as our
unrighteousness T.D. Beckons but as filthy Rags, nay no better, nor any other
then that, which Paul calls his Own; which Own of his, he having once counted
it gain, he had now suffered the loss of, and counted but loss and dung that he
might be clothed with Christ's: which Doctrine of T.D. if it were true (but God
forbid that any should take it from him for Truth, for its most abominably
false) yet let us see at least what use of Information were to be drawn from it,
and in a word its this:

1. That the Righteousness of Christ's own working in his Saints, and that which
the Saints received by Faith from Jesus Christ, and that fullness of it that
dwells in him, is but mere man's Righteousness, which he must utterly suffer the
loss of, and count on not as gain at any hand, but as loss and dung before he
can know Christ, or receive or be clothed with the Righteousness, which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteosness, which is of God by Faith in him:
and 2. that the foresaid Righteousness of Christ which he works in us, and we
by Fath receive from him is but our own, and is no better (even all of it) then
our unrighteousnesses are, that is as filthy Rags before the Lord: he that
reads this, let him understand it if he can, annd receive it for truth if he
dare; but if he do not, let him know, that T.D. has done his best ill will to
the truth that he can, to reach it to all men for no less then Truth however,
though such folly, falsehood (not to say blasphemy) it is, that worse scarce
ever fell from the Pen of a Professed Preacher.

4. One Observation more which is scarce fit to be noted to any other use or
purpose, but to the noting of T.D. to be such a notable nonesuch as is
(deservedly) Nigro carbone notandus, arises from T.Ds. discourse about the two
Righteousnesses of Christ, one of which he calls man's own and filthy Rags, (as
if Paul, when a Pharisee, had no Righteousness of his own, that he styled l^ss
and dung, but that which was Christ's, and which he had received from Christ,
which what a loud Tale it is, he is not much versed in the Truth that cannot
tell) and that is in such wise as follows ( viz.) whereas T.D. tells ut of
two different ends of the'e two Righteousnesses of Christ, as he does also p.
39. the one whereof (i.e.) that which is inherent in Christ, serves (quoth h)
eto justify us and give us a Right as a cause of our Title of the inheritance
of the Saints in Light, the other (i.e.) the Righteousness wrought in us by
Christ, which Paul calls l^ss and dung, and T D. imperfect and filthy Rags, to
sanctify us, and to make us meet for the Possession of Heaven, without which
Heaven would not be a place or state of blis^, nor we fit to enter into such a
Glorious Holy Place and Inheritance among Saints in Light; which of these two
give us Right to enter as the cause of our Title I shall show plainly by and
by, saying only at present against T.D. as it is said. Rev. 22.14. that us
doing Gods Commandments by the Power of Christ, as they are given out to us in
the Light, that gives us Right, as well as makes us fit to enter, as well Ius
ad Regnum, as Aptitudinem Regnandi: but from T. Ds. Doctrine, who Teaches that
the Righteousness wrought in us by Christ, which he also calls OURS, and dung
and filthy Rags, serves to sanctify us, and make us fit and meet to enter into
Heaven, its but meet here, least I meet not so fair an opportunity for it an
on, to observe thus much to T. Ds. shame, that if his Doctrine were as true as
it is false, that the Righteousness of Christ in us, which yet (though wrought
in us by him, and received by Faith from him) is but merely our own according
to T. D. and no gain, but loss, dung and filthy Rags does (though not enright
and entitle us to Heaven) yet at least wash, purify, sanctify and make us
meet and fit to enter into it, so that without being purged, cleansed,
sanctified and fitted by, or covered and clothed with the foresaid dung and
filthy Rags, we can in no wife be clean or fit enough to enter into that Pure
and Holy place, into which no dung nor fi^h, nor unclean thing, nor ought that
defiles can enter, nor (say I) whoever works such abomination, or makes
such a lie as T. D. does, who danceth the Rounds in this Rotten Doctrine of
his, till a man can easily find neither head nor tail in it, nor Truth nor
Unity with it self, nor sense nor reason, if he look on it in gross as it lies
together in the whole corrupted mass and unleavened lump, scarcely from one end
of it into the other: yet thus it is, know all ye Saints that are devoted to
dance bud-winkt in the dark, to the Tune of T.Ds. loud Trumpetings against the
Truth (viz.) that unless ye be clothed with the Royal Robes of that
Righteousness which is inhaerent in Christ: Person only, which is (as they also
say) as far off you as Heaven is from the earth, so that ye cannot have it, but
by that Romish Faith which is Creed quod habes and habes, believe only that ye
have it, and ye have it, sure enough (though sure enough ye have it not) you
can have no Justification, no Right nor true Title to enter into Heaven: and
unless ye put on and be clothed with the dung and filthy Rags (so T. D. partly
expressly, partly implicitly calls it) of that Righteousness of your Own (as he
Terms it) which is received from Christ nevertheless, and wrought in you by
him, if ye can believe T. D. ye are not meet in any wife to enter into Heaven,
but albeit ye have a Real true Right to enter, being (though still in your
sins) already justified by the former, yet ye may not enter for all that real
Right ye have so to do, into so Holy an Habitation, for want of being cleansed,
sanctified and made meet for it by this latter. So of the things that T. D.
has spoken ye have the sum.

And so I come to some fuller Examination of the way, by which, as a
meritorious cause, our Justification comes, and our Right and Title to enter
into the Heavenly Inheritance, and our meetness and fitness for the Possession
of it also.

And first I shall show what these matters come not by.

1. None of all this comes by any or all those good works or Righteousnesses,
which (abstract from Christ as the Worker of them in and by man) are most truly
and properly man's own; for howbeit T.D. charges us as crying up Our own works
of Righteousness, not only as our Sanctification, but as, de Iure, deserving
Justification also or acceptance in Gods fight, and entrance into his Kingdom,
yet (but that his eye is so busy abroad that its utterly blinded from the
sight of how it is at home) he might see us perfectly clear, and himself only
deeply guilty in part, yea wholly of the self same Error: for verily we say of
all Our own good works done by us out of him, and not by him in us, which only
are usually by God, and (...) also, properly Termed Our own, they are, as man
himself in the fall, who does them, is, altogether become unprofitable either
to justify, sanctify, save, entitle to, or fit us for Gods Kingdom: yea, what
God himself does Isa. 57. we do and will declare of Our own Righteousness, that
it cannot profit us, of our Companies we are gone to, and Congregatings with
them, etc. in our own wills and thoughts, these cannot deliver us, the wind
will take all these away, and as it has done some already, so will all those
that truth therein: we say as Ephesians. 2. by Grace we are saved, justified (not in
as you look to be, but) from our sins (in which we were once dead together with
you, in which we sometime walked with you, who cannot believe that ye can he
perfectly purged from them while you live, but that ye must live in some, and
some in you, till you die, after the course of this world, the Prince of the
air, the spirit that still lives in you children of disobedience) and in the
rich mercy and great love of God, wherewith he has loved us, made accepted in
his beloved, quickn^d, raised up and made to sit together, not in fleshly lusts
and eartly Palaces with painted Professors of him, but in Heavenly places in
Christ Jesus; and all this through Faith, not of our selves, for its the gift
of God, nor yet of ( self) works so as that any of us can boast, for we are
(not our own, but) his workmanship in all this created in Christ Jesus, whose
new Creatures we are unto the good works we now do in the Light and Movings of
his Spirit, in a cross to the will of our flesh, till it and the lust thereof
be wholly crucified, and we to the wo^ld and the world to us, which God has of
old ordained in order to the Eternal Life he has that way ordained us to, that
we should walk in them; yea, Tit. 3. we were formerly (for all our forms of
Religion, which yet were to the full as powerful as the best of your, or the
most Reformed Formalists empty Profession, without the Possession of that
Godliness ye prate of) fool^sh, disobedient, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures (as ye still do, and yet vainly hope to do well enough) living in
every malice, hateful and hating; But since the Goodness and Love of God our
Savior to mankind in Christ the Light appeared to us, we are from these sins
justified and loved, for which judgment without mercy and wrath without remedy
will come on you that judge your selves justified in them; yet not by any works
in the Righteousness that we have wrought, but according to his own mercy he
ha^h saved us [which saves to the uttermost and not by the halves as ye dream
he does, who Reckon without your Host, who will Reckon otherwise with you when
he comes nigh to you to Judgment, and ye come to Account by the Light, that
all the sins past, and to come of you Elect, and peculiarly privileged,
unsanctified Saints are Remitted, while they are [as hourly they are] yea, and
long too before they are committed, and that you while as unjust and guilty as
David in his very acts of Adultery and Murder, are yet acquitted, accounted
just, and held guiltless by him who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity,
and not abhor it, and call that good that does evil, and who will by no means
clear the guilty in his guilt, nor accept the filthy in his filth] I say,
according to his mercy he has saved us by the washing (Mark) of Regeneration
and the Renewing of the Holy Spirit; which he has shed on us abundantly by
Jesus Christ our Savior, to this end (Mark) that we being justified by his
Grace, (viz.) shed on us freely by Christ, not inhaerent in him only as the
Subject, might be made Heirs according to the Hope of Eternal Life: This and
not thine T.D. is the faithful Word; and these are the Truths about our
Justification or Salvation, that they of old were enjoined steadfastly to Teach,
that those that believed in God might be careful to maintain good works of this
sort, as useful, good and profitable unto men, counting all their own (which
yet T.D. says are necessary to sanctify and make meet) as dung, loss,
imperfect, impertinent, unprofitable and useless as filthy Rags?

Yea, Finally as Paul said of his own Worships, Works, Righteousness and
Services, while he was a proud, puffed up Pharisee, as most of our Formal Scribes
and Modern Ministers are (for he calls not that his own, as T.D. does, but
Christ's, which he was after clothed in, and by Faith had received from him, and
by him was enabled to perform and abound in) See 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more
abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the Grace of Christ in me. So Gal.
2.19, 20. I live unto God, I am dead to the Law, crucified with Christ, yet I
live, yet not I, but Christ in me, and the life I now live is by Faith, etc. So
2 Cor. 13.3. Christ speaking in me, is not weak, but mighty.
so say the Qua. of theirs, and I of mine, If any man think he has whereof to
glory in the flesh of fl^sh^y wisdom, self-righteousness, outward performances,
Well-worships, inward workings of the mind in earnest Imaginations, and of man's
will in zealous hastings, willings, runnings, strivings after God and
Righteousness and Good, in which yet the Kingdom comes not, nor the
Righteousness of it; I could say more then I am here minded to do; but since I
came in the Light to feel the Circumcision of the heart to the Lord by himself,
not made by the hands of man, and to witness the worth of the true Worship of
God in Spirit and Truth in the inner part, which his own witness within only
leads to, what good works of mine I once counted gain, I am now made by Christ
to count loss for those of Christ: yea, for the excellency of the true
knowledge of Christ to be my Lord, whom I once so called, but did not all that
he said, for whom I have lost all that, and what more he has yet called me to
suffer the loss of, and do esteem all but as dung that I may win him and be
found in him not clothed with the old Righteousness of my own, which was once
Paul's, and called by me, and T.D. both but as filthy Rags (so I know no
Righteousness of Christ is called by any besides T.D.) but with that
Righteousness which is by Faith in his Light (in which only he is known)
Revealed and Received from him: and in the way of that Faith by which God
purifies the heart, which overcomes the world in it, and works by that Love
that fulfils the Law in working no ill to the Neighbor, wrought in me by him,
even that Righteousness which through Faith in the Light is of God, not (as our
devising Diviners both Devise and Divine, to the making of the wicked ones seem
just and good before God, when they are nothing less) imputed, but to the true
making of them Really just and good, who before were wicked, imparted without
difference to every one that truly believes in him.

So that I do not (as T.D. says we do) with the Jews, that submitted not
themselves to Gods righteousness by faith in the light, which if they had
done, they would have left and lost their own, go about to establish our own
righteousness to justification.

2. Neither do I cry up our own righteousness so high as T.D. does, who calls
merely man's own, Christ's righteousness received from, and wrought in man by
him.

3. Neither do cry down Christ's righteousness in some measure to man infused
from that fullness of the same, that beyond measure dwells in Christ (as T.D.
does) so as with him to term these (any otherwise then the spirit it self is
pleased so to do to our encouragement in obeying Isa. 26.) Our own, for vix ea
nostra voco.

4. Much less (having 1 st depressed and thrust them down far below
themselves, under that diminitive denomination of OUR own, even those own of
man's, which the Jews, ignorant of Gods went to establish, which were iniquity
and abomination in Gods eyes, and which Paul calls dung and loss) dare I be so
blindly bold (so T.D. is after he has as undervaluingly, as untruly termed
them our own) as with him blas^hemously to vilisy them yet further, under that
Bull^sh Title of works but imperfectly good, but imperfect obedience and that
more beastly and b^llish term (which none that dwell in heaven can give, as in
effect T.D. does to the works of Christ) of filthy Rags.

5. Least of all, or at least last of all, dare I venture so far as T.D. does
(who yet thinks we make too much of our own good works, obedience,
righteousness, and too little of Christ's) who having drawn these two
righteousnesses and obediences (viz.) that of Christ's and man's which are as far
distant from each other as heaven and earth, so near together as to make but
one of them, which he calls man's own, and yet Christ's, and Christ's and yet but
man's own, and yields, whether mere man's or Christ's to be (as Paul called his) but
dung and loss, and as T.D. calls all ours, but imperfect and Rotten Rags,
after all this concludes that such a mere Chimera and non entity as this
mingle-mangle of his own making, which has a being no where but in his own
B^ain, and is not so much as Ens^rationis, but rather Ens irrational tatis, is
available to sanctify and make meet for heaven, for I deny, that any
righteousness that is no better then dung and filthy Rag; is available at all
as a cause of either justification or sanctification, of Right to, or fitness
for the Saints inheritance: and howbeit I eternally exalt every (...) of
Christ's obedience, every grain of that good he works, who works no evil, and
every dram of his righteousness in him else or us to be eternall^ and
d^servedly accepted of God; and entitling to and fitting for fellowship with
God and the Saints in light; yet as for that Bipartite Pipald Puppet, and
merely imagined Imp of T.D.'s. dressing out in (what should I call it?) Christ's
righteous Robes, of Man's Rotten, Rags; I deny either merit or meetnesse to come
by that mere none knows what: For if it be Christ's Own indeed, or ever came
from him as good, righteousness, obedience done or performed by him, though in
us, ^ cannot be imperfect, dung and filthy Rags and immeritorious, but
deserv^^g, and serving (according to the measure of it in us) both to justify
and sanctify, and as well to give right to, as to fit for the Kingdom, the
desert of every degree of his obedience arising from the dignity of his person
that performs it^^ But if it be mere man's own (as T.D. saves Paul's dung and
loss was, though wrought by Christ and received from him) then its but dung
and loss (as Paul called his) and, to speak in T.D.'s. bald Phrase, but
imperfectly good, and imperfect obedience and as truly filthy Rags, as both
truly and properly T.D. calls all Ours: But then neither meriting, nor so much
as making meet for the heavenly inheritance, and yet whether T.D. does not in
effect say it does (though he unsay it again, for to gainsay himself is as
ordinary as it is to say at all, wellnigh with him) let it be considered by
comparing his own sayings.

T.D. Do you think (quoth T.D. p. 22. that righteousness, which Paul calls his
own was not Christ's? Had be any righteousness, which he had not receved? That
righteousness, which was in the Apostle, never was in Christ, as the Subject,
but was wrought in him by Christ.

Rep. I might Reply yea, that righteousness Paul calls his own, and calls dung
and loss also, and had lost for Christ, was not Christ's, nor received from,
nor wrought in him by Christ, and he that makes Paul's own which was dung and
loss, and Christ's, which is all gainful to man, and not dung, but most
savoury to God, both one (as T.D. does.) will once rue it, that ever he wrote
so over honorably and transcendently of Man's, and so dishonourably and
disdainfully, without more distinction of it from man's, of the everlasting
righteousness of Christ and the living God.

But yet to do T.D. So much pleasure as to convince him of his confusion, and
incomparable contradiction to himself (though every one shall not have it so
from me) let it pass by way of false supposition, that Paul's own
righteousness he reckons on as dung and loss, though once he thought it gain,
and Christ's now received by him, and since the loss of Paul's own wrought in
him (which yet was indeed that true godliness which Paul elsewhere calls great
gain and profitable to all things (mark) having the promise of this life and
that to come so entaild to it, that it can entitle all that live in it
thereunto) be all one, as T.D. will needs have it, what serves this imperfect
drossy, dunghilly, worse then nothing righteousness, of Pharasaicall Paul to,
alias by T.D. most Duncically, called Christ's) what advantage is to man by this
mere loss' oh much every way (quoth T.D.) for I though it serves not for our
justification, nor to give us Right as a cause of our Title to the Saints
inheritance (for that righteousness that dwells in Christ alone, no nearer to
us in readity, but imaginarily only, then heaven is, where he sits, serves only
and only serves for that) yet the Robes (alias filthy Rags of it secundum te
T.D.) that reach down to cloth us here, that we may be adorned as like him, as
filthy Rags can make us like to one in pure Robes, These serve to make us
suitable to such a glorious presence, and meet for such an holy inheritance, p.
22. 39.

Ipse dixit. But I dare not descend after T.D. so deeply into these (shallow)
depths of Satan, so as to condescend to it as truth, but must needs condemn it
as delusion and deceit, for none of Paul's mere own righteousness, no dung and
loss, no imperfectly good works, nor imperfect obedience, nor such as that of
the Jews establishing, nor any, nor all our righteousnesses which T.D. and I
together with our unrighteousness dare denominate no otherwise then as filthy
Rags, does so much as fit for that pure possession: neithe can such as this
entitle, as a Cause, thereunto; yea if the righteousness of Christ within us,
wrought by him and received from him were indeed no better then T.D. makes it,
who makes it no better then man's own, I should then acknowledge the who'e
sentence to be true, which T.D. once utterd and sinc^ acknowledges the truth of
p. 38. which (seeing he intends it of that true righteousness of Christ in his
Saints which we testify to, that its not that which Paul calls his own, and
dung, but Christ's own indeed, who is the only Author of it) is somewhat more
then a mere lie and little less then b^astly blasphemy as T.D. affirms it,
(viz.) that any man that holds that principle of being justified by a
righteousness within us, living and dying in that principle ca^n^t be saved.

But indeed Christ's righteousness within us only is that by which souls can be
saved, as I shall show anon, for that without, which is in kind the same, never
iustifies, makes just, righteous, holy clean, nor saves from the sin till some
of the same be in us; every measure of the gift of which, though but a part of
the whole, is as perfect as the 1 st. fruit, and the mere earnest of the spirit
is a perfect gift, and as perfectly good (in its kind) according to its
mea^ure, as the whole lump and fullness out of which it is given, and is that,
which is by T.D. though but a part, but improperly called imperfectly good and
imperfect obedience, p. 45. For no obedience nor good that's of Christ no^ gift
of the heavenly Father in him is any other in nature then they both are (i.)
perfect as they are pe^fect, and as the fullness of good that, dwells in, and
flows from them, is perfect without any imperfection: And it is only perfect
obedience, as only that of Christ whether in the head or in the m^mbers of his
body, is, not any man's own upon or for which the Gospel gives life and
justification: Yet (Oh the Rounds that T.D. runs in, which there is no way out
of, but by the Door, that is the Light, which all The^ves and Robbers are
climbing above) T.D. tells us another untrue tale p. 45. which overturns that
untrue tale he told before for p. 38. He said no salvation is of any by a
righteousness within, for any, that b^leive it must come that way, for what is
within us, though rec^ved from and wrought by Christ, is but imperf^ctly good,
p. 14.15. and Rags: But p. 54. he says the Gospel gives life (mark) upon
imp^fect obedience.

So according to T.D. who sometimes rejects all righteousness within us, as
imperfect, as refuse, and as useless as filthy Rags, which are good for
nothing, sometimes again allows that which Paul calls his own and dung to be
called Christ's and good for s^mthing (viz.) though not to justify and entitle
as a Cause, or that upon which (which term upon though T D would in p. 21 of
his 2 Pamphlet shuffle into a more moderate sense then its properly taken in,
which is as much as to say for as the Cause of, he therein does but more
manifest his folly to all men) the Gospel gives the inheritance of life, yet
at least to sanctify, and make meet for, p. 14.15.22. but then this
righteousness within (whether Christ's or our own, which is dung, and Christ's
also by gift to him) must take heed however of creeping too high, for if it
aspire so as to assume to it self to be owned us advantageous to justify and
entitle, as that upon which the life is given, it must be hu^l'd down again to
^ary Hell, for T.D. p. 28. Do (...) all them to Damnation by whole ^ale below
all possibility of Salvation, that dare so much as hold that principle of being
saved by it; but for fear his damnation should be damned again as too damnable
a Doctrine, if he should not moderate it as to the legal rigidity thereof,
seeing he says the Law gives life upon perfect obedience and not without it,
and cannot believe any obedience that Christ can work in his Saints, in this
life, can be perfect, but all that he here works within men, imperfect, and
none perfect, but that he wrought without them, as far off as Jerusalem as long
as 1600. years since, and has now inherent in himself, no nearer to them then
heaven is to the earth; he bethinks himself or else forgets himself again, so
far (its not matter which) as to cut off the entail of eternal life, which the
Law gives upon no other then absolutely perfect obedience, and ^nta^l^s the
promise of it under the Gospel (whether Christ's or ours or both I know not
which, and I think he knows not well himself) unto an imperfect obedience, as
that upon which (mark) life is given under the Gospel: and contrary to Christ
who tells us, Math. 5. That the Gospel righteousness which reaches to the
thoughts must exceed and be more perfect, (if more perfect can be, but more
then perfect cannot be) then that of the Pharisees, whereof Paul was one that
as to the righteousness of the Law was blameless, yet came not near that of
the Gospel, there is in no case any entrance into the Kingdom T.D. says p. 45.
the Law gives not life without perfect obedience, the Gospel gives it upon
imperfect obedience; thus posito uno absurdo sequuntur mil^, and error minimus
in principio fit major in m^di^, maximus in fine. When our men called Ministers
err by one absurdity, rather then return, they multiply it into a 1000. and
rather loose themselves in the Laborinth of their own learned, thoughts, then
learn of Christ and stoop to the simplicity and plainness of the truth as it
is in Jesus, for but that they love that smoother and smoke of the pit Rev. 9.
They came out of, in aperto et facili posita est salus: The grace of God which
brings the salvation, appears to all men, teaching such as are willing to
learn at it to deny ungodlynesse and worldly lusts and to live godly,
righteously and s^berly in this present world, which life they hope not to live
till the world to come, where (unless the Pope Purgato^y be a truth, and their
own true doctrine, when they say as the Tree fa^ls, so it lies, be a lie) it is
too late to begin it.

And in such a Wood and Wooden Wheel, as to and fro, in and out, up and down,
round about here and there, no way out, does T.D. wander about this matter of
our justification by the righteousness, good works and obedience of Christ
within his Saints: one while saying one thing of it, anon another, sometimes
that its Christ's own wrought by him, received from him, sometimes their own,
even that own of theirs, which is imperfect, dung, loss, and (...) Rags, which
was theirs long before ere they knew him: Sometimes in another sense, then that
the spirit calls them both their own and his own also; sometimes this, sometimes
that, now that it serves for nothing being but imperfectly good (unless filthy
Rags be good for anything) then that as very loss and dung, as Paul counted
his own, that it serves him for something (viz.) to fit for heaven, but not to
enright to it, as the same in himself does and so its tantum, but not quantum,
now that its no less then loss of life, to expect life upon it, then that as
imperfect as it is, the Gospel gives life upon ^: so it sometimes this, and
sometimes that, sometimes himself well know; not what: Thus that single double
righteousness whereof man is the Actor, but whether himself, or Christ the
Author is scarce distinctly determined by T.D. Heating about in the tossing
Cock B^at of T.D.'s. brain, advanced one while up to the highest heaven, and by
and by deba^ed again to the depths of Hell, like men in a Ship that are
whiffled up and down in a troubled Sea, which the wicked, who are never well in
their wits, nor soundly stablish in the truth are ever like to, of whom one may
say with the P^^, Iamjam Tacturos Sydera Sumna putes,
Iamjam Tacturos Ta ta a^igra putes.
and with the Prophet Pal. 107.26.27. They Mount up to the heavens, they go
down again into the depths: They ^eel to and fro and stagger like a drunken
man, and (...) their wits end.

Never did I read or see in so small a piece of work so many Ringles and Rounds
as T.D. makes and runs in, except I.O's. who in many things makes, whether so
many or more, I cannot yet say, but I am sure many as plain round O's, and Cris
Crosses to himself, as most men can likely do it, that set not themselves to
it, in so little a compass as his is contained in, since I began to dive into
the Bottomless pit of that thing called Divinity, or ^o discern the shallow
divinations of the (so deemed) deep Divines.

CHAP. 4.
HAving hewed my way to it throw those craggy contradictions of T.D. to
himself about it, and dispersed and vanquished some of the dark vapors,
wherewith he had veiled that Question, that lies between us, I shall now vent
my verdit on it, in a more plain open view, and having negatively declared,
whose righteousness, and good works, justification and life is not given upon
and discarded all those of mere man's own, as D^ng, Loss, Rags, Imperfect, and
(what ever T.D. falsely charges on us, as affirming it, or affirms himself of
life given upon imperfect obedience, and meetnesse to inherit it by Paul's own,
which he renounced) of no worth, to give any influence into these matters; I
shall show whom and whose good works and righteousness, life comes by, and is
given upon, yea I here positively affirm that by none but Christ alone
Justification unto life can come; nor is there either title to the inheritance,
or fitness to possess it, by any other good works or righteousness save
those of the Lord Jesus only, whose only, and all whose works, even in the very
least degree thereof, when or wherever wrought, are perfectly good, when the
best of meet man's are as T.D. says but imperfectly good, which is as much as
to say imperfect-perfect things, every truly good thing being properly perfect,
and every perfect thing properly good, and every imperfect thing properly evil,
and every evil imperfect, or rather defect and imperfection it self; and every
perfect thing good for something, and every imperfect perfect thing (without
Gods wisdom, who orders sin to his own glory; and is easily able to bring good
out of evil) being properly and per se good for nothing.

Yea this stone of Israel Genesis 49.23. Christ which was ever set at naught by
you builders who seem to your selves so much to build upon him, but are seen
more then any to build beside him, and stumble at him, is now again become the
head in the Corner, Act. 4.11.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, nor
any other name under heaven given among men, whereby they must be saved then
that of the Lord our righteousness who is, not here in this world simply so
accounted (as it is, simplicer satis, accounted on by our Ac^demicks) and then
made to us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness Sanctification, Redemption,
hereafter in the world to come, but so ready made to us here and that perfectly
too (so far as he is perfectly trusted to and h^ped in 1 Pet. 1.13. for
salvation) Salvation from God, to such as expect not more the pardon and
forgiveness of what is past, then pu^ging from and power to forgo all sin, and
all unrighteousness in due time to come, who have the witness within themselves
of all iniquity to be (as they wait on him) so truly done away and remited, as
(though they meet with temptation (as Christ did) which is not transgression if
withstood) not to be done, nor at all committed any more: 1 Ioh. 1.7.9. 2 Cor.
7.1.119. Psalm. 1.2.3. And this peculiar privilege, and high prerogative has
he, who is the head, and has (as he is well worthy) in all things the
pre-eminence over his body, which he is the Savior of, purchased to himself
by his free humiliation and b^eience to death even the death of the Gross, to
be in perfect power to save to the uttermost, all that shall ever come unto God
by him.

Now much if not most of this is in general granted and assented to by all (
viz.) that Justification to life and Salvation is by none but Christ, and by no
other righteousness, but that, which is most peculia^ly and properly called
his, and not man's; but still the Question about which sub^judice lis est (viz.)
what Christ it is (for T.D. makes two at least if not more ( viz.) a Christ
within, and a Christ without) and what righteousness of Christ it is (for T.D.
makes two righteousnesses of Christ also (viz.) one within us and another in
him without us,) by whom, and upon which the title to Justification and the
inheritance comes.

And to this I answer that as I know no other person nor thing, that gives us
title to salvation then Christ and his righteousness, so I know no other
Christ then that one, which the Scripture speaks of, that dyed at Jerusalem,
and was crucified in the great City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, and
was an immaculate Lamb, slain by the beast from the foundation of the World, by
whose blood his Saints ever were, and still are redeemed and cleansed from all
their sins, and by the eating and drinking whose flesh and blood they have life
in themselves, whom they also as Paul and others did, witness speaking,
living, working, laboring in them, coming into them, (as they open to him)
supping with them, manifesting himself to them, as they keep his Commandments
(when not to the world that break them) making his abode with them, dwelling in
them by faith, walking in them as they in him, formed in them, being in them
that are in the faith, and not reprobate as concerning the faith, as some are,
who dream they have it, the hope of glory, even Christ Jesus, the Son of God,
the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, risen from the dead, and alive for
ever, the second man, the Lord from heaven, the quickening spirit, that showed
himself to his disciples, coming in where they were, the doors being shut,
appearing to them in what f^^m he would, vanishing out of their sight at what
time he pleased; Christ, the wisdom of God, the power of God, the word of God,
the righteousness of God, the sanctification and salvation of God, the Image
of God, the true vine of the Branches, the door of the Sheep, the light of the
World, and by his light in them, the judge and condemnation of all that hate
it, and perfect Savior of all that come to God by him, and to him in it, the
same that ever he was yesterday to day and for ever, the self same and not
another, no changling but numerically the same to them that see him, as the
wo^ld does not, who are commenting on him, but cannot comprehend him, guessing
at, but cannot k^n him, naming themselves after him, but are no kin to him, not
divided but individually one not one without us, and a different thing in us,
as T.D. dictates, ^aying two things are called Christ his person and his
operations in us p. 23. but one without us, and that same one in us, seen to be
but one, and the same without them, and one, and the same in them by the single
eye of them that are (being joined to him, 1 Cor. 6.) one and the same spirit
in him, though ^eeming two Christ's to the doubleey, that never yet saw clearly
any true Christ, for he that imagines any more then one Christ knows not
aright that one that is, but (what ere he thinks) unless it be some false
ones, in truth has truly ^een just none at all.

And as I own no other Christ but that one, by whom life comes to all that
believe in his light; so I own the life to come by that one Christ not as
without us, but as coming within us, and contrarily to T.D. at the dispute,
who (as he truly relates it, to his own fuller shame p. 22.) being asked by
G.W. whether we are not justified by Christ with in us? answered no but by
Christ without us; which Christ (to make but one of him still, whom T.D. by his
Metonymy Metamorphosyes into two things expressed by that one name, his person
and operations) as without or while without and not come into them, is no more
to them, who when he comes in them are his Saints, then he is to all them who
are without him in the World whose condemnation he is by his light, because
they yet believe not in it, that he, in whom is life, whose life is the light
of men, by it might come into them, and make them partakers of the life Ioh. 12.

But as he comes in (and men behold he now comes (...) in myriads of his holy
ones. Jud. 14. to convince all the ungodly of their ungodly deeds, and the hard
speeches that ungodly sinners have spoken against him) so is he made not only
their Sanctification to cleanse, and make them meet for the pure Lord to look
upon with delight, as vessels of honor sitted for him to take pleasure in, but
also even so, and no otherwise then so, as within, and bringing forth his own
Image, and righteousness within them, is he their righteousness to
justification, so as to enright and entitle them, to the gracious acceptance in
the sight of the Lord, which by his own holy presence, and holy spirit, and
holy operations in them, he has first^ fitted them for. And as by him else not
as without us, but us within us, ^o by that obedience, and those good works of
Righteousness; both active and passive of himself, not as without us only (as
is blindly believed by our blind guides, and their beleivers) but as within us
wrought and performed, does he really become our righteousness to the
justification of us in Gods sight and an Entitler of us, to the inheritance,
and a Sanctifier and sitter of us for it, and also we the righteousness of God
in him: for though whatever he did, and endured without in that body that lived
and dyed at Jerusalem, was as truly meritorio^s of perfect obedience, as to the
ends, in order to which it was yielded, being the fulfilling of the Law, and of
all the Types, Shadows and Sacrifices that went before him, and that, whereby
he left us an example that should follow his steps, etc. Yet if the blood of
that immaculate Lamb, and the suffering and the sacrifice of himself by which
he purges away sin, and that righteousness, and those perfect good works, and
holy spiritual operations of his be not witnessed nearer to us in time, and
place then 1600. years since at Jerusalem (viz.) within us now as 1 Ioh. 1.7.
It avails us not to our salvation.

And howbeit this true transposition of purifying before pardoning, of men's
forgoing sin by Christ's power in them before Gods forgiving and forgetting it,
runs in a clear cross line to your (...) of the Cart before the Horse, who set
justification from the guilt, before sanctification from the filth of sin,
expecting and accounting among your selves (without the Lord, while he is
silent, and before the bill of your accounts be brought in by him) ye are just,
and pure, and holy, and good in the sight of God, when its nothing less upon
the account of somewhat done by another, that never knew the workers of
iniquity, so well as to entitle them to an entrance into Gods bosom in their
iniquities, as if all scores were quitted between God and you, and your sins
blotted out 1600 years at least, before they were by you done, and by his
witness in you, as with a Pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond written down by
Christ, and the works of his spirit within, yet I absolutely assert that ye can
be no further justified then in such measure as ye are sanctified before God,
nor yet any sooner in order of either time or nature as you speak. I am not
ignorant of your ordinary School distinctions and positions namely that bona
opera non praecedunt justificandum sed sequuntur justificatum and dant non us
ad regnum, but only aptitudinem regnand^, etc. That good works go not before in
the person that is to be justified, but follow only in persons already
justified, and give no right to the kingdom, but only a fitness for entrance
into it, to such as have actual right before ever they do any good by the
power of Christ, and T.D. by implicit faith treads in the same common beat'n
track, telling us p. 16. that surely the leading of the spirit or
sanctification is a fruit and effect, and not a meritorious cause of not being
obliged to the penalty of the Law: yet all this is but tittle ^attle of those
whom Christ and righteousness serves to talk and make a trade on: Tell not me
T.D. of Thomas, of Io. Duns the Scot, and other Scepticks, Schoolmen and
Casuists, that make Religion a matter of dispute more then practice, for I say
(and yet no more then what the Scripture proves to any, but such as take more
care by their innumerable distinctions, senses, and meanings upon it, to defend
themselves in their sins, then to live the life of it, that the good works,
that are the gift of Christ and the fruits of the spirit of Christ in us, and
that righteousness which is of his working in us, who works in us, both to
will and do what are we do, that is of worth before God, are those by which our
Salvation is wrought out, 2 Phil. 13. and are not the fruit and effect of, but
go before Justification from guilt, and acquiting from the penalty and
condemning power of the Law, which is the fruit and effect of the other, and
the same that gives the aptitude and meetness for the Kingdom, the self same
Righteousness of Christ within us, wrought and imparted to us, gives to us the
Ius or Right to inherit it, and not another without us, only imputed; for as
is commonly said, quae supra nos, and so may it be truly said in this matter,
quae extra nos nihil ad nos, etc. what good works and Rigteousness of Christ
are done by him without us, what ever they are intentionally, and
conditionally, yet are actually and absolutely nothing to us, but as we come to
see and feel the same, by that same power that wrought in him working mightily
in us; performed within our selves.

Neither are the good works and Righteousness of Christ, which are the fruits
of his Spirits leading us thereto subsequent as effects of his not being under
the Laws curse in a person before justified (as T.D. and the Scholastic
Doctors of whom he learns it, indoctrinates) but are praecedent as causes of it
in persons in order to their peace with God, and Justification in both Gods
sight, and in men's, and in their own, for as it is said Isa. 31.15, 16, 17, 18,
19. of the inhaerent Righteousness, that resides and remains in the hearts of
Saints, which is the fruit and effect of the Spirit of God, making them of a
Wilderness a fruitful Field, by the pourings out of the Spirit upon them from
on high; so it is in truth that the work of that Righteousness is the peace,
and the effect or fruit of that Righteousness is quietness and assurance for
ever: yea, that people who of a barren Forest become a fruitful Field to the
Lord, bring forth fruits of Righteousness by Christ in them to the praise of
God, are they only that, when the Nail of Gods wrath, indignation and torment
comes down by Right on the fruitless Forest, have (even eaten us, or
thereupon) a due Right and Title to the dwelling in the peaceable habitation
and sure dwelling, and quiet Resting-places of the Fathers Love and Abraham's
Bosom^, as well as a fitness for it; which fitness and meetness is first, and
ever goes before the Actual, A^solute and Immediate Right there to come; for
whatever Remote and Conditional Right all men have to the Justification, Life
and Peace of God in Christ, Mediante fide, Iustitia, Pie^ate, Sanctitare, etc.
On Terms of that precedent Faith, Righteousness, Godliness and Holiness wrought
in them by Christ, which makes them mee^ for it; yet a Positive and Immediate
Right thereto, can no man have, till he be thus made mee^ to enter it, any more
then he, that was unmeet for the Marriage Supper, for want of his Wedding
Garment, who had as true a Rem^^^ Right as any that were there conditionally he
had fitted (i.e.) clothed himself accordingly, had in his old Suit, the Rotten
Rags of his own Righteousness, and not Christ's, a Real and Immediate Right, to
intrude himself into so Holy a presence, who was, with shame, thrust forth
forth for his labor.

And whereas our unjust Iusticiaries strike hard against us, as they think,
with that True Story Romans 9. of Jacob and Esau's being the one loved, the other
(...) yet, being (...), ^me neither good nor evil.

Rep. 1. I say, and so would they too, if they could once sea that (...) one
thing to be denominated aforehand by God, who foreseeing how it will be, often
calls those things that yet are not, as if they were, loved and ^ated
Respectively before or good or evil be actually done, or the doors born, with
Reference to the good and evil he foresaw would be done in time, and another
to be abs^lutely and actually l^ved and hated, not only without any reference
or respect to good and evil foreseen, that it would be done, but also before
the Subject; and doers thereof are, in rerum natura, as yet in so much as any
actual being.

2. That those two Persons were Types of the two Seeds, that (and not Persons,
but so as they are the Children of one or the other) are the only absolute
unchangeable Everlasting Subjects of Gods peremptory in alterable and Eternal
decrees of Election and Reprobation (viz.) the Seed of the Woman, and that of
the Serpent, which the Seed of the Righteous, who are ever blessed, and the
seed of evildoers, who are never to be Renowned, are respectively born of, and
adhaering to.

3. That though they will needs mis-understand it as spoken of those Pers^ns
only, yet it is not poken of two Persons only, but it is spoken of the 2
Nations that strove in the womb of Rebecca, and the two manner of people that
were to go forth of her bowels (viz.) Israel and Edom, which two Nations also,
but that what is most Right, is mostly a Riddle to them, they might Read (as
born after the flesh) were Types, yet of a more Mystical and spiritual Israel
and Edom Or m^n of the earth (f^r so Edom signifies of (...).)
, then they are yet well acquainted with, as near of kin to Esau, that is Edom,
as they are in G^ds Account, both in name and nature.

4. That Gods loving one and hating the other of these, was (as is most evident
in the Letter, Mal. 1.2, 4.) not without, but with respect to evil, and not
evil foreseen to be done in time, for on the Account of Edoms Mountains being
the border of wickedn^ss (as Jacobs were not) they became the objects of Gods
hatred, and a people against wh^m the Lord has indignation for ever.

5. That there was no such thing as Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated, said
of those two single Persons, of which our intricate Expositors interpret that
Text, before those two children and single pair of twins came out of Rebeccaes
womb, neither does that Text Romans 9.11, 12, 13. say so in: terminis as our
Academical Arithmeticians usually wrong repeat it, for the Text, says, that
before they had done either good or evil, or were bo^n either, it was said to
her, the elder shall serve the younger, and that is true enough, that he did
both in the single Type and the foresaid double Antitype, and its witnest in
the Saints, whom the world knows not, to be truth at this day, that the elder
does serve the younger, which was an underling to the elder a great while: but
of the other its said thus, not (as it was said unto her) but (as it is
written) Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated: and where, and when was this
written? before the two-single Persons of Jacob and Esau were born, or had done
either good or evil? I trow not; but if our benighted Seers look again, they will
see it was written by Malachi the last Prophet, who^e Prophecy was not before,
but after they were born, and had done all the good or evil they ever did in
the body; yea, so long after all this was written, that the men's bodies both
were 100ds of years before that, both dead and rotten.

And to inculcate this a little further, let thus much the considered, that
howbeit T. D. denies Iustific^^ion and Life to be given (^s myself do somewhat
more then himself, who falsely accuses me of it) upon my obedience or good
works, or Righteousness of Ours only and properly so called, for as much as
all Ours as well as Our selves, as in the fall without Christ and his in us,
are as an unclean thing, and ^ung and liss, and as filthy Rags before the Lord,
and as he speaks (improperly) imperfectly good, which is no other then evil (as
I said above) or imperfect, or to use his own Phrase still imperfect obedience,
which is but disobedience; nevertheless the good works, righteousness and
^bedience of Christ in us, as well as his without us, being, when but in part
or in the least degree, perfect, and the fulfilling of the Law (tuliter,
qualiter) and not defective or transgressive of the Law, for as we have of our
selves no other, so he has none such, nor are any of his his operations or
obediences imperfect, or a violation or breaking of the Law, and either a
violating or fulfilling, breaking or keeping of it every deed is, that is done
at all, even these are such by which Justification may, does, and must come, if
at all, and upon which the Gospel gives life.

And if any doubts it, as T. D. himself does, or rather denies the Truth of it,
I need go no further for an Argument, ad hominem, then to T.D. himself, who p.
45. says the Gospel gives life upon imperfect ob^dience, from whose own
imperfect speech in that particular I may Argue, and perfectly conclude the
Truth asserted of the worth, weight and vnloar of Christ's obedience in his
Saints, every part of which is perfect, a minori a^ ma^us, if I may be heartily
construed in my cauting back to him in his own Language of Imperfect Obedience.
Thus,

Arg. If the Gospel gives Life upon imperfect obedience, as evrs only is, if
any can properly be so called, then upon perfect obedience, such as at Christ's
within us and without us is, much more.

But, Secundum re, T. D. the Gospel gives life upon imperfect obedience;
therefore upon Christ's good works, Holy Operations, Righteousness and Obedience
in us, which is perfect and not imperfect, much more.

And if T. D. shall strive by the serpentine sublety, to save his head this
way, by saying, he intends by that Term of imperfect obedience, not any
obedience or righteousness of our own, wrought by us without Christ, but that
wihch is (as he says Paul's was, his own, that he received from Christ, which
own of his Paul counted less and dung) Our Own, received from and wrought in us
by Christ; yet let him remember at least, 1. that then he calls the gift of
Righteousness, by Faith received from God and Christ, from whom comes every
good and perfect gift (but not any insufficient, defective or imperfect, that I
or any ever read of) imperfect. And whereas he may yet twine and say, that he
intends not in such a sense as I take the word imperfect in for evil, defect,
insufficiency to its end or so, but for (...) only, or a less measure or
degree of that fullness, every part of which is also in a sense perfect; let him
2. consider what I said above viz. of no good, heavenly, spiritual thing, or
gift that comes down from above from Christ and the Father of lights, that
which is but in part, is any where no not in, 1 Cor. 13. or truly can be,
called imperfect; for the earnest and first fruits of the Spirit and Grace is
Spirit and Grace, and good, as the whole is, that its a part of, and not
imperfect, but perfect as the other is perfect, and so all that is born of God
is truly Holy as God is Holy, and perfect as the heavenly Father is perfect,
and sins not as he sins not, nor can, being of the incorruptible non-sinning
Seed, for all that sins is of the Devil, and thereby are manifest the Children
of God, and of the Devil; that, that is of God overcomes the world, and that
which overcomes the world is not overcome by the world, but keeps himself
that the evil one touches him not, and sins not, as he does, and does no
other that is begotten to it by the Devil, and is of the D^vi^, and he that
sins not does Righteousness, and he that does Righteousness is Righteous as
God is Righteous, Pure as he is Pu^e, and so in some measure perfect, though
not in the same measure perfect, as his heavenly Father is perfect, that is
bearing his perfect Image in his mea^ure, and not part of Gods, and part of the
Devils, as an Infant in nature, bears the perf^ct Image of a man in stature,
and not Centaure-like, part of a man's Image, and part of a beasts: and not
having a mixture of sin with his Grace, as thou (whether more foo^ish^y or
falsely it matters not, since its both in a great degree) supposedst (as thou
say p. 18) I meant, when in Answer to thy Question, (viz.) Whether th^r^ be
any true Believers who are not perfect? At the Dispute

I Replied, There are degrees among Believers, little Children, young Men,
Fathers; and these things may serve, as my Answer to that piece of folly and
falsehood of thine, now I am up on it, for whatever thou T. D. supposest I mean,
I suppose, and mean no such matter, when I say perfect; for every true Believer
and Sanctified one by Christ, though but in part, is as truly, though not ^o
totally perfect and perfected as he shall be by him who is said to perfect for
ever all such as are, so far as they are, for ever Sanctified by him, nor yet
(but that thy senses are sodden so as to Take, or rather Rake or Scrape things
for granted to thee before they are so given) did or do I grant (as thou there
tatlest) some persons to be justified, who never did fulfill the Law personally;
for though I told thee indeed, as thou truly tel'st it again to the world,
there are but two Estates, Justification and Condemdation; and now I tell thee
over again, that there is no medium between these, for every one stands either
Justified or Condemned, Guil^y or not Guilty before God, as his Law, which is
the Light is broken or fulfilled by him, and he that stands by the Light in his
own Conscience, by which God Judges him, in any Particular Cleared or
Justified, stands before God so far uncondemned, how ever Judged by man;
therefore wherein David was clear in himself, though clouded with men's false
accusations of him, he could and did with boldness appeal to God, to Judge and
Reward him in that case still, according to the integrity of his heart, and
innocence of his hands in Gods sight; and so Abimelech and others, see Psalm.
25.21. 26.1. 6.11. 18.26. Genesis 20.5. 1 Kings 9.4. But he that by the same
Light, which is no lie in the Conscience of either, Godly or Wicked (as T.D.
little less then persuades men it often is in both, p 19.) stands Condemned
within himself, and so consequently before God, whose witness that in him is
(let him* flatter himself as he will, and let T.D. and all men sing Lullaby and
Prophecy as smooth things to him as they can) so far as in any Case or Cases,
he Rebels against the Light, is so far inexcusably, till he repents and returns
to it, in such wise condemned by it in the sight of God, whereupon even David
himself where his heart smote him, for iniquity regarded in it (and he that
does it, let him dote the contrary if he dare, does I say assuredly, so far
regard it) could stand in no more boldness and guiltlesness in his sight, then
Adam could after he had fed on the forbidden fruit, for which he fled Gods
face; and where he fell short of that uprightness, he sometime stood Justified
in and by before, and failed so fowly as that flawes, fainirgs and falsehood
were found in him (as if ever there were in all his days it was in that unjust
matter of V^iah and his Wife, in which yet even while he was guilty thereby, T.
D. most impudently affirms he stood with God not in a condemned, but in a
justified estate) there, let T. D. lie as he lifts, yet David declares when he
had done that wickedness in his sight, God did not only speak in wrath and
judge him, but was worthy to be (though himself was justly condemned by it) to
be justified and cleared in so doing, Psalm. 51.4.

I ay, though I said there were but two states, in one of which every man is,
as he does good, which since the fall he cannot do but by the Power of Christ,
or evil at the suggestion of the D^vil, viz. Justification, or Condemnation:
yet I deny any person to be justified in whom the Law [which cannot be by the
weakness of the flesh] is not by the Power and Spirit of Christ fulfilled,
neither do I Imagine (as thou imaginest I did) a mixture of sin with Believers
Grace; for though they, that drink of the Whores Cup of abomination and
fornication, which is full of such kind of trashy doctrines and mixtures, and
medleys, which they ministes and measure out to one another, supposing I see
with such eyes as themselves, suppose such a mix^ure, and suppose I suppose it
too, yet I neither suppose, nor own such mingled messes of doctrine, but know,
that no more then Iron is truly mixed, or can cleave into one compositum with
mi^y clay, and no more then God and Idols, light and darkness, Christ and
Belial can be mingled into agreement, no more mixture is there of the sinners
sin, which is of the Devil, with the Saint's Grace, which is of God; and so
whereas thou thoughtest thou had caught me (as thou there say) in a
manifest contradiction, thou have but according to thy common custom in that
kind, caught thy self; instead of winding my self out of which contradiction
(of thy mere coining) though thou say I replied not, but sa^e down on the
Top of a Seat, like a man astonished and under the Heretics Judgment (i e.)
self-condemned; yet thou feast I have here so well wound my self out of it, as
to manifest it to all men that I were never in it, and to leave thee in the
lurch under the Heretics Judgment of self-condemnation, for thy folly and
fictions about it, which are hereby also manifest to all; for verily, if I were
at all astonished at any of the three days Disputes, thou miserably mistook'st
the manner of it, it being not at all, as the Jews were at the Wisdom of
Christ's, but as often as it was, at the stupidity of thy understanding and
answers.

Thirdly and lastly, From thy foregoing Grant to us, which is more then we say,
and would have thee say, That the Gospel gives life upon imperfect obedience,
let it be well remembered by thee, since its agreed on all hands, that all the
obedience that Christ yielded to the Law in that person called Christ without
us, was perfect, and in no wise imperfect, that then that imperfect obedience
(as thou call'st it) which the Gospel gives life upon (as thou say) can be
no other then that which is inherent in us, in ourpersons only and not his, in
whom all that is inherent thou dare not on pain of Blaspemy deny but that it
was perfect; and if so, then see how with thy wining to and fro, and running up
and down, round about, thou have at last brought thy Hogs (as they say) to a
fair M^rk^^: even till thou have drawn the dirt of thy fal'd charge of Popery,
as thou call that Doctrine of Life upon our imperfect works, which thou
threw'st at me, who never held it by an^, but Christ's perfect obedience, upon
thy Own indirectly-driving-self, so that if any man enquire who is it that
holds that Popery of Life and Justification upon Our imperfect obedience, T. D.
tells it that himself is the man, in whose Book p. 45. it is written as legibly
to all, as if it were branded upon his B^ow, as his own Doctrine, That the
Gospel gives Life upon imperfect obedience ^ and if he will take his Term of
imperfect, and Translate it better by the Term of perfect obedience wrought by
Christ in his Saints, I Will give him his word again with all my heart; and can
afford it, for if so, he gives me no less then the Question it self, which is
affirmed by us, and not denied (if so) by himself concerning life's coming upon
Christ's Righteousness, received from him and wrought by him in us.

So then the snare is broken and I am escaped, which yet is whole enough to
hold T. D. fast enough, who set it, who while I for whom 'twas set am set at
liberty by himself, cannot with all his struggling strain his own neck out of
the string, whereinto he has slipped it unawares. Sic ves non vohis fertis
Aratra B^ves.

Further, yet much more is to be said in proof of it, that our being first led
by the Spirit of Christ into the Righteousness of his working in us, is
Antecedent to our Justification, as a meritorious cause of it, though
considering how slenderly T. D. slides away from what was at the Dispute urged
to that purpose, even as he sets it down in his own Relation of it, p. 15, 16.
to his own best advantage, there were no great need of more, if all wereas wise
as some are silly, to see the strength of what was urged; but some are silly,
and some are willing, rather then to own troublesome truths, to wink against
it, and to seem more silly then they are; whereupon when I have Examined the
inefficacy of T. Ds. returns to it, and turned them home in their native
nakedness, to the shame of him who sent them out, I may not unlikely urge
somewhat more.

1. To this Argument from Gal. 5.18. They who are led of the Spirit, are not
under the Law; therefore being led of the Spirit, is a meritorious cause of not
being under the Law, and so consequently of Justification or Non-Condemnation
by it.

Thou T.D. Rep'yest, That I am very silly myself, or take my hearers to be so,
thinking this to be a proof of my former consequence, or that there is any
consequence in this Argument; whereas first this Argument is urged not so much
in proof of my former consequence, as entailed on that, but as entire and
absolute within it self: for as to the proof of the former consequence, (viz.)
Contrariorum contraria est Ratio; therefore as evil deserve Condemnation, so
good works Non-Condemnation; in proof of which thou sillily says, I should,
have pro^^ that there is Par. Ratio, for had I prosecuted that, I should have
proved that there is Contraria Barro, for the merit of the ones, and of the
other, as I have told thee above, I say as to that former consequence it had
been sufficiently proved before by telling you (but that in such a crowd of
conference as ye were in among your selves, it could not be heeded); that as
Condemnation and Non-Condemnation, of Justification were Contraries, so good
works which I said were not those of our own working without Christ (for I often
said, not by works of Righteousness we have wrong h^^ but what Christ's works in
and by us, none of which are imperfect but all truly good) and evil works are
truly Contraries, and so of contrary desert, the one being all as truly good,
as the other truly evils and as for thy saying, I am either silly, or take my
h^^^ers s^to^, in that I think there is any consequence in, the Argument from
Gal. ^.18. I say I did not take my heedless, hearers so silly thus, but I now
take some of them an ^thy self for one, to be much more silly then I did at the
Dispute, not only by reason of sundry other remarkably silly passages, that
are in thy Printed Relation thereof, but also in that thou think there is no
consequence in that Argument; for verily, were thou but as solid as thou art
silly in this matter, or could thou but look an inch or two beyond that 18th
verse, whereon the Argument is grounded, thou might see of thy self that
which is of force sufficient to prove the se^^et for showing in the verses
between the works of the flesh, which the Spirit leads out of, and the fruits
and works of the Spirit, which the Spirit leads such into as follow it, the
Apostle v. 23 adils this (viz.) against such there is no Law: (i. e.) such
works of the Spirit, as Love, Joy, Peace, Goodness, Meekness, Temperance, and
such Persons as are by the Spirit led out of the work of the flesh, adultery,
uncleanness, laferviousness, hatred, wrath, envyings, drunkenness, revellings,
etc. and into the other: whence to the proving of the Sequel of that Argument,
in which thou sillity say there is no, no consequence, I argue.

If such as are led by the Spirit out of evil into good works, are thereupon
deservedly not under the Law, then their being led by the Spirit, who are led
by it from under it, is the deserving or meritorius cause of their nor being
under the Law, and so of Justification.

But verum prius ergo and posterius.
The Minor which (unless thou will deny thy Principles) its like thou will
deny, is thus proved;

Those against whom deservedly there is no Law, are thereupon deservedly from
under the condemning power of it; for such is the R^gour of the Law, that who
ere deserves the Condemnation of it, till they come not to deserve it, first or
last, shall assuredly feel it.

But there is no Law deservedly against such as (...) not after the flesh into
evil, but after the Spirit into good works; therefore according to that also
Romans 8.1 deservedly no Condemnation.

For indeed those and no other (what ere ye deem to the contrary, being deluded
by the Devil, to the deceiving of your own Souls) are truly in Christ Jesus,
then those that are led by the Spirit, which who is led by, is led out of evil,
for it leads into nothing but good, those only are in the Spirit, and all the
rest in the (...), which follow the flesh in its lustings against the Spirit,
and so under the Law and c^^e, thought they name the Name of Christ, and after
him call themselves Christians, while they are not departed from iniquity, much
more while they plead for its continuance under the name of their infi^mi^ies
of necessity, while they abide in the body: yea, those and none else are
Christ's, though millions more may conceit themselves his, so as to be
interessed into the blessings of Peace, Life and Justification by him and
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the Promise, and sons of God, that are
led by the Spirit of God into good works out of evil, to live and walk in the
Spirit, out of the flesh and the f^uits thereof, out of vain glory, envy,
hypocrisy, and all deceit: and if any think he is Christ's, or any other men
are Christ's, so far as to stand justified before God in him, before he be
sanctified, or while he is guilty of such gross evils, as David was defiled
with, while he was wallowing in the Mire of that matter of Vriah, as T. D.
guesses David and all Saints are (by which name he paints them out as well
while they are in such a nasty pickle, as when they are wash) of impure the
Righteousness of Christ without him to himself, or count upon it that God
impures it so as to compute him or any Righteous, Holy, Good, etc. upon that
mere account of his own so counting en't and confident believing it so to be
before he find and feel that by his Faith in Christ's Light (which such Fanciers
as I.O. T. D. and most Divines and their Disciples are far from Faith in, while
they fight against it as fiction) it be revealed and ^rought in himself, and
imported to him, to making of him Righteous as Christ is, and to the purifying
of him ( in fiert^) till he come ( in facto esse) to be pure as Christ is pure,
1 John 3. To walk as he walked, and as he is, in whom is no sin, and in whose
mouth was found no guile, even so to be in this world, and so are his Sants
that stand with him on Mount Sion redeemed from the earth, without fault before
the Throne, Rev. 14.1. and lays claim to the blessedness in Truth, Psalm. 32.1,
2. Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3, I say if any man thus believe Trust and Hope as
aforesaid, his hope is but vain, and not that of theirs, 1 John 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
nor the sure and steadfast Anchor of them, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. that enters into
that within the vail, whether the Forerunner is entered, making the way for
such only as follow him in the daily Cross to the Carnal mind; yea, his belief
is but blind, his faith mere fancy; he feeds but upon ash^s, a deceived heart
has turned him aside; his trust is in lying words, he leans upon naught but
lies, a mere lie is in his right hand; Christ is not his, nor his Righteousness
his as yet, neither is he Christ's, while he lives in his lusts and his lusts in
him, while alive to the world and the world to him; for as it is in the Verse
next after that I last argued from, Gal. 5.23, 24. They that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, upon that Cross of
the Lord Jesus, then which Paul glorified in nothing more, as true Saints now
do, while the world is ashamed thereof, that is, the light by which Christ
condemns all sin in their flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in them, as truly as in himself, and they walk no more after the
flesh, but the Spirit; by which also Paul was crucified to the world, and the
world also unto him.

And now whereas T.D. and those Divines from whom he must come to be divided,
before ever he know his part in the undivided Christ, do ( uno ore) confess so
far unto this truth as to tell it further, then they are aware, against their
wills, while they tell us that the good works and fruits of the Spirit, and
Christ righteousness within the Saints, and the obedience, which by him they
are enabled to perform, are not only that which makes men meet to enter, but
are also all the righteous men's evidence for heaven both in faro ecclesia, and
conscientie, for I know no man among them, that says any other then thus, that
no men can know one another, nor any men themselves, to be Christ's and heirs of
heaven, and to have right to enter there, and that the faith in Christ which
they profess, whereby they say they stand, entitled to the righteousness of
Christ without them, is true, living, saving, justifying faith, and not fancy,
dead unprofitable, and good for nothing, 'but as it is accompanied with the
other fruits of the Spirit and good works, which serve (^ay they) to justify
every one that is justified (without them (say they) in the sight of God) in
his own sight, and conscience, and in the sight of men: I shall take all our
Doctors at their words, so far as they do yield, as Pharaoh did, to Is^ael by a
little and little at once, in order to the winding of them in at last, whether
they will or no, to yield us the whole Question in every inch of it, wherein
they stick (for we shall not ere we have done, leave them, so much as a hoof
thereof behind,) and while it is in and upon me, say something more to these
two grants of good works, giving 1 st. meetn^sse for entrance 2 evidence of our
T^Se to the in^ heritance, and the truth of that faith, which though it never
be alone (say they) yet along gives (on our part) true T^le to it:

As then to the 1st, I mu^e what great difference there is [but that they who
where they should not, make two into one (as T. D. does Paul's own
righteousness and that of Christ in him,) love as much, when they need not, to
make one into two] between the matter of merit, and the matter of meetness,
that our Divines can digest it exceeding well, to have it said the fruits of
the Spirit, and Christ's good works and righteousness within his Saints only
makes them meet to inherit, but cannot digest it at any hand, to have it said
that these of Christ and his Spirit in them do meri^ the inheritance or make
worthy of it: Does not the ^ame that makes meet and fit for, merit or make
worthy of it, and enright to it in some ^ort, and in Scripture sense at least?
The whole course of which tells you not only (as you tell one another often,
but that you often untell it again, when you tell that of necessity, men must
sin while they live) that no sinners nor unri^hteous ones of any sort have in
any wise any right to inheritance in the kingdom, or are either meet or worthy
to be any where but without the holy City together, as fearful, unbeleiving,
dogs, and abominable in the lake of fire, but tells you also verbatim in many
places, of all their and only their right and worthynesse to enter, who by
Christ's power do the sam^ will of God he did, and have and work the same
righteousness that he did in himself, within themselves, 1 Thessalonians. 1. They
that suf^er'd for the kingdom were worthy of it, 21. Math. 8. Not only they
that came (...) when bidden to the the marriage were unworthy, but such also as
took themselves to be entitled upon bare bidding, and so (as you do) ran in all
the have, and thrust themselves in, as those that had the only right, and who
but they the worthy guests, that thought there was no need, (I speak after the
manner of men) of the ^l^ves and Ribbons, I mean the Wedding Robes of Christ
righteousness to cloth their own persons, as if what he only wore (...) Theirs
too, so far as to enright them ^hith^r, were (for all their more bast then good
speed) thrust out at last, as u^worthy to be there, where had they been ^s well
sui^ed, as they were willing to have the good (...) might there upon,
deservedly enough, since the invitation was free, and though a gift yet what
more free the gift? Have stayed there among the rest as worthy: And the few
names in Sardis that had not defiled their Garment had right by promise, and so
ex debito (if promise ought to be kept, when made) though gratis too, because
the promise was freely made to walk with Christ in white, for they were worthy,
Rev. 3.4. I say worthy ex been placito, for as much as nothing, but the free
good will and pleasure of God, made him oblige himself to give a right to
such; and yet (to confound that nice and needless distinction of Critical
Scholasticks, which has confounded most Divines in Christendom into darkness)
ex condigno, also, for as much as by Christ's power and gift to will and do they
both will and do what is required, as the Terms and condition, on which the
thing is promised; which consistency that I make between ex condigno and ex
beneplacite, ex debito and ex dono, ex operibus and ex gratia, which T. D. and
most Divines deem to be (...) or inconsistent together in the matter of man's
justification, being a (...), that few of them can get over, a mere gnat, at
which they that in other things can swallow Camells, cannot but strain, I am
made free a little more here to uney.

T. D. thinks he has half knocked the Qua. for ever down into their dumps with
his deep drawn argument from Romans 11.6. T.D. If by grace then it is no more of
works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works, then it is no
more of grace, otherwise work is no more work: whence (quoth he p. 20.) if
justification be of works as you assert, then grace is excluded from having any
hand in our justification, which is contra^y to the Scripture, which says we
are justified by grace. Our justification cannot be a debt and a free gift. I
mean not both in respect of us. And this he calls his irrefragabaScripture
urged by him, that the hearers might be covninc't of the damnablenesse of our
doctrine, who dare to talk of good works and perfecting holiness bear, as ever
we mean to see the face of God hereafter, which he and The. Rumsey el^ewhere
call a Doctrine of Devils, and might ^^^th and detest us, as we deserve, and
indeed finding his work fail in its force the day before, before the fire and
the day, that declared of what sort it was, he prepared this against the 2d
days dispute as his Cornerstone, setting it in the front of his second fight
against us* and the truth, and to this (quoth he) nothing was replied.

Rep. 1. A good cause why (say I) for there was no room for Reply, but like as
Pilate, when he had asked Christ this Question what is truth? As soon as he had
so said, rose up and went his way, not staying to take his answer, so I well
remember T.D. crowded in the next Argument, which I have answered already above
concerning the works the Jews went about to establish (which Argument is so
near a kin to this, that one answer may very well for both, in both places Paul
by works, and own righteousness meaning no other then what are wrought without
Christ by us, and not any that are wrought by Christ in us,) I say T. D.
crowded the one so hard on the back of the other, and past so soon from one to
the other, that without interrupting of him, which he would ^^ve complained on
as much on other hand, there could be no interposing of an answer, and so
Pilate-like, not expecting it, he went his way to another matter, without it.

2. Yet now as to his Argument itself somewhat may be Replied, and 1st if
considered as in conjunction with its fellow that follows it so close at the
heels p. 21. from Romans 10.34. and bears such a broad show of backing it, it
is not so big, nor amounting to such a bulky Bulwark, but that one may easily
put them both in a bag, if no more be said but this, that in both Scriptures as
also Phil. 3. (where as inconsistent he opposes his own, while a Pharisee to
that of Christ within him when converted and a Saint, and Tit. 3. where he
opposes the works* of righteousness we have wrought to our being renewed by
the holy Spirit, and makes grace and renewing by the Spirit all one, as well he
might, for if we be not renewed by the Spirit and saved from the sin, then I
say grace is no more grace for what use is it of to us, if we be left in, and
unpurged from the sin, which Christ came to save his people from 1st, and so
from the wrath of to come, which will come unavoidably on all that are
disobedient, and unrighteous) Paul opposes the gift of grace Gods
righteousness to man's mere own works, which are not good though so thought by
himself, and man's own literal righteousness of the Law wrought in man's will
and Imagination only, out of Christ the light and faith in him and the
leadings and movings of his Spirit, and does not oppose grace to the
righteousness of Christ in his Saints, or sanctification and holiness, that
is of God, by faith in the light, revealed in and received by every one that
believes as inconsistent: for those are not only concomitant but consistent
and concurrent together to justification, as grace and Our works only are; not
for these two do tollere se invicem, I confess, so that if justification and
life be of grace, it cannot be of Our work^, et retro, if of our works, not of
grace, but grace and Gods righteousesse, grace and those good works wrought in
us by Christ, and for the doing of which we receive the grace, or gift of
ability from Christ, these are indeed one and the same, and so Homogeneous or
of one kind, that they may be Synonomous also, and bear both to be called
mutually by the same name of either grace, or good works, and so are they
throwout the Scripture, as one thing promiseuously denominated, sometimes by
the Term of grace, sometimes the gift of God in Christ, the gift of
righteousness, holiness, etc. For all this is grace and free gift, and yet
its inhaerent in us too, as the same that was in Christ, and being Christ's as
meritorious, ma^ing not only meet but worthy also, in such measure as its
received in, as it was in a higher measure in himself, whether it be a gift to
do, or a gift to believe, or a gift to suffer, as 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. Compared with
Phil. 1.27. To you given not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake
and they to whom this gr^^e was given were by God counted worthy of the
Kingdom, for which they suffered; and so Paul, who labored abundantly in
preaching the Gospel, says this work was the grace which was given him by
Christ in him, by which grace also he was, what ere he was, that was worth any
thing, having nothing but what he had received, that made him differ from
another; by which grace or gift all boasting and glorying in self was
continually excluded, and the glory of all to be given still to God, and not
flesh, man, and self: so that while Judas could blame none but himself for
being damned; so Paul and the rest, though they wrought out their own
Salvation, yet could bless none but God, who wrought in them of his good
pleasure (...) to work, will, and d^, for their being saved by his grace, 1
Cor. 4.7. 1 Cor. 15.10. Ephesians. 2.8. 3.8. Phil. 2.12.13. So that all along the
gift of both faith and good works are both called grace; yea, grace is no grace
yet, to Salvation from sin, while men remain in their sins, and unsaved by it,
and while the grace or gift of Gods righteousness, remains only in Christ
without them, save only that they are in a possibility to be saved, and while
they yet witness not him, and it by him within themselves to the destroying of
the works and Image of the Devil, which when they do, then, and not before
(let them pra^e of ^^ace as they will) they know the grace of God in Christ
Jesus, and then alls grace, and by grace and not of works or themselves, or any
righteousness of their own that they can thank for it, whatever they work in
the light and leadings of it, in Preaching, Praying, Service, Worship, and what
ere they have, are, enjoy, act, believe, endure, or suffer for his name.

And so grace and works, grace and the righteousness of Christ within us (when
man's own, which ye yet are only in, and establishing your selves by, who hate
the light and are out of it, is denied as Rags, as it is by us) do not
destruere, but ponere se invicem, so well stand together in the matter of our
justification, that indeed neither of them can stand in it, without the other.
Neither is grace at all excluded, as T. D. injudiciously judges, from any hand
in justification by our asserting it to be of works of this nature, and
establishing this inhaerent righteousness of Christ in us thereunto, but by
this alone is grace perfectly ectablished: Neither are these in opposition each
to other (as T. D. says they are) as immediate contraryes, as men's evil works
and these good works of Christ in man were by me affirmed to be, but rather
individually the same: and whereas T.D. says our justification cannot be a
debt and a free gift both, in respect of us; to what was said above, which
might serve to answer this, I add my denial of that position of his with my
grounds thereof; for howbeit in respect of the same time it cannot be a debt
and a free gift too; yet in respect of the same pers^ns with reference to
d^fferent times and seasons it may; for as it was nothing but mere mercy to
lost man, and free grace, gift, and goodness to man on Gods part and not any
debt or desert from God, on ma^s part, that 1 st. engaged or moved God to give
his Son, and to make promises in the Gospel to give his free gift of life
eternal, and to make Christ the Author of it, to all them that obey him, and
the mere grace of Christ to us, to come into the world a Light, and give
himself a Ransom for all and to promise to give life to all that come unto
him, and to God by him, that they might have Life and Salvation to the utmost;
yet seeing (as I may say so) God and Christ have by free grace, that moved them
to make it, thus put themselves freely into man's debt, on Terms of their
obedience, they are (man performing the conditions on his part) since then in
justice bound to perform it: and so to the same Subject mankind, from whom God
at 1 st. was altogether free, and to whom he was rich in mercy, and infinitely
free in giving Christ, and making promises he is since on account of his truth
engaged, if man be not wa^nting to him self, to make it good, and as it is in
the like ca^es, among men, that promise which pity, mere mercy moves to make,
piety and equity require its making good, so it is here, and its no such news*
but to such as are novices in the faith, to understand that which to the same
persons was grace and free gift at 1 st. becoming a matter of desert, and due
debt at last: So that though glory be to the grace and mercy of God, which
only moved him to say, when the wicked turns from his wickedness, and does
what is lawful and right he shall not dye, his iniquity shall not at all be
mentioned to him, yet the wicked turning, Gods ways are not so equal as he
pleads they are, Ezekiel. 18. Against man whose ways and thoughts are all crooked
and unequal, if he do not now justify, and forgive the reforming evil doer:
and having in his free favor said it that he that confesses, and forsakes
his siSs shall find mercy, John says 1 Job. 1.8. If we now confess our sins,
not, God is gracious and merciful, though that be Originally the ground of
all, and to be magnified over all his works, and is often expressed to the wicked
repenting, as the grand cause of Gods remitting 55. Isa. Let him forsake his
way and thoughts, and turn to the Lord for he is gracious, but says John God
is fa^thfull and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness: So having refuted T. D's. irrefragable Argument, (as he styles
it) from that Scripture Romans 11. Which I confess is irrefragable in truth, but
that T. D. wrests it (being one of those unlearned and unstable ones in the
truth, that Peter says 2 Pet. 3. Wrest Paul's Epistles and other Scriptures to
their own destruction) I return to proceed in that, which I went away from by
this profitable Parenthesis (viz.) to show how the Scripture ascribes the
inheritance as not only meet for them that are meet for it, but their due de
jure that do his Commandments, R^v. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments that they may have right to eat of the tree of life and to enter
throw the Gates into the City, but without are Dogs, etc. (1.) without the
City, and without Right to it, as well as without mee^nesse for it, who if
they were other (1.) doing the Commands they should have both mee^nesse,
worthynesse and right and ( jure hereditario by right of heirship according to
the promises made in that behalf) should both duly, and (keeping the condition)
no otherwise then deservedly inherit it; as he that having a promise of the
inheritance of a City in case he will adventure to storm, and overcome and
win it, fighting and overcoming accordingly (though the promise of it at 1 st.
on such Terms was a gift) may then claim it for his inheritance as of debt,
and desert, which it is not only fit and meet he should have, as on terms of
promise on another part, and performance of the Terms required on his own, who
ever helped him in it, he is worthy as the right heir, one that has due Title
to it accordingly to enjoy and inherit: And indeed the very word inherit, which
is so often-used both in the negative, where the wicked are excluded; as no
unrighteous one shall ever inherit and on the positive, and promissive hand,
where the righteous are included, as he that overcomes shall inherit all
things, does (if men were not praepossest with prejudice against the truth and
with blind principles, which (as its harder to knock an old peg out of its hole
then to knock a new one in when that's out) there is more ado to drive out of
them, dispossess them of, and draw them from, then would be to draw them to
own the plain truth, if the darkness were once dispeld) import no less then an
entailing the Title of the Kingdom to the good works and fruits of the Spirit
in us which are the Terms on which it is promised, on any name or thing
abstract from these, which yet T. D. is so absurd, as his fellow A B C Da^ians
in the School of Christ are, as to make in no wise a cause, but only an effect
of our justification and of our standing entitled to it on things without us,
that are nothing to us, abstract from these: Whereas if that be true (as it is
in their own Schools) that quo p^sito panitur, quo sublato t^llitur effectus,
etc. That upon the being of which the effect ever is, upon the not being of
which the effect can never b^, must needs be the cause of that effect, its most
uncontr^lably true that the good works and fruits of the Spirit in us, are not
the f^uits and effects, but the causes, of some kind or other, of our
just^fication; and as the cause of every sort, if it be but causa sine qua non
(as they speak) the cause that gives no influence, but only is a mere hangby
yet, necessarily too, as a Cipher, is in order of nature evermore before the
effect, so is our Sanctification, so antecedent to our justification even in
the sight of G^d, that contrary to our Sch^^lmens Figments, who say
justification is 1 st. of the two, so that God looks on us as just, while
unjust, before he makes us just, I say, till our Sanctification is, our being
counted holy in Gods sight can never possibly be.

Ob. And though its said he justifies the ungodly.

Rep. I say, yea justification is ever of ungodly ones, yet never in, but from
their ungodliness, as Sanctification and Salva^ion is of sinners, but not in,
but ever from their iniquityes; he clea^s the guilty, but by no means, no not
Christ's blood, so Exodus 34.7. as to clear the guilty while in their sins, or
hold them guiltless as T. D. dreams he did David, while they are guilty of
Adultery and murder, and while they are taking his name in vain, crying Lord,
Lord, but not doing what he says, naming his name, but not d^parting from
eniquity; he makes Christ to such as believe in his Light Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, but (what ere some count) he in
no wise counts him so to any, any further then he does so make him; he sees no
sin in Jacob nor tra^sgression in Israel, but it is because there its done
away, and remitted, not by pardon, without purging, but so as not to be
committed any more, or if it be there is new guilt contracted, and the sin
imputed, till again remitted on returning; but this Israel to whom he is so
truly good are them that are of a clean heart Psalm. 73. He will speak peace
unto his people and his Saints, while they walk in wisdom, but let them not
return any more to folly, for if they do they do, they must again hear more
rough repro^f from him then ever, and find him speaking in wrath, and v^xing in
his sore displeasure, there is a blessed man, to whom^he will not impute sin,
whose iniquityes and transgressions are covered, but it is he in whose Spirit
there is no guile, Psalm. 32.1. So that I marvail what our Priests mean by
Salvation, Justification, Redemption and such like, when they say a Saint or a
Sinner (what should I call their mongrell seed?) may be in a State of
Salvation, while they are in the guilt and filth of their sins, for I know but
two things Christ saves his people from (viz.) from their sins and from the
wrath, which is to come, and I know no Salvation at all from the wrath, which
is the effect; till there be a Salvation from the sin, which is the cause of
it, for posita cause a p^nitur effectus as well as sublata tollitur, and I am
sure none is there (as yet) from the sin, where men are not only in it, and it
in them, but singing loath to depart, and pleading for a necessary abode of
b^th these (themselves and sin) together while themselves are abiding in the
body. Yet T.D. so thinks, that to stand in sin, which is in the Reprobation,
and yet to stand within the lists of Gods love and Election will stand so well
both together, that David stood justified in Gods sight in that which if men
had seen him in, he would not have been justified in their sight, who love sin
more, and hate it less then God does, and yet all this altogether. But T.D.
thou have heard of God only by the hearing of the ear as yet by hearsay from
thy self and self blinding Brethren, but when thine eye comes to see him, and
he comes near thee to judgment, whose coming, who in sin can abide? and who in
iniquity, can stand before him? who is as Refiners fire to the dross and
Fullers Soap to the fil^h, thou shall, for all thy seeming Saint-ship, Abhor
thy self before him, and repent thy self that ever thou talkedst of men's being
in a state of justification before him, while under the guilt of sin (as purer
Saints then thy self have done, that have thought the same as thou do) in
very dust and ashes; and that walking in the fruits of the Spirit and holiness
of truth, must go before the sight of Gods face in peace, and that the sinner
shall not see his face and live, thy self shall see, whether ever thou come to
walk holily yea or nay.

But alas to what purpose is it to tell our P^iests this, when they tell ( in
effect) the same one to another, yet believe not what they say themselves, but
contradict it out of their own mouths as soon as t^e^ have done, like L^^ards
making good plain Prints with their feet in the Sandy ways they run in, yet
dashing them all out, as the go with their long bushy tail^s; they say no less
then that Sanctification goes before justification in the sight of God, though
they see it not, while they say faith, which they confess is a fruit of the
Spirit, the gift of God, a part of our Sanctification is that, that, as an
isntrumental cause of it, goes before ^ustification, as that by which we are,
and without and before which we cannot be accounted ^ust in the sight of God;
yet by and by again they tell us that justification, which is by faith, and so
not before but after it, goes before Sanctification, whereof faith (they say)
is a part, and that the leadings of the Spirit, and its fruits, among which
justifying faith is reckoned up as one 5. Gal. A^ea f^uit and effect of our
b^ing not under the Laws penalty that is of our justification from the guilt
of sin, so T.D. p. 16.

Sometimes, to escape and slip away from the shame of this absurdi^^ and
contraction, they tell us, or at least some of them, that Justification of
Saints or sinners (for I am to seek still what to call the Creatures they call
Saints, for if I call them Saints, it loathes me to call such sinners Saints, as
they Term so, yea, If they be Saints, which some so call,
Then guilty sinners are Saints al,
And if I call them that commit sin the Servants of sin (as Christ did John 8.)
and not Saints and Children of God, they will be ready to loath me) I say then,
they tell us that Justification of sinning-Saints, painted and Saint-like
sinners in the sight of God is without, and before Faith, or any thing else,
even before sin was, or men either, from all Eternity, and from all sins (
pastnor present, I cannot say here, because the sinning Subjects of this
Justification are not yet extant in the world) but from all that ever is to
come, and Faith by which the Justification comes, is but an Instrument, whereby
the Evidence of this long-since Justification in Gods eye comes in to men, and
manifests it to their eye, whereby the sinners themselves know it; and as for
other fruits of the Spirit, which are all the fruits of Faith too (which I
confess to be the first in being of all work; truly good, so that without it
it is impossible to please God, and whatsoever is not of it and in it, but out
of it, and out of the Light, in which it is, if true, is but sin) these are
only as Evidences to us, and to others that the Faith we have is justifying
and true, etc. and not dead and fained, and fit for nothing.

So say they, In Gods sight we are justified, freely from of Old without Faith,
or good works that follow and flow from it either; this we know and are assured
of, that Faith is opp^sed to it self as a work in the business of
Justification, and that Faith is imputed to us as being in stead of a perfect
personal righteousnese, or that it is the meritorious cause of our
Justification, I utterly deny (quoth T. D. p. 24, 25.) but Faith without works
is that by which we are formally justified, but the other, that is, good works,
that by which we are declaratively justified; in Paul's sense, who Romans 3.28.
says, We are justified by Faith only, without the works of the Law; a sinner
is absolved (I wot he means in his own Conscience, for I know not when T.D.
reckons, or whether at all God holds an Elected Saint guilty, if not David
while he was guilty of Adultery and Murder) In James's sense, Iam. 2.14. who
says By works a man is justified, and not by Faith only; a B^liever is
approved' (quoth T.D. p. 8. out of Diodat. whose words he uses) which
approbation of a Believer in his Faith (as true) is both in himself and before
men, so as they usually say by good works a man's Faith is evidenced to himself
within and others without, to be a true living Faith, and so consequently his
Justification with God to be surely known, which was, but could not be seen or
known to be before.

Rep. Now therefore a word or two to the grant of our Antagonists, that
Justification is before (in Gods sight) but it cannot be known to be by us or
others, nor evidenced to us, so that we can stand as justified ones, or
approved in our own sight and other men's, till we be sanctified and have both
Faith, which is a fruit of the Spirit, and other fruits of the Spirit, which,
if true, that Faith works by, as love, a pure heart, victory over the world,
temperance, peaceableness, gentleness, and such like.

Is it so Friends, that no man can appear to himself to be approved and
justified in Gods sight, nor to himself or others be known that he is so, till
he comes to believe, and do other good works of Righteousness, which first
declare the thing so to be? I wonder then how ye dare talk and affirm that to
be, before good works, which before good works ye confess cannot be known so to
be; will ye ever be in your wills, thoughts, inventions and traditions,
intruding your selves into that ye have not seen, and confess cannot be seen to
be, as you say it is, vainly puffed up in your fleshly minds, and entering into,
and venturing to reveal and vent out Gods secrets, which ye say are secret and
hidden to man, saying they are so and so, before the time you say they are
first revealed to you in? And telling men they are justified before God and
loved, before they do any good, and bidding them believe this for true Doctrine
from you, that it is so, till they come to do good works, and that that is the
only Evidence, whereby you can discern that thing so to be, which yet you say
is so, before either by you or them it is discerned? In his own secret thoughts
(say you) and bosom Councels the thing stands so, that we are justified, but
its not revealed to us to be so, neither can we know it to be so, that we are
justified, but from the time of our bringing forth fruits of Righteousness: Do
not secret things belong to God only, and things that he reveals, when he
reveals them and not before, to you and your children to talk of? Are ye not
like natural bruit beasts in this, that you often speak evil of that truth ye
know not, and often tell that for truth, which is not so, when ye know it not,
and even confess it cannot be known to be, till evidenced by good works, and
yet you will say it is of a truth, before any of those good works by which only
the Evidence of it comes to you, be brought forth in you?

It Is true, there be many things, in esse Rea^^, before they be in esse
cogn^scibili, Real before they be visible (though this Justification of yours
before Sanctification in Gods sight, which ye yield is before Sanctification,
but Sanctification before it in your own sight, and in the sight of all men is
not one of those invisible Realities, but (if may so say) an apparent, Real,
visible non entity rather, and fancy of your own brain; but what things soever
are in truth, to us they are not so, as that we in truth, and of a truth can
say, so or so they are, till the time that we come to see them, and that come
forth, which is the only Evidence, which we come to see them by; and he that
p^ates of that thing, as being so or so, which to him is not yet known so to
be, is a buisie body, whose tongue runs before his wit, his lips before the
light that would lead him out of darkness, and his thoughts not a little
outrun and out-reach his Reason. Tum demum, apud nos, res dicuntur fieri, cum
incip unt patefieri, to us things are only as they appear, so that whoever
perks up and prates of what he knows not, and of matters that yet to him are
not, which work (which is that of the Priests in many things) he that shall
count him that is in it a wise man, shall by my consent be canonized a fool for
his labor. Justification in Gods sight of a sinner is, say the Priests, before
any Sanctification is at all in him, but neither the sinner can know that there
is any such matter as pardon of his sin, or that he stands just in Gods sight
appears not at all to himself, not yet is it evident to us, who tell him it is
so, neither can we know it any more then he, till Sanctification appear in him,
from which as that which goes before it, ever in our eyes, we come to the sight
^f it: yet if he will believe us (who speak of a thing we know not, and talk we
know not what) and if he will take our words for it, that his Justification is
before he be Sanctified (who have no other Evidence of it our selves, or
whereby to make it Evident to him but this of his Sanctification, which is
evermore that which goes before the other, for ought we see or can discern, and
if he will trust us implicitly at a venture he may (but if he will not (say I)
he may safely chu^e.

And as to that speech of thine out of Dioda^us, I dare say it was not a Deo
datus concerning good works justifying a man declaratively, and serving in
James's sense to approve a Believe in the sight of men, for there is not Truth
in it, if meant so only and exclusively of their use to Justify formally, and
absolve a sinner in the sight of God (as it must be, if it serve that turn at
all to which thou usest it) yea, I contrarily affirm (yet not denying, but that
they do decla^e before men the Faith of him, that professes to believe in
Christ to be true, and not hypocritical) that they also tend as well as that
true Faith they flow from, to justify formally, and absolve sinners in the
sight of God. And though Paul Romans 3.27. concludes that a man is justified by
Faith before God without the deeds of the Law; yet he never concluded as you
cloudy Expositors of him conclude of his words, which ye wrest, beside his
Right, to your wrong meanings, any such ma^^er as that a man is justified
before God without the good works of the Gospel, between which of Christ's in
his Saints, and those of the Law, which are men's own done without Christ of
themselves, ye never distinguishing, run so far into confusion as ye do: which
deeds of the Law done in man's own thoughts, willings and run^ings, and not in
the Light and Spirit of Christ the Power of God, never reach the thing that is
run after (that is) the fulfill^ng of it, without which there is no life, for
the Law requires brick but affords ^o (...), good works but it gives no
strength to weak man in the flesh, and fa^ wherewith to perform; ^o the Letter
only kills, and only the Spirit giv^s the Life; So both Paul and James, and
we, as much as Diodate and T. D. do, for ever shut out them; yea, and so much
more, then any of you, do we deny the deeds of the Law (so done) as to the
doing us any good toward our absolution before God, by how much we do both in
our Life and Doctrine establish only the deeds of the Gospel, while you, who
doctrinally exclude the Laws deeds, do yet practically establish them to your
Justification; for howbeit in words ye establish Faith, as that by which ye
stand justified formally before God, yet that faith ye act, who believe God
accepts your persons and perf^^mances without his Righteousness inherent in
your selves, and while ye are yet impurged, and not so much as believing you
can or must be here purged from your sins, is far from the true Faith of the
Gospel, being no other then the false faith or true fancy of those, who were of
Moses and the Law, that trusted in lying words, that could not profit them,
Jer. 7. Isa. 1. Isa. 58.3. who thought God did them wrong, if he justified and
accepted them not in their fastings and services, though they never fasted from
their iniquities, nor loosed the bands of wicdedness, as if when they had been
at their formal humiliations for a day, they had procured some dispensation to
let Hell loose again, and were then delivered to do abomination; this kind of
barren, leafy lean-faith of yours, who look for life in it, is one of those
deeds of theirs, who were of the Letter and Law, and not that of them, who are
of the Gospel Faith, which formally justifies before God, which who are of, are
blessed with faithful Abraham.

But now as to the Faith and other good works of the Gospel, which all are the
works of God himself, and Christ Jesus working them in his Saints, among which
Faith in the Light is the first, from whence others come, without which they
cannot be, any more then it can be true without them, and by the Name of which
Faith, for as much as all follow it, all the rest are denominated in gr^ss,
John 6. This is The work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent,
these are the Righteousness of Christ and of his Saints, which is One, the
being of which in them and in him, and not their being in him and not in them,
is counted by God to them as their Righteousness, nor does the Faith without
them any more then they without it, both which concur as one cause thereunto,
obtain formal Justification in the sight of God. So that there is a doing some;
and sometimes the same (material) good, which deserves no good nor acceptance,
but rather evil and reprobation from God, being not good formally, but evil
before him, while the same, that does material evil also, does that good: and
such was Cains sacrifice, which was else as good as Abels, yet had noacceptance
by Right as the other had, because sin lay still at the door, and 'twas not the
Righteous one, but the evil-doer that did the good, and the sinner whom we know
God hears not, who had he done as been as it was b^num that he did, and
offered it as well as the thing of^ered was good, had been justified as well as
his Brother; If thou do well (laith God) shall thou not be accepted? Again
there is a doing good, which deserves no Ill nor Cond^mnation, but only Good
and Justification before God, being both bonum and b^ne factum also materially
good and formally well done, and that, de jure promissi at least, entit^es to
an entrance into the Kingdom: and such are all the good works done, on the
Gospels account, in the Faith and Power of Christ the Light, and in the leading
of the Holy Spirit, whether Faith it self, or Lov^, or any other that follow
these, which are not of our selves, but by way of gift and grace from God, and
strength from Christ received by us, who are weak in our selves, the fulfilling
of the Righteousness of the Law, which is all fulfilled in this word, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, for love works no ill to his Neighbor,
therefore is Love the fulfilling of the Law, Gal. 5.14. Romans 13.8, 9, 10. and
this is the Royal Law that gives Liberty from the lust to envy, or any other
evil, that keeps from stealing, and killing, and adulte^y, and from falling in
one point as well as in another, of which James says, if ye fulfill it, as by
the Letter none are, but by the Light and Spirit, which lead into the Love, the
Saints are enabled to do, ye do well, Jam 8.2. and what is well done, is twice
done; and so is every little that is done in faithfulness according to the
measure of the gift received, as from and unto Christ, and lets in (so far)
into the Lords acceptance, Matthew. 25.23. Well done good and faithful Servant
(was said on the improvement of two talents, as well as five) thou have been
faithful in a few things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord: This is that
love which, when Cains wrath does not, works the Righteousness of God, Jam.
1.26. in the doing of which by Christ's Power in our selves, and not by his
doing it without us in himself, who not as without us, but as within us is the
Justification from the sin, and so the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. he is made in
us the Righteousness of God, and we the Righteousness of God in him.

And his Light within, which leads all that in a cross to the lust follow him
in it, to this Royal Life of love, is that Royal and perfect Law of Liberty,
every degree of obedience to which is perfect, as it self is, and not imperfect
as all that of those is, who are of the Law, and not of Faith; and as thou T.D.
imperfectly and weakly wottest this is, for though, as to the Law, Bonum non
oritur nisi ex integris causis, yet I say of true Evangelial obedience, none of
which is imperfect, for its Christ's in us, Bonum oritur ex qu^libet actu, as
well as Malum ex quolibet defectu: and howbeit any one or more good works (as
thou say p. 14, 15.) is not a fulfilling of the Law, done as Paul in his
blind zeal did them before he knew Christ, while he served in the oldness of
the Letter, and not in the newness of the Spirit: for then all the bonum he
did, did but break the Law, being done not been, and so what ere he did in any
print, he was still guil^y of all, and in that na^^re he did it in, it was but
Cains sacrifice, which was in the Reprobation, the Tree not yet being good: yet
he that does and teaches the least of Christ's Commandments given out in the
Light, fulfils so far, that he so far enters by Right into, and shall be so far
great in the Kingdom of Heaven; in the observing and obeying of which Law only
Justification, acceptance and approvement comes, as an effect of it, in the
sight of God as well as in the sight of men; and so James will be found
affirming, though thy senseless self can not (looking in the Letter without
the Light) well see his sense; which Law or Light who so looks into, and
continues in the doing of what is there shown, this man shall be blessed
(Mark) in his deed, even with the blessedness described by David Psalm. 32.1, 2.
and by Paul Romans 4.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. which is, forgiveness of iniquity,
covering of sin, and non-imputation of it, which comes on all ( circumcision
and uncircumcision) tha^ ^elieve, without difference, Romans 3.2. as it came on
faithful Abraham, whose Faith, with those works James speaks of Iam. 2.21.
which were the fruits of it, were not one without the other, but altogether (for
they were Christ the Image of God, his operations in him, which thou also
say p. 23. are called Christ) accounted or reckoned to him as his
Righteousness as well in foro Dei as hominum: for hereby (says God) know I
thou love me, because thou have not witheld thy Son; and again (Mark) because
thou have done this surely Blessing, I will bless thee, etc. as also it was
said by Christ of Mary, Her many sins are forgiven her, for this cause, Because
she loved much: (...), Cujus gratia propter quod, see Arias Mountanus: so Mark
19. If thou^ wilt enter into Life, follow me, and we have forsaken all and
followed thee (says Peter to Christ) What shall we have therefore? Ye shall
sit on Thrones, says Christ, and everyone, etc. so 2 Thes^^. 6, 7, 10. that ye
may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer, seeing
it is a Righteous thing (Mark) with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled Rest with us, because our Testimony
was believed among you: here Faith and sufferings are made the cause upon which
by Right deservedly, and in Righteousness Rest is to be expected, as a debt by
promise, though Phil. 1.29. they are the gift of God to us, and not simply our
Own works, to you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer for his
sake.

T.D. Does not the Apostle oppose Faith and Works? Faith is opposed to it self
as a work in the business of Justification. p. 24. 1. Pamph.

Rep. Faith is neither opposed (as thou frivolouily supposest) good works to
the Gospel, nor yet to it self as a work in the business of Justification, but
both it self and all the good works, that are done only in it, which together
with it are the gift of God to us in Christ Jesus, who is ths Author; Worker
and Finisher of them, in us, are altogether as the one good work or
Righteousness of God and Christ in the Gospel, by which we stand justified
before them, opposed to man's mere Righteousness and works of the Law, by which
no flesh living can be justified; and though Paul when he says to him that
works is the ^eward not reckoned of grace, but of debt, but to him that
works not but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his Faith is
counted to him for Righteousness, does ^ppose Faith and our works, the Gospel
and the Law, which is not of Faith; yet when thou look with clearer eyes,
who can now see with no better then thou have, thou will see that he no where
opposes grace and Gospel good works, ^aith and the works of Christ in us, Faith
and the fruits of the Spirit, of which Faith is one, much less (as thou
fai^est) Faith, and it self as a work, but joy^s all these in One, as God and
Christ's single and singular gift of grace to us under the Gospel, as that one
perfect and personal Righteousness by which, as a cause thereof, we are made
meet or worthy to be justified in his fight, by which works and that of Faith
together with them justifying us as a work, as well as an Instrument to receive
Christ and his other operations wrought in us by it, all b^^sting (as blind as
thou art, not to see it) is Eternally excluded, forasmuch as both it and the
rest are a gift, as well as works given to us by him to perfo^m, For which the
glory belongs only to the giver and not to the receiver at any hand.

T. D. thou say as p. 25. 1. Pamph. the Scriptures attribute our
Justification to the Righteousness of Christ in the same sense that they deny
it in to works.

Rep. That Is true, if by the Righteousness of Christ thou intend the
Righteousness of his working in us, and by works those works of our working
without him, but utterly false, if by his Righteousness thou mean what he works
without us, and by works what works we work only in him, for the Scripture
attributes Our Justification to this latter, as to the former it attributes his
Own, of both which he beinh the only Author, not unto us (O Lord) not unto us
at all, but to thy Name only be the pra^se; who do not (as thy supposed
Ministers suppose merely that thou do, but far be it from thee so to do;
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do Right?) First count men just that are
unjust, in this world, and not make them so till the World to come, but first
justify the ungodly from their ungodliness and make them Godly, and then
countest them to be such as thou have made them.

But awake O ye divine Diviners, and see what a dream you are in, who deeming
the Lord to be no other then like your selves, imagine your selves as pure in
his, as you are in your own eyes, though ye are not yet washed from all your
filthiness, nor yet believe you need be so in this present world; whereas he
that condemns the Just, and be that justifies the wicked in his wickedness
(and I crow God is not an Abomination to himself) both these are an Abomination
to the Lord.

And hence is one ground of your so miserable a mistake, in that ye take (as ye
confess your selves) Justification in its mere foreign, and not in its near
and proper signification (viz.) a counting, and not a making of them just, who
are not so, whereas Iustifica^e and Iustificari is Iustum facere and Iustum
fieri to make and to be made just, properly and p^imarily, and then
consequently and secondarily to think and to be thought so; but you fleeing
afar off in this and many more points from proper names into foreign
acceptations, that ye may be as far as may be from such Truths as most torment
you, will needs (in this world at least) have the words to justify and be
justified, sanctify and be sanctified, to import and found forth no more then
injust^m and improbum justum, and Sanctum putare, and putari, and justificare,
and sanctificare, and ri, in no wise to be Ex injusto, and improbo justum, and
sanctum facere, and fieri; as if in this life God having somewhat else to do,
could not well have while to make people Just and Holy; and therefore (they
being also well contended so to be left) did agree to leave them to the liberty
of their lusts, under some certain toleration to live in them, and yet to think
them Just and Holy in the mean while, notwithstanding, and then hereafter, when
men are more willing to it, and himself a little better and more at leisure to
do it, to make them Just and Holy by some P^pisb Purgatory in the life to come.

But Friends, have a care however of what you do in this case, which is of no
less then Eternal Consequence to your immortal Souls; for assuredly let Paul
and James himself, Iam. 2. determine it if you will (whose sense T.D. thinks he
has (...) on his hand) yet you will find it so that ye can be no further
justified then ye are sanctified in the sight of either God, or men that are
after the heart of God: yea, if a man say he has Faith, and have not works,
can Faith save him? Can it profit him? Is it not dead? Yea, know thou not O
vain man, that as the body without the Spirit is dead, and can do nothing, so
Faith without works is dead also, Is it not made perfect by works? Was not
Abraham and others justified by works? See ye not then that by works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only? Yea, quoth T.D. approved by men, but not
absolved and accepted of God by works. Rep. then let Paul speak, Rom.14.17,18.
The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Spirit, he that
in these things seereth Christ, is acceptable to God (thereupon surely) as well
as approved of men.

Though therefore ye dream pleasantly while ye are awake and bless your selves,
saying, Aha I am warm, I have seen the fire, because in the Letter, where ye
read by the halves, singling out of it what best suits with, and serves your
sinful desires, and leaving out what serves to the crossing of your carnal
lust, and corrupt affections, you have been flashily and more shalowly, then
solidly, read of a Declaration of a Righteousness and good works of another,
even Christ, whereby only men can possibly come to be saved, never heeding at
all that this Righteousness of that other is to be wrought in the Saints by
him, who wrought it first in his own Person, before ever they can be justified
by it, and their Salvation truly wrought out by it, which we confess is to be
wrought out by it alone, and not by any that is merely man's own; yet when ye
come to see what a mere painted Paradise ye have been led into by that false
flash of your justifying Faith, without works concurrent, which is but the
fruit of your affectionate fancy, which would fain have it so, that you might
be saved by Christ, and yet serve your selves, you will find that you and your
whissling faith have in all this been but as Ig^is fa^^^^^ going before, and
Ignoramus fa^^^^^ following after.

And though (to Ring back a little to you here to the Tune of F.Os. Talk,
Mutaris murandis) about this matter of Atonement with God by the blood of
Christ, p. 125,126,127,128. of his English Pamph. Ye King a Requiem to your
Souls, saying with him Luke 12. Soul thou have been disqu^eted, perplexed, and
entangled about these considerations (as all men are more or less; without
exception) how thou may be Reconciled and at Peace with God, or have an
attonment for that guilt, which (Super) naturally, thou art sensible of, and
how thou may attain to true blessedness, and come to the enjoyment of God;
and thou have miserably groped up and down in the dark, not able to ^^me to any
satisfaction what will become of thee in time to come, and no way able to stand
against the uncontroleable convictions of thy own self-condemning Conscience:
yet now Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, there is merit enough in
store laid up in the Righteousness that Christ wrought in that single body of
his, that long since lived and died at Jerusalem for the sins of many years
past, present and to come, so that there is no need of any Righteousness to be
wrought (as in order to thy Justification and Peace with God) in that sinful
body of thine own, it must and may safely (fith the Righteousness by which thou
standst justified in thy sins (as T.D. says David did in his murder and
adultery) resides without thee in another person) ^^n as long as it lives: let
the Pop^sh Merit-mongers run, when they have no good works of their own, to
their Treasury of the Saints meritori^us g^^d works, the merit of which they
buy of the Pope for money, and by which they have indulgence and pardon for all
sin, for many years to come, and let the Qua. run to that Righteousness they
talk of, which is to be wrought by Christ in the persons of men, before ere
they can be justified with God, here is that which shall administer to all and
every one of us satisfaction as to all these things as Plenipotentiary to the
quieting and calming of our spirits, and cut off any further enquiries, after
such a thing as Goodness, Righteousness, Holiness, though that of Christ's own
working (as the Qua. say) in our selves in order to our peace with God; here is
that that gives us wherein to acquiesce, and wherein we will be satiated (viz,)
The Doctrine of the Scripture, which gives as glorious incontroleable a
conviction of Peace with God by Christ's Righteousness without us (not within
us, as the Qua. prate) as that Light in our Consciences they tell us of, gives
uncontroleable convictions of our sins: there its revealed (to those, say I,
the eyes of who^e understanding are blinded by the God of this world) that its
Christ without, and not Christ in us (or else the Devil and his Doctors are
blind, say I) which is the h^pe of glory, and upon which we are looked on as no
Repro^ates: So that O Soul, I would not have thee to cry out of wrath and woe,
nor sing to thy self of Judgment, but of mercy to the Lord, do thou sing: yea,
I must needs cry out (...) I have found an easy broad way to Life, by applying
the good of another to my self as mine, as truly as if it were in me inherent,
so that I need not turmoil myself as some do, and as the Qua. who cant believe
that what Christ has is theirs till they see it conveyed and derived from him,
by way of participation to themselves: We can believe that all that Christ has
is ours, though all that we have is our own, and need not be forsaken for his
sake: I have found that without me, which in vain, the Qua. seek elsewhere, as
within them, waxing foolish in their Imaginations viz. the business of
att^nement reconciliation and acceptance with God, which they are contriving to
find by Christ within them, to the producing of such horrible effects and
fruits, as tedious doing good and enduring evil for their Tenets as we are
loath to expose our selves to^^ What have they not done? What have they not
suffered? What miseries extitusque infelices, have not the Qua. pulled upon
themselves, ubivis gentium quo impelluntur Fanatici; by their faith and
doctrines of Devils, (so I.O. of Qua. doctrines Ex. 3. S. 35.36. and T.D. and
T. Rumsey of perfect holiness in this life) let them meditate terror and
dream of dread and bring themselves into Bondage, we will cast these
troublesome things far away from our thoughts, though we do sin, and he that
commits sin is the servant of sin (as they tell us) yet whatever bondage we are
in, to sin, we will not be under the spirit of bondage so far as to fear wrath,
or dread any danger so long as with such a glorious soul appeasing light (which
say I, is the Devil transformed into an Angel of light in you) the doctrine of
satisfaction and atonement by the blood of Christ, the Son of God comes in
upon us. This is, that that astonisheth us another way, so that we cannot be
astonished nor afraid of any amazement about the matter of our our sins this
conquereth all the Qua^^^s of conscience this ravisheth and satiateth our
souls, that though we may, yea must sin while we li^e, yet they have been
already reckond for with one that is Our Righteousness without us, though his
Image is not formd, nor his righteousness wrought in our selves. This is the
designed of the Apostles discourse to the Romans to prove justification by
faith without works of ours by Christ's righteousness imputed to us as ours to
justification before it be infu^ed to our sanctification (when the Devil is
blind say I) Oh with what glory and beauty (to them that see so much, as we do
in the worlds glory and the lust thereof) with what full and ample satisfaction
this Doctrine breaks out, this is that we looked for, this is that we were sick
for want of the knowledge of (being wounded by the light of God in our
consciences for our sins and withal in such love to them, as to be loath to
leave them or depart from them) viz. to bear of a way or Savior whereby to be
saved in them, and that we have now found and though we once c^yed out (...),
and were at our wits ends feeling our selves sinking to hell yet this Christ
(without us, without whom we also are feeling neither him us nor our selves in
him) this and not in the imaginary Christ of the Qua. within them is the stone,
by which we will stay our minds in as perfect peace, as we can, by putting away
the sense of sin, and the evil day far from us: Ex. 2. S. 28. Dicat quod quis
que volet ex hac opinionem non dimovebimur.

Though I say these things are in truth, the sum and substance of your sayings,
the very Image, proportion, lively pourtraiture of your dead faith; which ye
count living, and saving, and justifying and what not? Yet as the Lord lives
you will find it dead, even thou I.O.T.D. and your fellows, as well as we have
done, who were as high in that supposed saving faith, but real fancy, as your
selves, and your selves utterly undone before the Lord for all that, when he
comes to enter into judgment with you, as he has with his own House, the Qua.
where the Judgment in these days has begun: Therefore be ye warned, who seem
to sit warm by this your fantastical faith and imaginary painted fire, for
whatever ye think, and how ever ye bless and flatter your selves, with hopes
of true bliss^ and blessedness in this way, wherein ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, which are true, but that ye understand them not, nor yet the power
of the wrath of God; Yet this is but your Own righteousness all this while (1)
though real, as in Christ, yet of your own faining to your selves, as yours,
and yet not your own neither, so as that ye shall ever be saved by it, till ye
come to put it on and be clothed with it, in your own persons: Its but a fire
of your own composing with wood and hey and stubble, and sticks, and straws;
that crackles in your conceits like that of thorns under a Pot, that will soon
flap down, and not last longer then such flashy fuel as your fancies seed it
with: its not the joy of the righteous which the strangers, intermedle not
with, which burns sure and sollidly and the more when cold water is thrown upon
it.

Yea from the Lord God, I say to you all, as it was said of old to such as
trusted in the name of the Lord without his ^^ture, behold all you that kindle
a fire, and compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your
fire and in the sparks which ye have kindled, but this shall you have at last
from the hand of the Lord, ye shall ly down in sorrow.

And though in your pleasant trance, you sweetly sleep it our every one within
your Tents, as in a Pavillion, and snort it our every one to another that your
iniquityes are hid and your sins (who declare your sin as Sodom, and hide it
not) are covered, and the Lord impares, them not, though ye are far from them,
in whose hearts there is no guide, as if ye were those hidden ones of God, that
he himself sees no sin in, because its by Christ's blood (really and not
imaginarily) washed away: and though you Canonize your selves into the
compellation of the Saints while in your sins, and then sooth up and comfort
one another under that Title with smooth words, yet I^a. 29.7.8. As a dream of
a night vision, wherein an hungry, and thirsty man dreameth he eats and
drinks, but behold he awaketh and is empty, and faint, and his soul has
apptite so shall all the maltitude of those mere ^imaginers and Image-makers be
^^yea, as in a dream, when one awaketh so when the Lord awakes to visit you
((...) do^ing dreamers) he will assuredly despise your Image, Psalm. 73. Yet T.
D. sowes soft pillowes under the Armholes of his fellow Sainted-up-sinners,
least they should (...) under the unsupportable burden of their wounded
Spirits, when the light begins to show them to themselves, and judgment to
take hold on them, and their own sins to slave them in the face; Saying that a
man once justified cannot become unjustified again in the sight of God, and
what the Saints do, he heeds it not, so as to mention it to the Saints; and
would have the Saint by all means not be so senseless, as not to hold the
sense of his present interest in Gods favor and pure presence, though at
present under the same sins, which God behold as Paul y iniquity in another,
but as petty infir^^^^^ only in him, because he takes pleasure (...) in his
(sinning) (...), witness David, who (quoth T.D. p. 38) when he was guilty
(mark) of Adultery and Murder was not in a condemmed state but in a justified
estate, in proof of which I have said more, says T.D. to R.H. then this man or
any of his brethren can answer; in vindication whereof also when was urged and
proved against him that David was then, and long after condemned in his own
conscience Psalm. ^^. 4. and therefore could not stand justified before God, who
is greater then our hearts, and must (if they do) much more condemn us, ^ John
3.20.

T. D. Replies ( most unanswerably indeed; to what one might expect from one
that says no Qua, can answer what he says) all this, which is (...): ^^ It
does not appear to me that David was at this time (mark) unjustified in his
own conscience, but the contrary; i.e. justified for he spoke those words,
Psalm. 5^.4. That thou might^st be justified when thou speak and clear when
thou judge after Nathan had come to him and told him that the Lord had put
away his sin.

Rep. Which coming of Nathan T.D. was then told (but that he was so absurd as
not to hear) and hereby in told again, was after the Child was born, and not
while the adultery and murder was committed, which words of Nathan the Lord has
put away thy sin being spoken not till David had confessed to him that he had
sinned against the Lord, which was not till many Months after his vile sinning,
do evidently evince it to any that's not wilfully blind, that for many Months
his sin was not put away, but remained on the File, and that the Lord did not
hold him guiltless, nor the light in his own conscience neither till he had
truly repented from his sins.

Yet least any poor Saint like sinful soul should sink down, while he lies in
the sordid sink thereof, under sin and the sense of the loss of his interest
in Gods love, since he is so deriled that he may easily suppose himself to
stink in the in his sight. T.D. who has not one in all his Apothecaries Shop
(for ought I find) to save the soul of a Saint from sinning, has another
Antidote at hand, whereby to strengthen the hands, and save the soul of the
sinning Saint from sinking so low, as to believe God loves or likes him, ere
the less, when he has done: Yea, he is never without his Cordialls and Pills,
to purg the head and heart from all sense of judgment, that that evil day may
be put a far off and the Saints he past feeling of wrath, when they sin, and so
be more secure in commission of it; but Pills to purge from the sin it self;
he is so far from vending, that by his good will, he would have none of them
licensed to be vented by the Qua. in the Country where he has to do: Or if any
course be taken to purge men throwly by calling them to perfect holiness in
this life, he takes to contrary a course to keep the men unpurg'd, as to mount
against those, as against some cheating Mount banks, as delivering no better
then the doctrine of Devils, and to make men believe (that are such infidells
in Christ as to give credit to T.D.) that it is not possible to attain to such a
purging as this in the body, no not by the very All-healing herb of grace it
self.

His Antidote to preserve the Saints from too deep a sense of their sins, is
this, whereas the Qua, tell them, that if the light in their own consciences
accuse, and condemn them from the face of God for sinning, there is no God nor
Christ that holds them guiltless, since that of God within is his witness and
vicegerent, that what it says and judges in them, is as the voice of God
himself, and if that create trouble, man cannot create solid Peace.

Tush (quoth T.D for to the same purpose he talks though not in totidem verbis
p. 19.) what tell you us of Conscience; conscience is often erroneous, and not
rightly guided in the very Saint. Talk of conscience to the wicked, its office
is to be a witness against them for their sins, which if it do not check them,
but tell them God loves, justifies and accepts them, when they sin, its
defiled, 1 Tit. 15. and leads them into a wrong opinion of their estates in
that it testifies that their estate is good when its nothing less, for to the
impure is nothing pure; but unto the pure all things are pure, and when the
Saints sin and are defiled thereby, the office of conscience (as a witness) in
them, if it do its office, is to clear and comfort and speak peace, and if it
offer to trouble them when they fall throw infirmity into fowl enormity, and
dare be so bold as to darken their evidence of Gods love, and of their
justification in his sight, when they are guilty (as David was once of things
not fit to be named among Saints) yet I dare be so bold as to say it is defiled
in the Saints, and testifies falsehood to them also, in saying that their estate
is bad when (for all their sins) it is good no less then it tells lies to the
wicked, that their estate is good when its nothing less.

Thus we have the unconquerable and that uncontrolable comfort which T. D.
Administers to the Saints, when they become sinners, and fall into the same
folly and filth with other wicked men, who is very a Boanerges or Son of
thunder as he is in a few slight words, more th^n the same solid power with
Peter and John to the wicked; yet to the Saints (of his own coining) is he
another Barrabas or Son of Consolation; I mean not another of the same with
him, who confirmed the Saints in their goodness and grace, but another of
another kind, that comforts, confirms and chears up his sinful Saints in
their sins, and dawbs them over, who are dirty enough already (if such he
Saints, as he says are) with his own more dirty doings, who would have them
live as justified in Gods sight, and as uncondemned in themselves as Saints,
whilst ore head and ears in their sins.

But will all this hold T.D.? little did I once think ever to have seen such a
dish of doctrine drawn by a divine from Tit. 1. 15. though unto the pure all
things are pure, was wont the same way to be wrested by the Ranters; and for my
own part had I been minded to look for such a licenti^us piece of Libertinisme,
as he would learn men from thence (as I am far from it, knowing that in maxima
liberate, there is minima licentia) yet I should sooner have looked for a needle
in a bottle of hey, as they say, then have looked for the like from thence, or
have scrap't in that Scripture to find it, if T.D. had not told me, it had been
there; where yet (for all his telling me of a justification of a Saint in his
sins) I cannot yet find or see such a thing, nor any else I (believe) but such
as are as blind as himself: for the light in the conscience of both good and
bad, does tell them infallibly what they are, and testify to the face of the
best man in the world, that God does not justify him while he sins; which
witness of God within their own hearts is greater then the witness of man,
and will have audience at last, when it begins to speak out, when such a one
as I, may easily be slighted, who witness only for God from it, and therefore
I shall say but little more to this matter; nevertheless when T.D. and his
un^ust justified ones, come once to feel it stand upon its feet, which like an
innocent, just, h^ly Lamb, has been hitherto slain by the beast within them,
because it torments them with telling too much truth, great fear will then fall
on such as see it, and have made merry over it in its captivity, and at the
same time, there will be a great Earthquake, and lightnings, and voices, and
terrible thunderings, and great hail out of heaven, the Plague whereof shall be
exceeding great, every stone perhaps about the weight of a Talent, Rev. II.
Rev. 16. the storm of which shall overthrow their open hiding places and sweep
away their refuge of lies, and disanull the Covenant, which these D unkards of
Ephraim have made with death and hell, and pass over them like an overflowing
scourge, so that they shall be all trodden down by it: Judgment also shall be
laid unto the line, and righteousness to the plummet, Isa. 28. To take a more
exact account of them before God, then they are willing to give of themselves,
who now not knowing the goodness and grace of God within them, which in his
love, as a light, is given to teach, and to lead them unto Repentance, Tit. 3.
13. Romans 2. 4. to 13. Are in the hardness and impenitency of their hearts
treasuring up wrath to themselves against the day of wrath and the Revelation
of the righteous Judgment of God, wh^ in the day when he shall judge the
secrets of men, by Christ Jesus the Light according to the Gospel, that Paul
himself preached, will (mark) in his righteous Judgment Render to every man
according to his deeds, (viz.) to them, who by patient continuance in well
doing seek for glory, honor and immortality, eternal life: Yea, glory,
honor, and peace to every soul of man (mark) that works good: But unto them,
that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every one that does evil
without respect of persons, yet the Jew first, who say they are Jews, and are
not, but do lie, and are the Synagogue of Satan, and also to the Gentile; then
shall they know that such as sin, whether without the law, or in the Law in the
Letter, shall be judged respectively; by that letter such as have it, and all
by that light in the conscience, by which all are a Law to themselves, and that
it is not the Hearers, and Preachers, and Praters against the Laws justifying,
but the doers of the Law only by the power of Christ, which only does it,
shall be justified.

Three or four more of T. D.'s. (in comparison of what we might expect from him
in satisfaction) most unanswerable answers to such Arguments, as were urged by
us in proof of Justification by the Spirit of life and grace of Christ in us,
and by his fulfilling the Law in us, throw the condemnation of sin both in, and
clear out of our flesh, and by our walking not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, as a cause that gives Right and Title to it, I shall speak a little to,
and then dismiss T.D. as to this point, till I meet him again in other
matters, about which he joins in with J. Owen, with whom I must come to join
again too by and by, about the Scripture and the light, and some other things,
least he thinks I am lost in this long bout with T.D. So as to be run quite
away and never mean to come at him any more.

The 4. Scriptures alleged and out of which it was argued in proof of the
point above said were I Cor. 6. II. Romans 8. 2. Romans 8. 4. Tit. 3. 7.

To the Is It., And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
santified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and BY the Spi^t
of our God, whence it is to be observed that the Corinthians are said to be
justified BY the Spirit.

T.D. Replies I might say that perhaps that Clause should be referred to
sanctification, which is in a more appropriate manner attribu^ed to the Spirits
efficiency, as if the words had been, but ye are sanctified by the Spirit of
our God; and he gives his instance for the transposition from Math. 7. 6. give
not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast your Pearls before Swine, least
they trample them under their feet and turn again and rent you, where turn
again and rent you, is to be joined to the dogs (quoth T.D.) for as Swine do
trample under their feet, so dogs do ^ly upon a man, or tear him down, or else
justified by the Spirit, may be meant of the Spirits application, I mean (quoth
he) the 3d. person is the Trinity, not of the work of grace whereof we are the
Subject.

Rep. To all which I Reply thus Is It. let the Reader observe how T.D. dances
between two, and serves the turn of truth against I.O. who blames the Qua. and
others for denying the Text of Scripture to be such a certain, immovable,
stable, (...), Standard, Touchstone, of all truth as he contends it to be, and
for calling it a Nose of wax, not infassible, because flexible to every man's
fancy, while the said TD. by his twining it, which way he finds will fit him
best, proves it so to be, no less then practically, to our hands, yea, quid
verbis opus est, cum facta loquuntur, does not T.D. make a very Nose of wax, a
Lesbian Rule a mere piece of lead of the letter, a Reeling Rule, in unstedfast
standard, when he plucks it to pieces as he pleases, and makes many meanings of
it, and then out of them, still takes that that best takes with him, and makes
most for his own penurious purpose, for sometimes he turns one Text into two
senses, and when he has twatled one Text into two senses, and is so betwatled
in himself, as not to know which of the twain to betake himself certainly to as
the Spirits, says it must be either the one or the other, or it may be either this
or, that thrusting out the third, be it nere so plain and obvious, if it clear
the Qua. cause when indeed ( exclusively of the Qua which is most right and
true) its neither this or that, nor the one nor the other; witness the Text in
hand; sometimes again gives three senses to one Text, witness Ioh. I. 9. to
which position of Christ, that true Lights enlightening every man that comes
into the world, he puts three (viz.) p. 6. 1. Every man that is enlightened; 2.
Some of every Nation, and 3. p. 36. Everyman who is (spiritually) enlightened to
which three I.O. who joins with T.D. in one of his three, saying everyman is
not spoken absolutely of all, and every man, but with Relation only to the
Elect, whom he is graciously pleased to enlighten, being not contented with
that one single simple sense, doubles his Files, and adds a fourth sense more
nonsensicall then all the rest, which as senselessely he serves from that
Scripture phrase as it is in the Greek (viz.) not as the Qua. speak Christ
enlightens every man coming into the World, but thus the true light coming into
the World, enlightens every man, making the participle (...) to agree with
(...) and not with (...), which (but that, considering the order and placing of
the words in the Greek, its far more clear that way wherein its construed by
the Qua. considering its Analogy (as so) with the whole scope of the Scripture
also) might with more color, then now it is, be wrested the wrong way, as it
is by I.O. and be construed as c^ookedly as it is by him; but as much as he
hopes to overtop the truth with standing upon the double construction of a
Greek Term; yet he cannot, by all his taking so much thought about it, add one
Cubit, nor yet an irch to the Stature of his (...) talk from that Scripture,
but rather pulls him self a pegg or two lower, if (though yet we will not) we
should grant him his will in his own way, as to his double cause both about the
letter, and against the light: For if the Original Text may be so doubtful as
to be truly construed two ways in one phrase, or place; How fit such a flexible
thing is to be counted the only stable and infailible guide, as he pleads it
to be to meet fallible men, a more foolish wise man, and silly Scribe, then
I.O. is, cannot but se^: And as to the true Lights enlightening every man, which
he impleads thereby, what gets he, if we grant him his own improper exposition?
for whether we read the true Light enlightens every man coming in the to world,
or the true Light coming into the world enlightens every man it amounts to one
and same still, and both are Tanta mount to no less then what the Qua. stand
for, and I.O. and T.D. against (viz.) that the true light, which is come into
the World, Joh. 3. does enlighten every man that comes into it.

So here is more then a good many (viz.) 3 by T.D. and 2 by I.O. whereof one is
of the 3, and the other a fourth beast diverse (like the fourth in Daniel 7. 7.)
from all his fellows, that is to say between them both. 4 meanings in all, made
of one Text, which 4 mean all together to exclude the Quakers fifth, as an odd
one, though the only true one, that without mincing and pinching in the mind
of the Spirit is there intended in the Text by the Spirit, in which it was
written; for though their senses are some of them true enough to serve out
turn, yet (as they mean) not so fully as the Spirits true one; in proof of the
truth of which, when we, who are of the light, and of the day, and so needing
no proof of it to our selves, its so clear, do tell them, who are of the night
and darkness, that our meaning is drawn from the import of the Phrases, and
ours is the very meaning of the Word, as the Letter of them does import, and
ours is the most genuine interpretation of the Words, as they are taken in the
most Ordinary and literal sense of them, and that their meanings are far
fetch^, Foreign and every way improper; T.D. wipes away all this with a wet
finger, and though himself I know not how often argues ad libitum, which way he
will, and none must control him, yet me mutire nefas, we must be tied to take
such a sense as is imposed on us: As for him he argues sometimes from the
figurative and me^onimicall as p. 22. Christ is said (quoth he) to be in us by
a metonymy of the cause for the effect: so p. 44. holiness of that state of
the Resurrection is called perfect by a metonymy of the Subject for the adjunct;
sometimes from the foreign and more unusual, yea improper; sometimes from the
most ordinary, usua^l, genuine and proper signification of the words, sometimes
from (as he says at least, but falsely) the literal sense and import of the
phrases as p. 4. As for the Phrase ( in your hearts) it imports the same (quoth
he) with that, etc. And p. 5. when the Kingdom of God is Luke 17. 21. by Christ
and his, said to be in the Pharisees that expression may import (quoth he) that
the Kingdom which they upon a mistake did look for without them, was indeed a
Kingdom within them, and that (say I) is very true, T.D. himself has there
imported the very truth for the expression (in you) imports the Kingdoms not
being whi^hout them in the outward observation, wherein they looked for it, but
really within them, as he said, indeed: nevertheless T.D. who is like his
Father, that ab^de not in the truth, cannot abide (when he happens to be in it)
to be long in it neither, and is never well till he is out of it again;
therefore when by hap hazard, he had uttered the truth from the right imp^rt of
the Phrase (in you) cannot rest till he has changed his mind, and to his first
and true, has added another 2d and false meaning (so mightily is he enamoured
with many meanings and senses) and therefore adds another as false as his
first was true from another import of the same expression, as wrong as his
first was right: Thus, To which I shall add (quoth he) that upon 2d thoughts
(secondae cogitationes are mostly meliores, but are (I must not say maliores,
for that were false Latin, though true in English to him that can English it)
but long pepres in this place) I judge the most genuine interpretation to be
(...) among you, so the Preposition may be rendered in which last import of
T.D. the case is so altered from what it was before, that is stead of that one
truth (could he have kept to it) he uttered before, he has now uttered more
errors, and falsities, and absurdities then one, for if the Proposition i^ may
be rendered among, and so (...) may possibly sometimes (as, if ever, it seldom
does) import among you, yet first it is not usual nor ordinary, much less its
primary, proper, literal, nor (as T.D. calls it) its most genuine, but a most
unusual, foreign, secondary, illiteral, ingenuine and improper import; and 2.
in very deed, if T.D. will vouchsafe that Scripture, Luke 17.22. a Review, he
may come to return to his first judgment, which he past in truth (viz.) that
the Kingdom was indeed within them, and upon his second looks to Judge as
Right, as he went from, the Right to Judge amiss upon his second thoughts, for
what ever (...) may improperly import, yet in the Greek it is (...), which
imports not among you, and can properly import no other sense then truly and
properly within you: in in opere long obrepsit somnus, as I.O. says, and since
Non Divinum, but Humanum est errare, Aliquando bonus dortat Homerus: But
however there is two meanings to that one Scripture (as T.D. says) it may
import so, or it may import so; so that the Reader of T. D. may take his
choice, and read his inalterably Reeling-Rule of the Scribes wrested Scripture
which way he will, and not let it Rule him, but Rule over him as he lists.

Thus these two men T.D. and I.O. impose as many meanings, according to their
own minds, which are not the same that was in Christ, as they see good on the
Scriptures, and in stead of Reconciling them, and letting people (to whom T.D.
says, They seem to be at va^iance among themselves) see how well they are
agreed, and in stead of causing them like the Cherubims, to face one another,
which T.D. says p.4.36. is his dury and part of their work, they set them at
variance, by their several senses on them, and pervert them by their Perhaps's,
per adventures and pratings against the Phrases most proper, and for and about
their own improper imports, saying perhaps its so, or else perhaps so, the
Expression may import so, but upon the second thoughts I Judge rather (for it
may be s^^rendred) the most genuine interpretation is so, the meaning is not so
as the Ph^ase imports, it must be either so, or else so, or else so, or else
so; as who should say, we will have it any way, rather then the Qua. shall have it
theirs; and cause it to face three or four ways at once, if never a one of
them be right, and altogether against within, where the only true way is,
which ways the Cherubims always locked, with their faces only inward: and
they make to it not only many meanings, but any meanings, though never so
uncouth, and contrary to truth, sense and reason, so they may but wave off and
wind away from the right true meaning and mind of Christ, Luke 17.22. The
Kingdom in you is not without, but indeed within you; and yet upon second
thoughts quoth T.D. it is not in you, but among you, p. 5. and Rom.8.4. The
Righteousness of the Law said to be fulfilled in us, imports not in our
persons, but in Christ; p.17. and Omnes, everyman is not every man, but of
every sort some, Omnes is not all, but here and there one; p.6. so see I.O.
Exer.4. Sect. 24. Hoc est Syncategorema istud Omnis, the world, whole world,
John 3. 16. I John 2. 2,3. not the whole world, nor the most of it, but the
Elect only, that are out of it, not of it but a few in it, as T.D. at the
Dispute; so that on this soore our Scribes escape Scot-free still by their
shifts.

To meet with Quakers Priests need never doubt,
Nor need they when they meet them f^ar a Rout;
If (All)'s but (Some) (Out)'s (In) and (In)'s for (Out)
Then they are Always (In) and never (Out)
Thus the seed of the Serpent saves it self alive in its enmity against the
Holy Seed, not so much by plain down right dealing, nor any bold open facings
of the truth, quae non quaerit argulos, but by cowa^dly creeping into corners,
shameful sh^frings from sense to sense, mi^^rable marchings from meaning to
meaning, ^o that one can hardly know well where to have them, nor how to find
them, nor what they mean, any more then they, who know not which way to take,
when they have two or three before them of their own devising, nor very well
what to mean, nor very distinctly what they do mean themselves.

But as for us, Nos mutire nefas, we may not safely without their censures, so
much as take the Scripture to be what themselves are neither afraid nor ashamed
to make them; (viz.) a Lesb^an Rule, a N^se of Wax, which may be made (yet
scarcely is by any more then themselves) to show it self in 7, 8, 9, shapes at
once. And though they dare Di^pute themselves and argue any way from figurative
and f^^a^gn, and proper and improper, literal or mystical meanings and
importments of words and Phrases, yet they can well digest or di^pense with
none of all this in us, and least of all when we do (as we mostly or ever do)
keep to the ^rue, hon^st, ordinary and plain purport of the words, as they lve
open and clear to every ordinary and common capacity that is willing both to
know, own and do the truth, but rather will take any, and if one will not
serve, two mean^^gs at once, or one after another, whereof one overturns
t'^ther, to cross the truest by, and leave the Reader to choose, which best
likes him of two or three, so be he will leave that single one of the Qua,
witness T.D. who takes on him to domineer over all our truly Divine ones, with
his different, dev^sed and divided ones; who, when R.H. puts that one true one,
even the same that is expressed in the words on 1 John 9. Puts two meanings to
oppose it, adding p. 35. I would have him to know that both the meanings are
the Holy Ghosts, though but one is intended in that place, the Ph^ases will
bear either senses (that is) those aforesaid, and either of them c^^ss his
interpretation; and p. 6. the meaning of those words John 1.9. cannot be as the
l^^tter of them does import, but it must be either every man that is
enlightened, or else some of every Nation: and p. 7. It was usual with Christ to
speak words of a doubtful sense, Christ's meaning may be mistaken, when his
words are taken in the most ordinary and literal sense, and so it would be if
by every man we should understand every individual man; so that it is your self
(quoth he to G.W.) and not I that am such a giver of meanings, as the Jews,
who gave theirs contrary to Christ's meaning: and p. II. when to prove perfect
purging from sin, here I urged Psalm. 119. 1,2,3. Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, etc. They do no iniquity, as for the Phrases (quoth T.D.) they are
hyperbolical; thus any T.Y is used to turn the Truth off with: and p. 9. when
R.H. urged 1 John 3.9. Who so is born of God does not commit sin; That cannot
be meant of freedom from sin, but either there is an Emphasis in the word sin,
intending by it one sort of sin; Or, if not on the Substantive, on the Verb
(...), which notes to make a Trade of sin: So p.16. to the Scripture under
hand, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ye are justified by the Spirit of our God, urged by us to
prove Justification by the Spirit in us. I might say (quoth T.D.) Perhaps that
clause should be referred to Sanctification, or else justified by the Spirit,
maybe meant of the Spirits Application, which is as much as to say, Perhaps its
this, perhaps its that, but I well know not, whether this or that: so that the
Reader may of two take either, But will (say I) is wise, take ^e^ber; for
though two strings to his Bow still T.D. has, for fear one should snap, yet
neither of the^e here will hold on T.Ds. side so much as Ours, nor if both
could be twined so as to stand together in one (as they cannot, they are so
diverse and destructive to each other) would they prove strong enough to reach
the Butt, so but that by his overshort shooting T.D. at this time will loose
all he shoots for.

For first to begin next with thy last clause, wherein thou dare, or at least
do Preach out thy meaning not positively, but possibly only, or by Perhaps,
as in the first, that justified by the Spirit, may be mea^t of the Spirits
Application, meaning the third Person in the Trinity (as thou Term'st it) which
Phrase of justified by the Spirit, if it may imply such a thing as the Holy
Spirits Applying Christ's Righteousness to us, yet must it needs imply such a
far-from, Antic Applying, as thou implyest, who falsely imaginest that to be
truly Applied to men, that stands at such a vast distance, as to be no nearer
to them then Heaven is to Earth?

If the Spirit of God Apply Righteousness to any man for his Justification,
does he do it by the halves, as thou vainly hopest, so as to impute it, where
he does not convey it? Does he not do it in a more perfect manner then so, as
to give him his share, part or place in it, without its having its share, part
or any place at all in him? Is it false doctrine, as thy self p. 39. Rela^est
R.H. Relating thou said it was, to say a man must first partake of the
Righteousness which justifies, before it can be imputed to him as his? And that
is that a man's Righteousness any otherwise then Imaginarily? is it so truly,
properly and perfectly, that he partakes no more, and has no more partin, nor
participation of then merely by way of computation and supposition only, so as
to be counted to him to the steading of him, till it be some way or other also
actually and really conveyed to him? And grant we be justified by the
Righteousness of another only, and not our own (yea cur^ed for ever be and
will be that man (say I) that looks for Iust^fication by any Righteousness that
is merely his own) Eccl. 7. 15. for the righteousest man, that is only in his
own, perishes in his Righteousness, and I have seen such a one as well as
Paul, he that ever comes to Gods Righteousness, Rest or Sabbath, has left and
lost his own Righteousness, has ceased from his own works, as God did from
his, Isa. 58. 13. Hab. 4. 10. yet is there not a Righteousness which man lives
in the doing of, that is done in the assistance of another? Did David not say,
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me? Is there not a Just man that walks
in his integrity, and that lives in the doing of the Equity? Ezekiel. 18. Can
there be (as thou falsely and lyingly, boldly and blindly say there cannot p.
40.) no way of conveyance of that others Righteousness, so that thereby the
benefit of it may redound unto us, as truly as if we were every way the
Subjects of it, but by imputation? Can it at no hand be conveyed from that
other to us by impartition first, and then by imputation to us, as most truly,
really Ours, and not fictitiously only, afterward? Can we by no means be
truly said to be the Subject inhesive of it, and yet it be said to be not Our
own properly, but only another Righteousness, working it in us? Is there not
a Subjectum in quo, which yet is not P^r qu^d, as well as a Subjectum cui? A
Subjectum Inhaesionis duplex (viz.) secundum formalem inhaerentiam
Originaliter, and primario, and secundum formalem inherentiam derivative, and
secundari^, as well as Secundum extrinsecam adhaerentiam and imputationem: a
Subject in which the Righteousness of Christ is wrought (viz.) man, which is
not (save as an Instrument) he by whom it is wrought, but a vessel (as it were)
in which it is Revealed and Received, into which through Faith in the Light,
which is the gift of God, and a part the^eof (also) it is in part conveyed
before it is imputed, unto which said Subject, but as thereinto it is conveyed,
it cannot possibly be imputed, from him that calls no evil ones good, more the
good ones evil, more the good ones evil, and unrighteous ones Righteous, the
pure only pure, and all that is impure impure, nor shows himself in any shape
(save as a Judge) to any, but the pure in heart, and the inhaerent Subjects of
his own Holiness, without which none can see him approving? Must not both he
that justifies, and they that are justified, as well as he that sanctifies,
and they that are sanctified, be all of one, Heb. 7. 11. be all as one, in one
na^u, reimage, ga^b and cha^hing, that so he may not be ashamed to call them
Brethren, who will b^ ashamed of all that are ashamed of him and of his words,
Mark. 8.38. and is ashamed to call them Brethren, who are not ashamed to be
Brethren in iniquity? Can that be accounted and reputed by that Most Holy Head,
a part or member of his unspotted Body, that is yet filthy and unholy, or
before he has in any measure at all purged it, and made it ho^y and fit for
himself, that is yet full of spots, and wrinkles, and blemishes, as upon thy
Principles T. D. must be supposed? Will God esteem any just, clean and pure
before, I say before so much as in order of nature he has justified them by
his Spirit? will he before he has washed and sanctified them? Has any
unrighteous one, while he is yet unrighteous, and before he be made Righteous,
a Right to the Kingdom of God? Is it not more then is to be read in any
Scripture, but the Scripture of the Scribes, that from the example of David
would fain be found justified, and favored of God, for the sake of another
goodness, that they put far away from them, that they might be more free to,
then from their sins? Are there not yet treasures, treasuries of wickedness in
the house in the heart of the wicked, and the measure of leanness, which is
abominable? and shall I count them pure with their wicked Balances (faith God)
and with the bag of deceitful weights? Mic. 6.10, 11.

T.D. Yes (quoth T.D.) Why not? For the Purity and Righteousness of another
that was made sin for us, though he knew no sin, that we who yet know no
Righteousness of our own, nor of his neither within our selves, might be made
the Righteousness of God in him: from that Scripture 2 Cor. 5.

Rep. T.D. then be like accounts that we are but just so, and not a jot
otherwise, then as he was made sin for us, made the Righteousness of God in
him; and so as he was made sin, that never committed any sin, and was accounted
a sinner, that never was so by either nature or practice in his own person, had
though the Realty of our sorrows, sufferings and miseries, but the mere
imputation of our iniquities; so we must in him be made Righteousness, but
never perform any, and be accounted Righteous, but never be so by nature or
practice in our own persons, and have the Reality of his Rest, Peace, I^^es and
Eternal Blessedness, but the mere imputation only of his Holiness and
Obedience, and as God laid, lasht and punished on that innocent immaculate Lamb
without spot, that never owned nor delighted in any, but ever hated all
iniquity, the iniquity of us all, seeing he was willing to become a curse for
us all, to bear our cross and take our shame upon him, so he will put upon such
Saints all, as T.D. calls himself and others, while in their sins, as never
owned nor delighted in, but ever hatred the doing of Righteousness altogether
in their own persons, the reward of all his personal Righteousness, seeing also
they are as willing as as he was to be accu^sed for them, to be blessed in him,
to bear his Crown, and take all his dignities and glory upon themselves; for
the words of T.D. are these ( p. 21.)

T.D. How he is our Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. ult. tells us, as Christ was made
sin for us, so we are made the Righteousness of God in him; but the former was
by imputation, not inhaerence, and therefore so the other.

Rep. How now T.D. what is it so indeed, even so and not otherwise, that as
Christ was made sin for us, which was, secundumte, by imputation only, never
inherence, so we are made Righteousness (i.e.) by imputation only, never by
inherence? Art thou not a loud liar in this? If not, then farewell all hopes of
ever having any Righteousness at all in themselves, to those blessed ones that
hunger and thirst after it, not only in this world, where such are to be
filled, but also i^ that World which is to come; and as for such as hating
Righteousness, are in hopes to be held Righteousness, and saved without it, and
by that alone which is in Christ without them, they need not fear so much as
they do its entrance so far into them, as to have Dominions over them, for if
his word be worth taking T.D. warrants them, that as Christ never entered into
t^a^sgressi^^, though he was tempted to it, nor transgression into him, but it
was only accounted to him, so as to be Rewarded with evil upon him; so God
will never let them come into his Righteousness, nor let it come into them to
trouble them with that tedious transformation of them, from the fashions of
this old world, by the renewing of their minds, into a new Creature, but only
add or leave them to add iniquity unto their iniquity, that when the iniquity
of these sin^ul Saints is at the height, the Rewa^d of Christ's Righteousness
may be given them.

But seeing there is no such haste, nor much need to make mad folks run, who can
find the way fast enough to Hell, whether (facilis discersus A^^rn^) the
descent is easy, and the Devil eager and skilful enough to drive them without
T.D.s doctrine to help him, I shall check the wild A^lies Colt in his course,
which lacks much more to be fetched in with the Spirits Bridle, then forced on
with T.Ds. Anti-Scriptural Spur: in order whereunto I deny the first
Proposition of T. Ds. last Argument, as utterly untrue, for that Scripture 2
Cor. 5. ult. tells us not so (as he faith it tells us) it does not say (as)
Christ was made sin for us (s^) we Righteousness in him, as T.D. Repeats it to
the perverting of it, as by his perverse Readings, Repetitions, Rendings,
Renditions, sundry silly senses, and manifold foolish meaning he perverts many
more: But it faith of God, that he made him sin for us who knew no sin, that we
might be made the Righteousness of God in him; and that is another matter, then
T.D. makes of it; who first writes it down the wrong way, and then wrests it to
a worse end; for if it were truly so (but that Text says not that it is so as
T.D. mis-rehearses it) then to transpose his own words p. 38. as Christ is no
sinner by inhaerent defilement but by imputation only, so his Members must for
ever be no Saints by any inherent holiness or purity, but imputation only; and
as Christ never was the Subject (inhasionis) of what we were such Subjects of
(viz.) sin, lust, filth, envy, hatred, and other works of the flesh, which the
Light condemns, but was accursed for them only, as things done by us and not
him, so we m^st never be such Subjects, as he was of the contrary graces and
fruits of the Spirit, Love, Joy, Meekness Temperance, etc. but must only be
saved for them as things done by him, but never from them to all Eternity, but
remain (as he was in all points of misery, cursedness, affliction, infirmity,
evil and sorrow, tribulation, temptation, like unto us, transgression and sin
only excepted, Heb. 4.15. So) in all points of Mercy, Blessedness, Joy, Peace,
Power, Glory, Rest, good Consolation and Happiness, like unto him, Inherent
Grace, Righteeousness and Holiness only excepted: and so the Body, that is
united to that head, must abide absolutely for ever, as filthy as the head it
self perfectly holy, which is a doctrine as false as falsehood can make it, and
a matter not only Ridiculous and Monstrous to Imagine, but more monstruously
Ridiculous, if that mere Imagination should be true.

Humano capiti cervicom pictor Equinam
Iungere si vellet Risum Teneatis Amici?
And if T. D. (the sum of whole doctrine from the Scripture is this; viz. as
the Just once suffered for the unjust, but was never made inhaerently unjust by
his injustice, so the unjust are saved for the Just ones sake, but must never
be made inhaerently just by his justice) shall yet insist upon it as at all
inferred from that place, I desire him in order to his satisfaction to the
contrary to eye it a little better, as it is in the Greek, and then instead of
Arguing thus (as he falsely does) that As Christ was made sin, So we are made
Righteousness by imputation, not inherence, he may (as I do) find good ground
from thence to Argue thus ( viz.) if Christ was made sin, but by imputation
only, not inherence, and we Righteousness, not by imputation only, but
inherence, then not so ^^ he was made sin for us, are we made the Righteousness
of God in him, but in another manner: But the former is true, therefore the
latter.

In proof of the former, let it be well weighed, how the Apostle when he says,
God made him sin for us, uses the word (...), which is of a far more shallow
and slender signification then that he uses, when he says that we may be made
Righteousness of God in him ( viz.) (...), which is a word of a deeper dye; for
howbeit, they both are rendered by this Term ( Made) in the English Text, yet do
found forth two different sorts of makings, whereof the one is not so Real and
Substantial as the other: for the words (...), though they do signify a true
making sometimes, and may truly be translated fac^o, efficio, and ( passive)
efficior, yet is at most but a making of a more (as I may so say) sleightby,
external and accidental kind then the other, and sometimes such a one as
amounts to no more then a mere accounting or reckoning a matter to be so or so,
as it is thereby said to be made: wereupon they are sometimes rendered not only
in many other secondary sense, as by afficio (...) afficio te malis) also by
causo, pono, propono, Redulo, colloco, sometimes simul, and when one is said to
be made a Child an Heir that is not so born, by adupt^ but used also sometimes
to express existrimo, and to signify the making of a thing no otherwise then
by mere ^ptimation and computa^ion, and so God is said here to make Christ sin
for us, who knew and did no sin, in himself; but the word (...) signifies such
a solid sort of making as gives the thing, not a mere notional and
accountative, but a Real and no less then a true natural being so or so, as it
is thereby denominated to be made; for (if more can be) its more then sio,
factus, sum I am made, even no less then Nascor, gignor, natus, genius, siam, I
am so or so bern, so by birth, so by nature, not by some mere external
fabrication or function, as a dead painted Picture that has the show, shadow
and name, and not the life and being of what it represents, much less by mere
fiction, imagination, or bare empty computation only, but by a Real infusion,
impartition and conveyance of the nature of the efficient itself into the
effect, so that it is according to the measure thereof as (truly inhaerent) and
Resident in the one as in the other; as the nature of the Vine in the branches.
It Is to be observed that when ever we are said to be made anything truly Really
that Christ was, so when ever Christ is said to be made anything, that he,
Really was, it is expressed mostly, if not ever by that Verb (...), when the
Saints are said to be the Sons of God, though adopted, because they were once
degenerated into another seed by Sin, into that favor freely by his gift of
grace, yet to be by that same grace, begotten also back again to himself from
beneath, and born from above of his spirit, renewing them by a washing of
regeneration, John 3.3. 5. (...), Tit 3. 5, (...) (...), John I. 12. (...),
when Christ is said to be made anything for us, or any thing to us, which he
had the reality of for us, and we the Reality of from him respectively, and not
the mere account and imputation of it only, its express by the same Verb or
Root, as John I. 14. (...). The word made flesh and dwells in us, Rom I. 2.
(...), etc. Made of the seed of Abraham, born so, after the fl^^sh; so Gal. 4.
4. (...), (...), (...), Gal. 3. 13. (...) (...), Made of a Woman, made under
the Law, made a curse for us, for he had the Reality of our miseries woe and
cursednesse, but the imputation only of our iniquit^^s, so I Cor. 1. 30.
(...), etc. He was made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Redemption, not accounted so only, for when he is said to be made sin for us,
its spoken by another Verb, implying that his being made sin, is a kind of
making singled off from all the rest, for where he is said be in all points
like to us, sin still is expected, Heb. 7. 15. Heb. 2. 14. For as much as the
Children were partakes of flesh and blood, he took part of the same and where
they were partakers of sin, he took not part with them in that, but only took
part of their sorrows, and took on him to be a curse to Redeem them from it, so
(...) And thus we are here said (...) to be made (i.e.) by a new birth, and not
a bare naked account by the Righteousness of God in Christ; and this is not so
(as T.D. dreams it is) but far otherwise then so as Christ is said to be made
sin which is not (as T.D. truly says) by inhaerent defilement or real
Participation of the Serpents seed, between which and him there is eternal
enmity, nor of that sinful nature and Image, which man was not created in and
after, but contracted to himself by the fall, neither took he upon him that of
Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham: but we who are of Abraham's
Faith, and not of your mere Adamical fancy, are made not computatively only,
but inhaerently Righteous before God in him by a Real Participation of his own
Divine nature, so as whilst bodily in the world, to escape the pollution and
corruption that is in the world through lust, whereby, so far as partaking
thereof as naturally to seek the things of Gods Kingdom, as ye who as yet are
by nature his Children, who has b^gotten you to himself from God, who made you
upright, do take care, by pleading for sins necessary continuance in you here,
to uphold the fleshly glory of the Devils Kingdom.

So that as to that Ridiculous Retort of T.D. to R.H. his Argument, whereby
from the Union between Christ and the Saints, who says, I in them, and they in
me, R.H. concludes that Christ and his Righteousness are in the Saints; and
which T.D. refels foolishly thus, p. 38.

T.D. viz. If that Union makes us to be the Subjects of what Christ is the
Subject, because he is in us, then I hope it will make Christ the Subject of
whatever we are because we are in him, and then Christ is a sinner by inhaerent
defilement.

Rep. I say what ere thou hopest I hope no such matter, and thy self, all whose
hopes are yet but vain, wilt hope another matter then thou do, when thou once
come to hope truly in Christ Jesus: thou hopest it seems at pre^ent, being
loath to part with thy sins, that thou have sufficient Union with Christ to thy
Justification, while thou art the Subject of nothing but sin, and without being
the Subject of him within thee or his Righteousness either, or else it must
follow that he is a sinner, and the Subject of thy sin, because (as thou
hopest) thou art in him; but I tell thee thou has neither part nor portion in
this matter of I in them and they in me to thy Justification before God, nor
ever shall, till thou witness thy self as really born into, and by a new birth
made after his Righteous Image, as thou falsely hopest thou art with God counted
Righteous for his sake before thou feel him, and his Righteous Image Revealed,
wrought, brought forth and formed in thee: and as for thy inference of sins
being in him, because his Saints be in him, drawn from our Asserting his
Righteousness to be in his Saints, because he is in them, its a weak, lam^ and
decrepid deduction, forasmuch as first his being in them and they in him, can
neither of them possibly be any sooner nor any further, then in such time and
measure as the Body of the sins of the ^eth is put off, by his circumcision of
them to himself without hards, that they may be both ^it to dwell in him, in
whom no sinner, while so, has any inheritance or habitation, and fitted for
him to dwell in, being made an holy habitation for him, by his Spirit; for if
any man be in Christ, he is a new creature old things are past away, all things
become new; though ye old creatures, as far as your thoughts can thrust you,
and as far as your mere imagining of your selves to be in him, when ye a^e not,
can let you in, who will, needs be intruding yourselves into him impudently
before your time: And if any man be in Christ Jesus, in whom to them that are
in him there is no condemnation, he must be out of the transgressions, to the
least of which the condemnation is till it be condemned as well away from, as
in his flesh, and must walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; and
again if Christ the Lord come into any man as his Temple, the sinner cannot
abide the day of his coming, nor stand at his appearing, Mal. 3.1.2.3. But the
Refiners fire and the fullers soap passes before him, even the Spirit of
judgment, and burning to purge away the dross and tin throwly and wash away
all the flesh and blood, Isa. 4.4. Yea if ever Christ be in you, the Body is
dead because of sin, the spirit is life, because of righteousness; Romans 8.1.10.
And assuredly both Christ's being in his Saints. and they in him, were neither
of them intended of God to that end, that in such wise as they of
righteousness by him, so he should be the Subject of inherent sin, but both
one and the other to one and the same clean contrary end, and purpose, (viz.)
only, and alone their deliverance in him from the sin in which they could
never be just, or any better then abominable in his sight, but not in any that
they should be saved from the sin, and he by being in them become the Subject
of it in their stead; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
and not he the Image of Satan forever in our Room: so its said, 1 Pet. 3.18.
that Christ once suffered for our sins the just for the unjust, not that he
might bring us to God only and not bring God to us, nor so as to own and count
us holy in our sins, but to bring us to be Gods children by Nature and Image
and not to bring us to be so thought, and yet le^ us like the Devil, much
less to make himself by sin like the Devil; and that this is the only end,
its said, for what the Law could not do in regard it was weak^ through our
flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in our^ flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh (as all sinners and no Saints do)
but after the Spirit, Romans 8.3.4. which is one ( viz.) the 3d of the 4
Scriptures above named, I am under the examination of T.D's. Admirable answers
too, which that I may rid my hands on it while it is in hand, and not need to take
it in hand any more, and also, because his answer to it suits so well with what
I am here saying, not mattering so much order, as to tarry till its turn comes,
I shall take notice of his answer to it, and by a brief Reply, take it out of
the way; as I go: Having said no other of the 3d verse then I myself do, he
grants that the 4 verse imports the end, for which God sent Christ (viz.) that
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled (in us) so far he is right and
runs with me, but then he speedily spoils all again, adding that by that Term
(in us) is meant not in our own persons, but in Christ, his righteousness
imputed to us, as if it had been inherent in our selves: which I told him then
when he uttered it (as he relates) p. 17.18. was his own meaning, but not
Paul's, to which his yes started up against my no, and so it ended for that time.

But a word or two with thee T.D. about it now: Is the sense and meaning of
that Term (in us) (not in us) but (in another) not (in our persons) but (in
Christ?).

I never heard so much in all my days, that I know of, till I had it from
thee, and if thou had not told me so, I should never have believed it, to
have been so, any more then I can believe it now thou do tell me it is so,
and that is (to say the truth) not at all; for if this be so, that when the
spirit of God says (in us) we must understand him as intending (not in us) but
(in some other) I cannot tell where we shall have him, nor how to understand him
distinctly more then one can understand thee, who often speakst on thing and
think another, and have so many meanings for one Scripture sometimes, that
thou know it not which to take for true, nor which of them all to fix upon as
the Spirits, but hangst thy people up in the air, there to hover with thy self
in the Clouds of darkness, till neither thou nor they know well, either where
ye are, or what ye say, nor whereof ye affirm. But surely T. D. though thou
think (as all takers of Gods Covenant into their mouths, that hate to
bereformed and cast his words behind them do) that God is such a one as thy
self, Psalm. 50. and go about to make thy more talked on, then well known
unity in Trinity, a Trinity of vain talkers, and mere mockers of men like thy
self, saying one thing and meaning often another (viz.) that God offers salvation
to all men but intends it only to a few, or at least (by thy own confession)
offers it to more then he intends it, though I believe thy words were as R.H.
rehearses p. 40. and that twast an usual thing with Christ to speak words of a
doubtful sense: So that his meaning may be mistaken (by none but illiterate
Anti-Spiritists say I) when his words are taken in the most ordinary and
literal sense by ( every man) not meaning ( every individual) but ( a very
few) and by ( all) but (some) and that the meaning of the Spirits words Joh. 9.
cannot be as the letter of them does import [ ut prius] p. 6.7. and so here
that by [ in us] they all three mean not [ in our persons] but [ in Christ] and
a deal more of such Hoberdipoise; but let the Father, Word, and Spirit, which
are one, be true in their witness in heaven and every man a liar, that belyes
them as thou do, for there is no such matter, as thou intimately of them,
but the ways and words of wisdom are all plain to him that understands pro.
8. and dark to none but the Children of darkness and parables to none, but
such as seeing see not, therefore must not see the mysteries of the Gospel,
which are revealed to Babes, nor his secrets which are hid to none but such as
fear not him, whose secrets are with those that fear him; Blind Priests and
people hate the light,
Therefore of truth can have no sight.


Else how easily might they see that God, Christ and the Spirit, mean as they
say, and do not mean by [ all] [ but a few] nor by [ in] [ out] nor here by [
in us] [ in another] or [ not in us] and if this may pass for a current answer
to say, God by [ yea] means not [ yea] but [ nay] which he that has his
fingers in the fire, and will not pull them out at the hearing of, it is almost
pity but he should be burnt. This is an easier way to put off truth by, then
the common Creephole of all the Clergy, when they are cronded up into a Corner
[ viz.] in aliquo sensu ita est, in alie sensu non in one sense it is so in
another not, which may serve not T.D. only, who has more senses to one
Scripture then every one has, or he should have, though not enough to serve
his turn, but also the veriest Duncicall Disputant in the World. Yea at this
rates when Paul tells us that if Christ be not in us, we are Reprobates, and
it is Christ in us, only who is the hope of glory; if I were minded not to
admit of such a troublesome guest in my heart; as Christ is to all such
sinner-like Saints, as T.D's. Saints are, I could easily turn him out into the
Stable, as they did of old that could afford him no Room at all in the June and
excuse my self in it well enough too, by telling him in T.D's. distinction,
that by [ in us] Paul means not (in us) but [ in Christ] and so tell Christ he
is (in us) enough to our justification; if he be but in himself.

And as this last sense or senseless meaning of T.D. who says by (in us) is
meant (not in us) but (in another) as also that the righteousness that is in
another i.e. Christ, is in a sense too (as good as ^on-sense) i.e. by
imputation, Ours and (in us) (for that which is fulfilled not in our persons
but in Christ is according to T.D. in that Scripture Romans 8. Said to be
fulfilled (in us) as if it had been inherent in selves).

I say as that distinction of T.D. concerning ( in us) not meant ( in our
persons) but ( in Christ) and by ( in Christ) when fulfilling the
righteousness of the Law is spoken of, Ministers Latitude and liberty enough
to our Ministers, whereby to fence of and save themselves from truth, so it
lends Liberty and license more then enough to their Priestlike people, to save
themselves in their sins; for what will many care what they do themselves, if
the Law be not to be fulfilled in themselves by Christ; but it is enough in
themselves fulfilled to their justification if in Christ for them, and as well
as if it were inhaerent in them: So though the Priests often preach thus viz. he
that made us without our selves will not save us without our selves, yet fith
they to the contradiction of themselves as often unpreach it again, saying he
that made us without our selves, will save us without our selves by another
fulfilling the Law not in us but in himself for us, their people will quickly
cry. hang sorrow and care and of their two self confusing doctrines cleave to
that, that's next to them, easiest and most fitting their turns, and fall a
preaching presently in their works the pleasing things their Priests, who do
docere faciendo faciendo, do preach both in words and deeds he that made us
will save us, and show us mercy without any goodness of our own.

If (in another) (in us) be and ( in us) ( in another) We Will never be good,
good deemd are we in this, in that, ith rather.

So having wiped out by the way, that blot or blurred answer of T.D. to my
Argument from Romans 8.3.4. Seeing his answer to what we urge from Romans 8.2. (The
2d of the 4 Scriptures above said) is as near in kind to it for fillynesse, as
that 2d verse from whence we argue is near in truth to the 3d and 4. He here
make as short a dispatch and round a Reply to that too, now I am about it: Arg.
The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of
sin and death (says Paul) and (say we) the Law of the Spirit that is in Christ
and in the Saints whereby, the Saints are justified, is the same therefore the
work of the Spirit of Christ in us is the cause of our justification.

That place quoth T.D's p. 16. (but I trow not) is much against you for the
Apostle asserts the holiness of man's nature as a work of the Spirit conforming
it to the Law to be the meritorious case of our freedom from sin and death.

Rep. Thus far is son, and not against us, I am well assured, for it is no less
then the very Cardinal truth we plead for against T.D. that the holiness of
our nature as a work of the Spirit conforming it to the Law, is the deserving
cause of justification, for conformity to the Law cannot deserve condemnation
but non-condemnation and so (which is all one) justification: and if this be
not enough on our side, T.D. adds more; let me add (quoth he) p. 17. that the
Law of the Spirit of life here spoken of, is not only the meritorious cause of
our freedom from death, but from the Law of sin or obeying sin as a Law: In all
this I own T.D. whose Answer to my Argument is thus far as answerable, that is,
as yiedling to it as I do desire.

But then T.D. whose manner it is often to give a thing, and take a thing
(which is the Devils gold Ring, as I have heard Children say when I was a
Child) does not in all this give the cause to us so much, but he thinks he gets
it and carries it away from us again, as much in other parts and particulars of
that his parti -- colored answer: But I hope we shall fetch it all again, and
no thank to him for his gifts and grants, since what he gives he would have it
all again if he could tell how, and he thinks he plucks much from us again, 1st
by saying thus ( viz.) mark withal (quoth he) though I grant you the holiness
of man's nature as a work of the Spirit conforming it to the Law, is the
meritorious cause of our freedom from sin and death yet it is not that which is
(in us) but (in Christ) the Law of the Spirit, and so the holiness of man's
nature I and Paul (...) of, is that (in Christ) and not that (in our persons.)

R. To which I Reply thus. 1. What if I should answer T.D. that by ( in Christ)
is not meant ( in Christ's person) but ( in us) (...) eb^tl^^ ^^lionis to serve
him in his own kind, for when we say with P^^^^ (...), 4 that the
righteousness of the Law is by Christ condemning sin in ou^ (...) to be
fulfilled ( in us) he answers us thus that by that Term (in us) is not meant (
in our persons) but (in Christ) I might as well say retro that by (in Christ)
is not meant ( in Christ's person) but (in us) adbomi^^m it holds well enough
till T.D. recants his own odd distinction of the same kind: But as its as
unfound in itself as his is, so T.D. is not yet come to bear it to be done to
by us, as he does to us, and therefore I must sit him to a better answer. 2.
Then I Reply that thought the Law of the Spirit of life be in Christ, yet not
only in him, or exclusively of its being in the Saints, but so as that from
him and from his being in them it consequently, and upon that account is in
them also, for Christ is not in any, as their Righteousness, in whom his
Righteousness and the Spirit of life, that is in him, is not together with him
also; yea though it will not follow as thou fainest from the Saints being in
Christ, who were once sinners to their sins being in Christ together with them
(so the reasons above said, where I told thee that men must leave their sins
behind them and be by Christ divested of them before they can come indeed to be
in Christ, to whom no sinners (while sinners) are or can be united (unless
thou will contradict Paul who faith what Concord between Christ and Belial) yet
if Christ be in Saints, who leaves nothing of his own behind him where ere he
comes, his righteousness, holiness, and spirit of life, is in them also.

But no more of this T. D. confesses it p. 17. ' it is true (quoth he) that the
same Spirit is in Christ and in his Saints, but then he has a double bolt for
all this wherewith to shut us out from justification by that Spirit, in Christ
as in us. 1. The Spirit in us does not conform us to the Law fully (quoth he)
notwitstanding your vain assertion of perfection.

Rep. I never said that the Spirit of Christ in you did conform you fully to
the Law, if when thou say ( conform us) thou meanst your selves; for ye are
farenough from perfection, to whom it seems A vain^assertion, A Doctrine of
Devils, to talk of or reach it, and how should the Spirit conform you to the
Law, who though you have it striving in you and reproving you of sin, yet do in
the stiffnesse and uncircumcis'dnesse of your hearts and ears always quench,
grieve, resist it, refuse to be led by it and will not walk after it; but after
the flesh? But the Saints (and such only are all those that walk after it, and
not after the flesh) it eitheir conforms them to the Law, and that fully too,
or else what does it conform them to? Partly the Law and partly the Lust?
Partly to it self, and partly to the flesh? Does it lead any into any sin,
which is transgression of the Law? Or only out of all sin all such as give up
to be guided by it? If any be at all deformed, it is because they conform to
the flesh, and follow it, and stop the Spirit; but if any conform to the
Spirit, and follow it, it will conform them fully to the Law, and not to the
forms, fashions, foolish fellowships and lusts of the world, but transform them
from all these by the renewing of their minds, and lead them to perfect
holiness in the fear of God, thy vain assertion to the contrary in any wise
norwithstanding.

Thus the 1 st. bolt is broken, but 2ly (quoth he) if the Spirit did conform us
to the Law fully, yet were not that conformity the merit of justification.

Rep. Oh strange! that T.D. should deem there is strength in this to stand out
against us by, which is far weaker then the former: Does the Spirit working
holiness in our natures and persons, not merit justification, which is
non-condemnation? are Christ and his Spirits works of less or worse merit in
one time place and person then another? I judged they had been every where, and
always alike, and of like good desert from the dignity of the person doing
them (or else T.D. lies p. 15. of his 1. Pamp) and especially that their good
works, which are the fulfilling of the Law deserve non-condemnation (1)
justification (or else T.D. lies again in that same page) but since the Spirit
of life, and works of holiness in our nature and persons conforming them fully
to the Law do not (as T.D. p. 15. said before they did from the dignity of
Christ's person) deserve non-condemnation (for their conformity to, it, or
transgression of it merits one thing or other, good or evil; and we use to say
no truly good work deserves evil, more then an evil work merits good) we will
take it for granted that T.D. thinks the Spirits conforming us to the Law
deserves condemnation, and so let it stand that all people may understand the
Blasphemy and Folly of it.

Thus T.D. pulls hard to have his own again, but what he cannot win by force of
false position, heel see if he can beg it back from us in these following
fawning Questions.

I would fain know what or whether precedent holiness in the Saints merits
subsequent holiness; or whether the exercise of what they have, is the
meritorious cause of what they have not or of perfection, especially, if the
Law of sin intends the corruption of nature, as the Law of the spirit of the
life does holiness of nature, I would be instructed how a nature in part
corrupted can deserve total freedom, and I am sure the first work of the
Spirit renewes our nature but in part.

Rep. If I should grant T.D. in the negative all he asks, as he thinks I will
my negative or denying or saying N^ were such answer to his Questions as he
desires; but if I should say yea to all his Que^yes, it dashes him down, and
denies all he would have; and yet I must say yea to most of them if I say the
truth. Therefore T.D. I say yea to some and nay to some: To the 1st I answer
yea, that precedent holiness in the Saints, merits subsequent holiness and to
the ad I answer yea, the exercise of what the Saints have is a meritorious
cause of what yet they have not: And since thou ask what precedent holiness
the Saints exercising of when they have it, deserves subsequent holiness, or
what they have not? I answer all that is the fruit of the Spirit in them, and
the gift of God to them, whether Active or Passive, (if to merit be to be
worthy of a thing by right of promise at least.) 'Twas given to the Saints,
both to believe and suffer Phil. 1. Yet they were worthy of the Kingdom for
which they suffered by beleiving the Testimony of it, and suffering for it, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 'Twas the gift of God by promise to such as fight and overcome to
walk with Christ in white, and the gift of God to the Saints, that they could
sight, and by his strength overcome, yet they shall walk with me in white faith
Christ, for they are worthy. 'Twas Gods gift to do his Commandments, yet for
all that the doing thereof deserves that they yet have not, and without the
doing of which they should not enter by Right, gives right to enter the City
and eat of the Tree of life, Rev. 22.14. Five Talents, and two, and one were
Gods gift, yet as he that did not increase and improve what he had merited at
least the loss of it, so they that exercised the 2 and the 5 merited the
doubling of theirs and by promise had Right, using what they had, and being
faithful in few littles, to many, and to more abundance and to the joy of the
Lord: Much more I might say, but T.D. denies in this the Doctrine of his fellow
Divines, who tell that the improvement of (...) grace (as they call it)
deserves not the gift of special, but the improvement of special grace
deserves more of that still: So that though they deny a meritorious transition
a genere ad genus, from exercising of one kind of grace (say they) men deserve
not another kind, as he that improves riches deserves not righteousness: Yet a
desert (say they) there is, by the exercise of some grace of one kind, of more
of the same kind, as he that is holy deserves more holiness and he that sowes
to the Spirit of life, shall have life everlasting, as he that sowes to the
flesh reaps a crop (as all persons are to do suitable to their seed) of more
corruption: And if purchase may be granted to be meritorious of what is
purchased, he that uses a lower ministration (1) the Office of a Deacon well,
purchases to himself (says Paul,1 Timothy.3.) A good degree and great boldness in
the faith in Christ Jesus, and he that will entertain holiness, and Christ
when he knocks to come in, deserves to have the Devil and uncleanness driven
out by him, whose work it is to destroy the works of the Devil, and the very
end of his coming into the World; as till a man does, he deserves the Devil
should dwell in him still, as he must do, and not Christ, because (...)
existens proh betalienum.

And as to the last Query about which T.D. would be instructed (as I see he had
need) I say no corrupt nature deserves total freedom, but the holy nature,
which is in bondage to the corrupt nature (which is the enmity, and to be
slain, and never reconciled, for it is the Devils) that deserves to be freed
from the other, that usurps over it, as Esau did over Jacob a while, the heir
of all, and as the seed of the woman deserves to be delivered from the
enslaving seed of the Serpent.

And as for the Spirits renewing our nature but in part at (...) that's true but
every part of that renewed nature is perfect and perfectly renewed in a
measure, and not partly renewed and partly corrupted as I showed T.D. above,
every part of that, which in its nature is perfect, being truly perfect as the
whole is.

So having totally taken away two of T.D's. miserable mistaking answers to two
of the 4 above named Scriptures, whence we disputed with him, the justification
of Saints by the gracious works of Christ, and his Spirit in them, and not
those in Christ's Person only, it matters not much, now I am gone abroad from
following the first I began upon fully to an end, if I fall upon that in Tit.
3.7. and make as quick a Riddance of his graceless answer to that, and th^n I
shall have no more to do but go to an end with that in I Cor. 6.11. which I am
a little digres't from proceeding in for a while, and with that I shall make an
end for altogether as to this time with T.D. about the way of our justification
by the holiness, righteouscesse, and grace of Christ as inhaerent in us.

Our Argument is much what the same, yet somewhat stronger then T.D. relates it
p. 24. (viz.) that the grace of eternal life, being that grace which ver. 5.
(though opposed to the works of righteousness, which we work of ourselves
without the Spirit) yet is the same that's otherwise called washing of
regeneration and the renewing of the holy spirit, it follows that we are
justified by the washing of Regeneration and Spirit of Christ within renewing
us.

To this T. D. saying (in word) I am much mistaken (in deed) mistakes himself
much more in his semi-demi answering thus (viz.) that grace there is meant not
of Sanctification, but of the savor of God, which is manifest in the donation
of his Son to us, imputation of his Righteousness and acceptance of us, as
Righteous in him.

Rep. What a mess of graceless grace is here of T.D's making, here is grace
with a witness, almost all manner of grace mentioned as material, and of
moment in the matter of justification, but one, which is of so much use that
all the rest are in a manner useless till it come in, and which makes all the
rest grace so that (to say no more then then truth) they are no grace to us
before it or without it; and that (viz.) Sanctification while others are
included, is only and alone excluded: Poor Sanctification, its set aside, its
thrust out still from entering the lines of Communication among its fellows. T.
D. stands against the door so that, if he may Rule the Roast, men shall be in
favor with God and (contrary to what Divines commonly say, when they say, as
they do all, that Sanctification manifests Justification and the favor of God)
have it manifested too, in the donation of his Son to them, the imputation of
his righteousness and acceptance of them as righteous in him, and so
consequently, a Title to the inheritance, the Kingdom, Glory, and all the good
that heaven affords to all eternity; but washing Regeneration, Sanctification,
Renovation by the Spirit, Sanctification and Sa^vation from the sins, which
sins deserve the wrath, the curse and the condemnation, which Salvation from
the sins (alias) Sanctification must be before any well grounded hope of
escaping the codemnation, curse and wrath to come can be had, this latter sort
of grace is shut out for a wrangler by the wrangling contenders against the
truth, who had rather obey unrighteousness then it, and their lusts then him,
they call their Lord and Savior, and must be none of the ingredients among the
company of causes of men's acceptance with God, and being accounted Righeous by
him, but if they be not Righteous and Holy, must be counted to be so, without
it, and, if they be so, must be counted so by that which resides in another
person, by which till it come into themselves, they are not made so, and
without it, by the being of which, as in themselves and not as in another, they
can only (...) be truly made and really become Righteous and Holy: and so that
grace, which mainly, if not only (as it is a gift) gives the proper name and
nature of grace to all the other grace, may say of it self, cum nemo extru di
potest itur ad me, when none ought to be excluded as not meant, where every
grace God is mentioned in the Gospel, I only am left out alone, and they seek
my life also.

But Go too T.D. thou must not have thy wicked will in this wise against Gods,
about this thy so bold a bolting out of this grace of Sanctificatin from
concomitating and concurring together with faith (which is but a part of it,
the whole Series of the particular graces of which general grace of
Sanctification are all fruits of the Spirit) in the matter of our being counted
just in the sight of God: But as blindly buisy as thou art to tell us in a far
other sense then Paul does, that if it be of grace then not of works and if of
works, not of grace, yet I must tell thee that albeit it be of grace, and, as
Paul says truly, Romans 11. and in this 3. Tit. 5. not of works of
Righteousness which we work in our own wills, wisdom, and strength in
obedience to the Law, without Christ and the Spirit, who only can conform us
to it, and fulfill it in us, otherwise grace indeed is no more grace, but it
being of grace, that kind of work is no more work. Yet it is not so of grace as
that the fruits of the Spirit, Sanctification, Washing, Renewing, and the works
of Christ in us are excluded, otherwise Christ's own works (absit blasphemia)
are no more works, and of no such force and worth (as thou blushest not to
blaspheme so as to say they are not p. 17.) as to merit justification. Yea so
necessarily is it of such good works as are wrought in us by Christ, that
otherwise grace it self were no more grace; for what grace is that of being so
or so, so long as we are not in truth so as we are accounted? to be accounted
justified, accounted accepted with God, and accounted his Children, heirs of
his Kingdom, Righteous, Holy, saved from our sins (which whiles they abide the
wrath of God abides, and condemnation, and cursing hangs over the head of the
Subjects thereof) and yet not really to be so, as none are, and as (nemine
contradicente) without all contradiction none can know themselves to be, till
Sanctification, which is the evidence for heaven, and that which to us and all
men shows our Title to all the foresaid Privileges and Prerogatives, does
appear upon us: I say, what grace is all this? What Salvation from sin whiles
sin remains? What Redemption from the and curse the effects of sin while sin
the cause thereof rests on us unremoved? all this faith of the favor of God is
but fiction this hope of heaven, but vain, groundless, heartlesse, and
frustraneous, this divination of T.D. a mere dream of a hungry thirsty man,
that dreams he eats and drinks, but as its said before, his soul is empty, and
when he awakes, behold its another matter: Oh but (quoth T.D. the Spirit of God
the 3d person in the Trinity, he does apply the righteousness of Christ to us
to our justification and so we are justified perhaps (say you Qua. what you
will) and not upon account of Sanctification of us, by his work grace of in our
hearts and so that phrase justified by the Spirit, which ye insist so much on,
1 Con. 6.11. may be meant of the Spirits application.

Rep. Mark Reader (for having run throw the other 3. I return now to the 1st.
of the 4. Scriptures that we urged from, and T.D. answers so lamely to) T.D.
says perhapse its meant of the Spirits application to which I say, 'twere
better for T.D's. cause if it might be so meant, but for one reason I shall
show, it may not, must not, cannot, unless T.D. means a nigher kind of
Application, then I am sure he does, for if by justified by the Spirit be there
meant of the Spirits outward Application only or imputation of Christ's
Righteousness without us to our justifying before God, then the work of the
Spirits washing and sanctifying us also must be meant of the Spirits outwa^d
Application only and mere imputation of the cleanness and holiness of Christ
to us for our washing and Sanctification, for Paul says the same of them, they
all hang on one string and must run the same way and be taken in the same sense
relating all to that one Author thereof the Spir^^: Such (viz.) Drunkards,
Effeminate, Adulterers, etc. Were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified by the Spirit of our God: so if one (1)
justification be by external application only, then the other (viz.) our
washing and sanctifying is but by such an empty application, and outward
Imagina^y account and imputation only and not by the inward Holy operations of
the Spirit.

And indeed all your grace is one part of it as well as another by such outward
Application, and mere Computation only, and not by any true Real internal
Application of Christ's Righteousness, sufferings, and blood to your Souls and
Consciences, to the purging of them from dead works to the true serving of the
living God, your Justification is by imputation and outward Application, your
Washings, Regenerations, Sanctifications, Holinesses, Renovations, and all ye
have is by such a mere Imputation and Application of what is far off you in
Christ's person to your selves, so that what ever he is in whom is no sin, you
will deem and dream that God deems you so to be, upon nothing but a mere blind
confidence and conceit, that swimmes in your brain that it is so, when it is no
such thing, God knows: and so as one, that being at the North of Scotland
hungry and naked, should in his thoughts only apply a garment or a mess of
meat to himself, that is as far off him as the South of England, must needs
perish for want on it, if it be brought and applied no nearer to him, then so;
so you in all your Applications of Christ, and what ever is in him, who is as
far off as Heaven, whilst you are but on earth, far enough from thence, the
Lord knows, must necessarily faint, famish, perish, pine and starve, till ye
come to witness Christ and the Robes of his Righteousness and Holiness within
your selves, and eat his flesh, and drink his blood, and put him on a little
more effectually then ye do, by all your dead faith, and your eatings and
drinkings of bread and wine, for all your imagined Spirits, applyings and
imputings, by which, that the whole world, which does already, may and you
together with it lie still in wickedness, ye are ever dispelling and disputing
all true inherent h^liness out of door^: And so being but in a mere Aerie talk,
and vain thought of things, that ye are in them when ye are out of them, and
not doers your selves of what ye hear Christ has done for you before, as an
ensample, that ye should by his Power in the leadings of his Light and Spirit
do the same, ye do, but deceive your own Souls: and, as both Paul and James,
who both agree and we with them against you in this, do truly tell you, as
Righteous and Religi^us as ye seem to be to your selves and each to other, all
your Religion is but va^n, and your hopes that ye are this and that in the
account of God, that ye are Just and Pure, when really ye are nothing so, will
prove abortive, and as that of the hypocrite, when the Lord takes away his
Soul, no other then the giving up the Ghost: for Gal. 6.3,4. if any man think
himself to be something, and that he is thought of God, for that holiness which
is in another without him, to be something when he is nothing, and witnesses
neither that other, nor his holiness within himself, he deceives himself: but
let every man prove his own work, and what he does by the Spirit of Christ
within himself of the Will of God, and then shall he have Rejoicing with in
himself alone or at least als^, and not in another Person without him only,
and he that glories, will gl^^y in the Lord, Christ in him the hope of glory,
in the Lord in himself, in whom the Seed of Israel finds Righteousness and
strength, and Salvation from the sin, is Justified and shall glory, I a. 45.
21, 22, 23, 24, 25. or not every one that commends himself as Justified by
Christ, will appear approved at last, but he whom the Lord commends, which is
no man of sin that I know of, which David himself stood condemed in, 2 Cor. 10,
17, 18.

So having snaptasunder one of the two strings to his Bow by which T. D. strove
to shoot back to us that Arrow and Shast, which was sharp in his, and in the
heart of all the enemies to justification by the Spirit of grace and life
within us, from 1 Cor. 6.11. which pretended to no great strength it self,
being a string made but of a mere may be, or perhaps for justified by the
Spirit (if not otherwise) may be meant (quoth he) of the Spirits Application; I
come to try the strength of his other string, which is patcht up of no better
then such a poor piece of Toe too, as peradventure or perhaps; for when we say
with Paul in the Text the Saints are washed, sanctified and justified all one
and the same way (viz.) in the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of God
and his grace and holy operations in us, T. D. who confesses he chose to
out-word us (see his Epistle) and is never to seek for something or other to
say, though his aliquid is ever nihil, says thus. I might say that perhaps the
clause should be referred to Sanctification, which is in a more appropriate
manner attributed to the Spirits efficiency, as if the Order of the words had
been but ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our God.

Rep. Then it seems justification must go look its efficient somewhere else
and must have no share with washing and sanctification in the Spirits holy
workings in the Saints: it must be in the Name of God only, and the other only
by the Spirit, as if the Name and Spirit of God were such Heterogeneous
matters, that what is done by one cant be said to be done by the other, and as if
Paul had mistook himself in the placing of his words, and had been by the
infallible Spirit misguided, misplacing of them so, that when he should have
said ye are justified only in the Name of the Lord, and only washed and
sanctified by the Spirit of God, confusedly crowds these effects all under one
cause, and says ye are not only washed and sanctified but ye are justified
also in the name of the Lord, and by the Spirit of our God.

I do not wonder thou purst in this with perhaps only, for had thou
absolutely affirmed it for a positive truth, thou had of a truth lied thy
self into a very laughing stock to the lowest capacity in the Country, by thy
talk of so transcendently untrue a transposition. T. D. But such traspositions
are not without instance in the Scripture (quoth T.D.) as Math. 7.6. give not
that which is holy to Dogs nor cast ye your Pearls before Swine least they
trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent, where turn again and
rent you is joined to the Dogs (quoth he) for as Swine ds trample under their
feet, so Dogs do fly upon a man and tear him down.

Rep. We know well enough its the property of Dogs and I Swine to turn and
tea^, and ^rample, when Pearls and holy things are held out to them, having
paid pretty well for the experimental learning of it we have, since we began
to tell the precious Truth, and hold out such a holy thing as inhaerent
holiness is, to such an unholy seed as your selves are ^ but I am yet to learn
that these these ill qualities of turning, tearing, trampling, do not all 3.
jointly agree to both or either of these Creatures, severally considered, yea
all of them as much to one as to the other: For as Dogs turn and tear, so do
Swine, and as Swine trample under their feet what they tear, so do Dogs, or
else the Scripture, which is very unlike to T. D's. Scripture about it, is in
this case utterly unlike it self; for it tells us of the Gentiles, which in
oppsition to the children are called the Dogs Math. 15.24. which are without
the holy City, or any Right to enter there Rev. 22.14.15. (Though in their
anger and envy canina utentes facundia they grin like a Dog and go round about
it, Psalm. to whom yet the outward Court of the Temple external forms,
worships, observations, ordinances and name of Christians is given) that they
tread or trample the holy City under feet, Rev. 11.1.2.

No marveil therefore the Cat winkt when both her eyes were out, and that T.D.
durst not speak his mind out positively, nor point blank neither one way nor
another, in answer to our Argument from that Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.11. but only
by perha^^es; Seeing he was so blinded by it that he saw nothing what to return
directly and downrightly to it: and since he puts it off to us with no more
force then perhaps it is so, or perhaps so, as he says it is, though I have
said much more for satisfactions sake to such as seek the truth, yet to such as
seek nothing more then how they may cavil against it, and turn it off from
taking hold on either their own hearts or the hearts of others, I need do no
more then put it all back upon T. D. again with per-haps it is so or so; as I
say it is against him, it being a general general received Maxim among all
Schoolmen that an argument, that flies in ones face with no more force then
forte ita, requires to be no more forcibly refel'd then with forte non. Yea
forte ita semper sat been solvitur per forte non.

Thus I have at last made a clear end with T. D. as to this matter of
justification, having to the undeceiving of such as by his misty makings out of
our meanings in it, have much mistaken me and the Qua. as Po^ish about it,
showed plainly which way we hold it, and how it is, according to the Scripture,
of grace and not of works (1) our works properly and only so called, and yet
not of grace only but of works also (1) such as Christ and his Spirit only
works only in us: which the Spirit in a sense subordinate to himself, who is
the master-workman, to whom only and Gods grace in freely giving us such an
alsufficicent Assistant to do his will the glory of all belongs is pleased,
also, but more sparingly, to entitle by the the Term of Ours Isa. 26.

So that had it been as true, as [if T.D. and his witnesses together with him,
p. 58. be to be credited before himself alone] it is false that I disputed
justification in those Terms of (by our good works) as he says p. 14. yet if by
our works we speak of those that God, Christ and the Spirit work in us, it can
in no wise follow from thence, any more, then it does from all his other
pite^^s Premises whereby he improves himself to prove me so, that I am a rank
Papist, nor so much as it follows from the remaining of so many Relikes of the
Romish Who^e among our English Clergy that they are still living in and loving
the Skirts of that, great Whores Sco^tations.

Indeed to say as T.D. does of S.F. He has been at Rome, I deny not that.
He had great Bills of Exchange from Constantinople thither which I had not.
He witnest against the Pope and Cardinal there yet was not meddled with, which
is true.
He says he is above Ordinances, which I never said
He says Jesuits and Friars are which was not so, but in some doctrines, then
some Ministers of the (so called) reformed Churches.
sounder in doctrine then those called the Reformed Churches, He made light
on it when he was charged with Popery before 100ds of people, as well I might,
since I knew it was false.
He affirmed justification by our good works, which is false if by ours thou
mean ^^at men work out of Christ, but too true for T.D. to disprove, if by Our
works he means, as he does, such as Christ works in men.
and such as doctrines are a fair inlet to the Papists Bag and Baggage; alias
famish the Popes Bag and expel his Baggage.
therefore probably he complyes with the Pope and Cardinals, has a Pension
from him, and is manifestly a rank Papist, These 7 or 8 piball'd Magpie
premises and Humb^^ Be propositions, whereof some are true and some false, may
like so many Roaring Megs, and Thundering Canons, make such a hideous Rumbling
noise in a Country Church (as they use to say) as to frighten poor Folck out of
their senses, and force all Priest-bewitcht people whether they will or no into
the faith of what follows at their heels, as the conclusion they serve to
usher in (viz) that S.F. is a fer-vent Factor for the Sea of Rome.

Nevertheless Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
there is no more Consequence in them, though less Truth, then if a man should
argue thus, where the Antecedent and Subsequent are both true, though the one
very untruly deduced from the other viz. The Wheelbarrow runs Rumble to Rumble:
Therefore the Clergy will never leave climbing up by lies, till down they
Tumble.

The Second Apologetical, and Expostulatory Exercitation.
CHAP. I.
NOw I Return again to thee John Owen, whom (excepting here and there with a
word or two as occasion was) I have not visited of a long time, being by T. D.
his interposings in this Question about Justification, which is excentrick from
all the points in which thou encountrest the Quakers, so totally taken off for
many pages together from any steady discourse, or any but mere cursory
conference with thee, that some men, who measure others by themselves and take
an account of the Quakers conjunctions with them in contending for truth, by
the cowardly spirits they carry in their own breasts, may Term it little less
then shameful or total Tergiversation in me to tarry so long from thee, and not
so much as face thee all this while.

And now I am come to deal with thee, I shall freely allow thee the advantage
of the utmost assistance that T.Ds. Book against the Quakers, and that of I. T.
or R. B. also affords thee to help thee (if need be) at any dead list, where
thou art a stand in the Doctrines about which I have to do with thee, which
though some are more eminently to be canvased between us two then the rest,
which are but transiently touched on by thee, yet are no less then the five
aforesaid, viz. 1. The Letter. 2. The Light. 3. The Infallible Spirits present
infallible guidance. 4. The Universality or particularity of the grace of God
to the Sons of men. 5. Perfection of holiness, and cleansing from sin in this
life. In all which five (whether in the self same order as they are here laid
down in or no, I cannot say, nor is it much matter for that) as I am first or
last to speak on, or to join issue in against thee, So more or less T.D.
falls in and joins issue with thee in them against the Quakers, so directly
that I see not how I can meddle with one and let the other wholly alone, but
must unavoidably hold an intercourse briefly or largely (as occasion happens)
either simul or successive with you both, and with I. Tombs and R. Baxt. also,
who whether they meddle in their last book with them all or not, so as to
prosecute them, yet intimate themselves both in that and other of their labors
to be of the same mind with you, as also most of the Divines, so called, are
throughout this Nation.

Now concerning these which are the grand Subjects, in reference to which all
that is said of any of them by either of us, in our Disputation about them, is
but the Praedicate; so contrary are we (as the Case yet stands between Thy
self, and me) to each other in our Assertions, that very much, if not most of
that which is denominated of them respectively by either of us, is as
absolutely gainsaid by the other; So as whatsoever is (as most that thou
say at all of it is) falsely Affirmed by thee of the Scripture (the Subject
which, in a shallow sound of words, thou seem to stand for, but art seen in
truth to stand against) is utterly denied by me; and most of that which is most
truly Asserted by me, and the Quakers of the Light, and all the rest of
forenamed Doctrines, is as positively denied by thy self, though in thy
denying thereof, thou do not more evidently contradict both the Truth and us,
then thy silly self, who art yet so senseless as not to see it.

What Testimony it is that we bear of the grace of God, the Spirits guidance,
Perfection, and true Light (the Subjects which we plead for, and thou
impleadest) will be seen when I come in all plainness to give it out, with the
good grounds thereof, as at last I shall (God willing) howbeit not till toward
the last, for as much as in the last place thy false witness comes out against
it; and in the mean while betake my self to the intended Trial of those things
which are (as blindly, as boldly) bolted out by thee about the Scriptures; and
to declare wherein we do, and wherein we do not, and also why it is (wherever
we do not) that we neither do, nor may, nor can accord at all with thee about
the Scripture, for not Assenting to whose mere fancies about which, as
infallible and undoubted Truths, (having hung up thy Flag of Defiance against
Atheists, Anti-scriptural Jews, and Papists, and sought up thy foolish fight
also with sundry of thy fellow Protestant Divines, for not dancing after thy
unharmonious Pipe, nor singing to the same Truthlesse tune with thee about the
Scriptures) Thou beatest up the Quarters of the Quakers, and unjustly
Quarrel^st against them, slandering them (as fowlely, as falsely) in a long
Latin Piece of Scholastical scrible, as slanderers of the Scripture; whom yet
thou neither do, nor can evince to be such, unless that be to slander the
Scripture to say no more of it then matter of truth.

Now for as much as my Business with I. O. principally, and in part also, with
T.D. (as to the Scriptures) will lie mainly these two ways, viz. First to
clear the Quakers from those clouds of ignominy, wherewith they (as all their
fellow Clergymen commonly do) seek to cover them by their lies of them, as a
people that deserve to be held accursed among all for their enmity to the
Scripture. Secondly to recover both Priests and people (as much as may be) from
under those dark, cloudy conceptions of the Scripture, which these two men
being overcast with themselves, labor what they can to beget others into, as
if all the worlds were for ever utterly undone, and under the loss of all
saving truth, and utterly without any possible way, whereby to come to the
knowledge of the will of God concerning them in order to their souls Salvation
from sin and wrath to come, if the outward Letter or External text of the
Scripture be not Talked up into the Throne as the only Lapis Lydius ex 3.5. 33
sure Word of God, infallible guide, Trusty Teacher, Supreme Judge, perfect
Rule, st^m foundation, stable Standard, fixed, unerring, unalterable measure,
and such like (as I.O. states it to be) by which all Doctrines, Faiths, Words,
Writings, Spirits true or false must be touched, tried and determined, or else
no man can be at any certainty, where to be, what to believe, how to walk with
God, which to take for Truth, and which to turn from; I shall first plainly
show what the Scriptures are, and what we mean when we talk of Scriptures.

2. Briefly take notice of some of the base, unworthy, absurd abuses and fowl
aspersions and unjust accusations whereby thou I.O. (what in thee lies)
labourest much more abundantly and abominably (I must needs say) then the other
(as to this point) to render us odious to all men as despisers and deniers of
them; and then 3 dly. addressing to the controversy it self, leave all, who
shall read such Animadversions as are to be made by me of thy unfound
Assertions about it, to judge by that light of God in their own Consciences,
whether themselves or we err most beside the Scripture, or most duly deserve
the Censure of Anti-scripturists. First then I shall here give all men to
understand more distinctly yet then I have hitherto done what it is that I
intend, and what I would be understood as speaking of by this term (the
Scripture) which is to be so often agitated in this Discourse between me and
I.O. in whose Book also it is so often agitated; and what sort of those Holy
Scriptures it is, which is the common Subject of which so much is prated and
predicated by I.O. that is as utterly denied by the Quakers.

That we may not by hanging in universals only, which are in no wise or sense
truly seen, but by considering the particulars wherein they exist, conclude of
things in a tumultuous mist of Confusion, as thou do, distinguishing where
thou should not, and jumbling things into a kind of Omnigatherum which should
be more singly and severally spoken of, whose Trumpet gives such an uncertain
sound, that its hard to know either how or where one must prepare to the battle.

The word ( Scripture) then though it be an Univocal, nor AEquivocal (as used
by us) yet is it a General Term, and so Ambiguous and doubtful, unless it be
explained by its particulars, signifying not only all other kinds of
Scriptures, good and bad, that ever were in the world, but also more kinds,
then one, of that kind of Scripture which Abstractively from, and more
eminently then the rest in regard of its worth, we ordinarily call The
Scripture, and have singled out from all the rest as our Present Subject.

What thou meanst in thy heedlesse handiement of this more General Subject I
can hardly find; thou drivest it on when thou Praedicatest this and that of it
in most parts of thy Dispute at Random in general terms, and run'st away with
the word ( Scripture) at all adventure, scribbling it over again and again, The
Scripture is this, the Scripture is that, the Scripture is written by
Inspiration of God, the Scripture is the Word of God, the Scripture is entire
to a tittle and perfect. etc. scarcely showing which of those Three several
sorts of it, which thy self have divided it into, thou would have us to
understand thee as speaking of, when thou denominarest these high things of it
( viz.) Whether first thou mean the (...) and (...) (as thou caliest them, page
13.) (I) The individual and immediate Manuscripts of Moses, the Prophets, and
Apostles, and such holy and honest men, as were the first Penmen of the sundry
Parcels of that holy Scripture, which was copied cut, the Copy whereof is bound
up in the bulk now called the Bible.

Or secondly, the (...) and (...) (I) the transcribed Copies thereof, whether
first immediate, that were (at first hand) taken out of the first Copies: Or
secondly, those mighty mediate and far remote ones, taken by thou know not
whom, out of thou know not what Copies, that were handed downwards
successively, not without some mixtures, mistakes, and (for ought though
know) loss of much of what was at first, throw all the dark Ages since
then, to this of ours, by men that were some faithful, and some unfaithful, but
none of them infallible (by thy own confession, p. 167.) or divinely inspired,
so that it was impossible for them in any thing to mistake; which uncertain
Copies ye have as your only Rule and Canon at this day; in which Copies
nevertheless of the Originals yet remaining, that may ( secundum te I.O.
according to thy Concession) be more or less crooked, as it happens, and (thy
self granting there are varieties among them) cannot be all true; Thou do not
blush ( p. 173.) to add and say, That the whole Scripture entire, as given out
from God, is preserved without any loss, and within them all is every Letter
and Tittle, etc.

Or Thirdly, Whether thou mean the several and various Copies of the
Translations of those various and several Transcriptions into several Tongues
and Languages.

What thou meanest (I say) or which of all these Three sorts of Writings,
whether the first Manuscripts only, or the Transcripts and Translations also;
or the Two first only, and not the last, or all the Three; which are all Three
commonly called ((...)) The Holy Scriptures, When thou Praedicatest these
glorious things of the Scripture, thou do not very distinctly declare, but
go on in generals, and that Dolus latet in universalibus, thou art not
ignorant; so that he had need to be wise that very easily discerns thy mind,
and what thou meanest: yet this I know full well, and it is the more shame for
thee if thou be ignorant of it, that some things may be said ( tru'y) of some
one of these, that cannot ( without falsehood) be affirmed of the other Two, and
some things of Two that cannot of the Third; and he understands neither what he
says, nor whereof he affirms, whosoever he is, that without distinction
denominates all the things, that thou do of the Scriptures, of these Three
sorts all alike, or of any Two of them either, most of which will, upon due
examination, not be found duly applicable to the very best.

But whether thou intend one or two only, or all these Three throughout thy
Book, when thou contendest for the Scriptures to be now entire to a tittle, as
at first giving forth, to be the Light, Word, Power of God, and such like, is
not easy to learn. If ever we hear of thee again about the Scriptures, I
desire thee to speak home as to these particulars, and to write thy mind more
fully and plainly, and singly out, as in all places of thy Book thou have not
done, but as one that hates the Light; and is not willing to come to close,
pinchest in thy mind, and winkest, and twinklest, and triflest, and keep
back, as if thou were afraid (as no doubt thou art, though he that does truth
is not, Ioh. 3.20, 21.) to look the Light too fully in the face, or ( Ex. 4 S.
14.) Subtilius Disputare, to dive too deep in thy Dispuration about the Light;
or, as the Elephant, to drink more then needs must in fair water for fear of
seeing a foul face: but veritas non quaerit A^gulos.

For my part I shall deal ingnuously with thee in this, There are some things
thou affirmest of the Scriptures which I can grant to be true of some one of
these Three (viz. of the (...)) that are not true of either the (...), or
Translations: And there be some things to be said truly of these two, that are
not true of the first, and some things of the second, that are not true of the
first, nor of the third, and somewhat of the third, that's not true of either of
the other. But when thou scarest so high as to affirm the Scriptures (as thou
do) in general, to be the same in every tittle, syllable and iota as at
first, to be the Word of God, the Living Word, the Spiritual Light, the Power
of God, and much more, as will appear when I come to Reck^n up, and rank the
things thou Praedicatest of the Scriptures in Order, in order to my Answering
of them, I (who shall ever put a difference between the Writing of the Word,
and the Word it self Written of) do absolutely deny all these things of all the
Three sorts above mentioned; and if it stand so as that thou understandest all
these Three (as thou do of one of them at least, and that of the (...) or
Transcriptions, if but of one, the (...) or first Manuscripts, being all lost
and mouldred, and Translations all corrupted by thy own confession) when thou
affirmest all these things of the Scripture, then, so let it stand for me till
I have tried the truth of thy Positions, after which I hope all that stands not
upon good ground, will of it self to the ground come tumbling down.

And as by the Word ( Scripture) I mean (excepting where such things only are
Praedicated as are peculiar only to either One, or Two of them, and not to all
the Three) no less then all these three sorts of Scripture in the main
Controversy with thee, so no more then these three sorts, and these not one
jot more, not yet any farther then (qua tales) (1) So far only as they are
Scriptures (properly, truly, and formally so called and considered) or For our
Disputation is of things that are (formaliter) what they are, and are said to
be, of what is really and truly what its called, De Scripturae nomine proprio,
Ex. 1. S. 1, 2. Non fictitio and imaginario, nec figurativo; Of the proper Name
of the Scripture, formally so taken, and not of feigned, falsely imagined, and
mere Metaphorical Denominations.
outward Writings, Expressions, or Declarations ad extra, by Letters legible to
our bodily eyes, however extant upon what ever outward matter capable to
receive their impression, Tables of Stone, Walls, Skin, Parchment, Paper, by
the finger of God, or hands of men, whether Writing (the issue of which is
Propriissime styled Scripture) or Cutting, Graving, Stamping, Printing, in
which way, since that Art came up, the Scriptures are now most extant, the
effect of which though most properly it be called Print or Scu^pture, yet (not
to be too close and curious in Criticizing about Cockle-shells) shall be
allowed by me (as to our purpose) properly enough to pass under that name of
Scripture.

I say then it is the Letter, and not the Matter; the Writings, and not the
Subjects, Things, Truths, Doctrins, or Word written of, that is the Subject to
come under Consideration between us; whatever those things are that are therein
declared, though it is like we shall not pass them by neither, without taking
some useful notice of them; yet that makes nothing to us in the State of our
Question, as it stands before us, nor will all thy tumultuous hudling it over
in haste hinder this, nor thy shuffles about it shuffle it off, it is the
Declaration that thy Disputation with the Quakers is about, considered as
abstract from what is thereby declared; for by the Scripture I intend not the
Law it self written, nor the Gospel, nor the Light, nor the Faith therein
exhibited to us, and held forth to be read of in the Writing, for these are not
the Scripture, nor is the Scripture any of these, but the Writing it self that
holds these forth; I call no other thing the Scripture then that which is truly
the Scripture, and that is no other thing then the Scripture it self; I call
the Scripture, or the outward Declaration, no other things, and by no other
Names then those it calls it self by, 2 Chro. 21.12. Dan. 10.21. Luke 1.1. Romans
7.6. 2 Cor. 3.6.
or are truly answerable to its nature, and that is no other then the
Scripture, a Declaration of those things that were believed, and of the Word,
of the Faith that was preached, a Letter, a Writing, Holy Scriptures,
Scriptures of Truth, Books of Writing that consist, Treat of, and Declare in
forms of plain, true, suitable and sound words, various true things, sound
Doctrines, by which many unsound Doctrines of Devils, of false Prophets,
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, of false Brethren, ungodly Men that creep in,
and turn the Grace of God into lasciviousness; of false Apostles that brought
in Doctrines contrary to that at first delivered, and served their own bellies
and not Christ, Taught for Doctrines Traditions of men; of Iannes and Iambes
that resisted the Truth, of Baldam, the Nicolaitans, of Iezebel and Satan,
(which are all written of, and declared in the Scriptures of Truth, as well as
those of God, Christ, the Spirit, the Light and Truth it self) do stand not
approved, but reproved and condemned; useful Histories of what was done, and
spoken in sundry times and ages past by God and Christ, and the Devil himself,
and Men good and bad, and by Balaam and his Ass also; Precious Prophesies of
things, viz. of good to the good, of bad to the bad; Comfortable Promises to
the seed that is the Heir of them; Terrible Threatenings to the seed of Evil
doers, and Woes to the Wicked; Profitable Epistles to such as they were Wrote
to; Blessings, Curses, Prohibitions, Commands; Copies of Psalms and Songs that
were sung; Proverbs that were spoken; Letters that were written from men to
men; some by good men at the motion of the Spirit of God; some by Evil men out
of malice against Gods Servants, at the motion of the Devil; Some not without
the Spirit, by such as lived and walked in the Spirit, and were, in all they
did, led by the Spirit, to some private Christians about some worldly Affairs,
as that of Paul to Philemon; Some by Chief Captains to their Presidents, and by
Presidents to their Princes about Prisoners and Tumults; and diverse other sorts
of passages; So that (as written in the Spirit) the Holy Scriptures may be said
to be Homogeneous Writings, all of one kind; but in respect of the several
businesses written of therein, they are at Heterogeneous (I) a body or bulk of
as various Writings as any extant in the World-besides them.

Now by the Scriptures I mean these Writings that contain the matters
abovesaid, and many more, and not the matters themselves therein contained; And
if thou mean by the Scriptures any other things then the Scriptures themselves
(as like a Reed shaken with the wind, thou seem sometimes to do, and again
sometimes not to do) and which things the Scriptures are not; or by any other
things which are not the Scriptures when thou speak of them, ( viz.) the
Law, Word of God, the spiritual Light, etc. meanest the Scripture (as sure
enough thou do well-nigh throughout thy confused discourses and disputations
about it) then thy meanings are too mean to be any otherwise at all, then
meanly accounted on among any that mean honestly, and plainly, and know the
Truth as it is in Jesus. By us when we talk of the Scriptures (to use thy own
words, only vice versa, Ex. 1. Sect. 26. non sanctissima ista veritas, seu
materia Scripturarium, sed scriptura formaliter considerata intenditur,
honestly and plainly we intend that only which is so, even the form of writing
it self, and not the matter, or holy truths of the Scripture, the Scripturam,
and not the Scriptum, or at most the Litteram Scriptam, not the rem scriptam,
not the Verbum Scriptum, the Declaration, and not the Doctrine declared, the
(...), the (...), the (...), not the (...): not the (...), the letter in the
oldnesse of which thou art yet serving, who know not the newness of the
spirit, the Scripture or Writings of the Prophecy, and not the Prophecy of, or
contained in the writing, nor the Prophetical Word, the (...) not the (...)
the writing, for so the word is there translated truly, 2 Chronicles. chapter 21.
not the Word Written, or word of Prophecy that came to Elijah, and was sent
in a Writing to the King, which thou falsely say, p. 12. that Hebrew word
(...) is used for in that Text; and every wise man that is truly (...), and not
(...) (especially) in a dispute, where the Question is, whether the writing of
the Word of God be the Word of God Written of, or no, while sub judice lis est,
will, till the thing in debate one way or other be clearly determined, remember
still to keep these two things (as two) asunder. So thou do thy self while
thou art well in thy wits, witness thy words above cited by myself, Ex. 1. S.
28. where thou put a plain difference between the Scripture it self
formally considered, and the most Holy Truth or matter therein delivered; yea
when ever thou keep in any measure of sobermindednesse, thou keep'st these
two as distinct in thy discourse, as the two sticks of Judah and Joseph, Ezekiel.
37 19, 17. that were superscribed with two several superscriptions, vouchsafing
to each its own proper name, and not communicating the name of either unto the
other, but clearly dividing between them, so as that any one may see thou thy
self do not believe one of them to be the other, nor yet dare affirm them
to be Synonymous, witness, p. 12, 13. where thou make them two, and writest
of one of them all along, as in contradistinction to the other, in these Terms,
viz. not the Doctrine in it, but the (...) it self, The Providence of God no
less concerned in the preservation of the writings, then the Doctrine
contained in them, the Writing it self being the product of his Counsel for the
preservation of his Doctrine, Satan has no less raged against the Book, then
against the Truth contained in it, it was no less crime of old to be Traditor
libri then to be Abnegator fidel; which sour last Assertions of thine, though
they are, all four, false tales, for Providence is not so much concerned to
preserve the Writings as the Doctrine, neither is the Writing so necessary for
the preserving of the Doctrine, that (as thou there hintest it must) it must
needs perish if the Writings perish, for it was before them, and may be without
them, and will be after them; Neither thirdly is the malice of Satan so much
against the Book called the Bible, as against the Doctrine of the truth, for he
is willing to let hypocrites alone long enough to carry gaudy Bibles under
their arms, so be they serve him, and abide not in Christ's Doctrine, nor in the
Truth, the Scripture tells of, neither 4ly. is it or ever was it so great a
Crime to betray the Book called the Bible, as to deny the Faith, and the Word
of Faith therein written of, for the Book is not worth a Pin, as to salvation,
without the Faith, but the Faith is sufficient thereto without the Book, and
was so before the Book was, (witness the Worthies from Abel to Moses, whose
sufficient faith is written of, Heb. 11.) and would be if the Pope and the
Devils rage should reach so far as to burn all the Bibles in the World; so
here is four utter untruths asserted together, nevertheless as they are
Tru-lies, yet are they true enough to serve the truth, I here summon them in
proof of, viz. that thou thy self (who countest it as bad not to be as trusty
to the Bible, as to the Truth that is in it, as it is to betray the Truth, and
deny the Faith) do deny the Book, or Scripture, the (...), or the Writing to
be one and the same with the Faith, Truth and Doctrine, or the Doctrine to be
the Writing, or that these can truly be denominated each of other.

I say then that here, being more sober minded, as to thy discerning between
the writing and the written verity (though drunk enough elsewise to lay so many
lies, or at least so many tales that are not true upon the top one of another
in so small a space as one short Section) thou art freely willing fairly to
distinguish them into two.

Yea further yet, that thou do not judge these two to be one, it may appear
plainly to thy self, or any that are free to peruse the places in the 16. and
17. Sections of the same first Chapter, for if thou did, then in the
enjoyment of the one, thou would be satisfied, as judging thy self
consequently enjoying the other, but that thou art not in any wise, for
howbeit, by thy own confession there, Sect. 16. Capellus grants thee, that the
full enjoyment of the saving Doctrine of the Scripture is yet to be had, or
obtained by such as look chiefly after that, let the Letter be never so
corrupted, yet thou art at no hand content with this, but piteously pinest
after something else, which is not this saving Doctrine of the Scripture, nor
the Doctrine in it, but another thing, from which this contained Doctrine is
distinguished, and that is the Scripture it self, which thou judged thou have
not, notwithstanding thou have its Doctrine, unless thou have the Letter or
Writing also, and that so exactly and entire without alteration and ablation,
that not a tittle of it nor (...) be found lacking; these are thy words. Sect.
17. Nor is it enough to satisfy us, that the Doctrines mentioned are preserved
entire, every tittle and (...) in the Scripture, in that Writing, see Sect. 13,
in the (...) which we have, must come under our care and consideration, and to
say the truth, as thou putest a difference between the Scriptures of Truth, and
the Truth written of in the Scriptures sometimes (as I ever do) so it is the
Scriptures of the Truth more then the Truth it self, of which they are the
Scriptures, that thou mostly scrawlest for in those thy Scriptures for them,
which yet as is said above are not more for in shows and words, then in deed,
and in truth they are against them; nor is it the most substantial parts of
that bare Letter that thou wranglest for so much, as for the more accidental
parts thereof, viz. the points, trivial tittles and (...) So then it is
concluded hitherto on both hands, First, by thy self, as well as ^ly. by me,
that the Scripture and its Doctrine are not one, but two several businesses,
whereof the, First viz. the Scriptures are the subject matter so contended
about between thee and the Quakers; As for T.D. he draws his neck out of the
Collar here, and after he had engaged me to discourse it publicly with him,
whether the Scripture were the Word of God or not? and at the dispute desiring
to know what I held about it, when he heard how I on the Quakers behalf
declared what we meant by the Scriptures, viz. the (...), the Writing, the
(...) viz. the Letter, and that we only deny that Denomination of the Word of
God to that, not to the (...), or Word, or Doctrine, or Truth of God written
therein, he gave us the Question without more ado, saying thus, You cannot
believe us, to be so simple (surely) as to affirm the Scriptures in that sense
the Word of God, but we mean the matter contained in the writing, whether that
be our Rule of Faith and Life? P. 26. of his first Pamp. which subject matter
or Doctrine and Truth contained in the Writing, and testified to in it, which
was before ever the Writing was, and is (as to the substance of it) eternally
and unchangeably the same, Christ the Word, the Wisdom, Righteousness of God,
the War, Truth, Life, both yeaster-day to day and for ever, we never denied to
be the Word, and Rule, and Foundation, and what ever else I.O. and the whole
School of our English Scribes do ignorantly and falsely say the Scripture is,
though we are mistaken by most as denying the holy Matter it Treats of so to
be; but the matter is not the Writing, or the Scripture, but that which is
only written o^ in it, but the outward written Letter or Scripture, much more
the Book in which the writing is, which I.O. is so busy for, and for every
point, written title and (...), this not only we deny to be the Word of God,
but all our rash reproachers of us as denying the Scripture to be the Word,
when we come to their faces, are fain to fall in and deny the same with us
also; so Christopher Fowler after a long hot Public Dispute at Reading with
E.B. and my self upon this question, Whether the Scripture be the Word of God
or no? in which he contended a great while together it was, at last confessed
openly and plainly before all the People and Magistrates there present, that
the Scripture or Writing (and I know not what else is properly and truly the
Scripture but the Writing) is not the Word of God; after which concession of
C.F. they would hear no longer dispute, but the Quakers were driven out of
doors. But I.O. stands stiffly to it, that the Word of God is the Proper Name
of the Scripture, and even of every tittle and (...) of it, against the
Quakers; for that the Truth and Doctrine of it, or of Christ declared in it, is
Spiritual, Powerful, saving, Perfect, so that Cursed will he be that adds to or
detracts from it, no Quaker will deny, and to fight for the perfection and
integrity of that with them, is but to fight without an Adversary.

Howbeit I.O. when thy Brains (as it were) begin to crow (as they often do)
like a man in a maze, thou fetchest another turn back again upon the wheel,
and, as inconsiderately, as contradictorily to thy self thou blendest and
confoundest these two sundry things, that were before so severed by thy very
self, into one again, so that as the two sticks aforesaid became one in the
Prophets hands, so these two, that were sometime put asunder, and with thy own
hand inscribed with different Titles, are joined, Indentically Entitled,
denominated each of other, as Synonymous, and of two that stood divided, made
one individual, of two sticks become one under thy own hand, which writes of
the writing, and the thing written as of one, and in its handling of them
handles and feels no such matter of distinction between the Scripturam, and the
Scriptum, the Literam Scriptam, and the rem, or Doctrinam, or veritatem
Scriptam, the (...), the (...), and the (...), the Scriptiunculam Verbi, de
Verbo, and the Verbum Scriptum, the Letter or VVriting, and the Doctrine or
Truth written, the Scripture of, or concerning the Law, Light, Gospel, and
Word of God, and the Law, Light, Gospel, and Word of God it self, of which
the Scripture is but a true writing or Declration.

Yea whereas in that one single Section lastly cited, Tr. 1. chapter 1. S. 13. thou
makes distinction in thy sound, no less then four times between them, first
the VVritings and the Doctrine; secondly, the Writing and the Doctrine;
thirdly, the Book and the Truth; fourthly, the Book and the Faith; in the very
Section immediately foregoing, viz Sect. 12. which is as small as this, thou
(all things well considered as they stand therein) almost if not altogether as
frequently do confound them, and write as if with thee they were as one; for
besides thy stiling the (...), the (...), the Writing or Scripture, which is
well-nigh the total Subject Treated on in that Section, by these names, viz.
the Prophecy of Scripture, the word of Prophecy, the written Word, the Word
of God, and thy loud lying, in saying, that (...) or (...), is above fifty
times, in the New Testament, put absolutely for the Word of God, not proving it
to be so put so much as once, not being able (sure I am) to prove it to be half
so often, if thou could (as I shall show elsewhere) prove it so to be put an
hundred and fifty times, all that would prove nothing to thy chief purpose,
which utter untruth, must be more talked with in another place, thou twice
there make one of them as explanatory only of thy mind, and of what thou
meanest by the other in these Terms, viz. the writing or written word, the
(...) it self or (which [or] is there more conjunctive then disjunctive) the
Doctrine (as written) also thou make the one but explicatory of the other in
many other places, ( viz.) Ep. Ded. P. 20. Tr. 1. chapter 4. S. 2. S. 19. and Ex.
1. S. 24. where thou writest of them, not S^orsim as of two, but conjunctim as
of one and the self same thing, thus Scripturam sacram seu verbum Dei scriptum,
the Scripture or written Word of God, sacred Letters (the written Word)

N^ so incogiaant art thou, as not only both to divide into two, and confound
again into one these two distinct Subjects, viz. the Scripture, and the Word of
God, the writing and Doctrine of Christ therein declared within so small a
compass, as the space of two small Sections standing both together, but thou
both dividest and confoundest them within the little corner of one single
sentence, witness the last clause of the twelfth Section of the first chapter
of thy Treatise above cited, where thou expressest thy self thus, viz. not
only the Doctrine in it, but the (...) it self, or the Doctrine (as written)
is from God, (1) as his Word, for so thou meanest still by that term [from God]
in the first part of which the Doctrine written in the Scripture, and the
Scripture it self are made two, in the latter the Scripture and the Doctrine
written (as written) in it are made one, which is the same Doctrine still, as
well when considered (as written) as when considered (as not Written) and is
neither more nor less of God, whether written or not written, and under both
these notions, a distinct thing from the writing evermore: If the Serpent can
hansomly and fairly twine himself out here from the just censure of a self
confounder, let him escape scot-free this once and in this one thing for me, but
if he cannot do it without dawbing and dribling, and shuffling, and shifting,
and cutting, and lying against the Light within, then let him hang there for me
in his Fetters of darkness, till he learn to speak without confusion, for I
know not how in a way of honesty to help him out, or take him down.

CHAP. II.
HAving showed what truly and properly the Scripture is, and what we, the
Quakers, intend, and I.O. also (if we may take him as meaning, what he mostly
says) by that Term (Scripture) when we deny it to be what thou contend'st it
to be, and pleadest against us for, as its Proper Name, viz. the Word of God,
etc. I come next to those base abuses put upon us, and false matters charged
against us ( partly) by T.D. in his first Pamphlet, but ( principally) by thee
I.O. as concerning our carriage toward the Scriptures, Principally in thy
Latin Legend, wherein thou lie more at liberty, then in thy two English
pieces of emptiness, and the more securely by how much thou seem (to thy
self at least) to lie more hidden, or more obscurely, out of the reach of their
rebuke, whom thou reproachest in that Latin Language, then in the other;
insomuch that by thy own speeches we may conclude, that thy whole work (as
relating to the Quakers) which is fronted (but fronti nulla fides) with Pro
Scripturis, Adversus Fanaticos, for the Scriptures against the Fanatics (with
which new nickname the Quakers by many more besides thy self, who ( Arbitrio
Diabolico) wast one of the first Imposers of it on that ( truly) enlightened
people, begin now to be abusively branded) seems to be designed more to the
sporting thy own and thy Schoolfellowes le^d spightful Spirits, by playing upon
the Quakers in secret, in your dark Divinity cells among your selves, then
either to convince them to their faces of such errors as thou erroneously
accusest them of, or by thy crude Theological Disputations, Determinations (
tumultuarie sane fatis conscriptas) as thou call them ad lectorem, to
confute the Quakers plainly and openly, before Plain-hearted people; witness
thy own saying to the like effect, which I shall first enter at, as it lies in
thy little Latin Lecture Ad Lectorem.

Fanatici sunt erroribus and stultitia hisce diebus notissimi, quos imprimis
hic agg edinur. N^mo autem post homine natos, aeque ac ego desirasse censendus
esset, si ipsos scriptis hisce redargucre statuerim, cum nibilo plus sermonem
illum quo hic utimur intelligant, quam nos aliquories inconditum illum verborum
sonum omni sano sensu vacuum, quo ipsi non tantum umnibus altis, sed and ipsi
sibi in dicendo obitrepese videntur, mente pe^cipere possiinus. Sintsene omnes
(...), neque ultra linguam vernaculam lapiant.
J.O. The Fanatics (or with thee the Quak), who are in these days most notable
in their errors and foolishness, we here Principally assault. But no man could
be deemed to dote so much as my self, if I aimed at the convincing of them by
what I here write since they no more understand the speech we here use, then we
at any time can perceive that indigested sound of words, void of all sound
sense, whereby they, when they speak, seem to noise it out, to not only one
another, but all others also, Ex. 2. Sect. 23. They (the Quakers) are well nigh
all unlearned, and skild no further then their mother Tongue.

Rep The more shame for thee I.O. if the Quakers be all so unlearned, and
utterly unintelligent in the Latin Tongue (as thou say) that thou talkest
therein against them (as thou do) and chargest them with much more error in
Doctrine and evil in life, then will ever be made good against them by thy self
or any of thine Abetrours or stand approved for Truth, while the world stands
among spiritually understanding and honest minded men, when they come to be
divested (as hereby they are to be) our of that disguise thou dressest them our
in to thy Junior Ieerers at Christ's own Image, which is seen upon them.

Was it not enough for thee to have belved them in English, as no less then
twice ore thou have done in thy Epistle Dedicatory of thy Dean-like doings to
thy Reverend Friends the Prebends and Students in Divinity, in that Society (so
called) of Chapter Church Col. in Oxford, where thou wast lately Dean (but quo jure
divino, I yet know not) but thou must likewise needs lay at them, and lie in
ambush, and talk, and take on against them in a Tongue, wherein (if thy surmise
of their Universal ignorance of thy Latin Lies had been as sound as it seemed
to be) they had been left, not only incapable to do ought in their own
defense, in the midst of thy many mischievous accusations, but also insensible
of any hur^ at all, or of who it was that hurt them, with the sharp A^rows,
which, our of the same Devils Bow with T.D. in his, thou shootest at Random at
them, in that thy Divine piece of lying Divination.

Art thou not in this one of those (to whom the Woe is, Isa. 29.1516. That seek
deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord, whose works are in the dark, and they
say who sees us? and who knows us? whose turning of things upside down,
shall be esteemed as the Potters clay? Art thou not herein as like one of the
old Bastardly Broods, viz. the Amm^nites and Ashdodites, Zach. 9.6. that were
adversaries to the True Israel of God? yea as like Samballat and Tobia as ever
thou can look, who (with the rest of their Co-conspiratours against the Lords
work, that of the builders of Jerusalem, that removed the Babylonish Rubbish,
in order to the Repairing of Breaches, the Restoring the Pure Primitive Truth,
the building of the Old Wastes out of the Ruins and dejo^ations, and the
laying the foundations of many Generations, Isa.58.) said much what to the same
tune, as thou do of the Qua^ers, Neh 3.II. They shall not know neither see
till we come in the midst among them, and slay them and cause the work to
cease? sure thou wast doubtful of being called to acc^unt by the Quakers, and
conscious to thy self of thy own uncapablenesse to clear thy self in thy false
accusations of them, as denyers, despisers, sleighters of Gods Word and the
Scriptures, etc. had thou floured them so sowlly, and charged them so falsely
in English as thou do in Latin, and therefore (as the Laws made for English
people to be Ordered, judged, and Tried by, that the Lawers may prey the more
perfectly upon their purses, are laid up out of poor peoples sight in obscure
terms, long Scroles, and Latin screel scrawls so) thou chosest to be a
Barbarian to the Quakers, (as they seem to be to thy self, who art lost so far
in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, as not to know plain English) and to talk to thy
Barbarous Brotherhood against them in a Language they (as thou thoughest)
understand not, rather then to talk to them in a known tongue, about that
enmity to the Word of God and the Scripture, which thou inditest them (at your
High Commission) as guilty of; But very unjustly: for

As blindly as thou Judge we deny, and carelessly forget the Scriptures,
because we, like Sheep, are silent in the light, and not whining for it among
the Swine, that seed no higher then on the empty husk, yet we have not so
foregone it, but that (according to Christ's promise to such as are in the
Spirit, John 14.) upon new occasion, what ever we have read in it of the mind
of Christ of old, is by that Spirit brought a new to our remembrance; and we
know so much by it, that even it (now the word, it speaks of, is put into their
mouths, as their chiefest strength) shall be excellently useful, and used by
both the Tongues, and Pens of very Babes and Sucklings, to still and stop the
mouths of such Adversaries, to the Truth, and the Light, and the Letter also as
thou yet art, who talkest utterly against the Scripture in thy talking for it,
and pluckest it down while thou Placest it above the Light, and by all thy
Proof less provings of the Letter to be (as the light it pleads for, and thou
against, only is) a self evidencing Light and Power, have in Truth proved thy
own undertakings in that behalf, to be a piteous plain, self evidencing piece
of great weakness, and greater darkness; and many more uses are to be made of
the Letter yet, as well as to beat the abusers of the Scripture, and the livers
besides it with their own Weapon, of which more anon in its place; and if we
knew it not in the Light, as we do, yet from the very Letter we are well aware,
that the burden of base born Moab is near to come upon him, and the Night
wherein A^ of Moab must be cut off and brought to silence, and the Night
wherein Ki^ of Moab is to be cut off and brought to silence and that the time
is near to come, wherein as the Saints are now silent in Light before him, who
keeps their feet that they do not slide, so the wicked, whose way is a
slipery places in the dark, will be driven on till they fall therein, and shall
at last be silent in darkness for ever, and bowl within themselves, (but no
more so loudly against the Light) for by strength shall no man Prevail, Isa.
51.1. I Sam. 2. 21.

Nevertheless we must give you loosers leave to talk up your talk; for whether
we will or no talk ye will yet a while, so long as your tongues are your own
untamed and without the bridle, which while they are, though ye seem to be
Religious (as thou I.O. do) yet all your Religion is but vain; and though in
the Light we know what we know, yet from the Letter ye will be thinking your
think, and thrusting out your idle thoughts too, till your hands be tied,
against the true Light, and its Friends, of which ye make a mear mocking stock
among your selves, and must mightily then when ye are got (as ye suppose) out
of sight, divining Lies together in your Lattine Divinity Disputations; and out
of the Cup of your own Imaginations sit tippling to each other in the dark, when
ye are drunken as drun^erds with your own wisdom as with sweet wine, and folden
together as thorns, thinking no hands can touch or take you to thrust you away,
then ye lie in Lattin together at ease, as in a Bed, wherein ye take your fill
of Lies, which ye love, till ye be utterly burnt with fire in your place, and
be devoured as stubble fully dry, 2 Samuel 23.6, 7. Nah. 1.9.10.

Nor worse nor better then thus is the Case with thee I.O. and those Sons of
Belial that wonder after thee; nor is it any otherwise with thee and thy
wondrous Work, which thy own heart, head, and hands have not only wrought, and
wrote, but brought forth also into the world against the Quakers, wherein, but
especially in that last Fourfold Latin Fardel, which (thy Two former
Flim-flams falling into one with it) flows with them in one flood of folly and
falsehood, wherein [hoping (having lap't thy self close up in the Fig leaves of
that little learning and Logic that is used therein) thou lie hid out of the
sight of the Quakers, whose light thou deemest not large enough to lay hold on
thee in that Syllogistical Siege thou there layest, and those Logical lurking
holes in which thou lie in a learned Leagure against them] thou adventurest
more securely, then thou durst well do in thy smooth English Sermons, to ease
thy self of thy Adversaries, and Avenge thee on thine Enemies the Quakers, whom
thou art afraid of, though they are Friends to thee, and to the best that's in
thee, which is not of thee, more then thou art, or to it, or to thy self. And
being in a tumultuous hurry, in hideous haste, in the heat of Jealousy (which
makes all look yellow) in the height of Anguish, and such like mistiness
together, thou runnest over hedge and ditch, not minding so much as the Path of
common Reason, Equity, Honesty, or Truth, not regarding any guide or Rule to
direct thy Course by, whether the Light, or the Letter, or (as to thy
Disputation) the line of Logic it self; which two last thou pretendest (at
least) to be led by, but in reality art led in a certain muddiness of mind (
Reapse) besides them all; till (as Canis Festinans caecos parit catulos) thou
have brought forth not only a bundle of Lies and Abuses of the Quakers, but
also a business as full of learned blindness as most that ever I have read, of
no bigger bulk: Howbeit thou grantest thy self a Dispensation to over come all
thou Disputest with in thy Disputation, since (be it never so full of groapable
darkness, even to thy friends, and fellows, who will see, and say nothing, yet)
its laid up close, and safe from the sight of thy Antagonists the Quakers,
within the linen shroud of a dark Language, so that the Quakers cannot know
any of all this: for, poor, deluded, Fanatical, silly souls, they (quoth I.O.)
no more understand that Language, which we here make use of, then we
(Naturalists) can comprehend that hidden nonsensical [ alias Spiritual] sound
of words, in which they seem to gape it out not only to all others, but each to
other (...) in their Discourses: Thus like the Woodcock which having hid his
head in a hole so that he sees nobody, thereby gathers that nobody sees him,
thou judge of such whose lives are hid from thee, with Christ in God, that
thy life, and Lies likewise are hid from them: yet there are some, and (for
ought thou know not a few) among the Quakers, who have been where thou art,
though where they now are thou can never come, but through a true death to thy
own will, and present foolish wisdom, even that shameful death of the Cross, by
whom not only with that Eye, where with thou see, thou are seen, but also in
that Light, in which spiritual men discern both theirs, and them, by whom
themselves are not discerned, thou art both seen and comprehended; and though
thou give thy self leave to win all thou Playest for, while thou Playest
alone by thy single self; yet when the Game begins again (as here it does
between thee and the Quakers, as it has between thee and some of thy own
Fellows, who have already entered the Lists and taken thee to do viz. Henry
Stubbs of thy own society) thou may possibly prove no such Gainer, as yet
thou go for, among such as side with thee [ hook or crook] in thy crooked
carriage of thy crooked Cause, by then both ends of thy Discourses for it be
brought together; by which time it may likely appear to any save such, whose
interest compels them to choose rather to be ignorant, and let the Quakers Books
alone, then to be taught by them, how thou and thy Tracts and Tractatles, trace
it to and fro out of the Track of all manner of Truth, in the clouds of
confusion, up and down, in and out, and sometimes Round about, in not more
illogical then Atheological shifts; yet not more blindly, then boldly, since
unseen (as is supposed) by those who are most nearly concerned in the Cause and
Controversy that is carried on by them.

But as Crooked a Serpent as Leviathan is, yet his deceits are discryed,
notwithstanding all his Twinings and Turnings, now this way, now that again to
secure himself, yea the least of the little flock which he despises, is made,
in the Light and Power of God, to Spy and draw him out with a hook, yea if it
be but by a Sling-stone, Zach. 9. rather then his proud Reproaches shall go
Unreproved, the Lord will subdue and bring down the Uncircumcised Philistine,
that Devotes himself to defy both the Arm and Armies of the Living God.

Thou tryest I.O. to loose thy self and thy malicious hissing at the light,
from the observation of its Children, in thy Latin Laborinth, but herein thou
have lost thy self too too woefully, in another sense, in their open view, thy
language is savoured to be unsavory, and to be at best, but that of the
mongril seed that speak half in that of Canaan and half in the Language of
Ashdod; thy Voice is sounded to be that of the Stranger, whom none of Christ's
Sheep will ever follow; and as smooth as it is, like that of Jacob now and
then, yet thy hands are felt to be the Rough hands of Cain and Esau, wherewith
thou coursly handlest thy innocent, plain, honest-hearted Brother, whose
Sacrifice is accepted with God, as thine can never be while thy sin lies at
the door; Thou lie hunting abroad for Blessings and Benefices in the Earth,
and yet what thou gainest, even that way, by thy greedy gaping after it at one
time, justly enough (as from the Lords Hands) for thy fighting against his
Israel, thou loosest at another; but what ere thou gettest or loosest here on
earth, that seed of Jacob, against which thou bandest, will carry away from
thee both the Birthright and the Blessing of Heaven, and if thou turn not to
the light thou have been hitherto, in the vanity of thy mind, a scoffer at, and
lay not hold on the Eternal Inheritance, and life, it leads to, in a very
little while [as in love to thy soul I here advise thee to do] thou shall never
inherit it, but Death, Darkness and the Curse for ever in its stead, though
thou seek it carefully with thy tears.

Finally I.O. iu aurem tibi dicam, let me tell thee this one thing in thy Ear,
which yet [as the case stands] can hardly be Whispered so secretly to thee
here, but that, an hundred to one, one or other will happen to know it [and it
matters not much who does, or if all the world know it] besides our selves, for
it is a Truth told in love to the Truth first, and then to thee.

Tractatu'us hic Tuus aut illorum tractatuum pars, this thy third little
treatise, or last Latin piece (call thou it what thou will) is a very Lake of
Lies, and both it self, and Thou, who art the Author of it; and whatsoever, and
and whosever holds union so as to run along, or fall into fellowship with it,
in any more then that little Truth, that here, and there may happily be uttered
in it, run all down together with it in the Four Channels, or Exercitations of
it, as it were under ground (that the Quakers may not see it, who yet do see
both whence it comes, and whither it goes) throw the hollow holes, and
cavernes, throw the several Sections, or lesser Rivelets thereof, as throw so
many dark Cells, till, driving downward still throw that least, and last
Head-lesse and Tail-lesse piece of Envy against the inner Light, they issue out
into the outer darkness, and at last all empty themselves headlong into the
bottomless pit, from whence those Exercitations (for the most part) were at
first exerted, and so, downward still, into the most dismal Lake of all, even
the Lake of fire that burns with brimstone, which is the second death, where
the strong Warrior, who is as ^oe, and his work, which is as a spark, and
every Liar, and his Lies must lie and burn both together for ever, and not be
quenched.

And as for thy boasting thy self, and glorying over the Quakers as learned no
farther then their mere Mother tongue, and such as understand not so much as
the Latin tongue wherein thou (cowardly enough) encounterest them, nor know
how to speak sound sense to your understandings, in their seeming b^bble to
each other, and to all others; Alas poor man, this is no news to the Quakers
to see Sanballats and Tobias's High Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, Doctors and
reverend Rabbis, superstitious Athenians, University Philosophers, Epicureans,
and Stoics, who worship an unknown God, (A generation of Arteficial Fools, and
Scholastic ignorant Ones that of old encountered Paul, a better Scholar [in
Christ's School] a wiser builder then themselves, Acts 17.) count Gods Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles bringers of strange Matters, and New Doctrines to their
Ears, medlers beyond their line, measure, Rule and Call, doers and speakers of
bald businesses; no news to hear the Opposers of Truth in their Science
(falsely so called) say of the Quakers, What will these feeble folk do? Will
they fortify themselves? Will they Sacrifice? Will they make an end in a day?
Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the Rubbish that are burnt?
That which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break down their stone
wall, Neh. 4.2, 3. Oh thou Seer (that confessest thou wast neither bred nor
born a Prophet, but an Herdsman) come thou to Prophecy at Bethel? at the
Kings Chapel? away hence to thy own Country, eat Bread and Prophecy there;
if thou will Prophecy, but come not here dropping thy word, thou art not a fit
man to minister here, the Land will not bear thy words, Amos 7.

Whence has this man these things he pretends too, this boldness to teach us,
having never learned at our Schools, being never brought up at our Nurseries
of Learning and Religion? and such like.

But miserably wretched, and deluded men that ye are, ye little consider
(though the old Priests and Scribes, as bad as they were, took knowledge of
such a thing in Peter and John, Acts 4.) that as outwardly unlearned and
ignorant men, as the Quakers seem to you to be, yet they have been with Jesus,
from whom they have learned that, by looking to him in his own Light, which all
your mere sublunary literature can never lead you into the knowledge of, even
that hidden Wisdom of God in a Mystery, which the Princes of this world are not
acquainted with, that Cross of Christ, the Wisdom, Power, Righteousness,
Image and Glory of God, which is foolishness to them that p^rish: Ye glory in
your Fencer-like Faculties of Disputing in Form, and Mood, and Figure over the
Quakers, as a sort of Rusticks and Russet-Coats, disorderly Disputers, unruly
and vain Talkers, because they are not Regulated, as your own blinded People
are in all things ( implicitly) by the Rules and wordly Rudiments of you
Renowned Rabbis, but ye forget that the Lord has rejected the Scribe and
Disputer of this World, and will confound, and make foolish, and bring to
naught all his strong, and wise, and mighty Matters (that Are) by the weak,
foolish, base, abject, Contemptible things ( that Are not) and by stammerring
lips, and another Tongue, then they wot of, and by Precept upon Precept, line
upon line, here a little and there a little make the Drunkard of Ephraim
stagger, and stumble, and go backward and fall, and be broken, and snared, and
taken; and weary these vain, wise wildAsses out of their Academical Niceties
and Punctilio's out of their Accute Astutenesse, and Astute Accutenesse out of
their witty Wiles, and wicked wrestlings against the Truth by a foolish Nation,
that are even as no People in their eyes.

Ye tell the World that these People know not the Law, and are accursed (as
your Forefathers did, saying, Do you see any of the Rulers of the Pharisees
believe as they do?) they are un'earned and unstable, a giddy headed People
that wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; But ye heed not how Christ
tells the Scribes, that were as well skilled in searching into the Scripture as
your selves, that they Erred, and knew not the Scriptures, nor the power of
God; and how even ignorant and unlearned Peter himself (as to that Science of
yours ( falsely so called) or Wisdom of the flesh, which is ever enmity
against God, and is never subject to his Law, nor can be) speaks of another
kind of un'earn'd, and unstable Ones, then those ye count so (who are a
thousand fold more ( spiritually) discerning then your selves) that being out
of the Light and spirit, in which Paul and holy men gave them forth, wrest both
Paul's Epistles, that are hard to be understood by the learned of our
Letter-lauders, and also other Scriptures to their own ruin.

The Quakers Preach Christ his Light and Cross, the Power of God, the Wisdom
of God to the Jew (outwardly) a stumbling Block and foolishness to the Greek;
the Quakers know not the Originals, (say they) How can they Expound and Open
Scriptures? They know not the language we here use (quoth I.O.) whose Lies are
most in Latin against the Quakers, who busies himself about the backside of
the Book, and tangles and turmoyls himself in tedious Tattle about the External
Text, about the integrity of the Hebrew and the Greek; But ye (say I) know not
what is talked of in that Text it self ye so much talk of, when it tells of a
time, wherein the Eyes of all Israel, as of one man, shall be toward the Lord,
who will bend Judah for himself, and fill the Bow with Ephraim, and raise up
the sons of Sion against the sons of Greece, and make them as the sword of a
Mighty man in his hand; Yea, who so blind about the Scripture it self, as well
as about the things therein written, as the great Scripture searching Scribes,
and Scholastic Scriblers thereupon? who come not at all to Christ himself,
whom the Scriptures testify of, that they might have Light and Life; who never
at any time hear either his, or the Fathers voice, or see his shape; so far are
they from coming forth into his likeness or Image, which (in their own
imaginations) these Spiritual men of God (so called) pretend to appear in more
then any others.

Now as to the many frivoulous flouting phrases, and new fangled nickNames,
wherewith thou, who bear Christ's Name, more then his Nature (like the old
Heathen Enemies to the Truth) do cover its true Christian Friends, as it were
with wild Beasts-skins, that looking on them under that likeness, Name, and
Notion of Deceivers, Destroyers, Liars, Hypocrites, horrid, cursed, Diabolical
Blasphemers, the Dogs of your Flocks may be hereby encouraged and set on to run
the more greedily on to tear and worry them: These will all Reflect upon thy
self the envious Exerter of them, and lie with no little load, like a Talent of
Lead, upon thy Conscience, and sink thee down, among the rest of the
uncircumcised in lips, into sore Condemnation, when thou awakest to behold him,
who now comes in Myriads of his Saints, to Convince and Judge all ungodly
Sinners for all the hard speeches they have ungodly spoken against him in his
Saints, and Servants, whose Righteousness is of the Lord, and whose Heritage it
is to condemn every false, Blasphemous and unruly Tongue, that (as thine does)
rises up in Judgment against them. And as for us, the Reproach of Christ, is
greater Riches to us then the Treasures of England, which ye are glorying in,
and gaping after; Nevertheless I shall here have a few words with thee about
some few of them, as well as about the Lies, that under them thou rellest of
us. Thou ventest thy venom against us under those Two (now vulgar) Names of
Quakers and Fanatics, on this wise;

Ex. 11 Sect. 1. Fanaticos nostrates qui a tremore quo se in sacris agitari
ipsi fibi fingunt, aut reapse vi mali spiritus agitantur, vulgo trepidantes seu
Quakers vocantur, respicit Quaestionis pars posterior, quae est de Scripturae
nomine proprio.
J. O. The second part of the Question concerning the proper Name of the
Scripture, relates to our Fanatics, who from that Trembling wherewith they
fain themselves to be shaken in their holy Services, or rather the power of
that evil spirit, by which in very deed they are shaken, are commonly called
Quakers.

Reply: As for that holy duty it self of Quaking and Trembling at the Word of
God, which as blind a guide and bruit a Beast as thou art in speaking evil of
what thou know, as also of what thou know not, thou both ownest and
acknowledgest the holy men of God, were taken with of old, when moved to utter
his Word as it came to them (witness thy own words, page 8. viz. the coming of
the Word to them, filled them with dread and reverence of God, Hab. 3.16. and
also greatly affected even their outward man, though we dare not be so
desperate as to damn it all for Diabolical, as thou do, in these days, in
which God has his Prophets, and his People, as well as then; yet we own it (as
thou in word do) and (indeed as they did, Isa. 66.5.) and are (as they by
their Brethren) hated and cast out by you our Brother Christians (in Name) for
so doing; which mere fleshly Brotherhood, who hate us, and cast out our Name as
evil for his Names sake, shall be ashamed for it before him that appears to our
joy; and when Jerusalem has first drunk her part [as she is now a doing] ye
shall drink the dregs of the Cup of Trembling with the Devils [whose Portion
Trembling is, for all ye believe the History as they also do] and wring them
out together with all the wicked of the Earth.

And as we own the thing, so [saving all your Ironical Tauntings of us
therewith, which we deny, as that, which ye even of God must be denied for] we
own the Name, when used in his fear, as that, which is both Arbitrio and Iure
Divine, imposed by God himself, as their proper right, on his own People, whom
himself from that holy Qualification of Trembling at his Word, even thereby, as
by a peculiar Character, denominates, Isa. 66.5. and distinguishes from all
other people, that are found Quaking and Trembling mostly at the Word of man,
whom his Saints have ceased from, whose breath is in his nostrils; so that if
the Word of man, earthly powers, Princes, Parliaments go forth for such or such
a kind of Christianity, Religion, Worship, Order, or Form of Ecclesiastical
Doctrine, or Discipline, they all, Priests and People, and the Nations that
fear not God by wholesale strait stand stupefied Quaking, and Trembling, and
fall down Worshipping, for fear of the Furnace (the Quakers at Gods Word only
excepted) whatever Golden Image the King of Babylon pleases to set up, and
impose on them to how down to: As to Name and Thing then we own that of Quaking
and Trembling, but dare not like thy self, who ownest, and yet defamest it,
corrupt our selves in what we know; Nec tutum est ludere cum sacris, neither is
it a safe matter for such a high Professor, as thou I.O. go for, to jest
and fleere so as thou do, about such holy matters as Quaking and Trembling at
the Word of God, which thou must come to know nearer home, then ever yet, when
that Word nigh in the heart, thou so sowlely fallest on, comes once to be felt
in thee as an Hammer breaking thy Rocky heart to pieces, and to flame forth in
thee as a fire, and a spirit of burning under the Pot, whose filthy scum boyls
in it against the Truth, and is not yet purged away; When thou come to know
Moses, of whom thou pratest so much, a little better then yet thou do, thou
shall say, I exceedingly Fear and Quake (ass^re they self) as well as he, with
whom thou must Tremble on Mount Sinai, Heb. 12.18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, etc. at
that voice of the Trumpet, and that Terror of the Lord, and that Blackness,
and Darkness, and Tempest, which attends it, before thou come near Mount Sion,
and to rest in the Hill thereof, as much as in an empty sound of Words thou art
mounting up thither before thy time.

I.O. But this Dread and Terror (which Satan strove to imitate in his filthy
Tripodes and (...)) was peculiar to the Old Testament, and belonged to the
Paedogogy thereof; the Spirit in the Declaration of the New Testament gave out
his mind and will in a way of more liberty and glory, the manner of it related
more to that glorious liberty in fellowship and Communion with the Father,
whereunto Believers had then an access provided them by Jesus Christ.

Rep. That the Devil may, and does strive to imitate the things of God, I deny
not; yea, there is scarce any outward Appearance or Form that the power of God
puts it self forth in, but the power of the evil One in man strives ( Apishly)
to imitate and make the mere likeness and Image of it; but these Images and
Imitations are made among the Magicians and Wisemen of Egypt, who are gone out
from Gods Counsel, the Light and Power of God in the Conscience, into the mere
Imaginations of their own vain minds and foolish hearts, leaning to their own
benighted understandings; but not among these who leaving their own Wisdom
learn only at the lips of Christ, who leads even fools that love him, into the
Substance it self, and that wisdom which makes wise to Salvation. It Is true
that as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses by imitating what he did by the
finger of God, and acting outwardly so as he, as far as they could, till they
were forced to confess they could now (fainedly) follow no further, and in a
seeming show did the same by their Enchantments. So it is now, the Saints pray,
so do the Sinners; the Saints fast, so do the Sinners; the Saints; preach of a
Gospel, a Kingdom to come, so do the Serpents; the Saints meet, so do the
Hypocrites; the Saints Worship, so do the Idolaters; the Saints in the Power
and Spirit of God profess to be Godly and Holy, so do the zealous Sorceters in
words, who bewitch the people that they cannot believe and obey the Truth, and
their several seduced Societies which have ((...)) the Form of Godliness,
denying the power thereof, etc.

And as it is true, that as the Quakers Tremble at Gods Word, so that the power
of Gods voice, which shakes the Cedars of Lebanon (when heard) as well as the
lower shrubs, of^^times greatly affects the outward man; so the Devil may
cause some of his deluded ones to seem only to do the like: But what of all
this? Scillicet, because there is something done in Deceit, therefore nothing
now done in Truth; some Quaking is of the Devil, therefore none of God himself.
This is the sum of I.O's sayings of all the Quakers in gross; if not, learn
henceforth I.O. to take forth the prelious from the vile (as Gods Prophets do,
who are as his mouth, Ier.) and not to jumble these together in one as hitherto
thou have done; till then, I tell thee from the Quakers, so called, that
faining and being driven by the Devil, thou fatherest on us, we are far from,
and deny it as one of the many Lies the Devil drives thee to defame us with,
who are in the Truth, which the Devil abode not in, whose Works, with himself
and his Lies, and that Deceit which is of him, and dwells in thee, we deny and
defy also for ever.

And now whereas thou talkest of only Liberty, and Glory, and Fellowship with
the Father in these days of the New Testament, and such Quaking, Trembling,
Terror, Dread, etc. as greatly affects the outward man, as a matter belonging
to them of old, only to the Jewish Paedagogy, etc. as if the Word must come to
you now in a smoother manner, then to Gods Servants and Prophets heretofore.

Herein thou talkest as if the time of all such Trouble, Terror, Dread, and
Trembling at hearing of the Word of God, as usually affected the outward man,
and was in the Prophets, was all perfectly past, and men should see no more of
that in the world among the Servants of the Lord from that time, and forward,
wherein Christ after the flesh was outwardly incarnated, Crucified. and Risen
again from the dead; and all the Appearances of the Lord to his Apostles,
Prophets, Messengers, Ministers and Servants, whom he sends forth on his Errand
into the world now a days, are only in liberty and glory; dreaming pleasantly
in thy dark mind of ease, rest, peace and familiarity with the dreadful God
before thy time, damning down the rough, severe, troublesome, terrible,
trembling spirit, doctrine, and Ministry of the Quakers, to thee ward, and thy
serpentine generation of Vipers, that would fain flee the wrong way, when ye
are warned thereof, from the news of a wrath yet to come, to your lifelesse
Forms, and fig leaves, and false biding-places, sandy sickle foundations,
literal lurking-holes, fained pretenses, bare Bible bulwarls, selfish Fastings,
Prayers, Praisings, Preachings, misty, empty, pithlesse and poor Professions,
as a Doctrine of Devils, as a ministration wherein either fictitiously, or
rather really they are acted, and surpised by the Devil with trembling in
their holy services, Ex. 1 S.I. as they said of John that came Fasting and
Reproving. Judging and Threatening, laying an Axe to the root of their fair
leafy tree, and flourishing formal prosessings of the old Prophets Words, and
Writings, and pretenses to Abraham as his Children, and Moses as his Disciples,
and the Scripture as the Scribes and Openers of it; and telling of wrath to
come upon them, and unquenchable fire to burn them up as Chass, and this man
has a Devil, away with him, give us a Ministry that will speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, Seers that will see better things for Sion, that shall answer the
Messengers of the Nations, that enquire of them, the Lord has founded Sion,
it is Babylon that is to be confounded; O ye Quakers, ye Seers flee ye far away
hence to Rome, to Papists, Jesuits, Jews, Turks, Heathens, (among whom many
Quakers have been, but few or none of our Chimney-corner Churchmen that I know
of) but come not hence with your Plumb-line, thundering words of Judgment laid
to the line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, and laying waste the High
Places of Israel, and the Sanctuaries of Israel with the Sword of the Lord;
this our Land of Israel ought not to bear these words: it is disturbance,
tumultuousnesse, and Conspiracy against the Pious Magistracy, and the Godly
Ministry in the midst of it: Prophecy no more such rough things at Bethel,
they are not right things here, Prophecy to us Placentia, Prophecy smooth
things [alias Deceits] we are the Priests of Bethel, the house of God. Amos
7.7, etc. we are the Ministry of the reformed Churches, we are the Well heads
and feed at the Fountains, from whence Souls draw all their Refreshment; we are
the Doctors, Deans, Principals, Provosts, Presidents, Wardens, Masters of
Magdalene, Christ-Church, Jesus, Trinity, Emmanuel, and such like Christian
Colleges and Halls, the Religious Nursing Fathers to the Nursing Mothers
themselves that are [ alias ought to be] the very Nurseries of Learning and
true Religion: If ye come to us with a Word from the Lord, come not in your
wonted trembling postures, and obstreperous horrible vociferation, wherewith ye
dreadfully found it out throw our Streets, Cities, and Temples, know the Lord,
Condemnatur horrida illa vociferatio qua per vicos urbis, agros arque Templa
quae vocant illum cognoscite Dominum Rob^ant Fanatici. I. O. Ex. 3. S. 42. That
horrid tone wherein the Fanatics sound it out throw the City Suburbs, Fields,
and Temples, as they call them, that, know the Lord.
as if we were without God in the World; Prophecy no more ye Fanatics to us
in your pretended movings by the Spirit, if ye do, ye must bear and take the
shame of the Stocks, or the Cage, or the Whipping-Post, and a Pass to the
place from whence ye came, or the pulling off your Robe with the Garment, or
the stopping of your Mouth with stones, and the Pumps, and Mire, and Dirt, or
such like, Mic. 2.6, 7, 8. But verse. 11. if a man walk in a Spirit of Falsehood,
do Lie, and will Prophecy to us of wine and strong drink, Ease, Pleasure,
Peace with God in our sins, impossibility of being purged from them till we
die; and of Salvation and Justification of us (by the Example of David) while
under the guilt of Murder and Adultery, and of Profits and Preferments, and
more Maintenance for a Godly Ministry, that suppose Gain to be Godliness, let
him come, he is a Gospel Minister, he shall even be the Prophet among our
present Seers, and gain-getting Priests, false Prophets, and foolish People.

But alas poor man, thou art far enough from the New Testament or Covenant yet,
which is a Gospel, a Covenant of Light, which thou art so far from, that thou
fightest against it; thou think thy Judgment is over past, and the Old
Testament a thing that thou have learned long ago; but thou art not come so
near to the sharp Paedagogy of it yet as thou must do, so far art thou from the
glorious Liberties of the New; Thy words are true enough, the Word under the
New comes in a way of more Liberty and Glory, but its no news to hear High
Priests speak Truths which themselves know not; thou art at best but an Old
Testament Talker of the New, and one that's come truly yet under the Tuition of
neither; As for the New, the Word comes under it in Liberty and Glory, but not
to Old Testament Spirits, Doctors, Scribes, and Pharisees, they see not clearly
so much as Moses face, much less the Glory of God in the face of Jesus:
Condemnation is yet to come from Christ himself first to such as these, as well
as from Moses and John, yea Christ himself (whose friendliness to Publicans and
Sinners, as a Physician, was found fault with by such Friday fasting Pharisees
as this Age is filled with, as much as John's Austerenesse) was found in John's
rough Spirit, Camels hair Garment, and astonishing Appearance to them, that
went about to Murder him in his inward Ministry and Testimony within
themselves; and then they said of him too, as of John, Thou have a Devil, Ioh 8.

Ah poor Nursing Fathers and Mothers, Universally Erring, University Seducers,
poor seducing Priests, and seduced People! notwithstanding the Glorious Liberty
and Gloriousness of the Gospel Times, that ye are glorying in (in a Dream)
that ye live under, ye must most assuredly find a Condemning, Judging,
Terrifying fiery flaming Law laying hold on your Consciences, and finding you
out, and the Sword of the Lord entering into your Souls, and the Wrath of the
Lord rending your very heart strings a sunder, and dread, terror, and
trembling surprising you Hypocritical sinners in Sion, before ever ye shall
come to know the true Liberty or Glory of the Gospel, which is the Image and
Glory of God, brought forth among you; yea, judgment is already laid to the
line, and Rigeteousnesse to the Plummet, and the Hail is falling, that will
sweep away your Refuges of Lies, and the storm, that will overflow your hiding
places, and break and disinable your supposed Covenant and Agreement with Death
and Hell, as if your judgment were passed over by the Lord, and none of that
could come near you; and your Bed will be found too short for you to rest on,
and your Covering too narrow to wrap your selves in from the Wrath of God, the
power of whose wrathful displeasure shall make your Mount Sier shake like
Sinai, before ever ye come near to the sight of that glorious Rest that the
Saints ly down in on Mount Sion.

Now as to that other new found Phrase of Fanatics; These Fanatics, the
Fanatics of this time, our Fanatics Fanatical Quakers, Fanatical Souls,
Fanatical Enthusiasts, Fanatical Knaves, Fanatical Anti-scripturists; and
Epist. Ded. page 13. 28. 30. page 147. Second Title Page, Ad Lectorem, Ex. 2.
S. 2. S. 16. S. 21. S 22. S. 25. S. 32. S. 39. Ex. 4. S. 21. S. 23. S ult
Fanatici nostrates, Fanatici (...), hisce Fanaticis, insano cujusvis Fanatici
Nebulonis strepitu.
under which ever and anon, yea so often, that I may say, Fere numquam non, thou
soamest out (as thy fellows do) that froth, filth, and falsehood, which floats
about in thy foolish vain Spirit against the Quakers in gross, as against a
furious, distracted, mad, crackbrain'd kind of men, that (for so those Terms
signify, as used by thee) pretend to Visions, Revelations, Illuminations,
Inspirations, the Spirit of Prophecy, and such like; but are ( Reapse) stark
besides themselves, and bereft of their very wits and senses.

As new a Nickname as it is to this Age, this is no other, then what all the
Prophets of God were entertained with in the several seasons, wherein God sent
them out, by the many false Prophets that were Coaetaneous with them, and
therefore nibil novi, no new business to such as are not blind; He is but
meanly skilled in the Scriptures who has not yet learned from thence, That the
Prophets by whom God spoke, and by whose Ministry be mu^tiplied Visions, and
used Similitudes, as Hos. 12.10* were ever counted Deceivers, as the snare of a
Fowler in all their ways, that the true Prophet was a fool, and the spiritual
man, or man of the spirit, Mad, Hos. 9.7, 8. and hatred always in the House of
his God; And that Gods People (by mere profession) rose up against them, as
against an Enemy, and (as now the same Generation of Holy Hypocrites do, both
in Old England and in New) pulled off their Robes, and their Garments from them
(to whip and scourge them sometimes, as Seditious and Disturbers) that pass by
securely, as men most averse from War, and streitned the spirit of the Lord,
saying, Prophecy not so such as Prophesied in his Name and Power, and putting
them to shame if they did; when if a man would walk in the wind of his own
Invention, and Lie falsely, and Prophecy to them of ^elly Ohear, of Wine, and
of strong Drink, even he should be owned a Prophet by that People, Mic 2.8, 9,
10, 11. And that Joshua the true High Priest and his fellows, even Christ and
the Children that God had given him, were as men wondered at, were set as signs
to be spoken against, even to the house of Jacob, from whom he hid his face,
and their peepers and mutterers out of their own familiar spirits, to the
unbelieving Despisers, that wonder and perish, for signs and for wonders from
the Lord of Host that dwells in Mount Sion, Isa. 8.17, 18. Zach. 3.8. Luke
2.34. Act. 13.40, 41.

Yea, I. O. has read his own Book ore but by the halves if he do not learn
this Lesson out of it himself, page 58, 59, 61, 62. that the (...), or divinely
inspired men, whose Doctrine was to have been received as from God, who sent
them, and in whose Name they spoke, though but Herdsmen, and of mean
Occupation, were yet generally rejected upon innumerable prejudices that
attended the Truth they spoke arising from the personal infirmities, and
supposed Interests of them that delivered it; as Amos 7. Ier. 43.2, 3. Ioh
9.29. Act. 24.5. and that what with these things, and chiefly the Peoples being
so eminently perplexed with false Prophets, both as to their number and
subtilty, that they could not well discern aright between Gods Word and that
which was only pretended so to be, and so became guilty of unbelief and
rebellion against God, not submitting to what they spoke in his Name, it
always so sell out that scarce any Prophet that spoke in the Name of God, had
any Approbation from the Church (of dead stones) in whose days he spoke,
Matthew. 5.12.21.33. to 38* Act. 7.52.

Thus much I.O. may learn from these words, which are mostly his own, that it
was always so heretofore, and how it should be otherwise in the latter days
of this formal Christian Church called Christendom, then he says it was in the
latter daves of that Jewish Church, both which National Churches say they are
Jews, Christians, and are not, but lie, and are the Synagogue of Satan, he
cannot see, that will not purposely look besides the Scripture, which intimates
to us a necessity of the innumerable multitude of false Prophets, by which
People must be perplexed from submitting to the Testimony of Gods true Ones,
that now go forth from him to witness against the other, since it says so
long since as it was written, that many Antichrists and false Prophets were
even then already gone forth into the world, which as, according to Christ's
praediction, Matthew. 24. they then (and not now, as our Seers say, who cannot see
themselves for their selves) began to breed, so have ever since spawned
themselves by a successive generation of the same seed of blind Seers, that
suppose Gain to be Godliness, in such Myriads over the face of the whole Earth,
that he must even go out of the Christian World at least, that will find any
clean Corner where these croaking Frogs, and unclean Creatures, and costly
Caterpillars are not crawling.

So then by reason of the many subtilties and serpentine insinuations of the
many false Prophets in these last days of the Gentile Christian Church (in
name, not nature) it is now as 'twas ever of old, that the true Prophets of the
Lord, whom he reproves the other by, are looked on as Fanatics, fools and mad
bare brained fellows, 2 King 9.11. Acts 26.24. that do but pretend and seem to
themselves to see that they do not, and make themselves Prophets, and are often
punished, as a sort of giddy guides, with stocks, stones, prisons, and such
kind of rough Reproofs, as the false Prophets, the Shemaiahs or Dreamers, which
speak lying words in the Lords Name, which he commanded them not, suggest as
most surable for the true Seers, to the Officers, whether Vice Chancellors,
Chief Priests, or Earthly Powers, that are (as the Beast that bears her is) the
Subordinate willing Executioners of the Clergy, or Whores wicked will, as in
the letter, from the false Prophet, to the Chief Priest against Jeremiah of
old, Ierem. 29.26, 27. The Lord has made thee Priest in the stead of Jehojadah
the Priest, that ye should be Officers in the House of the Lord, for every one
that is mad, and makes himself a Prophet, that thou should put him in
Prison, and in the Stocks: Now therefore why have thou not reproved Jeremiah of
Anathoth, which makes himself a Prophet unto you? etc.

As for thee I.O. I know not but that thou art the first that fastened that
wonted foul Name of Fanatics upon the People of God, called Quakers, in these
days, by thy fighting against them, and falsely accusing them, as fit for their
Frauds to be punished with Prisons, etc. under that Name so overfrequently used
by thee; for which it has since (justly enough as from God) befallen Thee and
thy fellow mongril Presbyter-Independents (Haman-like, who hanged high upon the
Gallows of his own preparing) to be whipped smartingly by that more smoakie sort
of Locusts, who are in the dark behind thee, with this Rod of thy own
gathering; for now by that Papal, Prelatical-Priesthood, that hope (but their
hopes are as-thine, and those of all Hypocrites are, as the giving up of the
Ghost) to overtop you all, even ye and all Sectaries that side not, or ride
not with them back to Rome, are branded by that same Name Fanatics of thy own
faining, which is become the common Charesteristical of all, but either Romish
or Canterburian Catholics; and thou thy self perhaps under that Notion of a
Sectary, and account of a Fanatic, as well as on some others, art justly (
Iudas-like, who betrayed the Truth) detruded down from that place of
Pre-eminence, from whence thou prated'st out that Preheminent piece of Latin
lack-Light against the Quakers, and according to Psalm. 96.25, 26, 27, 28. Psalm.
109. 7. to 21. Acts 1.20. deprived of thy dainty Deanery, and that thy
Bishopric, or Episcopal Office has another taken; and like as he did Doeg
(the Edomite) Psalm. 52.1, to ult. for the same Dog-like doings, viz. devising
Mischiefs, being as a sharp Razor to the Saints, deceitful workings, loving
evil, lying, devouring words more then good, and rather then to speak
righteously, has God plucked thee away from thy Prerogatives in that (falsely
called) Christs-Church, thou was it lately Head of; and if yet thou shall (as
perhaps thou may) happen ever to recover to any such outward Lordlinesse
again over Christ's true Church, and Gods own Heritage, who (come Summer heat,
or Winter storms) will still stand Green as an Olive in the House of God; yet
for all thy now flouting at them as Fanatics, and their way as Madness, that
day comes on a pace spoken of, Wisd. 4. 15. and 5.1. ad sinem, wherein those
righteous Ones thou wrongest shall stand out in great boldness before the
faces of all such as thee, who have afflicted them, and made no account of
their labors, and ye shall be amazed at the strangeness of their Salvation,
so far beyond all ye looked for, then repenting and groaning for anguish of
Spirit shall ye say within your selves, This is he whom we had in derision, and
as a Proverb of reproach; We fools cou^ his life madness, and his end without
honor: How is he numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the
Saints? Therefore have we erred from the way of Truth, and the Light of
Righteousness has not shinned to us, and the Sun of Righteousness rose upon
us; We wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, gone throw
Deserts where there lay no way, but as for the way of the Lord we have not
known it: What has Pride profited us? and what has Riches with all our
vaunting brought us? etc.

Thus far as to those Two Archi-Pseudo-Prophetical Titles by thee I.O.
tauntingly imposed upon the People, who at this day hear the Word of the Lord
and Tremble at his Word, viz. That of Quaking Fanatics, or in thy Sensu
Composito, Fanatical Quakers.

Now I come to those thy many other misprisions, and mis-representations of us
under the Terms of poor, deluded, foolish, Knaves, Crows, Vagrant Rogues, or
Vagabonds, Enthusiasts, Locusts, and such like.

J.O. The clamor of every Fanatical Knave, Ex. 3. S. 26. Epist. page 28. poor,
deluded, Fanatical souls amongst us called Quakers, for the instruction of the
younger sort, against whose abominations I have subjoyned the Theses in the
close of the other Treatises. Iuniorum instructioni quibus in sacrarum
literarum studium ingenii a cumen (...) intendentibus passim hosce corvos
sequi, Testaque lutoque, nee animus ost, nec otium specimen hoc novi
Fanaticismi refutati, qui (...) comitatus nullubi non grassatur, dicatum est.
Ad Lectorem.
To the Instruction of the younger Scholars, who, intending the accutenesse of
their Wit to the study of the holy Letters or Scriptures, have neither list nor
leisure to follow these Crows ( the Quakers) up and down, pelting at them with
Tiles and Dirt, this show of new Fanaticism refuted, which swarms even every
where, accompanied with strange Devils, is Dedicated, so Ex. 3. S. 2.4.
Fanatical Enthusiasts for their Enthusiams; so Ex. 3. S. 19. Locustas hasce cum
primum ex sumo purei prodierint, these Locusts ( the Quakers) when they came
first out of the smoke of the Pit; so Ex. 3. S. 17. Errones, Vagrant Rogues, or
Vagabonds.

Reply 1. Thy Judgment of us in general, which is mearly that of mans-Day,
which is the night, and a very small matter to us, will prove a matter of
moment, that will fall heavy on thy self at last, when the Judgment of God,
which we know is according to Truth, and is against thee, comes upon thee, and
all thy Judgment before thy time, and evil speakings of whom, and what thou
utterly know not; And as for us, if we judge thee again for many of the same
things of which we are judged by thee, yet our judgment is just and true, and
not our of its due time and place, and will stand ore thy head for ever, being
passed in the light, and day, and Spirit of God, in which the Saints are to
Judge the World, and the spiritual man discerns the Animal man and his matters,
but is not discerned by him: But as to this of Knave, it savouring much of that
Billingsgate Rhetoric (which T.D. has so much of, who called L.H. at his own
door in Dover -- he knows what, and ye says he is not able to match G.W. at
it) to render Reviling for Reviling Terms I shall forbear, and be silent here,
giving I O. my Goliah-like (...), (who conflatis naribus inflans, sets the
Saints so much at his heels, and (to use his own words) Gigantaeo quodam fastu
E'atus, like some Son of Anak looks on them as Grasshoppers, disgracing and
disdaining the whole kind or Species of the Quakers, what he is able, sometimes
as poor, deluded, foolish, and yet sometimes again as more Knave, then Fool)
leave to overcome me herein; for though I can truly say (having been at the
Popes Palace which stands in Monte Caballino) that font labra Prolui
Caballino; yet haud unquam me Prophetam somniasse tam altum memini, ut Repent
sic Rabula prodirem.

Reply 2. Thou talkest much here, and at the front and sag-end also of thy
English Epistle in Commendation of thy Junior Students valuing and studying the
Holy Scriptures more then any thou know, and of their bending the best of
their wits that way; how ye value the Scriptures we will see by and by, but till
ye study the light and spirit more then ye do, which the letter came from, as
ye are yet at best, so at best ye will become but obtuse acuti homunciones,
sharp-witted men after your own blunt fashion, who in truth are as
sharp-sighted in the Mystery of the Holy Scriptures, as a very Mole is into a
Millstone. Behold O thou Academical Student in Divinity, who call the Quakers
Anti-scripturists, thou art called the Scripturist, the Text-man, the Opener-of
that Book called the Bible, which is a Book as much sealed to thy supposed
learned self, as to the unlearnedst sort of men in the World, that can but
barely read it, and thou art restless in wrestling against the Light, and
restest in the dead Letter of that Law, which is Light and Life, and make thy
boast of God, as the man that know his will, and tryest out the things that
are most excellent, being instructed no higher then so thy self, and taking on
thee to instruct all out of that life-less Letter, which is all thy Law, (and
yet much more then thou live by) and art confident that thou thy self art a
guide of the blind, a light of them, which are in darkness, an instructor of
the foolish, poor, deluded Quakers, a Teacher of Babes, which have a form of
formal Knowledge, and of external Truth, as it is in that mere Letter of the
Law, but thou (being enmity to the light the Quakers live in) art rather a rash
Reprover of the things that are most excellent, a blind Guide, a dark
Lantern, an ignis fatuus, a fleshly, foolish, Instructor, an untaught
Teacher, that must yet come to be taught out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, out of which the Lord is now ordaining strength that shall stop the
Liars mouth, and still the stout Enemy and Avenger; and from the stammering
lips that thou stand amazed and astonished at, as uttering nonsense (in thy
non-sensical Nodel) shall thou stoop to learn the Soul-saving Truth, or else be
left to perish in thy envious enmity against it in thy damnable darkness, in
thy wilful blindness, obstinate unbelief, and unparalled ignorance of it for
ever, as the Pharisaical Jew was, whose case this was before thee, Romans 2.17.
to the end; And though thou teach others, yet till thou teach thy self,
alias learn at thy own measure of Christ's Light, that teaches thee in thy own
Conscience to know thy self more, and live more like Christ's Teachers, then
thou do, thou shall bring as few to God as thou have done, who have left all
that have learnt of thee yet, where thou thy self yet art, viz. in sin, and not
believing thou can ever be out on it (as they and we tell thee (truly) thou
may) while thou live, or till the World to come, where the Popes purgatory
is which (as truly) thy self deniest, and shall bring men as near to God, who
is Light, as those who are left out of his Kingdom, which is Light, in the
Darkness, which is the Devils kingdom; Thou teach other's should not commit
Adultery, but thou art the Adulteress, and Imperious Whorish Woman, with whom
all the Kings and People in the Antichristian World have committed Folly and
Fornication, and, bewitched with thy Sorceries, have run a Whoring after from
the Lord. Thou teach another should not Steal, and professest to abhor
Idols, but thou art that Sacred Thief, that committest that sacrum furtum, that
fine sort of Sacrilege, and stealest the words, which thou sellest for Money
when thou have done, after 10, 20, 30, or 40 shillings a Sermon, out of the
true Prophets Writings, and Fathers, and old Authors; and so what thou
learned in thy Accidence, when a Schoolboy in the Country, thou make use,
and witnessest the Truth of, now thou art become of an University Scholar, a
Clerical Countryman again, viz. in legendis veteribus Authoribus proficies, in
Reading of old Authors (for so many Doctors do out of their Notes in the
Pulpit) thou shall Profit; for profit thou do thy self in outward Goods, but
not the People in inward Goodness, who are generally in all Parishes left as
ignorant and profane, as the Priest finds them, when he is called from them,
either by death, or some Deanery, or higher Divine degree of spiritual dignity.

Thou make thy boast of the Letter, but throw breaking the Letter thou
dishonourest God and his Ministry, while thou do more docere facienda, then
facere docenda; and as Accute and Accurate a Curate as thou art of Souls, thou
art not quite so useful as a Wherstone, Qui cotis usurpat Officium reddit
saltem alios acutos, ipse licet interim plane Hebes est and obtusus.
which serves to sharpen other things, though it self remain blunt and obtuse;
but thou that pretendst to keep the Key of Knowledge and the Kingdom, art
neither quick to enter thy self, nor suffer, much less servest to quicken,
so much as thou slug'st them that would, by the best thou do thou make thy
Converts no better then thy self, who art not yet so good as thou should be;
and in thy fighting against the Quakers, who would have thee but so, as thou
ought to be, art not one jot better then worse then naught it self.

And if thou servest to sharpen at all, it is more to make men more keen, whose
Teeth are enough on edg at them already, against the Saints and the Truth they
dwell in, and by thy lying words, which are as Swords and sharp Arrows that
way, to reach them, that attend to thy contemptuous Tattle, to use their
Tongues, after the Example of thine, as sharp Razors, to speak proud things,
proudly, disdainfully, and contemptously against the Righteous.

Reply 3. As to thy term of Enthusiasts, or Expecters of Inspiration by their
inward Speculation, I say that thou, who art gone forth of thy self to look for
it without thy self in the outward observations, shall wait long enough before
thou there find the Kingdom, which is within thee, whether ever thou come into
it yea or nay, for it comes not to any of our cryers Lo here, lo there.

Reply 4* As to that of Locusts and Vagabonds, that day is now dawned upon the
Earth in the late benighted Horizon of this Nation, in which we are seen, and
see both who, and from whence the Locusts are, and when they came up out of the
Pit, and how that these Locusts, and Caterpillars, and Canker-worms, even the
slumbering Shepherds of the King of Assyria, as Nah. 3.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
whose King is the Angel of the bottomless Pit, whose Name is Abaddon, and
Apollyon, the destroyer of Souls, Rev. 9.1, to 12. have crowned themselves, and
made themselves many, and spread themselves over the whole earth as
Grassehoppers for multirude, and camped about in all hedges in the cold day,
and have spoiled and devoured, and had power to sting men as Scorpions, and
have made their wickedness to pass over all men continually, and must when the
Sun of Righteousness arises, (as now he does, with healing in his wings on
all that fear his Name) flee away, and their place not be known where they are;
and thou show thy self to be yet darkened with that smoke they have for Ages
and generations ascended out of, that deemest those Locusts to be the Quakers,
who are rising up in the light and power of the truth of God, to the dispelling
of that smoky fog of errors they have lain hid in.

Reply 5. We see also who are the Vagabonds in the sight of God, even such as
with Cain are fled from his Light in their consciences, and gone out from his
presence into the Land of Nod where they are busy in building Cities, and ^air
outward dwellings for themselves, but have no habitation in God; and not the
Quakers, who for the Gospels sake choose to have, with the Apostles of old, no
certain dwelling place upon earth, 1 Cor. 4.11. though else as capable to have
many as your selves, who have often many more earthly homes and houses, then men
are capable to hold in a way of honesty.

Reply 6. And though thou stilest us Crows, yet such as are not in the
blackness of darkness may see we come not so near to that carrion Creature
either in color or conditions, as such do as so account us, who never yet put
their spectacles on but when their eyes are abroad and gone from home; But who
ere are the Crows, its easy enough to be seen who are the Magpies and
Parrets, whose pratlings and pratings are, as from no higher principle then
men's teachings, and imitation of words themselves know not the true meaning of,
so for no higher an end but barely to get something for the body and the belly,
as Romans 17. v. 17, 18. which usually is the chief Churchman and Grand Senior
among the Greedy Clergy, and the oldest Master of Arts Quis expedivit psittaco
suum (...)? Picasque docuit verba nostra Conari? Magister Artis ingeniique
largitor Venture, docuit negatas Artifex sequi voces. Per.
in most Universities and Countries.

Reply 7. And whereas thou speak as if it is not worth the while for thy
Junior Students to follow those Crows (the Quakers) so as to stand pelting and
flinging at them with dirt and Tile-shards; In that say thou truly indeed;
Whereupon (I say) those Scripture studying Scholars to whose use thou devotest
these thy Theological Disputations against the Quakers, in a strange Language
by thy own confession, might be easily better but likely not worse busied, then
they ordinarily are, whilst what with stones and Tobacco-pipes, dirt and mud
and such like materials they are assaulting the Quakers in their (elsewise)
quiet meetings in their two nurseries of Learning, ill manners and Irriligion,
viz. both Oxford and Cambridge: And 'twere more worth the while for both
Vicechancellors and Mayors to Bocardo some of them for these and worse matters,
for examples ^ake to other rude Rabbis, then to connive at, countenance and
encourage them in it, as some have lately done; but alas, that the Juniors
throw stones, mud and dirt with their hands, no marvel, when such a Senior as
I. O. is throwing mire and dirt against the Quakers with his inky crow quill,
and pelting at them the best paper-pellets he has with his Parret-like pen; and
no wonder to a wise man, that from the greatest to the least ye are all
bedirtying the Quakers, since the wicked are always like a troubled Sea that
never is at rest, but ever casting up mire and dirt in the face of Truth.

Reply 8. As to thy pitiful Terms to us of Poor, deluded, foolish, unlearned;
It Is true, as thou slightingly say, the Quakers are for the most part poor
in this World, and, as T. D. flings it also in our faces, having no great
visible estates, but rich in Invisibles, in that faith ye are out of, by which
they stand Heirs of that Kingdom ye have no inheritance in till ye believe in
the Light ye yet hate; and they seem as Poor every way else, as having nothing
in another World, to your Laodicean Lordships, who are boasting your selves in
your Profession of that ye are out of the Possession of, as Rich and increased
with goods and in need of nothing, yet are they making many Rich by their
Ministry, when your selves (as unwilling as you are to know it) are not only
poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, but impoverishing all
that have to do with, or that ever trade much with you, and maintaining all in
the same (inward) beggarly condition with your selves; so that their souls
never thrive into the life ye sometimes talk of, into the thing, which is the
end of all outward Ministry, or into any better then bareness, and seannesse,
and b'indnesse, and barrenness it self, while they fit under the shadow of
your Ministry, whilst thousands in this Nation that have been turned to the
light, and the Truth within, by means of the Quakers Ministry, which a taking
heed to within is the end of, are come to witness the Word of Christ, which
your letter is but a witness of, dweling Richly in themselves, and with the
Spouse, Cant. 3.2, 3, 4. that sought her Beloved in your broad ways once,
wherein she never found him, being passed away from you Watchmen, who beat and
smite and wound them for so doing, Cant. 5.7. have in the narrow way, which ye
have no mind to walk in, found him whom their souls loved.

Ye often tell such as Relinquish your Ministeries, that ye have been a means
of opening their eyes, and think strange that they cannot abide under your
Teachings, as well as heretofore; but were it as true, as ye do but deem it so
to be, that your pains had proved so profitable, as to open the eyes that now
see, ye could not but see of your selves, that while they abode in blindness
they abode quietly under you blind guides, but when once they came to see, they
saw they were to abide there no longer.

Ye call your Universities the eyes and the Well springs, heads, fountains,
mothers and nurseries of Learning and True Religion; but the Lord is judging
those filthy Fountains, and the Rivers that run out of them, and turning their
waters into blood, and giving them blood to drink, of which also they are
worthy, yea and righteous is the Lord in judging, for they have ever shed the
blood of Saints and Prophets, and strove to root out the True Religion, that is
Pure and undefiled from off the earth, and have nourisht up Illiteracy it self,
if that only be learning, as in Scripture sense it is, 2 Pet. 3.1 Cor. 2.1, 2.
to know Christ and the Scripture by the Spirit, and have headed all men in
their hatred of the Truth, and been mothers of most of that mischief that is
now befalling all Nations where they are, and the Wells from whence those
Legions of learned unlearned ones, to whom the vision of all is as a Book
sealed, have sprang, and to whom all people have leaned as their Leaders, till
they have utterly lost the way to life, and the Right eyes of those
Idol-shepherds, which the sword of the Lord now comes upon till it be night
unto them, that they shall not divine, and till they sha'l be utterly darkened.

And this I declare not as one that am utterly against that outward Inferior
furniture* or lower sort of literature, whereon ye live and feed till ye
surfeit, and for having but a little of which (for some, that pretend to very
much, have not overmuch of that, and as much abuse, that little they have more
in defiance, then in defense of Truth) ye Reckon on your selves as exceedingly
enriched; nay, if most of you had more of it then you have, it were not much
the worse, would you use it better then you do; and were ye as Rich and learned
(as ye are in that) in the best kind of learning, which the light within leads
to, and ye fight against, and the measure of Gods gift of grace in your own
hearts, that brings Salvation with it to all that submit to be taught by it,
teaches ( viz.) to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly,
righteously and soberly in this present world, as little of which learning and
life is to be found among young Academical self. Admirers, as among any people
upon earth, among whom there is, whether magna or parva cura linguarum, major
or minor Artium, I will not say, nor is it much material, so long as what is of
the Lord most expected lies most neglected, but I may safely say not maxima,
but minima pietatis.

But I speak it as one not a little lamenting over our Nurseries of learning
and Religion, and not a little grieved to see how little of God and godliness
in the power of it is either seen or sought after by those Seers and formal
Seekers, but those of outward letters and writings, whereof some are as bad
rotten, poysonsome, false and foolish, as othersome are good, wholesome, true,
sound and solid; in the best of which yet without the Light, which universally
they hate, and look askew at, the life of God can never be found: and to see
how little yet our Nations supposedly learned leaders have learned of that
Mystery Christ Jesus within themselves, whereby to become any other then Ignes
fatui, or false Leaders to the whole Land, which has been wholly caused to
err by them, and has been led of them to its own destruction.

Yea, this lamentable, and shall be for a lamentation of lamentations, with
which I must make a little out here to lament against you O ye nursing Mothers
(so called) to the Church of God, both in this Nation and throughout
Christendom, that there is none among all the sons, which to the vast expending
and exhausting of her earthly treasure, and the very Quintessence of all her
carnal things upon them, both in her Universities and in all her Parishes, when
removed from thence, she has nourished, and that is found able by the Spirit,
which only does it, to minister spiritual things truly to her, or in requital
of her who has so enriched them for it the other way, to enrich her with any
true, lasting heavenly treasure, or to measure and tale back again to her, even
as well in her Protestant and more reformed, as in her Popish and more deformed
States, any other then such Trash, Wood, Hay and Stubble as is now falling
before the fire.

And that by all the most Learned labors of her most Learned Rabbis, Doctors
and Students in Theology, and Clergy of what sort soever, the rest of her
children called Christians have not learned so much as to know Christ and
themselves, much less Christ in themselves, so far as make them honest, true,
holy, just, sober, meek, pure, loving, gentle, merciful, pitiful peaceable,
patient, temperate, and after his own Image, which is the end of all Learning,
Ministries, Ministrations and doings that pertain ad intra, and ad extra too,
to Christian Religion, which Christ or Image of God ad intra, and ad extra also
who are not come to witness in and on themselves, know not yet Christ the
Mystery, the hope of Glory, and cannot prove themselves upon due examination to
be in the faith, or any other in the sight of God then Reprobates.

And that by and from her Priests and her Prophets, whose own eyes are not yet
anointed with eye salve, that they may see, that have took upon them to be her
Supreme Guides into goodness, and took many millions of money for many Ages
and generations upwards to make other men learned in the Truth, to direct them
into Righteousness and Holiness, the hands of evil d^ers have been
strengthened, so that none has returned perfectly from his wickedness, but
such evil fruits, as darkness, Ignorance, blindness, bloodinesse,
uncleanness, drunkenness, and all sorts of ungodliness and profaneness is
gone forth into all her Lands: So that a little of that honest learning how to
live Godly, righteously and honestly in this present World, that is now found
in abundance among poor, plain Country Rusticks and Russet Rabbis (as some
University Doctors and Divines (witness Doctor Featley) have derisorily
denominated the Mechanics, that meddle with expounding Scripture) amounts to
more then all that great learning, little equity, less honestly, and least
godliness, that is found among the nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers of them
all.

And this is Lamentable and a Lamentation with which I must here lament, not
only over all Christendom in general, but over these Protestant parts of it
also, where Popery is so abjured, that men spend their money on their pretended
Feeders for that which is not the bread of Life, but light heartlesse branne,
that is measured out to them at a high rate too, the Lord knows, out of the
barren brain of their brutish Pastors, who have not sought the Lord in his own
light, but at the most in that mere Letter that gives not the Life, of which
Letter they are the Ministers (for means too) and not of the Spirit; Whereupon
(as the Lord says, Ier. 10.21, 22.) They shall not prosper, but all their
flocks must be scattered, in order to which, the noise of the bruit is already
come, and a great commotion out of the North to lay their Cities desolate as a
den of Dragons.

That (howbeit their deluders cry out against the Quakers, who freely undelude
men, as poor deluded, fanatical, etc. yet the poor people are most miserably
couzened, cheated and deluded by their blind Guides, that see little themselves
into the marrow and mystery of spiritual matters, and not standing in the
Counsel of God given out by his light in their own consciences, never come to
hear his Word coming to them within from his own mouth, and not hearkening to
what God himself says in them, as the true Prophets did, Hab. 3.1. never come
into the true vision of him, or his Will, but run and say he says, because
they find it written he said so, or so to others, when they never heard him
speaking it in themselves, and so never profit the people at all, as God said
of old such should not.

They sit as the old Pharisaical Scribes did, who heard not at any time the
voice of God nor saw his shape, in the twilight of their own imaginations
searching the Scriptures, and looking in them for the eternal Life which only
testify of it, but come not unto Christ, in whom only they Testify it is (
for in him is the life, (say they) and his Life is the light of men) that they
may have his life in themselves, and from it only Minister unto others; and so
such food for their souls, and Raiment, and Riches, and Gold, and eye salve as
they have, which is none of that which Christ (whose light within or inward
Council they reject against themselves) Counsels all Laodicean like
self-corceited Angels and Churches to buy of him, such lifelesse stuff they
give (I should say) sell, in as good words and fair speeches as they can put it
off withal to simple people for outward Food and Raiment, and Gold, and Silver,
and Riches, as they have, pertaining to the Belly and the Body.

So the Bodies of Shepherds are often full and fat;
But the Souls of poor Sheep pine and starve, for all that.
And that the Souls of poor people should ever come possibly to be made any
Richer toward God then they are, while they stand under the droppings only of
the lips of such Linguists, as are no higher learned then their nursing Mothers
teach them, I cannot expect, if nil dat quod in se non habet be true, since the
chief spirituals that those spiritual men have themselves, who learn to be
Teachers of Religion to others, no where but at the Universities, are but
carnal, natural, animal, literal; such as without the light and spirit and
living Word of God within (for that in the name of his fellow-Students there
I.O. to whom its vouchsafed of God (says he) but (say I) of the Devil so to
do, fights against as fiercely as he can) is obtained out of many Books and
Writings, the best of which is the Bible, and the naked letter of it, by the
improvement of a mere animal understanding, which the letter of the Bible it
self also says perceives not the things of the spirit.

Nor can I expect as the case is with them, that they themselves, who there are
taught to be Gospel* Teachers should attain to any more then such a shallow
speculation and thin external Theory of those things as they have, or should
ever enter into the depths of Gods Kingdom, whilst in the depth of the
Serpents subtilty they are beguiled so far from a single hearted search after
the Truth in the simplicity thereof, as it is from Jesus, the light of the
World, by the beams thereof made manifest in their own hearts, that, taking it
for granted aforehand that all that, and no other then that is Truth, which is
held forth and told for Truth in the times of their Residence at those foresaid
Fountains, which are not steadily running one way neither, but to and fro as
the Tide turns, and running several ways at several seasons, they stave off
all that as Heresy at a distance, which is handed to them any other ways; no
more doubting, but that that must be error, which at the Well-heads of Divinity
is pleaded against, then they do that that is Truth they there plead for; so as
Is qui nil dubirat nil capit inde boni, these confident, blind, bold,
implicit-faith't Iuniors that visit the Academies for this end, that they may
become for a livelihood Preachers of the Faith to others; never doubting that
to be the true Faith, and Truth, which they find professed in their times, set
themselves on work to study how to defend it at a venture against all
Heretics, before they have either found or felt it to be Truth within
themselves, and stand steadfastly Tempered still according to the present
Temper of the Grand Seniors of their Respective Nurseries, who Temper
themselves ever according to the Temper of the Times, and the Rulers that
happen to be in them; whence it comes to pass, for the most part, that as
there is like Prince like Priest, so like Priest like People in these Northern
Islands, where after some certain time of standing and studying in the
University, these hasty Hirelings run abroad before the word of command be
given them from the mouth of the Lord, and settle themselves up and down, till
the Country swarms with them, like so many Locusts, successively supplying
the waste places of such as either die in Parishes, or depart from one to
another, where there is a bigger Boon, ne detur vacuum, that there be no place
void or empty at any hand, which is not more an abhoring to nature in general,
in rerum natura, in the fabric of the Universe, then it is to these natural
minds, in bujusmodi Rerum natura, in the fabric of their University affairs.

And sometimes so do they hasten on their own heads, to be Prophets and Pastors
for their own ends and livings sake, upou which account, being thereby capable
of some Parsonage or Ecclesiastical emolument, much more then for service sake
to the Gospel, many younger Brothers and poor men's Sons are sent there to be
educated, that before their haughty heads are halt hatched into any solid
understanding of either themselves or the Truth of God, or their hearts so much
as warmed into any way of wisdom from above, they run like a company of Green
guls with shells on their heads, and sow themselves under the earth (for heaven
they see not) in such seats and soils as best like them, and plant themselves
(for plants of the heavenly Fathers planting they are not) in Parishes, Palaces
and other places, as Chaplains and Curates, and then divide, and divine out
that divinity they have stored their heads, and commonplace Books withal by
stealth of study, out of the common stock of spirit stinting stuff, which like
a spring, that's never drawn drier then 'twas at first, remains the same still
at the Wellhead, for the furnishing of all new comers; behaving themselves so
honorably, or rather onerably in their respective bounds or circuits among the
people of these Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland also, whether they
sail by whole sale, even by whole Tuns at once, that more like the Pope in his
Peterdom, then like Peter, who commanded the contrary, they Lord it over their
stocks, so as to live upon them whether they will of no, and often without
their leave, if they can be licensed elsewhere, set up their shop of books, and
go out and keep market in their Parish once a week, and sell one or two of
their thoughts upon some Text of Scripture by a Glass full at a time, at the
Rates of about twenty shillings a piece, and which is most Tyrannical, force
people too to buy their commodity, be it good or bad, Truth or Errout, right
or wrong, honest or counterfeit, and which is worse yet, without allowing any
the liberty to try it in the public market place, or old Masse-house, where
they hold it forth, whereas all other Tradesmen and Shopkeepers excepting
these Mystical Merchants, give all their customers leave to try their Wares and
Merchandise, and leave them to their own choice, whether they will buy it or
no; And which is worse yet, when they have sold their Sermons to them, or read
or said them over to them out of their notes, they take them away along with
them, and leave them not to the people, who are to pay for them per force when
the time comes, and, which is (...) illorum (...), the prime piece of
delusivenesse, perhaps sell the self-same Sermons for as much more at another
place, at a funeral or some such like occasion; whereas if any shoemaker should
take the shoos, or Bookseller the Sermons, which he has sold, and sell them
to another, I know what these men, who call the Quakers Fanatical Knaves, as
well as others, would quickly be ready to account of them.

And whereas a man may buy a whole Bible for five shillings, they sell some one
verse of it, a little set out and flourisht, and amplified with no other
Trimming, but their own fallible vain thoughts upon it, for Twenty shilllings,
which Bible might serve a whole Town to read in; one chapter of which is worth
Twenty of their uncertain Sermons: or if men be minded to have Sermons, these
Nations are now so full of them, that for groats a-piece one may buy Twenty
Printed Sermons of men, whom they count more eminent then themselves, which may
serve to hear and read at home, no less then Twenty weeks together, one of
which Sermons have more truth in them, then either Priests or People upon their
Principles of non perfection of holiness and purging from sin in this life,
are like to practice as long as they live; and till they practice what they
know already, its but labor lost, pains taken, time spent and money expended
in vain to preach and hear in order to their knowing more, since whatsoever is
known and remains undone, does but add to their condemnation.

And thus not the Quakers, whom I.O. calls poor and deluded, for they grow rich
in good works, though spoiled in goods, and will never be more so spoild and
deluded as they have been, but seek to save others from being deluded by men
made Ministers, with Academical accomplishments and Accoutrements, who are the
evil ones and Seducers that way worse and worse, rather then better and better,
for all the talk^ on Reformation, deceiving and deceived; I say, not the
Quakers, but the Parish people are every way impoverishr and deluded, being fed
and enriched for their money, with nothing but men's fallible words, and
worthless thoughts, in stead of the true Living Word, and precious things of
the Living God.

And yet neither will these Parish people suffer themselves to be always so
bejaded are they are by the Rabbis that ride them to Ruin, but rather, when
their eyes are a little further opened to see how they are posted on by their
Priests, that love the wages of unrighteousness, to defy the Israel of God
against the drawn sword in the hand of the Lords Angel, Messengers or
Ministers, with Balaams Ass refuse to pass with them any further, and open
all their mouths as one man, to rebuke the madness of their Prophets.

And as thou I.O. say truly enough, Ex. 2. S. 8. of the overthrow of that
Ambitious and Arrogant Crew of the Papal Clergy, so sav I in ipsissimis verbis,
of the downfall of that intolerable insolency of our Protestant Clergy, that
have pusht them beside the saddle, and settled themselves there in their steads.

Viz. Neque sane usque adeo obrutuit humanum genus, ut semper praestigiatores
istos spirituales, qui (...) contra manifesta Christi Praecepta, Sanctorum
omnium exempla communia rationis istius qua homines sumus principia and (...),
posthabita aeternae salutis cura in caecitate and ignorantia voluntatis divinae
propriique officii, negligentia supina mortalium ullos Idololatriae illecebi is
illaqueatos detinere conantur far velit.
Neither verily is mankind become so brutish as that they will alwaves bear
those spiritual Mountebanckly cheaters, who for filthy Lucres sake against the
plain Praecepts of Christ, the examples of all the Saints, the common
Principles of that very Reason whereby we are men, and of that common
understanding that all men have by the light within indelebly implanted in
their minds, casting behind their backs the care of eternal Salvation, do
endeavor by careless negligence to hold all men entangled in their enticing
snares of Idolatry, in blindness and Ignorance of the Will of God and of their
own duty to him

As then that of the Popish Priesthood (which thou I.O. speak of) will not,
so neither will the solly of this Kingdom of Priests, that have more lately
Lorded it in their Dominions, proceed much further, but be manifested to all
men, as the others was before them both; yea, (as thou savest) of thy (so
called) poor, deluded fanatical Quakers. Fanatici, (...), etc. So say I of
these poor, deluding Fantastical Anti-quakers, Fanatici (...) sunt erroribus
and stultitia bisce diebus notissimi quos hic inprimis aggredimur; These
Fantastical, self-conceited Seers whom I here primarily Plead against, are in
these days most notoriously known by their errors and foolishness already
not to a few of their own former followers, and will be to ten times as many
more in the days that are immediately hereafter following.

Thy many Taunting Terms wherein thou both belyest, flingest and quippest at
the Quakers, being thus (not in the same Taunting or Twitting way, but) in a
way of true judgment turned upon thy self and thy own fellow-flouters at them.

I shall more closely examine, what thou falsely accusest us of more
particularly, as concerning our deportment toward the Scriptures, whom thou
falsely declarest to be so grossly opposite thereunto, as duly and deservedly
to be denominated by those Terms, by which thou also miscallest us, of
Fanatical Anti-scripturists, p. 147. Ep. p. 28.30. (...) Ex. 3. S. 26. i.e.
Haters of the Scripture, and to be rankt among the rudest Reproachers of them
in such words of thine as are hereunder Repeated, and Replied to.

I.O. Thou say, Satan in these days assaults the Sacred Truth of the Word
of God in its Authority, Purity, Integrity or Perfection, especially in the
poor, deluded Fanatical Souls commonly called Quakers, etc. Ep. p. 28.30. That
to this sort of men (the Quakers) it was not enough to join in with those in
Ages past, who cast Reproaches on the Scriptures, and approve of all the
opprobrious speeches that have been cast out against them, but they also
rejoice that the care of this matter, viz. of spoiling the holy Scriptures of
(its proper name) that glorious Title, of the Word of God, is by Satan conferred
upon them: That they (the Quakers) who would seem to bear away the Bell from
all, as to the stout opposing of the perfection of the Scriptures, Thou
principally encounterest; and as it is an honor to thee, that God has pleased
to confer on thy unworthy self this Task of fighting against those enemies of
his Word (the Quakers) so what thou shall perform in prosecution of this
function, thou ought to ascribe to his grace, etc De Scripturae nomi^e
proprie contra Fanaticos nostrates, etc. huic hominum generi non satis e^set
iiscum congredi and sociari, qui praeteritis seculis convitia sacris Scripturis
intentarunt, atque omnia in illas injecta opprobria suo calculo approbare, etc.
Ex. 1. S. 2, 3. Praemium strenuae contra Scripturarum Perfectionem oppositioni
Debitum nemini mortalium sibi praereptum vellent, etc. Quod Deus placuerit
provinciam hanc adversus verbi sui hosts demicandi nobis indignis delegare,
Ex. 3. S. 16.


Reply. Herein thou not only show thy s^l to be of that sort of men, to
whom it is not enough to join with those in Ages past, who cast Reproaches on
the hearers of the Word of God, and Tremblers at his Word, Isa. 66. 5. (now in
scorn called Quakers, and cast out by their Brethren for his Name sake, as then
they were) and to be an Approver of all the opprobrious speeches that are cast
out against them by this adulterous and sinful generation, who bend their
Tongues like bows for lies against the Truth, which lies thou should be a
valiant Reprover of, but also to rejoice that the care of this matter of
fighting against the truest friends in the World to God, and his Word (the
Quakers) and of Raising such Reproaches, false Reports, scandals and
opprobrious speeches, as the Rabble of Junior Rabbis Reproach them with, is
conferred upon thee by the Devil; for thou egregiously belyest the Quakers in
this particular, who deny not, but Purely and Perfectly own all that Authority,
Purity, Integrity and Perfection of the Scriptures, which the Scriptures
Ascribe unto themselves, and rob it not of any proper name, or any Title at
all, which by it self is either Attributed or appropriated to it self, as that
of the Word of God is not, as is seen hereafter; much less are they such
enemies to the Word of God, or that Sacred Truth written of in the Scriptures,
as thou most abusively and blasphemously belyest them to be, that thou need
to stand up, as thou do in thy mere demi-^^^gested demications against them,
for the Scriptures, and the Word of Truth, between which and the Scriptures, in
which it is declared, they divide aright, so as to give its own proper name to
each of these, whilst ye Divinity Doctors in your deep dotage, making no due
distinction betwixt them, for all your pretended friendship thereunto, are
found very enemies to them both.

So that whereas thou, who in other matters then this gloriest in thy own
shame, seem to glory in this function of fighting against the Quakers, as in
some great grace peculiarly given of God to thy unworthy self, more then any,
as if Praemium strenuae contra Trepidantium Perfectionem ac ^anocentiam
oppositioni debitum nemini mortalium tibi Praereptum velles, thou seem to
thy self to bear the Bell before all others, in thy stout opposing of that
Innocent Seed of God, to which grace of his thou Ascribest what ever, Relying
on his help and assistance thou performest in thy function aforesaid; I
conclude against thee to the contrary, thus in short, that it is Satan himself,
who set thee at work against the Quakers, and helped thee as well as he could,
and furnished thee with many a lie both against the Quakers and the Truth, and
led thee in a mere fools Paradise to prate with malicious words, and speak evil
of thou know not whom nor what, and left thee to bewray such weakness,
folly and false hood as falls not at all from such, as have help and assistance
from God, but ever flows from the father of lies and his children with whom
thou will have thy reward.

Quicquid Judaei, quicquid Ponteficii in opprobrium Scripturarum dicere unquam
sustinuerunt, id omne horrendo percussi scotomate and dicunt and asseverant
impuri homunciones, Librorum Titulos horrendos pudet refer, Ex. 3. S. 12.
Gregis hujus precipui Errones and Corryphaei hic, illic impie and blaspheme in
sacras Scripturas provocati dixerunts Quae sit communis eorum Sententia ex
libris ab ipsis editis, etc. S. 17.
J.O. Whatsoever the Jews, whatsoever the Papists have been bold at any time
to utter in disgrace of the Scriptures, every whit of that these impure men
(the Quakers) stricken (as 'twere) with some direful inordinate motion or
rapture both say, and assert, so that its a shame to relate the horrid and most
foolish Titles of Books; the chief Vagrants and Ringleaders of this Flock,
being urged, having spoken wickedly and blasphemously against the Scriptures.
What their Common Opiniin, I have thought good to set down as taken and
Collected from their own Books, and set Conferrences held with them, etc.

Reply 1: Here Is a most palpable Lie related of the Quakers, on whose behalf I
here openly profess against thee before the World that we own all those
Writings, not only of Moses and the Prophets of the Old, but those of the
Apostles and Evangelists also, which are commonly called the Scriptures of the
New Testament, to be Scriptures of Truth, written by holy men of God (as those
of the Old also were) as they were moved by the Holy Spirit, whereas the Jews
(who own, value, study, and stand for those of the Old to this day, as
zealously as your selves in words do for both) do maliciously and lyingly
affirm them to be false, fictitious, and full of lies.

Reply 2. Whereas we say no such thing, nay, nothing at all in any disgraceful
way of the Scriptures, but say only in words of truth and soberness, that they
are not to be so exceedingly Adored and Idolized by men, as they^^re by you,
who make them little less then All in all things to the Church; the Papists
speak much in disparagement of the Scriptures, in which we say they do but
blasphemously babble against them, viz. That they are inferrior to the Humane
Traditions of their Church, or at least to the unerring breast of their Ghostly
holy Father, without whom opening and authorizing them, they are of no more use
nor authority then Aesops Fables, and such like.

Reply 3. Whereas thou art ashamed to Relate the horrid foolish Titles of the
Quakers Books, in proof of their blasphemies, against the Scriptures; I believe
that's true indeed, though all the rest are palpable Lies; for if thou should
Relate the Titles of the Quakers Books in proof of the Truth of this thy Charge
of them, which is utterly false, then thy Lie which is plain enough already,
would be seen more plainly then it is; for in all the Titles of the Quakers
Books that ever I read, who have read Ten times more of them (I believe) then
thou have done, as I have seen Christ only exalted on the Throne, and the
Scripture owned in its place; so I never saw, and am persuaded also thou never
have seen any thing Written by the Quakers, that borders on the foresaid Jews
and Papists blasphemings of the Holy Scriptures, and therefore as I cannot much
marvel at it that thou art ashamed to do it; so I do not much blame thee, that
it does so much shame thee (as thou say) to Relate the most foolish of them.

If it were true, there was malice enough in thee I.O. to provoke thee to have
instanced some Particulars in proof of this parcel of Scandal to the fuller
shame of the Quakers, whom to scandalize what thou can is thy chief design,
and to have named those blasphemers and their Books; but pudet refer (say
thou) I am ashamed to Relate, etc. Thou art loath to be too punctual in thy
Proof, lest it proving too short of thy Charge, the stain thou would have
stuck upon the Truths Friends should be stricken back upon thy self, and the
Lie come to lie at thy own door, for if sounded out too loudly and distinctly,
it might Echo and rebound home again to thee the Author, and so redound to thy
dishonor; so thou fold'st thy self like the Serpent, whose seed thou art, in
indefinite complexes, or at least lapest thy self up in Universals, and dare
not lay thy self out at length, nor grow too far into Particulars; for dolus
later in universalibus quae nunquam been sentiuntur, nisi ex particularibus
suis, as Deceit lies most securely, and keeps best hid in Universals, which are
not clearly perceived but by the Particulars in which they exist; so by being
beheld in the said Particulars, both they and the Lies, that lie often in them
undiscerned, come more unavoidably to be discryed.

Reply 4. Whereas thou say thou think meet to set down our Opinion, as
Collected out of our own Books and Speeches, and accordingly do declare what
we hold, as concerning the Scriptures, thou most plainly Confutest thy self as
to the Lies thou tellest of us, for thy self acknowledgest of us, that we own
that the Scriptures do contain a true Declarationem hanc voluntatis Divinae a
Spiritu Christi, qui Scriptoribus ejus adfuit, proces^isse proftientur, etc.
Pro vera and indubitata mentis Divinae Declaratione agnoscant bactenus recte
Quidem, etc. Ex. 3. Sect. 18.

Si Res eorum secundum vota successissent, eas (Scripturas) dudum penitus
rejecissent, etc. S. 19.

Negant (Scripturas) immotam, perfectam, stabilem cultus divini -- Regulam
esse, etc. Sect. 20.

Abs eo Spiritu (Christi) ducti -- opus non habent Authoritate Scripturarum,
etc. Sect. 21.

Haec summa horum hominum sententia, Sect. 22.


Declaration of the Will and Mind of God, proceeding from the spirit of Christ,
inspiring the Writers, that thus far we are right, and that we stand to this
Confession without any renouncing it, only that we would have wholly rejected
the Scriptures without doubt, but that things have not fell out according as we
could wish, and do deny them to be the ordinary, inalterable, perfect, and
standing Rule of Gods Worship, and our Obedience without the Revelations of the
spirit, and such like; And this (say thou) is the sum of these men's
Judgments, etc. Which if it be, where is the wicked Blasphemy all this while
wherewith thou Chargest us? For there is none (as shall appear) in the worst of
this, which yet thou set down as gathered out of the Quakers Books, and
Speeches, which thou say bear blasphemous Titles against the Scriptures; but
pudet refer, I blush to set them down, must answer all.

These things I O. do convict thee of telling many notorious Lies against the
Quakers, even too many for a man to tell, that calls himself a Minister of
Christ, and D. D. though not all by very many, which thou tellest in thy Book;
some of which lies yet (left they should not be loud enough' to come under
every ordinary Readers Observation, if told but once, are either expressly, or
implicitly two or three times over related.

Inter se distant, Judaei, Pontifices and Fanatici, Ex. 3. S. 2.

Qui in rebus aliis omnibus diversissime sentiant in hanc blasphemiam
conspirent omnes, S. 14.

Perpetuo invicem digladiantur Pontificii atque Fanatici (...), Ex. 3. S. 2.

Internecioni se mutuo devovent, S. 3.

Caeterum non iisdem rationibus ducti, sed illi pro traditionibus, by pro
Enthusiasmis atque Revelationibus suis, tanquam pro aris and focis
contendentes, atque ita non secus ac Sampsonis vulpeculae obversis Caudis
ignitas faces in segetes Ecclesiae ferentes, cuncti amicissime e loco suo
sacram Scripturam deturbate aggrediuntur, S. 4.

Eam a loco suo in Ecclesia depellere satagunt, iisdem vestigiis insistunt
Panatici nostrates, quibus ad nequitiam hanc viam patefecerunt qui inter
Pontificios spirituales dicuntur, Ex. 3. S. 10, 11.

Adversus verbi sui hosts, Ex. 3. S. 16.

Contra quosvis (...), S. 26.


J. O. The Jews, Papists and Quakers differ among themselves; it so falls out
that they who in all other matters are most different in Opinion, conspire
altogether in this blasphemy, viz. against the Scriptures.

The Papists and Enthusiastical Fanatics do perpetually War against each
other, they mutually devote each other to destruction. They are not acted by
the same Reasons, but those for their Traditions, these for their Enthusiasms
and Revelations, Contending tooth and nail, and so like Sampsons Foxes with
their Tails turned to each other, bringing firebrarnds on the Churches
BreadCorn, they all attempt together very friendly to thrust down the holy
Scripture from its Place.

The Papists do earnestly endeavor to detrude the Scripture out of its proper
Place in the Church; our Fanatics tread in the same footsteps with them, into
which wickedness those among the Papists that are called the Spiritually, have
led them the way.

And elsewhere thou Reckon'st us up among the rest, as Enemies of Gods Word,
and haters of the Scriptures.

Reply 1. Howbeit I. O. thou, who in thy Epistle pretendest it to be thy aim,
and intention in thy Discourse, to discover the Reproach that is cast by many
upon the Scripture to its disparagement, and to vindicate it therefrom, do
(as in most things else wherein thou bend'st at us) discharge thy Bow at a
venture, so as at Random to rank us, as joint Abettors with them in gross, in
that one gross, and common Cause of Caluminating, Vilifying, Decrying, Denying
the Scriptures, among Atheists, Pagans, New Testament Contemning Jews,
Papists, and the whole Rabble of Rude Reproachers thereof, whether in Whole, or
Part, as if we were, if not the Ring leaders, yet at least the Rere-ward of the
Ragged-Regiment of Anti-scripturists of what ever sort, yet in this thou have
most grossly abused us, and thy self also, by thy false Accusing and Belying of
us to the world in that Particular, and must most assuredly come into
Condemnation in ^he Judgment for Condemning the Generation of the Just; for
however thou mis-reportest of us to the causing of many to mistake us, yet of a
truth we are no such manner of People, as thou would make men believe we
are; but such as shall manifest our selves even in this present Contest with
Thee (for all thy perking up into a proud pretensive Prate against us (Pro
Scripturis) as if we stood in some deep Defiance, and thou against us in some
eminent and more then ordinary Defense of the Scriptures) to be in no enmity,
but in true unity with the Scriptures, and to be more real Friends thereunto,
then either thy self, who wilt be found in as real enmity to them, as thou art
in seeming friendship, or any of those aforesaid, with whom thou Rankest us, as
if we were the Rankest Enemies thereof, that ever appeared in any Age since the
Scripture had a being to this present day. Be it therefore fore-known unto thy
self, and all men, who will believe, and can receive it for truth, and who so
will not, let the mischief of his mis-belief in this matter be upon him, that
though we own not thee I.O. and side not with, but mostly against thee in that
very Book, wherein thou stand up so stiffly against Atheists and Papists,
and all AntiScripturists, as well as against the men called Quakers, whom thou
but supposest to be such; And though we may possibly be found saying some
things (soberly) which Atheists and Papists say ( scornfully) of the
Scriptures, which are gainsaid by thee, and gainsaying at least twenty
things, that are asserted by thee of the Scriptures, in thy zealous Pleadings
for them, yet we are no Atheists (as thou supposest) neither are we Papists, or
Jesuits, neither are we Anti-scripturists in any wise; nor do we so much as
take the part, or serve the Interest of, nor side, or comply with any of them,
any more then we do with thy self, whose Antagonist and T. D's too, I am in
this present Reply to thy Reproaches of the Quakers; in Vindication of whose
Interest alone, abstract from that of the Papists, as much as from thy own, and
thy Party of Protestants; and singly, and solely on behalf of the Truth
professed by the Quakers, and opposed by thee, and all the other whom thou
opposest; And finally, for the Scriptures, which are truly owned, valued, used,
known, and Practiced only among the Quakers, I herein stand up more or less
against you all, as against such, who (none of you excepted, no not those among
you Protestant Pretenders to it, who would sain seem to others (as you do to
your selves) to be most fervent for it, any more then those Decryers and
Denyers of it, with whom thou slanderously say the Quakers side) will every
one of you be found Foes to, denyers of, and fiery fighters against the
Scripture.

And this that we are no Atheists, nor yet Associates, or Assistants to any
such, as are without God in the World, but that People who know God, and are
known of him above all other People upon Earth, the best of which in words
profess to know God, whom in Truth they know not, but in works, deny, being
abominably, in their Lives, disobedient to his Light, and to every good Work
void of Judgment, will as easily, as evidently appear to every Patient and
Impartial Reader that can suspend his Censuring till he has Read these present
Animadversions of Thy mad Subversions of the things of God, unto the end.

And that we are neither Papists, nor yet Assenting or Adhering to that
Synagogue of Rome, in any of their abusive defamations, depravations,
depressions, decryings, disparagements, or abominable attempts for the
abolition of the Scriptures, which they, as thou say truly, would (if they
were able) deprive all others of, or of their lives, I give the world here to
understand, as far as they will understand it, or take it for truth form me,
who for Truths sake merely, am of less credit and repute in it, then else I
should be, by a present Protesting in the Name and behalf of that People called
Quakers, against the Papists sordid, sottish, sinful, shameful, seeking wholly
to suppress the Scriptures from being seen at all by the Vulgar, and scoring
out of it, what makes most against their bruttish and worse then heathenish
Idolatries, and wresting those Holy Writings, and turning them as they list to
their own turns by their most false and far off Translations, and as utterly
untrue Interpretations of them, besides both the plain sense of the Words in
the Original Languages they were wrote in, and mind of the Spirit of God, which
Originally moved Holy Men to write them, and many more such Juggles, some of
which 'twere better for it then it is, if the Clergy (so called) of the
Protestant part of Christendom, who are too too full of the like, were clear
of, and fully free from, as they are not, for all their Protesting so much
against the Popedom for its adulterating of the Scripture.

Which Protestation of mine against the Romish Clergy, I the rather, and the
more largely enter here again, not only because I am so generally misreported,
that by many, even thereupon, I am also mis-believed to be too great a
Favorite, and by some flatly a Jesuit, and so more then an ordinary Friend to
that false Fraternity, but also because it may fall out that that slender and
senseless suspicion of me (if not timely suppressed) by reason of Three things
may in time (though groundless) grow so great in more, as it does already in
some, that, for the sake thereof, very Truth it self, when ^old by me, shall
not taste well from me, nor take place in the hearts of men, with whom commonly,
Damnati Lingua Vocem habet, Vim non habet.

Those Three Things above briefly hinted, are more fully Replied to as
follows; 1. In regard that not only T. D. in his Two Toys, puts us and the
Popish Party together as Brethren, for jumping into one Judgment about the
Scriptures, but also thou I O. who art a man more believed and beloved by the
World, which heeds and loves its own, then I, who am not so much heeded as
hated by it, because I am not of it, do often in thy unquiet Quarrel with the
Quakers (so called) which I, who am one of them, am now answering, so unequally
yoke us, and the Pontifical Clergy together, as Co-conspirators against the
Scriptures, that (...) the younger sort, for whose instruction thou devotest
those thy Latin Labors, and more then a good many of those Junior Novices,
both in University and Country as are ever ready as Rawly as Rashly, Iurare in
Sententiam Seniorum, to drink down desperately all that, and digest it by
implicit Faith, that is imposed, and handed out to them for Truth from the
Tongues and Pens of their Grand Gamaliels, since thou I. O. DD. say it, will
unquestionably more then think it to be all Truth that thou say of our
Co-Partnership with the Papists in their baseness toward the Scriptures, in
those false sayings of thine that are forecited, wherein thou injuriously
avouchest us to be Approvers of all their Tauntings, and joint Blasphemers with
them of the Scriptures. 2. In regard that (howbeit it is not at all in
Vindication of the Popish Clergy in any of their Devilish doings, nor scornful,
or spiteful speakings against the Scripture, but of another Interest, even that
of the true Clergy, or Heritage of God, (as remote from Theirs and Thine too,
(...), I am an Opposer of thee as to that same Book, wherein thou so vehemently
Opposest the Papists; hence many may, as some already do suppose I am in far
firmer friendship and fellowship with that Fry of fighters against the
Scripture, then with thee and thy fellows, who would fain seem at least to
fight against them for it; but (if any man will be ignorant of me and my honest
meanings, let him be ignorant) for my part as I am a well-wisher to all Souls,
and am in friendship with all men, having and holding as truly Pacem cum
Personis, as cum Peccatis Bellum; so I am in no fellowship with that in all
men, whether of the Romish Religion, or that which ( inform) is more Reformed,
that is not in fellowship with the Scriptures, (for that which is not in union
therewith, is not in fellowship with God) fighting against neither small nor
great, save only against the sinful seed of the Serpent in them, which from the
spirits of the spiritually throughout all Christendom, spawnes it self forth in
spite, and spiritual wickedness against the seed of the Woman, who must bruise
his head at last, though he obtains for a while to bruise her heel, between
whose seed, which is one, and his seed of every sort, whose name is Legion (for
they are many) the most endless enmity is; so that though I appear against
those Paper-works of thine, wherein thou appearest upon the Stage, in part
against that Synagogue of Satan (but more palpably against the Synagogue of the
Saints) yet this is not all to gratify the Romanists in their scurrilities
against the Scriptures, more then thee and thine Abettors in your scarce
Schollar-like, much less Scripture-like scoldings for them; but as occasion is
( Pro Scripturis) for the Scriptures, which, notwithstanding thy empty
Apologetica's for them, ye, and the Papists also are both utterly against, I
shall not spare to grate hard against you both, as such, who while you are
scribbling of the Scriptures, whether Pro or Con, are yet our of that precious
Truth the Scripture tells of, and against that living Word, that eternal and
internal Light it calls to, which leads to that Life of God that the Scripture
calls for. 3. In regard that I am, and shall unavoidably be found in this
present Controversy with thee, saying some things against thee and thy untrue
Assertions for Truths sake (yet with a due Respect thereunto) which the very
Papists say (though truly enough, yet too disrespectfully) about the
Scriptures. In this respect though, I would not have them so; yet I believe
some are, and some will be (if peradventure these Premises prevent it not) so
blind as to believe I own the Pope and his Apostolical Church, because I cannot
own all that as true and Apostolical, which some Prime Protestants tell for
Truth, but rather tell the Truth with him when he tells it about the Scripture,
or any other thing, then Error and Lies with those, who pretendedly for the
Truth and Pro Scripturis, Protest against him: For I must give the Devil his
due, so as to acknowledge his Words to be true, when he speaks the Truth,
though to a false end, rather then sooth up thee I.O. or any other men, so as
to say the Crow is white, and that ye utter Truth, when ye tell utter untruth,
though against the Devil himself, to please either thee, or them.


Howbeit many men in these days, and not a few of those, who are called
Christ's Ministers, and counted well studied Scholars, or at least would not be
well contented to be not so accounted, are yet so dim, as without any more ado
to deem them to be Romish Priests, under Pay from the Pope, who own some
Truths, which his Priesthood owns (as if because at Rome they own Christ to be
the Son of God, they must needs be of that Church, who deny him not so to be)
but more especially any Truths, which by these Divine Deemers are not Deemed to
be Truths, and thereupon disowned by their non-discerning selves, upon whose
crazy Concerts, and cloudy Accounts, and crooked Conjectures, some, that do
more service to the Truth against Popish Fictions in a year, then themselves do
in an Age, are through their shallow surmises by their implicit Faith't People,
as sinisterly supposed to be Supporters of the Papal Hierarchy, because
themselves, whose Idol the Letter is, are not digested in all their Extravagant
Exaltings of it, though the Popes extreme of Exalting his leaden Legends, and
Holy Chair above it, be more professedly distasted and detested.

Thus such as believe, according to the Scripture, the general Grace, and Love
of God in giving Christ to die for all men, for as much as that also is
believed at Rome, seem to these senseless ones to favor too much of Popery,
because the empty understandings, narrow Nodels, and heedlesse Headpieces of
many Protestant Parish Priests are not as yet enlarged enough to comprehend it;
who notwithstanding being blear-eyed at home, whilst Eagle eyed abroad,
Nunquam vident id manticae, quod in tergo est, never come to see, or sent that
plain Popery of their Parish Posture and Parish pay by way of Tithes, which the
Night is now too far spent for any but Owls, Bats and Night-birds not to see,
that its of the Pope; since though its a piece of stark rank and Popery, not
held without the guilt of Perjury, yet, as its their own ( and suus cuique
crepitus been olet) so its that which serves their turn better at this time,
then the Extirpation of it Root and Branch according to their Oaths (which
would savor less of Popery, and more of pure Pietv) will ever do.

Of this sort of Evil Surmisers is T. D. who, not only as thou I. O. do,
Accuses us (me in particular) as one big with, and spitting out venom against
the Scriptures, for not owning those outward Writings as the only Rule of Faith
and holy Life, but also accounts of us, as no other then broachers of Popish
Doctrines, and bringers in of the Popes Baggage, for dissenting as in other
points so from his blind Tenets about the Scriptures

Yea, so earnestly does T. D. drive on his Design of Insinuating it into men's
minds concerning me, that I am Popishly affected, that he finds occasion of
Accusation against me as so, as well where I more fully own the Scripture, then
himself does, as where I may more easily seem (to one that's blind) to deny it.
Witness his words, Page 27. 1. Pamph where for owning the Epistle of Paul to
LAODICEA, which he sputns at as Spurious, he flies thus foolishly in my face:

T.D. We know (quoth he) your Brethren of the Popish Party have laid many such
Brats at the Apostles Doors, which they will not Father, and you show what you
are in Abbetting their Wickedness.

Reply 1. What a wicked and Adulterous Generation of men is this? like that in
which Christ lived, who would have something to say against the Gospel and the
Truth, let it come handed to them which way soever; they would neither lament
at Christ's mourning to them in John's Ministry, nor Dance at his Piping to them
in his own, but reject and belie him when he came contrarily to them in John's
Fastings; and condescendingly to them in his own Eatings and Drinkings, as
either having a Devil, or being a Drunkard, or a Glutton, or a Friend of Gods
Enemies, and Sinners, or somewhat or other still that was naught, rather then
own the Truth at any hand that in both Ministryes was held out unto them; So is
the Ear of our now Pharifaical generation of Scribes stopped, like that of the
deaf Adder at the Voice of the Charmer, let him Charm never so wisely; among
whom T.D. is a Chieftain, who Ranks us among the Popish party, as spitting out
our venom, that we are big with against it, Page 28. 1 Pamph. and as denyers
of the Scripture together with them, because we deny many false things that
many such Ministers as himself do most absurdly affirm of it; and yet Charges
us as Brotherly owners and Abbetors of the Papists wickedness also, for owning
the holy Scripture in many parts of it, wherein our English Ministers do not
blush to deny it, and so consequently for owning it much more truly and fully
then themselves: Thus, -- Heu stirpem invisam!
Hei mihi quod n^llis amor est Reparabilis Herbis!


If we should, as they falsely* Accuse us, own the Scriptures less then our
Accusers do, we must be Papists; if we own them more, and more of them then
themselves do, we must be no less then Papists.

We must stand doomed as Papists, who, be we nere so wary,
Are Papists deemed in this, and in the clean contrary.
But that I am not so Popishly affected as I am, as well every way, as every
where misrepresented to be by those, who to sit the more securely in their own
Popishnesse, do in the Apishnesse of their Spirits sound it out with a dreadful
noise to the stunning of their already Pope-serving people, Popery, Popery,
against all that come near to Storm them out of their Popified Parish postures,
practices and preferments, to what I have said sufficiently above, I shall now
add what follows in evidence thereof, whether you will hear (O all ye my
unjust Accusers in that particular) or whether ye will forbear, to the perfect
ending of my Protestation which I have begun to enter against that Synagogue of
Rome, viz. First, That (whatever they may own of what I have above, or shall
yet say) I own not them as Apostolical, nor as any other then that Apostatical
Harlot, which, together with her two Brats, that more lately are broken out
from her bowels, viz. Prelacy and Presbytery, has in Three parts (as the great
City is said to do before its fall, Rev. 16.19.) sat like a certain unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in unity, or one great Tripartite Mystical Babylonish
Whore, with her Tripple Crown upon the many waters, or Tongues, Nations,
Kindreds and People, and reigned over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.1.2.15.18.

And as to their behavior toward the Scripture, which they woefully mistake
themselves to be the only Trustees, to whose care and custody it was committed,
I profess against them with I. O. that they have woefully misdemeaned
themselves toward it, as by sowly betraying, and (to their own eternal shame)
falsif^ing that their pretended Trust, corrupting, depraving, vitiaring,
interpolating, adding, detracting, forging, foisting into the Scripture what
never was of the spirit, so by abusing it every way, so that none of the Copies
of it (as it comes through their hands) whether Original or Translated (and if
thou I O. can show any that come through other hands of which thou can say
infallibly they are not altered and corrupted (as in thy Book thou have not
done) Dic quibus in terris and eris mihi magnus Apollo) are fit to be a fixed
stable Rule, or infallible Guide to us thoroughout in the knowledge of the Will
of God; And lastly, (for take it at the worst its worthy of a better carriage
toward it then they afford it) in a scurrilous scoffing way underva'uing,
vilifying, defying, unworthily depressing it far below it self, as much as it
is over-valued, Idolized, blindly worshipped, deisted, and enthroned far above
it self by your selves, who, together with the Popish party, like the Frog and
the Mouse, being very busy in busling against each other with your Bulrushes
about the Scripture in your two opposite Imaginations, will find a Generation
that waits upon the Lord, and mounts up with wings as quick-sighted as an
Eagle, though no better then a blind Buzzard in your eyes, who will win the
field from both you stout Warriors, which are at it tooth and nail to your own
ruin, and shall one have no more thank from God then the other, whilst, for
all your zealous pratings pro and con in two different Erroneous extremes
concerning the Letter, ye are both exceedingly, and both extremely erred from
the Light it came from, and the Life it calls for; the one exalting the bare
dry bones and dead body of the Letter above the Word of Life, which Letter too
is magnified more in an empty sound of windy, plausible Commendations of it,
then by any, so much as outward Conformity to it in Conversation; the other
establishing the dark lump of their own lying Legends and dead stinking
Carcass of their Traditional Divinations, partly derived from faithless
Forefathers, and partly divined forth from the deep pit of their Great Ghostly
Fathers fathomlesse Fancy, as a Standard in stead of it.

So that howbeit I.O. the detestable wickedness of that Antichristian
Conclave, who (as thou say) sell themselves to work all manner of
Abominations against the Scripture, I abominate as much as thou can do (yea
be not thou so blind as to believe, that I abet them in any of their
beastliness of that nature) yet withal do not thou believe that, that while I
abandon their brutishness, I can own thee in thy blindness, and the many
absolute Absurdities, whereby thou grossly abusest it, and the truth, and thy
self well-nigh as much another way, who perhaps think thou can not easily
(if at all) be transported into Error, while thou art Extolling the outward
Text of Scripture, and gainsaying at a venture all that those Debasers of it
hold out about it; for a^ the time is coming (as thou truly enough Prophesiest
unto them) wherein it shall repent them for ever that they have lifted up
themselves against this sacred Grant of the wisdom, care, love and goodness of
God, page 4. o^ thy Epistle. So say I to thee, the time is at hand wherein it
shall repent thee that ever thou liftedest up thy self (as thou do) in so
vain a way of lifting up, and advancing the Letter over all that, which is to
be preferred before it, and was before it, as that it came out from, and points
men to, even the living Word and inward Light and spirit, which (as held out by
the Quakers, not in any way of that Devilish disparagement of (as thou
intimatest, Ex. 1. S. 3.) or spiteful disrespect to the Scripture) thou set
at naught with all the Calumny thou can likely cast on them; yea as thou
say of the Pope, Ex. 2. S. 8. Papae Tempus erit, etc. So say I to thee, Non
Papae solum, sed tibi tempus erit cum magno optaveris emptam intactam
Scripturam.

And that I am no Jesuit, nor sider with them about the Scripture, so as to
agree with them in upholding their seigned infallible Chair, besides what many
can witness, who have been Eye and Ear witnesses of my opposing them in other
Nations, I add this as my Final Defense of my self, as to that Aspersion of T.
D. He that will give heed to it let him, if otherwise let him choose, Non cum
Jesu Itis, qui Itis cum Jesuitis. So then as to Evince it that I am none of
those Idiots that Idolize any mere men's Writings, as many do the un kilful
scriblings of their Scribes for the Scriptures, little less then Israel did
the Golden Calves, after which they dotingly ran from God himself, saying of
these Imuges in their own Imaginations, These are thy Gods, etc. Nor yet any
mere Writings of those holy men that wrote the Holy Scripture it self, as most
of our misty-Ministers and their people do, because they were written by Divine
Inspiration, little less then Israel did the Brazen Serpent, because it was
hung up by Divine Institution: I shall First take occasion to thrust down that
enthroned Calf of thy Anti-scriptural Triobulary Treatises, Theses, and
Atheological Thoughts upon the Scripture from that high place it has in the
Thoughts of such as fall down before it, as Moses threw down that Molten Image
which the High Priest made, and ignorant people made a God of) and stamped it
to powder: And Secondly, As Hezekiah not without Gods own approbation, took
down the Brazen Serpent which had its being (as the Holy Scripture it self had)
not without Gods own appointment, when once men began to do Homage to it, and
called it no more then Nehushtan, that is a piece of Brass, that they might
know it was no God; So shall I take down the dead Corpse and bare Carcass of the
best Copy of the Scripture, since men begin to go a Whoring after it, from God,
and Christ, and the Word of Life it self, out of that high and stately Throne,
wherein thou I. O. statest it, and from those surpassing and lofty Titles of,
the Living Word of God, the most glorious spiritual Light in the World, above
the Sun, the most perfect Rule, and many more such like; with which thou (as
hereafter appears) do invest and exalt it over all, even over the Light it
came from, which is by thee unjustly put behind it, and dehased below it,
though both in time and worth it is far before it, and style it by its own true
Name of Writings of Truth, or Holy Scripture, that so men that seek to it more
then to God himself for Salvation, and search it, and therein think to have
eternal Life [at the old Scribes did that never came to Christ, the Light,
above whom they prefered it] may recollect themselves and see that the Letter
gives not the Life, but does only testify outwardly of another, whom being
lost from him by looking to the Letter, which bids look to him, they never look
to, nor never yet came to, that they might have Life.

So withal to evince it that I am none of those Popish Ignoramus's, that deal
so ignobly with the holy Scriptures, as to set them at naught, and pluck them
down (as they do) not only below themselves, which have as Real and Great an
Excellency as any such thing, as is no more then an External Writing of an
External Truth can possibly have, but also below that, which is worse then
naught (viz.) their leaden Legend of Lies, their trashy Traditions, their
moldy Massora, their invented Oral Law, their vain verbum (...), and that mere
imagined Moon calf, the unerring breast of their most erroneous holy Father,
and such like; I shall in this Work before all the world prefer the bare body
and letter of the Scripture, which is legible to men's bodily Eyes, far before
that (...) (as thou truly call it) for all their Abominations, before that
whole Body of Fools bawbles, that bottomless pit of Paultrinesse, that
boundless bundle of Baby clouts that endless Ocean of Omnigatherums, that
dirty puddle and deep dunghill of Devility, rather then Divinity, which the more
its dived and raked into, the more rotten it renders it self like some for did
sink, that stinkes the more, the more it is stirred in; for such is the
Traditionary Treasury of that saltlesse unsavory Sea (upon which therefore the
plagues of the Vials (which must be filled upon you also) are fallen, falling,
and to fall) which Sea of Rome is, as the blood of a dead man, lifelesse,
putrid and corrupt, so that every living Soul dies that lives therein.

Yea, Consider the naked literal Aspect of the holy Scriptures, nor in its
highest, not in its primitive, best, and purest, as at first given forth, but
in its mere derivative, in its lowest, meanest, and most altered and
adulterated capacity, wherein it stands at this day, wrested and torn, and like
a Nose of Wax twisted and twined into more then twice, if not ten or twenty
times twenty several shapes by men's untrue and tottered Transcripts, and
Translations (for Oh that vast variety of Lections, besides the Infinity of
Senses, throw men's misrenderings, corrupt copyings, correctings of, and
commentings on it, etc. that the World is now loaded with, and led out into!)
yet as mere a graven Image as that is with Ink and Pen on Paper or skin of
parchment (for it is so, though I reject their jeers, as improper and impious,
by whom it is scoffed at as Chartacea, Membranae, etc. for it is not so) and as
dead a Letter as it is (bear with me in that Expression I. O. till I come to
show where thou so call it as well as Papists and Quakers, whom thou
quarrellest with for so calling it) and as very a Nose of Wax and Lesbian Rule,
and no certain stable standard as it is (for I know not why what they wickedly
(because Tauntingly) we may not honestly (since truly, seriously, and soberly)
so call, which may so easily, so endlesly be altered by the wills of men, as
they self I.O. show us in the 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. pages of they Preface, the
Scripture may, and made to stand which way any Critic pleases) and as no
Authority to us at all, as they (in their baseness and hatred of it, which I
condemn) do say it is of, as it is my continual exercise in works to do it, so
do I here in plain words exalt the Scripture, which they so debase, and state
it over all that their Trash and aforesaid Trumpery, even on the very top of
all their long Train of Traditions, and over the archest Tittle of the Tripple
Crown; the proudest pinnacle of Peter's (now un- Peter-like) painted Temple, the
highest point of that pompous, pious, piteous Pillar and ground of Truth, the
choicest Chapter of that holy Church, and infallibly erring infallible Chair.

Thus doing, I shall be owned at last, if not by I. O. and such as have his
dim Doings, as they have his person, in admiration, because of advantage, yet
by all unbyassed beholders of both our undertakings for the Scripture to be no
more a pander for the Papists (as I am more belyed then believed to be the
lying Tribe of Levi) then for himself, but a just, plain, and impartial Pleader
for the Scripture against them both, and a doer of Right to those holy Writings
which are egregiously wronged by both Papists and Protestants, as between Two
parties of partial Praters Pro and Con about them; by one of which they are
scarcely more sottishly and Satanically (for Superstitions sake) Abhorred, then
unduly and Superstitiously Adored by the other. For howbeit thou deemest thy
self, and those thy self Reverencing fellow Students of it, to whom thou
Dedicatest thy Endeavors to Vindicate it, to be such as value the Scripture as
much as any thou know; yet there are many whom thou know not, but
supposest to be sleighters and disowners of it, who, if to own, value and exalt
it, be to ascribe all that to it, which it assumes to it self, to Preach and
practice that holy Life, which is the end of it, and to give it its due and no
more (as indeed it is) do own, value, honor and exalt the Holy Scripture much
more, and much more truly, then any of your self-exalting selves, who, saving
your fair Speeches for it, and your fawnings on it, ( Ore tenus) your common
aerie and mere verbal Commendations thereof, and of your selves as valuers
thereof, do yet in truth no more value, or honor it, then the Jews (whose
grand Idol that is, as the whole is yours) at this day do their own owned part
thereof; of whose dotage in that kind, I have in sundry Nations been an
Eyewitness, in not a few of their Synagogues, who Adorn, and carry it about
(as ye do your Bibles, more beautified without, then your selves are within)
and lift it up with loud noises, especially when these words are read, (viz.)
He shall magnify the Law, and make it honorable; when yet the Truth it makes
mention of, has no Mansion in their minds to the renewing of them; yea, I may
truly say you do more undervalue the Scripture by your advancing it above it
self, and over-valuing and worshipping it so much as ye do in your words,
whilst alienated from the Light it came from, and calls to, in your Works and
Lives, then some of the Synagogue of very Rome it self, who in lips and lives
too, do undervalue it; by how much Deceit and Hypocrisy is far greater
Iniquity, then it is for men openly to disown what Cordially they do not own,
and to pretend to be no better Friends to it then indeed they are; and by how
much as all is not Gold that glisters, so all that, which by its glistring
would fain seem to be Gold, when it is but Dross, is worse then that, which
both is Dross, and seems to be so.

Yea, those that undervalue the Scripture so as to set Traditions above it, and
they that overvalue it so as to set the Light below it, both these must come
under Condemnation from me, as being both Abomination to the Lord, before whom
(witness the Brazen Serpent, and Christ's Apostles, Acts 14.11. to 19. whom the
people did worse in Worshipping as Gods, then if they had not heeded, but hated
them as of the Devil) it may be worse to overvalue, then to undervalue many
things, which may be of his own Appointment: So that ye have little need to
decry against Papists as Decryers of the Scriptures, and less to link us (the
Quakers) and Papists together, as Adversaries in Common to the Scriptures, as
if your selves were the only Patrones thereof; for as Anti-Papistical as ye
seem to be about the Scriptures, yet ye will be found Acting, not more against
them, then (though in a different way from the Papists) against the Scriptures.

And howbeit thou taylest us and the Papists together, figuring us out by thy
fine Tale of the aforesaid Foxes, as falling from, and fighting against each
other, and yet both fellow-friends against the Scripture; That is false as
urged, and uttered with that referrence to the Papists and Quakers, as joint
Injurers of the Scriptures, wherewith thou ridiculously Relatest it, but true
enough, yea too too true, If Related in that right Referrence, which it bears
toward the Papists and your Selves; yea, Quid Rides? be not so merry I. O.
about the Mouth; for De te (mutato nomine Quakers) Fabula narratur; thou
think thou have shrewdly hurt thy mere fancied Fanatic Foes with a flap of
a Fox-Tayle, but in that Tale thou have but made a Rod for thy own Tail; for
verily he that has but half an Eye, and by thy mentioning thereof, is minded
to search where, and to whom thy Simile best suits, will find how causelessly
and incongrously thou crowdest the Papists and Quakers so closely together as
Companions in thy abusive Comparison; and how aptly it may rather be Applied to
that Romish Synagogue, and your Selves, to whom it comes as nigh as four feet
(if any Simile can truly be said to run on all four) can well carry it; and
who, as much as ye dissent not only in diverse other matters, but also about
the Scripture it self, the one for, and the other against the perfection,
purity, integrity, authority, and excellency of the mere Text and bare Letter
of it, do yet concur as closely, and come as nigh to one another in denial of
the Truth and Doctrine thereof, as four pence comes to a Groat. Yea, the Truth
is your selves, and they are far more fitly figured by those fiery-Tayld Foxes
which tended two several ways, yet ended in one and the self same work of
Destroying the Philistims Corn, whilst turning tail to tail, and drawing into
your two different Extremes, one sort crying up Unwritten Traditions to be the
most perfect Rule above the Scripture; the other crying up the Outward Letter,
as the most perfect Rule, above the Internal Light, Word and Spirit, which gave
it forth, ye not only fill the World, as with so many Fire brands with your
fiery Contentions, so that like that Corn which failed when it felt the fire,
it fell together by the Ears to its own ruin and destruction, but also
between you draw and drive all people (being erred from it your selves) from
that, which was before them, in the being of a Rule, and will be found to be a
most perfect Rule without them both, ( viz.) that Light which thou so laughest
at. So that their Souls starve, famish, perish, and pine away for lack of the
true Bread of Life, Christ Jesus, whom the Light only leads to, and for want of
that Corn of Heaven which God feeds those with that truly fear him.

And as to what is said about your valuing and exalting the Scripture, which ye
say the Papists and Quakers do set light by and undervalue; I say, If to be
very busy about the dead bulk, the bare backside of that Book, which contains
the Scripture, called the Bible, If to bless it, and adorn, and adore the
naked Body of it, If to do by it little less, then all that the Papists do in
way of honor and exaltation of it to the dead Body of their Great Goddess the
Virgin Mary, be to honor and value the Bible, then ye honor it indeed, but
scarcely else; If to overlay it with Gold and curious Colors, If to make
Images and Pictures of it, to print it on Title pages of their own Books in the
hands of Priests, If to hand it up in paint upon Sign posts, Ensigns, Colors,
etc. If to attribute to it many high prerogative Titles which are not belonging
to it, but to Christ the Light, and his light alone, as Via per quam nos ad
Deum, Deus ad nos; the Saints Re'uge, most perfect Rule, Living Word of God,
and a score more of the same sort, which it no where takes to it self, which
yet who so cannot give it, cannot have the common privileges due to them with
other men in their own Native Countries; If to laud the Letter more then lead
the Life which it requires; If to be ever coming for Counsel to it, but never
conforming to the Counsel of it when it calls you to the Light for Life; If to
place Holiness, Righteousness and Religion more in a Round of Reading it, and
preaching upon it, then in being and becoming so Holy, Righteous, Religious and
unspotted of the World as it requires; If to spare no cost in Printing,
Re-printing, Binding, Beautifying, Buying Bibles of all sorts and sizes,
storing all Studies, Libraries and Houses therewith; If to carry them about
under your Arms; If to hold them up in your Hands out of the Pulpit ore a soft
Cushion while (till the Glass be run) you Collate thereon; If to be more
Critical in Coting, and punctual in Noting this proof and the other about the
Practice of Piety, then to practice the piety therein approved; If to be loud
and Clamorous for this or that more Corrected Copy of it, against these or
those that are more Corrupted; If to have it in so high esteem, and account, as
to count it one of the most gainful Commodities that men can trade in, or get
Money by Ministering out of; If to cry it up, and make no small stir about it,
as Demetrius the Silversmith, who by making Shrines for her brought no small
Gain to himself and his fellow Craftmen, who by that Craft had their Wealth,
did about their Image Diana, which fell down from Jupiter, who with the Workmen
of like Occupation, cried out, full of wrath, of the Greatness of their
Goddess, against such as they could not prove to be Blasphemers of her, for
fear least there should be a Despising and D^stroying of that more then fit
Magnificence they magnified her withal by promoting of the Truth, and so their
Craft be in danger to be set at naught; If to Vindicate it with as much
v^hemency in long self-confounding. Scripture defending Discourses, crude
indigested, self-confuting Divinity Disputations (such as I. O's.) from that
real Right, which is done it by its Rightest Friends the Quakers, who vindicate
it from that real Wrong that is done to it by its forenamed (not so much
nominal as real) Fox-like Foes; If to decry them, who decry those, that in
works deny it, as decryers of it, like such as use to cry Whore first against
honest Matrons, left their own Whoredoms by them discryed, should be
discovered; If manually and verbally, more then mentally and vitally to advance
and extol it; If so to advance, extol and value it, as to detrude, deride, and
vi^ifie that light it came from, which was before, and is above it for the sake
of it; If to make your boasts of the Letter, and yet through breaking the Law,
that is laid down in it, to dishonor God, whose Name is blasphemed among Turks
at this day by the lawless lives of some Letter tawding Christians (which
Turks if you bid them less for what they Sell, then at first they ask, will
say, What belike you think I am a Christian that ask more then I mean to take)
If to wear out your wretched days, spend your precious hours, spinne out your
whole lives in speaking of, and for it, and one to another about it, in
scrambling and scraping, and scribbling, for the mere skull of the Scripture; If
to be obstinately obstreperous in peevish prittleprattles for every little
Letter, particle, point, trivial Title and (...) of it; If to tear and tire
yourselves and others in toylesome Treatises about the Integrity of the
External (non-Original) Original Text of it; If to transgress beyond the
bounds of all Sense and Reason, and transcend the measure of all modesty and
Truth in talk of the infallible Truth of fallible men's mere fallible
Transcripts of it out of the Original Text of all, which ye confess is not now
in being, and that in every Apex and (...) of it, as thou I. O. do; If to be
(as thou in the first page of thy Preface say some of you are to good (but I
say to little purpose) almost every day in Commendation of the Scripture, and
Exhortation to the study of it; If like Stoics to stand studying in it with
your own natural understandings without the Life and spirit which only opens
it, till ye Commence Stocks, staves and stones, sottish Priests that forget the
Law of their God, lost from it by looking for it in the Letter of it, and in
the Wood of your own Wisdom together, yea (Antitipically) those very Stocks at
which yet the People, who are likepeople-like-Priest, ask Counsel, their staff
which declares Error to them ye Teacher of Lies, the stock and the dumb-stone
to which (woe to them) the vain people say. Thou art my Father, thou have
begotten me, Awake, Arise thou shall Teach, Jer. 2.27. Hos. 4.6, 9, 12. Heb.
2.18, 19. If to Comment at large upon it; If to load the World, and lead it
into a laborynth with your Infinite labourings and illiterate labors about the
literal Sense of it, and endless endeavors to explain it, till ye make it
more intricate by your opposite Expositions, and that in such very places,
which to any (save such light haters, as standing in their own light cannot see
Wood for Trees) are as plain as the Nose on a man's face; If to claw it, and
call it Lydium lapidem, a true undeceivable, fixed, sure, and inalterable
standing Touchstone, and disown those as dishonourers of it, who (in words)
compare it to a Nose of Wax, a Lesbyan Rule, and yet (in your own Works) so to
make it, by bending and bowing it every one to his own blind Invention, so as
to cause it to stand Nine ways at once, and to propound not only how possibly,
but also how facile it is to wrest it into as many various Lections by the
advantage of the Hebrew Character as can be in the most flexible Writing in the
World, or any Critic can invent (as thou I.O. teach in thy Epistle) If to
play Legerdemaine with it, so as in a presence of valuing It, to say great
matters of it, and then to depresse it so as to unsay them again, and then to
run the Rounds and say them again, as thou I.O. often do; If to boyse it up
into that honorable Title of the Living Word of God, and again to hurl it
down into that more temperate Term, which yet ye will not endure others to Term
it by of a Dead Letter, and yet (to go round again) Horrendo percussis
scotomate, after that to say its Living, and no where said to be Dead; If to
deal so worthily with it as to affirm it to be perfect as to its own end, and
fall out with such as deny it so to be, as no Quakers do that I know of, and
then from the same Handwriting that before affirmed it, to deal so unworthily
with it as to deny it so to be (as if I.O. does not my Eyes are out, but if he
do, he will surely say his own were not well open when he did so) If to say its
profitable to its end, and that its end is to make men perfect, and yet to say
no man is made perfect in this World, in which only the Scripture is confessed
to be of use, nor till the world to come, where its granted to be of no use,
and cannot profit at all; If thus to toss it to and again like a Tennis Ball
in a confused, self-contradictory kind of talk, sometimes telling the Truth
about it, sometimes belying it, sometimes giving both it, and the Liar himself
the Lie, who so belyed it; sometimes, yea often lying against and always
living beside the holy Truth, and Doctrine itself declared by it; If to exceed
in setting forth its self evidencing Excellency, in avouching its Divine
Authority and Power to Command men in the Name of God as his Word, and yet
never to come under the Power of its Commands, so as yield Obedience thereunto,
If to call it your Rule, and yet never submit to be ruled by it; If both to
overvalue and to undervalue, to lift up and cast down, to honor and dishonor
it, be truly indeed to value, exalt and honor the Scriptures; If all the
particulars above enumerated, and many more of the same sort that might be
instanced in by Induction, be in heart, word and deed so to do, then I shall
yield the Scripture to be as much so valued, honored and exalted in this
ever-Reforming, never-Reforming Nation of England as among Papists, or any
other Nation whatsoever, and by our self separating, sensual, literal,
Antiscriptural, Anti-spiritual, high Notional Professors, as well as by the
best National Protestants that are therein, and by I.O. himself, and his
Reverend Fellow Students (if they study and value it at the same rates with
himself) as much as any I know: Finally, If this be very highly to value it, to
be always charging, challenging, and calling out for the Allowance of large
and liberal Maintenance As J.O. does in his late shuttling sheet of Answers to
some Queries about Tithes.
and Augmentation of Means, by all means possible, out of all men's
possibilities for the Ministers, not of the Spirit, but of the Letter only, as
those of men's making are, who steal words enough from thence, cut of which,
together with what of their own they patch them up with into one or two hours
piece of work in a week to pick out a Living by, And if that be to value it, or
esteem it, or prize it, or rate it high, or set much by it, or make much of it
to sell every Sermon, so stole, and made but on some one verse of it (and yet
some make so much of one verse as to make many Sermons on it, stretching it
out, for ease-sake, to hold out the running of many Glasses) for 20 shillings a
Sermon, and more Money, and to have and to hold some Hundreds, at least one
Hundred of pounds, for at most one hundred of Sermons; I say if this be to make
much of the Scripture, there is more made of it in one year by our Divines, and
Doctors of Divinity (amongst whom I.O. was once none of the last nor least, as
to valuing and making much of it) then ever was by all the Quakers in the World
since that Nickname began, who yet, if to make much of it be to live in the
Light as the Letter itself exhorts to do, do make more of it that way in a
year, then all those Priests and Prophets that preach it for Hire, and Divine
out of it for Money or ever have done since the World began, or ever will do
while it has a being.

So that howbeit thou I.O. in thy hostile mind representest the Quakers as
hosts, (...), enemies and haters of the Scriptures, there is no such matter;
for if they be haters of it that hate to be reproved by it, and cannot endure
the sound Doctrine delivered in it, which is according to Godliness; the
Letter has no such haters of it as the very Ministers of the Letter are, who
are ever enmity against the Life, Light and Spirit it calls to walk in; And if
they may be said to love it, who are livers according to it, the very Letter
itself has no such true lovers of it, as the Quakers, who are in thy blind
zeal hated by thee, as haters of it, for living that Life it calls for.

As to thy Tale of our striving to thrust the Scripture from its own place in
the Church of God, its as true a Tale as its fellow false ones; for though we
set Christ and his inward Light, living Word, and Life-giving Spirit only on
the Throne in the Church, yet we own and establish the Scripture, which is but
the mere Letter in its proper place, wherein it is to stand (since it had its
being (as so) from the other) as subservient, and subordinate to the other,
which are its betters, and its elders, and not as such a Dominus fac Iotum as
thou make it, as if those that gave being to it, must now come under it so as
to stand barely at the Bar before it to be tried by it, while it sits in
supreme Authourity on the Bench, as the most perfect, infallible Touch stone,
Lydius lapis, and standing Rule (for no less, but much more thou would have
it, even Light, Rule of Trial, Judge, Witness, and all) to which all Spirits,
even Gods own, that gave it out, as well as all false ones, must stand, or
rather stoop, and submit to be judged by, and the foundation which the Church,
or World in the World, or Wheel in a Wheel must stand, or else fall and fail
for ever; for as there was a time wherein the Church (which is but one from
Abel till now, and can have but one and the same Rule, bottom and foundation
for ever, and one Rock on which its built, which is neither Peter, nor Paul,
nor any of their Writings, nor of any Prophets that wrote before them, but
Christ the Light to the Nations, and the Rock of Ages and Generations) was
without it, and not placed upon it, so there was a time of thousands of years
together wherein it had no place, nor use at all in the Church, nor so much as
any being in the World; and as for such high place as thou in thy own will now
alowest it (as its own) as wise and quicksighted as thou art to know and see
non Entities, and things that never were at all, I know no such Place that God
ever set it in, nor time, when he so super-eminently exalted it; and though I
acknowledge, and am not ignorant (as thou art) that mere men and blind builders
(as seeing as thyself) have Canonized it into the Head of the Corner, laying
him aside, whom God has made so, yet I am to learn, and so art thou (for all
thy hasty teaching it, as Truth, to others) where ever the bare Letter or
Scripture (which is all one) was created into such a Lord, as thou look on
it to be, over his inward Light and Spirit in the heart, and authorized so
infinitely, as thou imaginest, over all things by the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth, the only Author and Creator of all things.

Ex. 1. S. 4. Non tantum Scripturas omni sua Authoritate spoliare easque e loco
suo mouere, sed and ipsum Christum Personalitate sua atque divina existentia
exuere hoc unico stratagemate intendunt and conantur.
J.O. Not only to detrade the Scripture from its place, but also that by that
one only device of denying to the Scripture that glorious Title of the Word of
God, the Quakers aim and endeavor to divest Christ himself of his Personality
and divine Being.

Reply. Was ever man left of God to show his own Folly by more palpable and
apparent absurdities, then thou here utterest, who by that very thing, whereby
we seek to invest Christ with the proper and peculiar Right both in Name and
Nature, whereof your selves rob him, belyest us, so as to say we thereby seek
to divest him of it? Is not the Word of God not only the proper Name Ioh. 1.
Rev. 19. but also the proper Nature and divine Being of Christ, which he had
before he was made flesh, from the very beginning before the Scripture was,
that declares of him, before World it self was, which was made by him, and all
things in it, so that without him nothing was made that was made? And because
that we will not take this glorious Title of his, to whom only of Right it
belongs, viz. the Word of God, who has no corruptible Word that I know but
only one, that's incorruptible and lives and abides for ever, and is both
essentialiter and effective and enunciative too the Word of God, and invest
such a corruptible thing herewith as the mouldring Letter, a Writing with men's
hands, which Worms may eat, and men's Hands blot out, deface, and destroy; and
because we will not attribute that everlasting Name of his, to that which in
Nature is not everlasting (as ye do) but decaying; do thou say we divest him
of his divine Being? Do thou not beget this bastardly business of divesting
Christ himself of his divine Name and Nature, Excellency and Existence in thy
own brain, by ascribing these to the Scriptures, and giving the glory thereof
to another under that high Prerogative Title of the Word of God, due only and
alone to him, and not to any Letter, that man, as moved by him, writes of him,
and then lay it at the door of the Quakers? Art not thou the man that
appropriatest that Name and Nature, which is proper to Christ alone, to the
Scripture, by disputing as to Name and Thing in esse reasi cognoscibili, that
it is the Word of God, and that glorious Title is its proper Name? and is not
this what in you lies to dethrone Christ, who only is so, and place another
ever him as the only most, perfect Light, Foundation, Touchstone, by which his
Spirit must be tried) and yet accusest thou the Quakers of displacing him?

Does not the Scripture say that Christ is the Light, which the Church
Ministerially is to hold out and bear witness to ( Ioh. 1) in all her
Preachings, Administrations and Walkings, and the Scripture is written out for
the sake, and Instruction, and profit or use and service of the Church, 2 Timothy
3.15, 16. 1 Cor. 10. yet set not thou the Letter above the Church and
Christ too, saying, Page 76. The Scripture is Light, it is the duty of every
Church to hold it up, almost the whole of its duty; and this Duty it performs
Ministerially, not Authoritatively. A Church may bear up that Light, it is not
the Light; it bears Witness to it, but kindles not one divine beam to further
its discovery: All the Preaching that is in any Church, its Administration of
Ordinances, all its walking in the Truth hold up this Light? Thus magnifying
the Letter above all, and making it the main business of the Church to
magnify and hold it up, much what as the Jews do, whose Work in their
Synagogues is to lift up the Letter, while they loath the Law and the Light it
came from, and is but the mere Letter or Writing of?

J. O. The whole Truth of the Words of God is as to Name and Thing opposed by
the poor Fanatical Quakers; Satan in these days assaults the sacred Truth of
the Word of God in the poor deluded Fanatical Souls among us commonly called
Quakers.

Reply. It was none but Satan himself that is a Liar, and the Father of it who
told thee so, and in thee tells it out for Truth to the whole World; For, 1.
The whole Word of God, which is but of one, and not of many kinds, that I know
of, as thou would make it, as if God had one Living, one Dead, one Fallible
another Infallible, one Corruptible another Incorruptible, one Eternal, one
Temporal Word; one that's only Letter, another that is Spirit and Life; one
Written, and another Unwritten; one within men, and another, that's not the same
in Nature, without men; that one and the same Individual Word of God, I say,
which is the same, whether within or without, Written or Unwritten, neither of
which the bare Writing is, as to both Name and Thing we own and honor, as that
which from everlasting to everlasting is unchangeably Authoritative over all,
inviolably pure, every way entire and absolutely perfect as God is, whose Word
it is, and so we assault it not in its Name, nor in the Thing, as thou say;
for we know and never did yet deny (unless 'twere before we knew it, and while
we were the same with you, who yet know it not, nor never heard it from his own
mouth) the Word of God to be the Word of God; And also though thou Scandalize
us so grossly as to say Satan sets us on work to bereave the Scripture of the
glorious Title of the Word of God, as its own Proper Name; That 2. is also
false, for at the Will of God, and in service and obedience to him, and not of
Satan, we strip the mere Letter of that Glory, wherewith thou unduly do
invest it, and take it down from that high Throne and Authority, wherein Satan
sets thee on work to set it up, ^that men may do homage to it, and so run a
Whoring after it from the Word of Life it only points at, as Israel did after
the Brazen Serpent, and dance about it in their Idolatrous hearts as the God
that must save and deliver out of Egypt. But, 3. Were that true, yet howbeit we
own the Word of God to be as truly and properly called the Word of God as in
truth it is so, and give to that still its own due proper Name of the Word of
God somewhat more then yourselves do, who call that by the Name of, and make
that Title of the Word of God the very proper Name of another thing, which is
not it, but as inferior to it, as the Effect is to the Cause it came from,
viz. the outward Letter De nomine Scripturae proprio contra Fanaticos
nostrates, etc. I am to encounter our Fanatics at present about the proper
Name of the Scripture; the part of the Question which is about the proper Name
of the Scripture respects the Quakers, Ex. 1. S. 12.
or Scripture, that came forth from it, and is but a Copy and Declaration or
Images of it, as much in worth and dignity below it, as the painted Picture of
a fire or a man on a Wall is to the true fire or Person which they do but
outwardly represent. And 4. As for the Writing or Scripture, which thou say
we deprive of its proper Name, because we call it not the Word of God, and by
all those glorious Titles and Epithites thou stilest it by, which we confess
are due to the Word, (viz.) Light, Living, powerful, Quickening, Foundaiton,
most Perfect Rule, and many more, as we shall see anon, thou say most falsely
in that, for these are as truly due, so properly due to, and the Proper Names
of the Word it self only, of which the Writing is but a Writing or mere
Scriptural Declaration, and not the Proper Name, nor Properties of the
Scriptures.

I.O. Thou tellest, Ep. page 30. That the whole truth about the Word of God
(which thou falsely Slanderest us as confusedly opposing) thou have endeavored
to comprize in thy Theses.

Reply. Thy Asserting that the Scripture ought to be called the Word of God as
its proper Name, and that it is in esse reali and cognoscibili the Word of God,
and known so to be, and consequently the Light, Foundation, Rule, and whatever
else the Word is known to be, which is the main matter thou affirmest and
puzlest thy self to prove against us, is so far from being the whole Truth
about the Word of God, that it has no Truth at all in it, but in plain Truth
is wholly a Lie, in esse reali and cognoscibili also, to all, but such as know
not (as thy self do not in this point) either what they say, or whereof they
affirm.

J. O. Thou say thou compleatest in thy Theses the Doctrine of the
Scripture, concerning the Scripture.

Reply. Thy Doctrine concerning the Scripture, which is, that it is the Word of
God, and known so to be, and is to be called, or else its stripped out of its own
proper Name; this is not the Doctrine of the Scripture concerning it self, but
thy own Doctrine which though thou dignifie it with the Title of Pro Scripturis
in thy Latin Title Page, is more Con and Anti, then either Cum or Pro; yea,
much more against, then either according to, or for the Scriptures.

Ipsum Verbum Dei omnem ejus usum quod attinet, penitus respuere, etc. Ex. 2.
S. 27.
I.O. Thou speakst of the Quakers as altogether rejecting the Word of God, i.
e. (with thee) the Scripture as to its whole use, and of spoiling the holy
Scriptures of All Use, Authority and Perfection; Apparet eos omni usu,
authoritate ac perfectione sacras Scripturas spoliare, Ex. 3. S. 22. Nullt
dubium esse possit quin si res eorum secundum vota successissent, eas dudum
penitus rejectssent, Ex. 3 S. 19. Utinam deleantur inquiunt Fanaticorum
nonnulli, ut omnes ad lumen illud quod in iis est attenderent magis, Ex. 3 S.
13.
And as those who if things had succeeded according to their desires, would no
doubt long since have have utterly rejected them. Yea, as those, who wish them
quite blotted out, that all men might more attend to the Light within
themselves.

Reply. Though what Use, Authority and Perfection the Scripture is owned by us
to be of, will appear more anon in its proper place, yet that we deny it not to
have an Authority and Perfection and precious Use I here declare to the
undeceiving of such as are deceived by thy Deceits and Lies; much less do we
reject, as thou falsely objects against us, the Word of God it self, which is a
greater matter, and of more moment then the Scripture, as to its whole Use; and
in proof of it against thy self, that we own the very Bible and Letter to be of
use, and do also much use it as occasion is, I shall here Cite I O. to give
account to I.O. of this Lie, that against I.O. I O. himself has forged.

Yea, I shall go no further at present then to thy self, who (as in at least
Twenty things more in thy self-confounding Fardel thou do) confutest thy self
as to this Lie, in those very parcels above quoted.

For mark, Art not thou the man, who as brisk as thou art in bedirting us with
this Slander of rejecting the Scripture (which thou falsely call the Word of
God) as to all its use, its whole use, and that altogether, could we have had
our Wills, yet to the Contradicting of thy self which is as ordinary with thee
as to eat and drink, confessest and Commendest us thus far before all? as
follows in thy Latin piece, where thy words Englished are to this purpose;

Ex. 1. S. 7. That the Quakers profess the Holy Scriptures to contain a
certain Revelation of Gods Will, and so far to have come forth from God as it
proceeded from that inward Light which was from Christ in those who wrote those
Books which ye name the Scriptures. And Ex. 5. S. 18. That the Quakers
acknowledge the Scriptures to contain a Manifestation of the Will and Mind of
God, both in respect of those who wrote them, and of those also to whom they
were delivered from the beginning; and that this Declaration therein held,
proceeded from the Spirit of Christ which was so with the Writers thereof, that
they could declare the infallible Truth; and that the things written therein
are an undoubtedly true Declaration of the Mind of God? And do thou not add
thus much, That thus far we are right, and that none that own them thus far,
can altogether reject the Scriptures, unless he will declare himself to be
selfcondemned, and that we will not easily yield to a Renouncing of this
Confession?

Is all this then that thy self Confessest of us the Quakers, whom thou
Condemnest for utter rejecting the Scripture consistent with such an utter
rejecting it as thou Chargest them with? Do not here clear the Quakers out of
thy own mouth, out of which thou Condemnest them, for the same thou clearest
them in, to the Condemning of thy self to be one out of whose one and the same
mouth comes to the same men, Blessing and Cursing, Excusing and Accusing for
the same thing? Does any good Fountain send forth sweet Water and bitter at the
same time? Is not thy Tongue an unruly Member, which thy self can tame no
better then therewith to bless God, and men too that are made after Gods
Image, as owners of the Scriptures, and yet to Curse them with thy Lies as
denyers thereof when thou have done? Art thou not herein right Baalam like, who
for the Preferments-sake from which God kept him, would sain have Cursed Israel
with his Divinations as thou do with thy Divinity Disputations, and yet was
against his will forced to forbear, and to his own shame to bless them
altogether?

Object. Oh but (quoth I.O.) no matter what the Quakers confess of the
Scripture now; no doubt had things fallen out accordinn to their desire, and if
People could have born the denial of it, who bore such respect to the
Scripture, that they would have flown with fury on the Quakers Pates, if they
should have seemed to deny it, the Quakers from whom the fear of that more then
the force of Truth forces that Confession, Proculdubio Jamdudum rejecissent,
had doubtlesly Rejected them utterly long ago, Ex. 3. S. 19.

Reply. This is not so true not well-grunded a Surmise as this, viz. No matter
how the Priests fawn, own the Kings, Protectors, Parliaments or Powers still
that are in present Being, to save their Standings in their present Places and
Preferments; No heed's to be given to their Crouchings Cringing and Humble
Representations; No doubt but as things fall out, and succeed to the serving of
their Interest, they will turn still to what best serves their turns, and have,
Exceptis excipiendis, been generally known to have done so now long ago, even
from Henry the Eighths time to this very day.

As for the Quakers, could they have dissembled so as ye do for fear of man's
Fury, they might have escaped many, if not all those furious Fallings of your
bloody mad-brain'd Parish-Professors upon their Pares, and have saved Oxford
and Cambridge that labor and pains, they more like Fiends, then Friends of
Truth, have been at to persecute them long since also.

Again. I.O. Do not thou say it is evident enough that some of us Read the
Holy Scripture in Private, or at least Remember what we have Read or Heard out
of it, and for the most part carry the Holy Bible about with us, and that in
our Digladiations or Disputes we very often rehearse and urge the words of the
Scriptures; and that the reason why we own Translations is, because being not
learned farther then our Mother Tongue, we shall then deprive our selves of all
use of the Scriptures, which we are loath to do?

Which of these two I O's. must we believe? Or if it be but one I.O. (as no
doubt it is) divided against himself, and telling two contrary Tales, whereof
but one can be true; which of his two Testimonies must men give credit to? That
wherein he says we strive to bereave men of All Use of the Scripture, and
count it odious and abominable to have Heresies, Error, false Doctors and
Doctrines Convicted and Confuted out of it; Or that clean Contrary one, wherein
he tells all men that we use it so as to Read it in Private, Remember what we
Read, or Hear of it; Carry it about with us, use it, and urge out of it in our
Disputes, and are shy of denying it to be Translated into English for our use,
least we should be deprived of All that Use of it our selves, which we are
willing to make.

For my part, let others do what they will, I have found I.O. telling so many
Lies, when in his malice, he talks against the Quakers, that I shall rather
take that for Truth now, which against his envious lying self he here talks for
them; for some Use, and that not a little himself here affirms we make of the
Scriptures; and in other places quotes many Scriptures out of which we argue
against our Opposers; and if it be never so little use its enough to stop his
mouth out of his own mouth, who says we utterly reject the Scriptures as to
All its Use, for he that rejects it as to its Whole use, or All its use, must
be one that makes no use of it at all.

And if I.O's. Testimony had been only, that we deny many ill uses of it, that
himself and other Scribes make, that spend and take up more time in scraping
and scribbling for it, then take care to live the life of it, and that wrest it
to their own ruin, he had said the Truth; Or had he said we deny many of those
good life's, that many make of it, he had much lessened his Lie and his Folly in
it; but because we own it not as useful to all those extraordinary, weighty and
mighty life's, which he says falsely are to be made of it, which indeed are to
be made only of the Eternal, Internal Spirit, Word and Light it came from; to
say we deny all Uses of it, as if it were good, and profitable, and useful, and
fit for nothing, this renders his Lie the more liable to all men's view, and
himself to be as blind as one that can see no difference between staring and
stark mad.

What I. O. is that which is not said to be good for all things, thereupon said
to be good for nothing? If I should say soft Wax is not useful to stop hot
Ovens with, must it straitway be thrown away? and must it be taken for Granted,
that I say its not good to Seal with, or that its useful for nothing? That may
be good to Cut and Kill (as a Knife) that when it has so done, cannot quicken,
nor heal, nor save, nor cure; The Letter kills, as an Executing Instrument, but
the Spirit only gives the Life.

And whereas thou say we wish it blotted out, that men may come to the Light
within, in which is the life; Nay stay I. O. no have to hang true men, we would
have all come to the Light and Life within indeed, no such have yet of the
Scriptures going hence though old it will wax once and wear away; there is many
precious Uses, though not all the Eminent ones thou talkest of to be made of it
before it go hence; One whereof is that very thing upon the account of which
thou falsely say we wish it blotted out, viz. That men may come to the Light
within, which the Scripture is so far from hindering any from coming to (but
only that the blind Porers in it with their natural Eyes, cannot see Wood for
Trees) that it sides with us in helping to call People to the Light in the
Heart, which thing is as well the end of its being written, as it was the end
of Paul, and John's, and all the Prophets Ministry by word of mouth, Act 26.17,
18. 1 Ioh. 1.1, 5, 6, 7. And is the end of all our Ministering now, as we are
moved of the Lord, by Voice or Writing; the Letter bids look to the Light, as
that which leads on to the Life, but both Letter and Light are a cloud to the
Egyptians, that pursued them, which to Israel, that obeyed it, was a help.

And as it serves with us to call to the Light, so before it pass away, it
must be used against them, to send them packing first that have Abused it, as
thou have done, and to accuse as a Witness against them such as have owned it
as their Rule and Foundation yet lived and built so much (as ye have done)
beside it. And as Christ said to the old Scripture- searchingScribes, Joh. 5.
that would never come to him the Life, whom they Testified of; so say I to you
of the same Seed, Do not think that Christ by his Light, within you only,
whereby ye are made as all men are, who have not the Law in a Letter, a Law
before God to your selves, will accuse you to the Father, ye have another that
accuses you for your Vanities and Deceits, even Moses and the Apostles and
Prophets Writings, in whom ye trust to get Life; for if you had believed them,
you would not have belyed, but believed in and obeyed the Light and Word in the
Heart, which they call you to, for the Scriptures testify of that; but fith
you believe not their Testimony to the Light, how can we look that by our Words
ye should come to believe in the Light it self.

So that ye stand Condemned, and must be Judged by the Law or Light within, as
well as such as are without the Law in a Letter without; and fining under and
against the Law in the Letter, by the very Letter of the Law, throw boasting,
and yet breaking of which, ye dishonor God much more then the Heathen do, Romans
2. Ye must be condemned also.

So that the Scripture is of much use yet, and we are free it should stand, and
not be blotted out, that by the Testimony of it, which is one and the same with
ours to the Light, ye might be (if yet it may be) brought to look to the Law of
Christ, which (and not the Letter) is the Light and Life; but if you will not
come to Christ and his Light in you, that ye may have the Life; its all of a
price to you, whether the Scripture stand or be blotted out, for your Names are
not (while ye are Enemies to the Light) written there for Life, but as yet
blotted out even by the Scripture, while it abides unblotted out, from under
Heaven.

I.O. Ex. 2. S. 26. Thou say, The Quakers little regard the understanding of
the Scripture, and this is one of their Eminent Deceits so long as they have
the Words they are well enough without the sense, as nothing appertaining to
them.

Reply. Saving I.O's. fine figment in this matter, which may be more manifested
in its proper place, howbeit we are well satisfied without so many several
silly Senses and mis-meanings of it, as are ministered cut by the unlearned
Ministers, that know not the Mind of the Lord, nor ever shall, while they lean
to their own mere Natural empty Understandings, and lye-poring in the Letter,
as they do without the Spirit, which only Receives and Reveals the deep things
of God, and opposing the Light that only opens it, yet we are not against the
true sense and meaning of the Spirit, which expounds the Mysteries, and shows
the Secrets thereof to those few Babes that fear the Lord, which are hidden
from the worldly wise and prudent; but whether the Renowned Rabbis Preach for
prize, or hold their peace, we nevertheless still have true meanings and mind
of Christ.

I.O. Ex. 2. S. 21, 22. That they affirm it is not lawful for any to Interpret
the Scriptures, or give the sense thereof. And, S. 22. That altogether with the
Interpretation it self, they reject, damn, curse all Mediums of Opening
Scriptures, the weighing the Words and Phrases, and daily Prayer; and comparing
of diverse places together; that the Opening of hard Places, the clearing and
proving of the Truth, the Conviction and Confutation of Heresies, Errors,
false Doctors and Doctrines, the Edifying any by Instructions and Exhortations,
and all the other ends of lawful Interpretation of the Scriptures, are odious
and abomination to them; they not only prosecute with Enmity all Expositions of
the Scripture by word of mouth in private Families, Meetings, Churches, Schools
of Believers, to the Opening of the Sense of the Word, and the giving of
Knowledge by the Scripture it self, but also as little esteem and most
Childishly defame both Commentaries, and all other Books wherein part of the
Scripture is Interpreted, or any Truth cleared or confirmed out of it; or the
Faithful persuaded by Exhortations to Holiness, and Gospel Obedience, or men
are Instructed in any other manner whatsoever in the Knowledge of God.

Reply. Whether all these stories of I.O. which I have here put together, do
more savor of the French Galimafrey, or wild-Irish bonni-clabber, i will not
determine; but I am sure they are an unsavory Mess of Omnigatherums, made up
of many sorts of lying Reproaches, that have no Consistency with the Truth,
which would far better have become a Doctor of Divinity to have told of the
Devil himself, had he been accusing of him, who is the false Accuser of the
true Brethren, rather then such a legend of Lies as lie here legenda, legible
to all that know them, of the Quakers.

I cannot say of this indeed, as of T.D. his doings in his way of sharp
shooting out his false Tales against us, that it will sound much to our shame
in a Country Church, because its well nigh all laid out, not to say lied out
in the Latin Tongue (though only Englished here) but it will ring such a Peal
in the University Colleges, among the Junior sort of Haters of whom God loves,
and among all (save the lack-Latine-Country-Clergy men) against the Quakers, as
will make them prick up their Ears and listen (that they may learn how to lie
against them also) more then ever they did to the Quakers themselves, that of
them they might learn the Truth; but the best on it is, though here is a Nest of
them together, if that would do any good to I.O. or hurt to the Quakers, yet by
Lies and Deceits none ever did, or ever must prevail against the Truth.

Yet to all this thou addest, That we turn the Church of God into a Hogsty; And
that we are great Reproachers of that Divine Goodness that gave it, in setting
so slight by Interpretations of the Scripture in order to the understanding of
it: To all which yet I shall answer no otherwise then thus briefly and soberly
as follows.

Viz. We acknowledge Gods goodness in giving it, and deny not all exposition
of the matters in it, provided it be by them, as they are so moved, that live
in the light and spirit of God that gave it forth by holy men, which only
opens it aright and knows its own, and searches the deep things of God, that
are laid down in it, in the writings and meetings and Churches and Schools of
the Saints and Believers (which wot you well are not your Christ-Church
Colleges nor Academical Covents, but the Quakers Public Congregations, where
I have sometimes had and heard more Scripture truly opened in an hour, than in
some Steeple houses in a year, any more than we do any true Translations of it
out of our Tongue into another, of which matter about Translation since thou
say we covertly conceal our counsel, thou may have it more fully perhaps
anon, when I have first wiped away all thy lies of us out of the way.

But because we do indeed, though owning the spirit and spiritual men's
expositions, yet deny the naturally wise men's cloudy conceptions, mysty
meanings, shallow-brain'd senses, and excentrick Expositions, of the things of
the spirit, which he knows not, as they lie in the letter which he knows as
little, as useful or profitable, much more as so necessary as thou would
make this natural man's mighty doings about the Scripture, who is he indeed and
not the Quakers that for want of such spiritual learning as naturally unlearned
Peter had, wrests it into strange senses to his own ruin, and because we do
not childishly (as thou say we do) but soberly and justly complain of those
vast confused Bombasting Bumbles of blindness of the cloudy Clergies
composing, viz. Comentaries and other Books thrust out upon pretense of
clearing the Scripture, which is clearer then they are, but in truth to the
thickening of the Air, that the Sun shines not clearly through it, thereupon to
say that we reject, damn and curse all manner of opening Scripture, and that of
daily prayers to God; this is a business of thy own bruiting about, whereby to
render us odious among thy Oxonian fellow students, that they may reject and
damn and curse them thence whom God has not cursed, and against whom none of
Baalams enchantments can prevail: for we own the daily prayers of such as God
owns, who pray in the spirit, though we know God hears not sinners, nor the
prayers of the wicked, nor of such as turn their ear from hearing his Law,
which is Light, in their own hearts, their prayers are abomination to him: and
we own the openings of the Scripture by the spirit that gave it forth, when he
opens the mouth or guides the pens of any that have the mind of Christ to
utter any of it, as it lies in the letter hid from the natural mind, unto
others; and to say this is to turn the Church into a hogsty, as if there could
possibly by no Religion nor good manners nor sheep like innocent demeanor, nor
any thing but mere bruitishnesse, beastliness and swinishnesse any where in
the World, but where men sit under the Ministry of the Preachings, Logical
Expoundings, Writings, Ecclesiastical Rhetoric and other Reacks of those
fleshly and earthly minded spiritual men, Doctors and Commentators, etc. that
have long ago got the parent and engrossed all that work of expounding
Scripture for money to themselves; this I utterly deny, and I also affirm that
if that Crew and their Creatures be the Christians, and the Church of God (as
they call themselves, as if the Quakers were all Heretics, that do not own
them) then the more ado men make to be Christians in name, the further off from
the nature of Christ, and as the old Proverb is, the nearer the Church, the
further from God, there being nor such fordid stinking sinks for wickedness,
filth, pride, lust, persecution, scoffing, hating God and good, ungodliness
and all manner of uncleanness to be seen in all the Christian World again, as
are easy to be seen in Cathedrals, Colleges, Academies, etc. where men sit at
the Fountains and Well-heads of Divinity and Nurseries of Learning and Religion
(as they call them) and directly under the daily dispensations of their Doctors
Oral and Scriptural Divinity Disputations and Expositions.

And whereas I O. makes a challenge to have it tried between them and the
Quakers, saying in the next Section after that, wherein he saves the Quakers
sleighting their Interpretations do no less than turn the Church into a
Hogsty, thus

Ex. 2. S. 28. Enimvero si omnium seculorum, omnium qui unquam extiterunt
Christianorum experientia, si ea quae ipsi vident, spectant, audiunt quotidie,
ullius apud eos ponderis essent aut momenti, usum, necessitatem, fructum
interpretationis Scripturarum per solennem verbi praedicationem, expositionem
viva voce, aut scriptis factam, negare verecundarentur: spectemus utique
utrumque gregem, cum illum qui verbo licet fruantur, interpretatione ejus
destitutus est, tum illum qui una cum verbo Dei, aliis etiam mediis cultus
divini, quae in verbi interpretatione plurimum consistant fruitur, si modo ex
fructibus arbor dignoscenda fit, bona apparebit illa, quae istiusinodi fructus
cientiae Dei tulit, quibus ubique progerminavit legitima Scripturae
interpretatio.
J. O. For if the Experience of all Ages of all Christians that ever were, if
those things which themselves see, behold, or hear daily, were of any weight or
moment, they, the Quakers, would blush to deny the use, necessity, and fruit of
the solemn Preaching of the Word, Interpretation of the Scripture made whether
by word of Mouth, or Writing: Let us take a view of each Flock, both that,
which although they enjoy the Word, yet is destitute of its Interpretation and
also that which, together with the Word of God, enjoyes also the other means of
Gods worship, which consists very much in the Interpretation of the Word; if
now the Tree be so, and be known only by its fruits, then that will appear the
good one, which has brought forth those fruits which the legal Interpretation
of the Scripture has every where produced, or brought forth.

Reply. Let it be well heeded, First, That by the Word of God here, I O.
intends the Scripture; And Secondly, That by Legal Interpretation he intends
not such as is (as I said before) used and owned by the Quakers, ( viz.) That
which is only in the Light, and in the Spirits movings, that moved to write the
Scripture, but such as is made among the Naturalists and Scholars in their
Academical Imaginations, and by the Priests in their Parishes, and then I am
here ready to answer his Challenge, and I say a Match, let it be so.

First, Let both Flocks be viewed, the Quakers, and the Parish People; I will
not say but that among them that are called Quakers, that frequent the Places
of their Public Speaking, there are many, not only by reason of whom, but also
by whom the way of Truth that the Quakers walk in, is evil Spoken of; but I O.
either has, or should have more wit, and sense, and reason, then to account
the Routs, that are made by a rabble of rude ones that frequent the Quakers
Meetings, to render them odious with their odious Carriages, to the Quakers
themselves; that he ought, Non Trepidantibus sed Tripudiantibus vitio vertere,
qui vertunt seria ludo, and ludunt cum sacris, etc. to impute not to the
Quakers, but to Scholars, and Apprentices, and Prateis, and Players, and
ungodly Scoffers, and Children of the Devil, that make a Mock and a May game of
Holy Matters, and would never band so bitterly against the Quakers and their
Meetings, if there were not something of God in both:

Secondly, In their Meetings there may be some Antic tricks done by some that
have run out from the Truth and lost their Conditions, and being not steadfast
in their Watch to the Light, have degenerated into Darkness and Delusion; by
whom some things have been done, and many more then T.D. mentions, that are not
owned by the Quakers, to whom, they are wise men the while, that blame the
Quakers for it, who cannot prevent it, as Vice-Chancellors and Proctors might
young Scholars rudeness, and Magistrates the Peoples bruitishnesse in
Parishes, but will not.

And Thirdly, In the silent Meetings of the Quakers, there may be some that get
no further then the outward Form of Godliness, and not grow out into the
Power; and here and there one that may be over-taken with a fault, which if
they be, it shall be found with a witness by the Wicked, that Watch for their
Halting, and will make more of one Malefactor that is found among all the
Quakers, then of 40 Drunkards, Swearers, Cursers, Scurrilous Scoffers and
Scorners, Gamesters, Couzeners, Cheaters, Liars, Laughers, Light-Talkers, and
Lewd-Livers in a Parish; and then many Scores of High-way-men, Thieves,
Fellons, Murderers, and heinous Malefactors that are Hanged and Trussed-up
every year, that live and die under the Ministry of the Church of England.

But make the worst that can be made of the Quakers Crimes, if they were 40
fold worse then they are, or rather single out the very Excrements and Dreggs
that depend that way, to say something against; yet Hoc astquid nihitest, that
something is nothing in comparison of that open prosessed Prophannesse and
Iniquity that abounds beyond the bounds of Modesty, yea of ordinary Immodesty,
and of Impudency it self among the Parish People, where there is such a
constant Custom, and deal of Expounding of, and Preaching from the Scrirture by
the Ministerss of their own meanings, upon it; in which mere Anthropo
Theological Labors of the Clergy, the extraordinary high Acceptance of which,
by the Powers, and Parliaments, and Priests each from other is Expressed and
Accosted ordinarily with the Common Complement of Great Thanks for their Great
Pains; and as eminently fruitful and Profitable as thou professest it to be, it
is evidently more profitable to the Preachers Purses, then the Peoples Persons,
whether we Consider the Bereavings of poor men's Bodies of their Right, or the
Successelessnesse of thereof to their Souls, which from year to year, are
little or nothing the better for the blasted Ministry of these Word-stealing
Money-Mongers, and Self-Sending Prophets, which the Lord is against, as fast as
they run in his Name, and Blesses not, but says they shall not profit People
at all; and as apparent it is they do not, as it is that God says they shall
not. For from Generation to Generation, what Fruit is found in the Parish
Churches of the Popes Constituting? and what success to Sanctification and
Salvation from Sin, by the Great pains of the Successive Sermonists of several
sorts, that Simonically have got their Gifts at University, and as freely given
them out, as they have freely received them (if so to do be to Sell them for
more Money then they cost them there) is seen by the true Seers, who can see
little l^sse Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and Moral Wickedness, since the
Old Homilies were Read by the Non-Preaching Animatum Curates were Succeeded by
the Powerless Preachers, that are more Reformed from the more gross Idolatry
and Superstitions of those dismal Seasons. Is there any Parish any better
mannered then in Ages above? Does not every Priest that has stood 10, 20 years
in his Parish, leave it for the most part as Blind, Ignorant, Dissolute,
Lascivious, Rev^lling, Riotous, Luxurious as he found it? whether he dies among
them, or departs from them to a bigger booty? A Coming together there is for
Customs sake in their Best Clothes, as finely as they can afford to do, when
their (supposed) Sabbath comes about in its turn; a sound comes from a
Money-Merchants mouth, and enters in at one Ear of the People, as fast as it
can get out at the Other; and while it stays, it Swims in the Head, but sinks
not down to Renew the Heart; and some Psalms may be Sung to the Praise of him,
whom the Dead in Sin, that live Sin, cannot praise; and so there is an end of
the business for that day, till it come again; till when, Hell breaks loose,
and the Devil is served for the most part all the Week after; insomuch that it
is but for the Kettle to upbraid the Pot with its black ugly Hue, for the
Priest and his People to make Narratives of the worst of that Naughtiness,
that is found anong the very worst of those that are owned as one in Fellowship
by the Quakers, and their Ministry.

Secondly, Let both Flocks he viewed ( viz.) the Young and Old Scholars at
Universities (to begin near home at Oxford and Cambridge) behold those that sit
under your Grave Divine Doctorly Expositions, and at the Ocean of Books that
are bound down (beside what a number each has in his private Musing place) by
your Library Benches, And the Quakers that sit in silence, and wait only on the
Lord; let both Flocks be tried by their Fruits, and see which most resembles
Christ; and whether the Quakers carriage, or the Scholars, since the Quakers
came among them, have been most Innocent, Vninjurious, and Harmless; and which
look most like the Swine, Wolves, Bears, Tygars, etc. and which most like the
Fold and Lambs of Christ.

And which of these Two ( viz.) the Quakers that have the Word, and yet are
Retired from you to wait upon God alone for their Teaching, and to learn of him
at his own mouth and light in silence in all Subjection, not making such a
noise as ye empty Casks do in your busy brains about Formal set times, set by
the will of man, for Expositions and Interpretations, nor in Tumbling ore of
Tomes, Bulkie Books, and Contentious Commentators; or your Selves and your
University Scholars, that make such an infinite ado in your Inventions about
Interpreting things (sometimes) that would be ten fold plainner then they now
are, if Natural Schoolmen had let them alone, who when in aperto and facili
posita est salus, the way to Life lies as plainly laid down and declared by the
Letter in a thousand places, as it does in that one, Tit. 2.12, 13, so that
there need be no such heaps of Books as there are, more bulky then all the
Bible, to open some one small Book of it, do draw Clouds over the clear Face
of it by interposing and imposing on People the Thicket of your own Thoughts,
and darken the open Counsel of it by your Writings without End, and by your
Words without Knowledge.

I say, which of these Two, the Quakers or your Scholars, bring forth Fruits
most meet for God, and like those of the Spirit, Peace, Meekness, Patience,
Temperance, etc. Gal. 5. Let them be the Good Trees, and so known and owned to
be by their Fiuits; and let them be the true Flock of Christ, and be by us, as
I am sure such are by himself accounted as his Sheepfold.

And which abounds most in those Fruits and Works of the Flesh there spoken of
also, viz. uncleanness, lasciviousness, wrath, hatred, Drunkenness,
Revellings, and such like; and which wallows most in that kind of mire, let
them be the Hogs and Swine, and not Christ's Flock and Fold, but he held hence
forward for a Hog-sty.

Now for my part if I were to judge by what Fruits have come forth in and from
our Two Nurseries of Religion of latter years, and as well in, and from Oxford
it self, as Cambridge; and how many of them in the time of I.O's.
Vice-Chancellourship there, I. O. knows as well as I (even such as are not sit
to be named among Christians) and what Fruits of Righteousness have been found
among the Quakers both there and elsewhere, who have suffered innocently, and
(as to rendering evil for evil) patiently under them and others, I could
quickly determine the matter; but since its like I.O. will hardly let me be
Judge in my own Case, lest I cleave too much to my own Cause and Company, let
such Books as are Extant of the Scholars Misdemeanors against the Quakers in
their own Meetings, who have been always bound to their Good behavior toward
the other by that of God in their Consciences in the midst of all their abuses
to the Quakers; and then let all men Judge which Generation of men, the Quakers
or University Scholars and their Respective Assemblies do most exactly
resemble the deportment of Swine in their Hog-styes.

Besides those sundry Relations that are Extant in Print of the Imprisonments,
Whippings, and other Persecutions of the innocent Servants of the Lords sending
among them to warn them of their Wickedness at Cambridge; there are Two at
least ( viz.) one styled, A true Testimony of the Zeal of the Oxford Professors
and University-men, put forth by R.H. And one much more lately under the Hands
of 8 Witnesses, styled, A true Relation of some of the Sufferings inflicted
upon the Quakers, as the Fruits of the Evil doers (viz.) the Proctors and
Scholars at Oxford, in which who reads may see the matters of Fact, to which I
Refer such as are minded to be Judges between me and I.O. (an Oxford man) in
this Case, who (if they be not such as are loath to call their Brothers
Thieves, and their Sisters Swine) will assuredly from those Arch-Abominable and
Antick-Actions conclude from thence with me, the Actors and Abbettors look much
more (then like the Sheep of Christ) like Foxes, and Bears, and Wolves, and
Dogs, and Wild Boares, and Swine.

However, whether it shall stand with I.O. or nay, it matters not; I shall from
thence infer my Conclusion. That if Innocence, Quietness, Patience under
Sufferings, Temperance, Godliness, Reproving Wickedness, and becoming fools
for Christ, exposing themselves for Truths' sake as Signs and laughing stocks
to an Adulterous Generation, be the Characters of such men, as the Scripture
calls Swine; then that House and Family of the Quakers is become a Hog-stie;
But unless turning, and tearing, and renting, and trampling, under feet, when
Pearls and holy things are held out to them; and devouring, and hurting to
death, and tying Maids Arm to Arm together, and tumbling them into Graves, and
dirting them, and dragging them into Pools, and setting them on their Heads
with their heels upwards, and Pumping and well-nigh stifling them, Mocking,
Stoning, Scourging, putting poor innocent Strangers (that came in love to Truth
and them) into Cages, and out of their Coasts; and haling the Quakers out of
their own quiet Meetings by the hair of their Heads, and breaking the Doors to
pieces, and Windows where Quakers meet, and carrying away the Keys, and
knocking tenters in the key-holes, pulling up part of the houses, squeezing
them in their passing to and fro between the doors, turning up the forms and
seats where they sit, and like wild Horses and Colts riding upon the backs of
men and women, and smoking their Rooms with Gunpowder and Squibs, and
stamping rudely like Tavern-hunters in their Holy meetings, and crying out give
us Beer and Tobacco, and Wenches, and Whores; and bringing in strong Beer, and
drinking to them, and for refusing to pledge, throwing it on their Clothes, and
Bands, and pouring it down their Necks, and singing Bawdy Songs, and Cursing,
and Sweating, and such things as would be counted as favoring more of Bedlams
and Swine, then Saints, if Quakers should ever have done so in their
Masse-Houses, and obscaene Carriage toward Women, puffing and blowing with
Tobacco-pipes in their Mouths; raising Doctrines and Uses, and Points about
Cobblers and Tinkers, and Tobit and his Dog, offering to put their hands under
Women's Aprons, asking if the Spirit was not there; and many more such filthy,
stinking, sordid actions, as Hooting, Yelling, Laughing, any thing to hinder
the Hearing of what was spoken of Truth; drawing some into Colleges, and there
most unseemly and inhumanly abusing them; and this not only Tolerated and
Connived at by Officers, that should have punished it; but also Countenanced
too much in part by some of them.

I say, Unless these boarish, brutish Gestures, Cum muliis aliis qua nunc
praescribere longum est, be the behavior of Christ's Sheep, then, for all the
uncessant pains of Interpreting of the Scripture at the Wellhead of Religion,
and for all I.O's. saying, That if what we see, and daily hear, would sway us,
we would be ashamed to deny the fruit of Expoundings of the Scripture to be
best, where they are most Expounded, as they are ( pro forma) in the
Universities, as fair and far from it as they seem to be to themselves, they
look more like Hog-styes to the view of men after Gods heart, and the Children
of these Mothers more like Herds of Swine, then the Places and Persons of the
people called Quakers do, among whom there is not such a busling, and such a
business about men's Books in order to it, nor such Clamorous noises about
Opening the Scriptures, as is among the Scribes, that are Strangers to them;
but the words of the wise, even of Wisdom it self, Christ Jesus, are heard in
quiet by them that are Wise, more then the Cry of him that Rules among Fools.

And as for what Fruits of saving Knowledge of God, and Righteousness and
Holiness of Truth are abounding in most Academies, Towns, Cities, and Places
in all the Reformed parts of Christendom more or better then is to be seen
among Turks and Heathens (unless Couzening, Cheating, Lying, Drunkenness, and
some such like as abound more among Christians, then Turks that never talk out
of the Scripture, be better) has been seen by some Quakers, and how the Name
of Christian stinks more then it would do among the Gentiles for the sake of
such as Preach, and Hear, and Read, and Expound, and boast of the Scripture,
and yet break them, and name the Name of Christ without his Nature: But what
doings there are in other Nations, and the Preaching places and Nurseries
thereof, to which these of our Nation are not inferior in silth; I shall say
no more here, but let them pass, as matters which being Extra nos, are parum,
or nihil, or miaus ad nos, of less moment to us then our own; Concluding my
Return to this particular Challenge of I.O. with his own words ( mutatis
mutandis, additis addendis) a little amplified, and the Subjects or Persons, of
whom they are Spoken, Altered, and Substituting our Modern Academies, and their
Masters, Doctors, Divines, and other Students, and the whole Rabble of Rabbis
there in the room of that University at Tiberias, which I O. talks against in
the words of one Dr. Lightfoot, together with his own, and the Jewish Rabbis,
Gemarists and Massorites pertaining thereunto; as they are to be read in the
240, 241, 242, 245, 246, 247, pages of I.O's. English part; the Censure he
passes upon them, being no other then what exactly accrews to the Universities
universally throughout Christendom, from whence come the whole Crew of
Clergymen, that count themselves, and are counted to be the Clearers of
Christ's Truth to all other Christian Creatures; And what I. O. says of the
Massorites of that Accademy, is a clear Character of these corrupted, and earth
corrupting Coveats.

I. O Chap. 4. S. 13. Whilst they keep the Scriptures we shall never want
Weapons out of their own Armoury for their destruction; like the Philistine,
they carry the Weapon that will serve to cut off their own Heads. Let us then a
little, without prejudice or passion, consider who, or what these men are, who
are the supposed Authors of all Knowledge and Godliness. 1. Men they are who
have not the Word of God committed to them in a pecullar manner, as their
Forefathers, Prophets and Apostles had of old, and many have now, being no part
of his Church or People, but are only outwardly Professors and Possessors of
the Letter without just Right or Title to it; utterly uninteressed in the
Promise of the Communication of the Spirit while they so have it, which is the
Great Charter of the Churches preservation of Truth, Isa. 59.21. 2. Men so
remote from a right understanding of the Word, or the Mind and Will of God
therein, that they are desperately engaged to oppose his Truth in the Books
which themselves enjoy in all matters of importance unto the Glory of God, or
the good of their own Souls from the beginning to the ending, Scuffling for the
Book itself, but persecuting the Life in them where it is; The foundation of
whose Religion is Infidelity; and one of their chief Fundamentals, an
Opposition to the Gospel in the Quakers, whom they glory to fight against, and
think they serve God in opposing with what spite they can. 3. Men under the
special Curse of God and his Vengeance, upon the account of the blood of his
dear Son in his Saints. 4. Men all their days feeding themselves with vain
Fables, and mischievous Devices against the Gospel, laboring to set up a New
Religion under the Name of the Old (when the Old they hate, as Ier. 6.) in
despite of God, so striving to wrestle it out with his Curse to the utmost. 5.
Men of a profound Ignorance in all manner of Learning and Knowledge, but only
what concerns their own dunghill Traditions; as appears in their stories, filled
with innumerable sopperies. 6. Men so addicted to such monstrous Figments, as
appears in their Talmuds, as their Successors of after Ages will be ashamed of,
yea for the most part Idolaters. Now I dare leave it to the Judgment of any
Godly prudent person, not addicted to Parties and Names, who is at all
acquainted with the importance, not of the Hebrew Vowels and Accents (but the
Light and Spirit the Quakers call to) unto the right understanding of the
Scripture, with whatever influence their present Fixation has into the literal
sense, they (not knowing the Spiritual) embrace, whether we have not very clear
Evidence and Testimony, yea undeniable and unquestionable, to cast the rise and
spring of all the Irreligion in the Nations upon this sort of men; so far are
they from bettering: things by their Interpretations. S. 16. Recount I pray
from the first Foundation of Universities (throw CHRISTENDOM) and what do you
find, but a sort of Men being made Mad with (or above) the Pharisees,
bewitching and bewitched with Traditions, blind, crafty, raging; pardon me not
(for I shall ask none) if I say Magical (if Simon Magus was so in thinking the
holy Ghost of God is to be bought with Money) and Monstrous? what Fools, what
Sots as to such a divine Work as the Gospel? Read and Consider how to every
good Work void of Judgment the great Doctors among them do behave themselves?
how seriously they do of nothing? how childish they are in serious things? how
much deceitfulness, froth, venom, smoke, nothing is in their Disputations?
Insomuch that I may say truly of these, as I.O. says of all men, Page 104.
Those whose Lips should keep Knowledge, that is University-men and Clergymen
as much as any, are by Nature so vain, foolish, malicious, such Liars, adders,
detracters, have spirits and minds so unsuited to spiritual things, so liable
to Alteration in themselves, and to Contradiction one to another, are so given
to Impostures, and are so apt to be imposed upon, have been so shuffled and
driven up and down the World in every Generation, have for the most part so
utterly lost the Remembrance of what themselves are, whence they come, or
whether they are to go, that I can give very little Credit to what I have
nothing but their Authority to rely upon for, without any Evidence from the
nature of the thing its self.

CHAP. III.
Having Cleared the Quakers from sundry of those Calumnies thou falsely castest
upon-them as concerning their Carriage toward the Scriptures as if they were
Enemies, Haters, and Reproachers of it, and suchlike, who in Truth are its
truest Friends, in the former Chapter; I come on to Consider some of thy Cloudy
Conjectures and Conceits concerning the Bounds of the Canon (as ye call it)
thereof; the Hebrew Punctation, and thy Asserted Integrity of both that and the
Greek Texts of it, without any variation to a very Title: Concerning the Canon
of which thou Writest as follows;

JOhn Owen. Page 3. God spoke of Old, or formerly in the Prophets; From the
days of Moses and downwards, unto the Bounding and Consignation of the Canon
delivered to the Judaical Church in the days of Ezra and his Companions, the
men of the great Congregation.

Reply. 1. Why say thou from Moses downward, etc. as if he had never done so
before till then? Did not God speak in his Prophets, and by them to the men of
their several Ages from Moses upwards as well as from Moses downwards? Did he
not speak in Enooh the seventh from Adam, in Noah, in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Lot, and Job, who lived before Moses (if Catholic Tradition be to be Credited
in one thing as well as another) and whose Book, who ever Penned it, whether
himself, or some other, for ought thou know was written before Mos^s, who
thou think wrote the first of the Scripture, either lived or wrote? and by
them, who were upright, righteous, just, and walked with God, to the wicked
unrighteous Worldlings, and wantons who walked with the Devil in their
Generations, who all were before Moses, as well as by Moses, and those that
lived after him?

2. Why say thou downwards to the Consignation and Bounding of the Canon in
Ezra's days, as if between his days and the days of Christ's flesh the Spirit
of the Lord was straightened (as it never is, Mic. 2.) and God had limited and
bound up himself from manifesting his mind cut of his own mouth, to any men at
all, for so many Hundred years together, because some Prophets had been moved
by him to commit to Writing, or at least to permit to be Written by For every
Prophet did not write down either all he said in his days, nor all that which
in writing is set down of his seeings, and sayings, doings and sufferings with
his own hands; witness Jeremiah for whom Baruch wrote: and who wrote the
latter end of the 5 Books of Moses, which ye dream he wrote every little and
Iota of himself, Deuteronomy. 34.5 to the end? Did he write of his own Death and
Burial, and of Isreal's Mourning for him, after he was dead?
others, some few of those things they saw and said concerning partly their
own, and partly the after times, and other Nations? Does not Wisdom say of her
self, That in all Ages entering into holy Souls she makes them friends of God,
and Prophets? Wisd. 7.27. And were there no Holy men of God in those days,
wherein ye imagine all Gods speaking in and by any Prophets then was ceased, in
and by whom he manifested his Mind as he moved them to speak and write, as
immediately as he had done others before them?

And who told thee, That the Canon (as thou call'st it) or full standing Rule
of Trial, or infallible Touchstone of the Old Testament Scripture, to which
nothing must or might be added after it till the time of Christ in the flesh
was Completed, and, after its Consignation and Bounding, by them delivered to
the Judaical Church in the days of Ezra ( alias Esdras) and his Companions the
men (as of your own heads ye are pleased to term them) of the great
Congregation? Whence have thou these fancies of thine? Or suppose they be not
simply Suppositions, but real Truths; whence do thou fetch or take them to be
so, but from the untrusty-Traditional-Tales of thy Forefathers, and such Jews
as are little less then unerring Oracles with thee, when saying ought that
suits with thee (yea, thou call page 203. the Assertion of Justin Martyr of
the Jews corrupting the Bible out of their hatred to Christians, An Incredible
Figment) yet little better, but much worse then ordinary Infidels, men feeding
themselvns with vain fables, desperate cursed Opposers of Truth, mischievous in
their devices against the Gospel, of a profound Ignorance in all manner of
Learning and Knowledge but only what concerns their own Dunghill Traditions,
addicted to monstrous Figments, bewitching, bewitched with Traditions,
Idolaters, Magicians, blind, crafty, raging fools, sets, full of deceitfulness,
froth, venom, smoke, nothing but faithlesnesse and infidelity it self; what
not that's naught, where any thing issues from their most Catholic Testimony
that makes against thee, Page 241.242.244.303?

Yea, whence know thou (who art easily apt to Question, when it serves thee
so to do, whether there ever were such men as the 70. and such men as the
Tiberian Massorites in Rerum Natura? page 243.336.) that ever there was such a
thing in Rerum Natura as that Great Congregation thou art every where in thy
Book so greatly taken with, and ever and anon betaking thy self to for Refuge,
but only from thy putting more confidence in thy own uncertain Conjectures,
together with the Catholic Tradition of the (with thee) creditlesse Jews and
Christians, then in the Conjectures of the Prolegomena, as Learned as thy self
at least, who oppose thee in it? For there is not so much as any Scripture at all
that mentions such a set Sanydrim of Ezra, Nehemia, Joshua, Zacharia, Haggai,
etc. as thou set it down in the Book of thy own Brain, and the
Counting House of thy own conceit that there was; page 302.303.

And let it be (as it can be no more then) imagined there was such a great
Congregation, which (it being, as not possible to know it, so nor here, nor
there to mine or any man's Salvation) I Will not search into so far as to put my
self into any Capacity of either saying or gain saying it that there was; and
to ground any as I. O. does many things upon its being so, as he but thinks, is
(as he says in another case, page 293.) to build Towns and Castles of
Imaginations, which may be as easily cast down as they are erected: yet when
alls done, whence had that Sanydrim, such Authority as to confine and bound out
that Canon, and Canonize some of the Writings of such Prophets as ye wot are
Canonical, and Cashiere the rest of the Writings of the same Prophets, and all
the Writings of some other Prophets, as of no such divine Authority, as to
Command with their fellows in Gods Name as his Word, and to abrogate them as
Apocryphal (as ye speak) and disband them from the bench of Judicature, and to
bind the sweet Influences of the holy Spirit, so as to say, O Spirit of God be
silent now, blow no more, nor make any more Prophets now for these many hundred
years to come, but become subject thy self to be tried by the Touchstone of the
Writings of such Prophets, as thou have already moved to write Gods Mind, or so
many at least, as it seems good to us now to Authorize and Establish into a
standard for the Trial of thy self, as well as all false Spirits?

And if I. O. say (as he does, page 303.) That was not called the Great
Congregation from its Number, but Eminency of Persons; yet I say are any
Persons so Eminent (if I.O. be not a Liar, page 35.) as to have Authority from
God to Authorize and Canonize (casting aside what they like not) what seems
good to them, into the Name (to bespeak I. O in his own feigned phrase) of the
Word of God, that they themselves must be subject to the Authority of, and of
the Rule that themselves must be Ruled by, and of the Foundation that
themselves, and all others must be built on, and of the Basis of their own
belief?

It is indeed (quoth I.O. page 35.36.) a Contradiction for men to say (and if
for other men then for I.O. [say I] who says the same yet sees it not) They
give Authority to the Scriptures, they Bound the Canon and deliver to the
Church what it shall be, which it has antecedently to their Charter and
Concession.

And again, Moreover (to say the same of his supposed Sanydrim, that I O says
to the digrading of the Septuagint from that high Conceit some have of them,
and eminent Account some have them in, page 339.) If the Ability of the men be
granted, yet what security have we of their Principles and Honesty? Oh much
every way (thinks I.O. for, though when he is pleased to speak diminitively of
men, the Care and Fidelity and Pains of whom in Translating we have as good
ground to believe was as great to the full, as any of that of those he Commends
in Transcribing, he disparages it into Oscitancy, Inadvertency, Negligence,
Ignorance, the Wisest not seeing all, and such like, page 319. yet when he
speaks of the Care, Pains and Fidelity of men in Transcribing, which is a Work
as liable to mistakes as the other, that he may keep up the honor however of
his ( infallible) Transcripts to this day, then he utters himself more
Hyperbolically; and as for Ezra and his conjectured Companions, he makes their
labor to Reform the Church, and all the Corruptions crept into the Word (as he
speaks, though if the Letter were the Word it were not liable to Corruption)
little less then Monstrous, and their care in restoring the Scripture to its
purity (mark) extraordinary, page 171 308. Yea, of the Points, which yet he is
to prove Coaevous with the Consonants, and as old as any Scripture. I doubt not
(quoth he) but of that we shall yet manifest that they were completed (it
should seem then that every Tittle is not now a^ at first giving out of the
Letter if the Vowels were incompleate till Esdros days) by the men of the
great Synagogue Ezra and his Companions guided by the infallible direction of
the Spirit of God.

I might (as I. O. does often beg or take it) crave leave to Answer this
Conjecture with another, page 146. and fling back I.O's. as well as T. D's
Forte ita, with so much at least as Forte non; but ipse dixit, J.O. says, he
doubts not their infallibility, so I, who had rather be silent then disparage
Ezra, will add no more to I. Os Rex sum, then nil ultrae quaeio Plebeius.

And now I am upon a Consideration of the Canon of the Scripture, let me here
make an end with thee I.O. as concerning this Cogitation of thine about the
Consignation of the Canon of both the Old, and that thou call the New
Testament; of which New thou say, page 27. That what thou had spoken of
the Scripture of the Old Testament, viz. as to its immediate emanation from
God, and its being canonized together with it into a standard, the same must be
also affirmed of the New, with this addition of advantage and pre-eminence
above the Old, That it began to be spoken by the L O R D himself.

And as for thy Canon of the outward Scriptures of both sorts, one of which
thou call the Old, the other the New Testament, after the Bounding.
Completing, and Consignation of which in their Respective Junctures and
Seasons, and the delivery of it so Canonized to the Church or Churches
Respectively as their Eternal, Infallible, Touchstone, Rule, Foundation,
Testimony, Standard, no more must be owned on such a high Account, as its
Authorized into, as of divine Original, nor be added by either God or man,
while the world stands, Page 3. So Ex. 3. S. 27. Post completum quem vacant
ejus canonem nullae novae revelationes circa fidem co^munem Sanctorum aut Dei
cultum aut expectandae sint aut admittendae credimus and prositemur.
I would sain find from thee (if yet thou art able thy self to fathom to the
bottom of thy own Faith, or rather Fancy in this point) where thou find, and
whence thou foundest all thy confused Communications and crude Conceptions
about this Canonization of such and such outward parcels of holy men's Writings
into a Rule or Standard, and disfranchizing such and such of others, as holy as
those from a standing within the Bounds of this Magna Charta, that certain
Synods and supposed Sanydrims of thou know not whom have given, and do (as
thou deemest) give and grant thereunto, together with them? Where learnest thou
all these Lessons but from the Lectures and lying Legends, and voluminous
Lexicons of the illiterate Literatists of the world that are always laying on,
and loading one another with their endless, boundless, and bottomless
Scribles about the outward Original Text and Transcriptions and Translations of
the Scripture in their tedious Tomes, Talmuds, and Talmudical Traditions till
they are lost from the very Letter, much more the Life it calls to, so that
they have no leisure to live, or learn others to live thereafter, in the
inextricable laborynth of their own Labors about it? Who leads thee into the
vain Imaginations of these things, but thy own and other men's (well nigh
innumerable, and invincible) inventions? What Tangles thee and others in such
trifling Talkings and Treatings one to another of things that none of ye all
can have any infallible Evidence, or yield to any infallible Assurance of, but
a crowd of Conceits, and Catholic Traditions? with which the world, and ye in
it, are so overcharged, that ye cannot contain them now without infinite,
frothy and fruitless contendings about them, and obtruding your own
Observances, imposing your own Supposings, and thrusting each upon other your
own bare threadbare Thoughts of things that ( ne flocci facit) it amounts not
to the value of a lock of Wool (as to Salvation) whether they be known or not,
till being thronged and thrust into the thorny Thicket of your own Thoughts you
there tear one another to pieces about the Scripture; insomuch that I truly
may, and plainly shall be so bold as flatly to Contradict what thou say
falsely of thy Canon and Standard, since the closing and completing of it, that
it is a means to end all strife, it is rather throw the folly of its Ministers,
the means of all strife and Confusion in the Christian World.

Thou say indeed of the Writings of the Old Testament that the Canon thereof
had its Consignation, Bounding, and Delivery to the Church, as its Rule, so
that from thenceforth nothing Written either from Moses upward, or to Christ's
time downward must be admitted to be owned as Canonical, or inspired Scripture;
And thou say, page 27.28. That God, who himself began the Writings of the
Word with his own finger, after he had spoken it, appointing and approving the
Writing of the rest that followed (i.e.) from Genesis to the Revelation, as
they are ordinarily numerated in our Bibles, except the Books called Apocrypha
(for I reckon all those are reckoned by thee as the Books thou speak of,
Epist. Ded. page 3. Never indicted by the Holy Spirit, as remote from being
(...)) does lastly command the close of the immediate Revelation of his Will to
be written in a Book, Rev. 1.11 and so gives out the whole of his Mind and
Counsel unto us in Writing, as a merciful and steadfast relief against all
Confusion, darkness and uncertainty; but what a Relief it is against
Confusion, I shall show more hereafter.

And as to thy Scriptures Canonization or the Consignation, completing
Bounding of the Canon of it, a few words here about the manner and means and
true bounds thereof (for as to the Question whether it be a Canon, that is, a
Rule at all yea or not, I may defer it also to another place) let me
Expostulate with thee I O. yet more about it yet how, and by whom your Standard
comes to be so Bounded (as ye say it is) and to be limited to those Demensions
of Latitude, Longitude, and Profundity, that ( ad amussim) exact Measure,
Height, Depth, Length and Breadth, that is allotted to it, as (without the
Apocripha) it stands bound up within your late bound Bibles? I mean that such
and such Parcels, Prophesies, Proverbs, Histories, Epistles, Holy Sentences,
Sacred Sayings, shall stand Owned, Honored, Signed and Authorized with the
Sacred High and Holy Titles of Gods Word, Gods Witness, Foundation, Rule,
inalterable Standard, and not one piece of Holy Writing more or less, then
those already so Consecrated and Canonized; so that such and such ( puta, those
that ye now commonly call Canonical) shall shand as the Standard; and all
others; viz. those called Apocryphal, and whatever are mentioned in that
Scripture ye so own, shall stand out of, and off from it, as no part of the
Standard while the World stands?

Who was it? Was it God or was it Man that set such distinct Bounds to the
Scripture, so as to say such and such a set number of Books, viz. Those those
that are sum'd up together before your Bibles, excepting the Apocrypha, which
stands between them, shall be owned as Canonical, and the rest, though such as
were of the same divine Inspiration, be rejected as humane, and no otherwise
accounted on then other mere men's Writings, not to be received with such high
respect as the other? Whence have thou this Conceit that God himself Commanded
the Close of the Canon of the Old Testament to be Malachi, and the bounds of it
to consist of such Books of the Prophets, as ye now have, exclusively of such
Prophesies, therein mentioned, as ye have not? and the Close of the Canon of
the New to be the Revelation, and the bulk of it to be those few Histories, and
Apostolical Epistles, as ye have exclusively, of such even therein mentioned,
as ye have not? Who was it that said to the Spirit of God, O Spirit, blow no
more, inspire no more men, make no more Prophets from Ezra's days and
downwards till Christ; and from John's days downward for ever? But cease, be
silent and subject thy self as well as all Evil Spirits to be tried by the
Standard, that's made up of some of the Writings of some of those men thou have
moved to write already, and let such and such of them as are bound up in the
Bibles now used in England, be the only means of measuring all Truth for ever.

Who was it God or Man, the Spirit in the Scripture it self, or the Scribes in
their Synods, Councels, and Consistories that so Authorized or Canonized these,
and expunged those?

Was it not mere Men in their Imaginations? Does the Scripture, do the Spirit
and the Apostles therein give any order for, or make any such mention in the
least of such a matter? Is it not mere man in his Imaginations, that has taken
upon him according to the good, or ill Conceit, that he has taken to him, of
these or those respectively, to say (which thou say is a Contradiction to
say) he will give Authority to the Scriptures? Is it not man in his proud mind
that comes in with his sic volo, sic Iubeo, so l'le have it, thus it shall be?
Saying to the Books of Scripture as God says to the Waves of the outward
Ocean, hitherto shall ye come and no further; So many of the Prophets and
Apostles Writings shall be in the Authority, Nature, Use and Office of the
Supreme Determiner of all Truth for ever; and all others, even such as are
written by the same men, in the motion of the same Spirits shall be but as
common men's Writings, and be looked on afar off as Apocryphal, i.e. hidden or
unknown Writings, that no such notice shall be taken of, as of the other?

And as for the Books which ye sprinkle with that Name of Apocryphal, and give
leave to to have a standing with it, but not so as to make any part of your
Standard; What think ye of them upon second Thoughts? Are they fit for nothing
but to be Cashiered and cast out of your Canon by whole sale, by Tradition one
from another, without trying them? Is there nothing among them that may be
judiciously Judged to be of as divine an Original and Authority as some of
those particular Letters to private men, as that of Paul to Philemon, about
private personal, or Domestic matters, which ye own in such a transcendent
manner as ye do? Surely if some of hem be fictitious or fabulous or but humane,
so that ye will say no better of them then Vox hominem sonat; yet is there
none, or nothing among them all that is to be noted or counted upon as of
divine Authority and Original, and of as self-evidencing Efficacy as some of
those ye own? None that ye can see cause to sign meliore lapillo, with some
better Name then ye vouchsafe them, and standing in the Church then ye allow
them? As if they were a certain mongrel seed between that of Canaan and Ashdod,
that ye know not well what to make of, nor how to entreat so ill altogether, as
not to afford them a middle place in some of your Bibles between the Old
Testament Writings and those ye call the New, nor yet so well, as to entertain
them into your Canon neither?

Surely there be some of them, which when ye look them over again not so
cursorily as to overlook them, as ye ordinarily do, ye may find ground to
receive as such, as have as fair a stamp of the beaming Majesty, Truth,
Holiness and Authority of God and his Spirit, as some at least (not to say the
most) of those ye ascribe to God, as their main or only Author; and that do
favor as much of I.O's so much insisted on Theo-pneusty, as some other
Historical, Doctrinal and Prophetical parts of your acknowledged divinely
derived Scripture do, of which (what Infidels soever ye are as concerning them)
yet I, together with many others, whereof some are as Booklearn'd as your
selves, can say Credo Equidem nec vana Fides genus esse Deorum.

It Is indeed the Faith, or rather Infidelity of such as call themselves
Reformed Churches, that all those Books called the Apocrypha, without
exception, are in no wise of such divine Original, as them ye call Canonical;
but who first set the one upon the Bench, and the other at the Bar, I am yet to
learn; but this I know, that howbeit ye second their depression and digradation
of the one so far below the other, yet as neither one nor the other were ever
Canonized by God himself (if we speak of the Outward Text only, about which my
business with I.O. lies) into that Name of his Word, and into the Authority of
the Foundation of Faith, the infallible Rule of Interpretation of itself, of
Trial and Examination of Spirits, Doctrines, etc. of the Supreme Judge also, by
which all Controversies of Religion are to be determined, the only pure
Authentical Standard, unto which the Church is finally to Appeal, in whose
Sentence it is to Rest, into which all Faith is finally to be Resolved; so if
such Synods of men, either Ancient or Modern, as have shouldred out all those
at once from sharing with the other Writings in what they can lay just claim
to, had been as Spiritually discerning as they were Spiritually blind, shallow
and undiscerning, they would have seen cause to have joined some at least of
those Apocryhal Scriptures to an Equal Participation of that Plea of divine
Original and inspiration with the rest, as without Cause they justled them all
out from it by their joint Consent.

And though it be the declared Faith of that Assembly of Divines that both
Houses of Parliament advised with 1648. and of the Congregational Churches in
England, whose Confession is put out this instant 1659. as to that Article
about the Scriptures word for word in the same words with the other, That the
Books commonly called Apocrypha not being of divine Inspiration are no part of
the Canon of the Scriptures, and therefore are of no Authority in the Church of
God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of then other humane
Writings; yet this I declare to the whole World as my Faith concerning them,
that though I own neither them, nor the best bare Wriing, or outward Text or
Letter of the other Scripture at so high a Rate as I.O. does, who makes the
naked Letter in all things equivolent to the holy matter; yet whatever is truly
to be praedicated of the one, or can solidly be pleaded on the behalf of the
one, which ye call your Canon as to the divinity of their Original, the same
may be pleaded on the behalf of not a few of the other.

And as they all, that in general are stilled Apocryphal, can plead their
Authority from long before the Apostles days; and also the special Care and
Providence of God (which is an Argument of such weight with I.O. and T.D. page
27. as swayes them not a little into their frivolous Faith about the rest) in
the preservation of them to this very day; So that all of them have been kept
by the Church, that kept the rest bound up and Translated into various
Languages, and as publicly allowed to be publicly Read as the rest, and
highly esteemed by Austin, and other Fathers, ye Divines cannot easily be
ignorant.

And as for sundry of them, ye are ignorant with a witness, if ye see them to
be as ye say they are, not of divine Inspiration, or see them not to be of as
divine an Original as some, or even any of the other, which ye own so to be.

As for that Fourth Book of Esdras, which is but the Second as it stands in the
Apocrypha, besides that its acknowledged by Clem, Alexandrinus, Faber, and many
more men of Renown among you, and by many Holy men in these latter times, as
well learned as your selves, at least in the Wisdom of Gods Spirit, to be
written by his immediate Inspiration; so is it such a plain Prophecy consistent
of many Particular Praedictions of things to be fulfilled in these last Ages,
as the like to it, or a least clearer is hardly to be found in all the
Scripture besides it; insomuch that he who reads it in the 11, 12, 13, 16
Chapters of it, and some other places, and sees not the beams of a divine
Majesty in it, and sees not the Matters now managing upon the Stage in the
World, that are there foretold in it, reads not in the Light of that Holy
Spirit, that moved in the Writing both of that and all other Holy Scripture,
and may come before he is well aware to feel ere long the dint of that divine
displeasure that is denounced against the Sinners of the latter Ages, and
thereby come to be convinced of the Divinity and Truth of that Scripture, which
our Divines that usually see altogether by the lump, and are loath to see any
Truth Sigillatim, till they are all made to see it whether they will or no,
will hardly yield to, if they be their Old-wonted-selves, till very Necessity
forces and frights them into the Faith of it.

And the same may be said, as to the divine Original of Ieremiahs Epistle,
which was written and sent to them that were to go Captive into Babylon, and of
Ecclesiasticus, and the Wisdom of Solomon, which favors so much of the Wisdom
of the Spirit, that he is yet in that Wisdom only, which is from beneath, which
is Earthly, Animal, Deceitful, who does not acknowledge the finger of God,
writing those deep and precious Truths and Praedictions in the heart of him,
whose hand was the Committer of them to outward Writing (which whether it were
not Solomon after whom it was so Entitled, Nil ultra quaero, he uttered 3000
Proverbs, whereof scarce 300 are extant in that Book of his Proverbs, some of
which as standing inserted there in the Hebrew Text, are not the Original Copy,
but a Transcript only at best out of that, or some Second hand Copies taken and
Copied cut long after Solomon's days by the men of Hezekiah 8 or 9 Generations
from him, Prove. 25 1. The 30 Chapter of which Book also are the Words of one
Agu^ the son of Iaketh) but sure I am that Book of Wisdom was inspired or
breathed into the Penman, that expired or breathed it out, from no less then
that Wisdom which is from above.

The main Argument that ever I have seen against the divine Original of these
Books, are, First, Their being not written in the Hebrew Tongue, which what a
poor pedling piece of Disproof it is, he is no wiser then he should be, that
does not see; for what warrant is there that all that was not Penned in the
Hebrew Tongue is no Scripture of divine Inspiration? Or if there be, is it not
as conclusive against much of the Scripture which I.O. counts Canonical, the
whole of which he reckons (at random) was wrote in the Hebrew Tongue, since its
evident that much of that Book of Hester (9 Chapters and 3 Verses of which are
set among the Canonical Scripture, and (oh the Wisdom) the other 6 Chapters and
10 Verses of the 10 Chapter by you self-willed Choppers and Changers, because
written in Greek are reckoned and ranked with the Apocryphal) was written not
in the Hebrew, but in the Caldee, as much of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel also
were.

And besides, if being written Originally in the Hebrew will avail toward the
evincing of them to be Canonical, this will help some of your Apocrypha into
your Canon, since that of Tobit or Tobias is not only (as that of Ba^uch also
is, the Holy man that wrote much for that Prophet, and of that Prophecy of
Jeremiah) most pretiously both Doctrinal and Prophetical, but also extant in
the Hebrew as well as Greek and Latin; and that of Ecclesiasticus was written
Originally in Hebrew, witness Jesus the Son of Syrach, who himself confesses
in his Prologue, he Translated it out of the Hebrew Text; and if ye say that's
but a Translation then at best, and so not Canonical Scripture, I Reply Two
things thereto;

First, This argues ad hominem against I O. then Tittles and Iotaes of the
Hebrew Text are lost since the giving out thereof at first. Secondly, That
either Translation must be owned as Canonical with you, as well as the first
Original Manuscripts and your Original Transcripts, or else it must be
concluded what ever you Linguists have, yet the People that live upon your
Lips, not being able to read Hebrew and Greek, have no Canonical Scripture at
all to read.
The Second Argument that is supposed to be of weight against the Divine
Original of the Apocryphal Scriptures ( Broughton, in his Sinai Sights, touches
upon them both) is, because no Writers in the New Testament, Cite or Quote any
of them any otherwise then they do Heathen Authors.

But I marvel not, fith the wise men are to be befooled, that prudent Broughton
should be so blind as not to see, how Paul, Heb. 1 3. quotes out of Wisd. 7.26.
And Heb. 11.5. quotes Wisd. 4.10. And 1 Cor. 6.2. quotes Wisd. 3.8. And Heb.
11.35. quotes 2 Maccab. 7.7. Yea, and Christ himself, Matthew. 23.36, 37, 38.
quotes 2 Esdras 1.30. And Rev. 7.9. answers to 2 Esdras 2.41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
46. besides many other Passages in the Scriptures of the New Testament; but
especially in the Revelation relate to their Paralels in that Second Book of
Esdras, which is the Fourth at least of that man Ezra or Esdras his Writing,
whereof that some should be received as of divine Original, and some that have
as truly spiritual a Tincture on them, as the other, or any in all the
Scripture ( as that Fourth of Esdras has, wherein also he declares his Visions
and Revelations he had from God, in which he would not sain and Lie (for then
he were not fit to have his Two First Books owned as from God) should be
rejected as merely humane, I see not any solid Ground for it; Yet such is the
divine The-anthropical Wisdom of our mere humane Divines, that Two of that same
man's Books, who wrote all the Four, (for the Identity of the Person, that Penned
them all, every Believer may easily believe) are Canonized as divine, and the
other Two Condemned as but humane.

Thus though I.O. prates so much for the whole Book of Gods being
providentially preserved, so that we may have full assurance that we enjoy the
whole Revelation of his Will (that is, with him, all the Writings that ever
were written by Inspiration from the Spirit fit, to stand among those that he
makes the Standard) in the Copies abiding amongst us; and contends that the
whole Scripture entire, as given out from God without any loss of so much as
one Letter, Tittle, or Iota, remains and is preserved in the Copies yet extant
among us to this day; which is that Arch-Assertion in which having at first
over shot himself in blindly bolting it out, rather then endure that honorable
shame of owning his own Ignorance, he as blindly posts on to maintain, page
153.162.169.181.203. Yet upon I know not what frivolous Conceits, and
prejudicate Surmises possessing the minds of himself and his Brethren of both
the Convocational and the Congregational way, among which blind Custom, more
then clear sight, I believe to be none of the least, which are so far from
enjoying the whole Book of Scripture, wherein the Mind and Will of God lies
declared by his own Inspiration of the Penmen, that no small part of that
Scripture that was written by men divinely inspired, and so providentially
preserved, he refuses to enjoy or own as of such divine Descent from God, as
other parts of the Scripture are, but Rejects and Contemnes it as Apocryphal,
that is, so altogether hidden from him that he knows not very well what to make
on it.

But suppose he should own and take all the Apocryphal Writings into his
Standard and Canon (as he calls it) of the Scriptures, does that and all the
rest both Old and New, that are bound up in old English Bibles with it,
Constitute the utmost Bounds of his Canon? Does his Standard stand in so little
room? Is it Closed within so narrow a Corner? Consists it of so few, so small a
Company of Holy men's Writings, and Scriptures, as are Comprehended in no
greater a Compass then that Book called the Bible contains to? Is that the
whole Book of God, the whole outward Declaration of his Will by the Writings of
Holy men at his own motion? The whole Scripture entire that was ever so given
out from God, without any loss of any of the Integral parts of it, so much as
of one Letter, Tittle, or Iota? Is all Extant? All Remaining? All Preserved to
this day that was Written by Holy men, as moved by the holy Spirit? And is that
all of the Inspired Scripture, which we now have, and enjoy in our present
Bibles? Was there no more of the Old Testament Scripture, then the Apocrypha,
and that which is commonly counted to the Canon? And is the Revelation the
Close of the immediate Revelation of his Will to Holy men, and of his moving
them to write it out by his Holy Spirit? Number tam -- Pellibus exiguis arctatur
Spiritus ingens.
Two things I.O. at least I have to say to the Contrary.



First, That is not all of the Old, nor all of the New Scriptures, that were by
Inspiration Written before Christ, and after him to the same use, ends; and
purposes as the rest were Written, until John's Writing the Revelation.
Secondly, That as there was much more then that ye wot of, which was Written as
the Spirit moved from Moses to the Revelation, so there has been more, since
then, so Written, and more is, and will yet be in time to come, before (as near
as it is to it) the World that now waxes Old toward it, be at an end.
First, There Is not all in your Bibles by much, and by how much who knows? That
was given out upon Inspiration of God, when as (to say nothing of the Testament
of the Twelve Patriarchs now extant) there is not all the inspired Scripture by
much, which that inspired Scripture ye have makes mention of; Where Is the Book
of Nathan the Prophet? the Book of Ahijah? the Book of Iddo? 2 Chronicles. 9.29. the
Book of Shemaiah? 2 Chronicles. 12.15. the Book of Iehu the Prophet? 2 Chronicles. 20.34,
1 King 16.1: the Book of Gad the Seer? 2 Chronicles. 29.29. the Book of Iasher? 2 Samuel 1.18.
Of which it may well be supposed that he was a very Ancient Writer, since
those that wrote Joshua, who ere they were (for himself it was not that wrote
it all at least (as Moses not all Deuteronomie) unless he wrote of his own
Death and Burial before he died; See Josh. 24.29.) do quote him, Josh. 3.10.

Where Is that part of Jeremiah the Prophet, wherein he spoke that which Matthew
cites, Matthew. 27.9, 10. about the giving the 30 pieces of Silver, the price
that Christ was sold at, for the Potters field; for howbeit Zachary the
Prophet, Zach. 11.12. speaks of the same thing (who was in his work an Exalier
of God in his time, which the Name Jeremiah seems to signify, and so may be
called Jeremiah, which is not likely to be Matthews meaning) yet in all the
Prophesies of Jeremy extant in your Bibles, there is no such thing spoken; And
for you to say either that Matthew was mistaken, quoting throw forgetfulness
one Prophet for another; or that the Transcribers of the Copies of their
Original out of Matthews Original Copy, failed so fowlly in their Transcribings
(for all your Copies that ever I saw so read) as to write Jeremy for Zachary,
will be for I.O. upon his Principles, who stands to plead every Letter, Tittle,
and Iota that was in the (...) to be now in the (...), as sorry a shift, and
miserable remedy, as he makes for himself, and finds, who leaps out of the
frying pan into the fire.

Where Is the Prophecy of Enoch, spoken of Jude 14. out of whose Prophecy the
Jews can tell you more then ye wot of from that of Jude? And as for Ezra or
Esdras, and his true Companions, of whom thou say truly enough, if not truer
then thou art aware of, that their care in restoring the Scripture to its
Purity, when it had met with the greatest Trial that it ever underwent in this
world, considering the Paucity of the Copies then extant was great, and that
the Consignation and Bounding of the Canon delivered to the Judaical Church,
was in their days; and that they did labor to reform all the Corruptions
crept into the Word of God It seems then thy Word of God (so called) may be,
and was corrupted (i.e.) the Scripture, secundum te, who sometimes say it
cannot be corrupted in its Original Text, and is not to this day: But were it
the Word of God indeed, as that is, it speaks of, and as thou say it self
is, it were incorruptible indeed.
And that they completed the Punctation (the compleatnesse of which then was
not Coaevous with the Text, as at first Written in Hebrew, as thou contendest,
to the Consuring of thy self here) and that they were guided herein by the
infallible direction of the Spirit of God, Page 177. 211. 302. 303. Did not
they, in the Spirit and Power of God, Write many more Books, even 204. most of
which are not in your Bibles; Read 2 Esdras 14. throughout the Chapter? Where
are all these, and sundry more Scriptures (some as, and some more Ancient then
Moses) of which I will not now speak particularly?

And as to the New, Where is that First Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians,
mentioned in the first of those Two that we have? 1 Cor. 5.9. And that First
Epistle of his to the Ephesians (for its evident he wrote One to them before
That) mentioned in that One which ye have, Ephesians. 33? And that Epistle of his
to the Laodiceans, mentioned, Col. 4.16? Besides several to Seneca, Neros
Tutor, and other of Paul's Writings, who was doubtless far more Voluminous in
his Writings then that poor pittance of Epistles to Churches and Ministers, and
the Letters to Philemona Tradesman, about a Domestic business of Receiving
his Servant Onesimus, that had been unserviceable to him, amounts to; of whole
Spiritual Scriptures, and Speeches that fell from him at his Martyrdom, that
were taken by such as were present at it, some in these days have seen more,
then that which was Written of him by Luke in the Acts, and Written by him in
the Epistles ye count a part of your Canon.

And whether that, which John wrote to the Church, mentioned by him in the 9th
verse. of his Letter to Gaius, were no other then the first of those Three
Recorded? And whether that of Jude, whereof Jude 3. he says in the
Praeterimperfect Tense, When I gave all diligence to write unto you of the
Common Salvation Mark, The Salvation of God was Common to all men then, however
its now Impropriated by the Personal Electionists unto themselves.
it was needful for me to write unto you, etc. were not One he wrote before
This, which was now but under his hands, is more then all you Sayers of what ye
think only, are able groundedly to gainsay. And whether Clements Epistle,
whose name was in the Book of Life, and that Church of Rome to Corinth, wrote
30 years after Paul's, may not Challenge to be ranck'd among the rest, is worth
your enquiry? And what think ye of that sweet, shorr, precious Reply of Christ
Jesus himself in his Letter to Agbarus King of Edessa, who wrote so loving'y
and beleevingly to him about the Malady that lay upon him, as it stood Recorded
in the Roles of that City, and may do still for ought ye know, which is to be
read, and many other precious passages about that business in the
Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius Pamphilius? Is it not as Christian, as
Divinum Spiritum, non hominem sapiens, and worthy (as particular as it is) to
stand in your Standard, and claim a room in your Canon, as that particular
Letter of Paul to Philemon?

What is become I say of all these, and more then may now be mentioned, none of
which is within the Confines of your Congregationally Constituted, Synodically
Composed, Ecclesiastically Authorized, Clerically Conceived Canon?

1. Were they not divinely Inspired? That were to Render doubtful your
undoubted Divine Original of what you have? Since some of them are quoted in
these you have.

2. Are they all utterly lost? That were to loose himself much more in his
Cause (who is lost too much already) for I.O. to say so, since more then (...),
one jot, or one Tittle is then passed away and perished from the Law (if the
Letter be it) not one jot or one Tittle of which Letter, quoth I.O. (woefully
mis-interpreting that of Matthew. 5.18. for the lotaes and Tittles of the mere
Text, and Letter, which Christ utters only of the Doctrine, Truth, and Holy
Matter of the Law) is to pass away, till Heaven and Earth (which are yet
standing) are past away. See I.O's. words, page 13. Hebraea Volumina nec in
Vnica dictione corrupta invenies; Citing Pagn. and Matthew. 5.18. (...). And Page
316. 317. Speaking of the bare Copies of the Scripture, Does not our Savior
himself affirm (quoth he) of the Word that then was among the Jews, that not
(...), or (...) sof it should pass away or perish? Where let not the Points
but the Consonants themselves and their Apices be intended or alluded to in
that Expression, yet of that Word, which was Translated by the 70. according to
this Hypothesis, not only Letters and Tittles, but Words, and that many are
concluded to be lost; And say I, Speaking not of Translations (all of which
I.O. seeks to prove deficient, from Page 320. to Page 344. See it at large in
above 24 Pages together) but of the Original Text it self, which he Pleads the
Entirenesse and Integrity of, without loss to a Tittle, that upon this
Hypothesis, that all the forementioned Books are lost, not only Points and
Consonants, and Apices and Letters, and Tittles and Iotaes, but Words, and that
many, yea Books, and that many, are contrary to his Arch-Assertion, concluded
to be utterly lost.


3. Or did not God Himself intend to Dignifie these with the same honor, and
Crown them with so high an Account as those, though as well descended, and as
immediately derived from him as the rest? or did he not design them to the same
Spiritual Ends, and Renowned Uses with their fellows?

4. Or were these Books out of the way and not present at the time and place of
the first setting up of your Standard by such Synods and Sanydrims as took on
them to stablish, Sign, Seal, and Authorize what Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles should, and what should not stand under that honorable Title of the
steadfast Standard, and so were Censured and Sentenced for ever for not
appearing at that sacred Session and high Court of Judicature, which was to
Judge what Books should be from thence-forth the Supreme Judge to which all
should Appeal in all Cases, and in whose Sentence all should rest, and all
Faith be finally Resolved; and not coming in at the Completing, Consignation,
Bounding, and Final Closing of the Canon, should for ever Iure
Ant-Ecclesiastico, or Apostatico, and in foro hominum, forfeit that (
Originally) Equal Title, which in foro Dei, Iure Christico and Apostolico they
else had to be Canonized with their fellows?

Ah poor men! It pities me to see how ye Dream together in the dark, and mope
up and down in your own misty Imaginations about your Original Texts and
external Letter, leaving the Original Truth it self, which was before your
Texts were ever talked on, or had a being in the World, turning your backs on
that internal Light in the heart, which all the Tendency of of your Letter is
to turn men to, and from which your Scripture Originally had its being. It irks
me to see how for want of betaking your selves to the measure of the Light that
shines in your own Consciences, that infallibly would lead you to that which is
the end of all Scriptures, and words spoken or written as from God, (viz.)
honesty and righteousness, truth and acceptance with God and Holy men, ye
trace to and fro till ye tire your selves in the perplexing Cris-Cros Track,
and endless Round of your own mere Thoughts about a thing, which the more ye
try, the more ye Tangle your selves about it, and the more ye look after it,
and in it, in the way ye look into your beloved Letter, the more ye loose your
selves in it and about it, till at last you will eternally loose both it and
your selves too, by not looking to the Light at all, even no less then
altogether; See Epist. Ded: Page 30. I.O's. Preaching on that Subject, the
Scripture, and his publishing of it is said by him to be but his Thoughts, so
page 146, 147. what he delivers about the Prolegomena and Appendix to the
Biblia Polyglotta was but what his own Thoughts had suggested unto him, suitable
to other learned men's Apprehensions. So Page 149. He runs the Hazard of giving
his Thoughts on them. Page 151. He discover, his Thoughts on the things
proposed by them. So Page 163. What he gives out concerning the Purity of the
present Copies of the Originals of the Scriptures he so Scribles for is but an
account of his Apprehensions. So Page 225. He purposes to manifest his Thoughts
on the Epistle to the Hebrews: So Page 278. He desired Dr. Ward to give his
Thoughts on the difference of Apert Sounds and Vowels, which he did
accordingly. And Page 177. He says, when he shall Communicate his Thoughts to
the World about an Universal Character, it will doubtless yield much, if not
Universal Satisfaction unto learned and prudent men.

O ye Wise and Prudent Vain Thinkers, and Senseless Surmisers, that sit down
Universally Satisfied in the shadow of your own, and one another shallow
Thoughts! When will you come to busy your selves about that which is
infallibly clear and certain, and let your deep infinite Disputings about dark
and doubtful matters (of small moment to you too) altogether alone? When will
you wash your Hearts from that Dunghill of mere deemings, and divinity
Dreamings, with the untempered Mortar of which ye are all to be-dawbed, so that
one can discern little or nothing that savours of more then dubiousuesse and
disputablenesse it self, descending or flowing from your Well-heads and
Fountains of Forgery and Fabulosity, and little or none from the Breasts of
your Nursing Mothers of that (...), plain, purely reasonable sincere Milk of
the Word, whereby the growth is into the Life of God; but such as is mangled
and mingled with the Mire and Mudde of your putrid and puddlely Opinions and
Opinations? Will you never cease from Teaching for Doctrines your own
Conceptions, Apprehensions, and Conjectural Conclusions of things for Truth,
taken from no surer Topic place, then that self same that ye Condemn in
Papists, (viz.) the Traditions of men? Will you never give over filling, and
feeding the vain World for filthy Lucre with such perishing Food, as the thin
froth and Foam of your own Fancies, instead of the Bread that comes down from
Heaven, and that Meat which endures to Eternal Life? Oh thou European Athens,
or Academical Minx, thou manifold Mother with thy Children, for whom it is as
easy for the Blackmore to change his Skin, and the Leopard his Spots, as for
thee, who have been accustomed to Apostarize from the Council of God, and err
from the Mind of Christ, to withold thy foot from wandering after thy own
Images and Imaginations, will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be?
How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?

Now as to the Four ways by way of Query above propounded, which of them all
I.O. means to Answer by, who talks so much about the Closure, Completing,
Consignation, and Bounding of the Standard and Scripture Canon ^ I cant well
say: But as for T.D. with whom I have somewhat to do, and to deal alittle here,
he Replies Affirmitively to the Third among them, saying, Page 26, of the First
Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, mentioned in that First of Ours, and so
consequently of all the several Scriptures that are not bound up in your
Bibles, which I asserted to be as much a Rule as those ye have, that they were
not intended as much for your Rule, as those in your Books.

To whom when I Replied at the Dispute with him (as he there Relates) Thus,
viz. If that Epistle was wriiten to the same end with those we have (as it was,
viz. to Instruct the Corinthians how to carry themselves to gross Sinners, I
Cor. 5.9. compared with verse. II. I wrote unto you not to Company, and now I
have written unto you not to keep Company; And the same was said of his First
to the Ephesians, i.e. that it was to the self same End as that we have, Ephesians.
3.3. As I wrote before, that ye may understand my Knowledge in the Mystery of
Christ so now) then 'twas intended as much for a Rule as the other; But it was
Written to the same End: Ergo, If one a Rule, then the other.

T.D. Denies the Consequence; Saying Sermons, private Religious Discourses have
the same common End with the written Scriptures, yet the Later only are our
standing Rule; the former our Rule but so far as they agree with the Later in
the Scripture.

Reply. Which Reply of T.D's, is so unreasonably ridiculcus, that he is scarce
Animal Rationale Risibile, that receives, and entertains it seriously as the
Truth;

For First, it supposes as if Paul's First writing to the Corinthians, were not
Written Scriptures, as well as the Rest we have, but an Orall Discourse.

Secondly, It supposes Pau's First Epistle of all to that Church, which was
cited by himself in his Second, as written to the same End, and was written in
the same Spirit of God in which he lived, and walked, and out of whose movings
he wrote no Epistles to the Churches, Though this I consesse, which makes
little for J.O. but much against him, where he talks, as one that meddles with
what is out of his reach, of Gods putting every word so into their mouths, and
speaking by them in every Tittle they wrote, that somethings in Paul's Writings
he (as himself says) spoke; and not the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.12.
was fit to stand in no other Account then the Sermons, and private Religious
Discourses of our Clergymen and their Common Christians, which must stand or
fall as they square, or not square with the Standard of Scripture; And as if
the Seniour Epistles of Paul to Corinth and Ephesus, must like Prisoners at the
Bar, receive their Sentence of Guilty, or not Guilty, worthy or not worthy to
be owned as a part of the Rule or Canon, by their Iuniours, or such as were
sent after them, to sit as Judges of them at the Bench; And so hereby his Reply
is as it were an Affirmative Answer to the First of my Four Queries, viz. That
Paul's Writings were not all alike of Divine Original and Inspiration, but some
Epistles to the Churches of his, were uttered as he was moved by the Holy
Spirit, (...), and others (...), of private Interpretation, or as private Men's
Writings. Credat Apella.

And when 'twas urged by me, that there was no more evidence or Character of
these Epistles being a Rule which are, then of those which are not in your
Books; Then T.D. seeing what he had Replied that way would not hold, Replies by
way of Answer to the Second of my Four last Queries, affirming that Paul's first
Writings to Corinth and Ephesus were lost when those we have are saved; and so
makes this distinction of the ones being perished, the other preserved by Gods
Providence watching over them, when he did not over the other a signal Evidence
that God intended the one for a standing Rule to us and not the other; and
herein he and I.O. Jump together and border pretty near one another, since I.O.
insists exceedingly (as an Argument of their being a Rule in the Church) on
this business of Gods preservation of every Tittle and Iota of divinely
Inspired Scripture to this day, whereby he implicitly denies all the
aforementioned, that are not in your Bibles, to be any of them of Divine
Inspiration; But with this Difference from T.D. that I.O. says not a Tittle of
the Inspired Scripture is lost; T.D. to the confuting of I.O. Confesses (being
I believe informed of some Holy Scripture at the Dispute, which he knew not of
before) that not only Tittles and Iotaes, but some whole Books of which he
dares not say expressly (though intimate it he does in the Head next above
spoken to) that they were not Divinely Inspired, are lost and perished out of
the World; So that the Preservation of what is Preserved, is made a Signal
Token that its to be our Rule, and the loss of what is lost, that that was not
written for such an end.

To which Signal Token of Gods intending the One and not the O. her for A Rule,
when I Replied (as it is transiently done above to I O. touching the Books
called Apocrypha) that there is more Ancient Holy Writ remaining extant to this
day, preserved for our use by Gods Providence, then ye own or honor with a
standing in your Standard (instancing in the Epistle of Paul to Laodicea) then
by and by T.D. who rides the Rounds not much less then I.O. and is never
positive nor steady to any thing he Asserts, so as to stand long to it without
shifting ( Proteus like) into another shape, when he is ashamed to be seen
longer in his old one, comes out in a clear contrary Gelour, and flatly
contradicts himself, and unsayes what he said but just before; And whereas he
had made the preserving of what was written, and is preserved, an Argument of
its being designed of God for a Rule, affirms, That all that was written by
Holy Men (meaning Paul among the rest, or else he speaks not at all to the
purpose) and preserved also for our use, is not therefore our standing Rule:
Thus one while it is so, and one while no; then neither, yet both no, and so.

Paul's Three Epistles, viz. the Two to Corinth, One to Ephesus that we have,
appear therefore to be our standing Rule, because they are preserved to our use
to this day; but his first of all to Corinth and Ephesus, therefore not so,
because not preserved; there is his first saying.

His very next of all is this, Paul's Epistle to Laodicea, though preserved for
our use, yet is not therefore to be our standing Rule to this day.

So what ever Paul's Epistles are, yet I am sure Paul's Life and Example is no
Rule that T.D's. walks by, nor I.O. neither, for his yea was yea, and his nay
nay; he did not use such lightness, as they both very often do, who say nay to
that they said yea to just before; neither did he speak so according to the
Flesh (as they) with whom now there is yea yea, and anon to the same thing nay
nay; but as God is true, and Christ is not yea and nay in his words, and
enjoynes us to be steady in our yea and nay, so was Paul's word in what he spoke.

And yet the Reason T.D. renders of his saying No, to what he said not No but
so just before, is as Reasonlesse as his self Confutation is; for (mark) then
(quoth he) If what ere was written by Holy men (alluding to Paul) be therefore
our standing Rule because preserved, the Discourses of Holy Ministers in former
and latter times should be our Rule, which they are not, but are to be brought
to the written Word as our Rule and Test.

In which if by Holy Ministers in former times, he means Paul among the rest,
as he must, else he misses the matter, then some of Paul's Epistles are the Rule
and Test, which his other Epistles must stand bare before to be tried by, which
is absurd; If by latter Ministers he intend such as himself, who Confesses his
Ministry to be fallible; I would have him to know, and that he shall find more
of anon, that Paul's Ministry, and every true Ministry that Ministers by word of
Mouth or Writing, as moved by the Holy Spirit, which moves and leads none
fallibly, but all infallibly, whom it leads, was no such fallible Ministry as
his false one is, that it need be tried by his other own holy Writings.

But now as to the Epistle of Laodicea instanced in, T.D. was so hard of
belief, and difficult to he persuaded that there was any such at all, that if
one of Sandwich had not stood up and said he had the Book wherein we Asserted
it to be Printed, we should hardly have gained so much Credit among the Clergy
then present (such pro and con they made about it, as to have been believed)
that there was such a thing in Being; so ignorant are they of some present
parts of that Scripture they call their Rule; yet at last 'twas yielded such a
one was extant.

But for all that, T.D. who has ever more ways then one into the Wood where he
loves to wander, when he is bedged out of it one way, will find or make himself
a Gap into it by another, and as to this matter of PAVL to LAODICEA, he has
Three or Four shifts, for fear one fail, affirming after he had found it
Translated into English, not to, but from Laodicea Though I affirm it is not
from Laodicea, were it truly rendered, being (...), Col. 4.16. which Arias
Montanus renders more rightly, Quae est Laodicensium, or Quae est Laodiceae,
the Epistle which belongs to the Laodiceans, or is of, or to Laodicea.


First, That for ought we know, it might be that First of Paul to Timothy, the
Postscript of which says it was Written from Laodicea; of which Postscript
(which its notorious enough to every Novice, that neither it, nor the other
Post-scripts were Penned by such as wrote the Epistles themselves) when I Asked
T.D. Whether he owned it and the Rest as Canonical, or no? As Canonical (quoth
he) for ought appears yet to me, as your Epistle to the Laodiceans, of which
Epistle yet he had said but just before, It might be that of Paul's to Timothy,
which yet that it was, is so unlikely, that it is little less then to be like a
Child to Assert it; A likely matter indeed that its Paul's to Timothy meant Col.
4.16. That which Paul wrote to Timothy was to Timothy a particular Person,
about particular Matters concerning him, as in that Capacity of a
Church Officer, I Tim. 3.14, 15. What should he Charge the Colosians so much to
look after that for? Or if he had, Would he not have said, See that ye read the
Epistle to Timothy? Had not that been plainer?

Secondly, But seeing that Snap, T.D. fits another string to his Instrument,
and then Fidles on in this fashion, denying it to be Paul's Epistle at all,
either to Laodicea, or Timothy, or any one else; branding it with the Name of
one of the Brats laid by the Popish party at the Apostles doors, which they
will not Father, and me as a Brother of the Popish party, and an Abbettor of
them in their wickedness, for Fathering it on Paul at all.

And then Thirdly, That he might seem to say something, though no better then
nothing to every thing, rather then own any thing for Truth before the World,
be it never so plain, that the Quakers tell him, he bethinks himself, and upon
Second, or rather Third Thoughts, adds (having perused the Judgment of some
Learned men about it) that 'twas neither Paul's to Timothy any more then to
Laodicea, nor yet altogether such a Brat, or Bastard brood as a metr Chimaera
hatched, and bred, and sained in the Fancies only of the Popish party, but at
least a Real Epistle, yet one that was so far from being Paul's to Laodicea,
that it was rather one Written by the Laodiceans to Paul himself, a more
incredible pigment then the first, for all it is his Reverend Dr. Davenports
Opinion on the place.

Thus Oh the twistings and turnings, and chop^ings and changings, and piecirgs
and patchings, and shiftings and shufflings of T.D. to wind himself away from
the Truth which is to him so Intolerable, that with I.O. hee^l bear the shame,
and run the hazard of giving his incongruous self-overturning Thoughts thick
and threefold against it, rather then truly turn to it when its truly and
uncontroulably told and laid before him; As it is in this Case about the
Epistle to Laodicea, about which he traces to and fro two or three false ways,
and yer can scarce tell well, which of the Three to fix upon, or steadily to
stand to, or stand still in.

Nevertheless notwithstanding T.Ds. advance in Three Motions against the Truth
of Pau's Writing to Laodicea, yet they help him not; but for all his two
strides and a Iump, yet he leaps too short to reach the matter of Truth he
would resel by it, for Quid verbis opus est quum facta loquuntur? there need no
more words in proof on it, the Epistle of Paul to Laodica is extant, and speaks
out it self and its Author whose it is, as well by the stale and majesty of it
as by the Superscription, being both Translated and Printed in English, as it
was found, though not in your Testaments, yet in the Oldest Bible that was
Printed at Worms; And also in a certain Ancient Manuscript of the New Testament
Text, which I have seen and can produce, written in Old English 340 years
since, or above, before the Art of Printing came up here; by which its evident,
that it was owned as Canonical in the Church of England in those days, and was
(however it came to be since left out) bound upamong its fellows.

And howbeit it be filled in our English Translations of Col. 4.16. the Epistle
from Laodicea, besides the genuine sense of the Greek, which, as is showed
above, will much rather bear it to, then from Laodicea; yet let it be read
from, that nothing lessens the likelihood of its being Paul's; for though he
wrote it to Laodicea, yet if the Colossians would read it (as Paul bids them
do, as that the Laodiceans likewise should read what he wrote to the
Colossians) they must read it in a Copy from Laodicea whether it was sent, or
else not at all; as the Laodiceans it they read that he wrote to the
Colossians, must have it first from Colosse, or at least a Copy of it; For as
for the Scriptures of the New Testament (quoth I.O. who helps us in this,
though he hinder himself another way by it, as to his Canons Constitution out
of the first Original Copies, page 166.) it does not appear that the (...) of
the several Writers of it were ever gathered into one Volumne, there being now
no one Church to keep them for the rest, the Epistles, though immediately
Transcribed for the use of other Churches, Col. 4.16. (Mark how he Quotes the
very Place too we are upon, as if he owned Paul's to Laodicea, which if he do,
he wounds himself to death in his Arch-Assertion, that not a Tittle or Iota of
the inspired Scripture as given out at first, is lost, but remaining every Apex
of it in the Copies w now enjoy, fith here is a whole Epistle of Paul's lacking,
as well as his first to Corinth and Ephesus, in which were many Tittles and
lotaes) were doubtless kept in the several Churches, to which they were
directed; From those (...) there were quickly (...) given out to faithful men,
whilst the infallible Spirit continued his guidance in an extraordinary manner.

Here T.D. said no more, but was ad Altum srlentium, and at his Non ultra, as
to opposing the being of such an Epistle of Paul to Laodicea legitimate, but
rather fell under the weight of what Evidence was brought to prove it so; yet
when after long striving against this Antecedent, which was urged in proof of
this Conclusion, viz. That there is more Holy Scriptures extant to this day,
which are as much a Rule as those ye have in your Bibles, and call your Rule
exclusively of all others; to show himself to be one of those I.O. speaks of,
who are as like I.O. too as ever they can look, that are (to English J.O's.
Latin) Quid vero cum iis agamus, qui adeo infeliciter stupidi sunt ut nulla
ratione nec experientia, etc. Dicat quod quisque volet ex hac Opinione non
dimovebimur. Ex. 2. S. 28.
so unhappily stupid or self-willed, that they will be indoctrinated by no
reason nor experience; but as if themselves above must overtop all, being puffed
up with a vain persuasion of their own Faith, they obstinately persist in the
contempt of such things as they understand not, and so with the Comedian cry
out, Let who will say what he will from this Opinion, we will not be removed:
T.D. at last denies the Consequence, saying, page 28. Suppose we should grant
you there were such an Epistle legitimate, yet it will not follow that it was
intended for a Rule to us.

And why so? may any Rational Reader say; For this Reason (quoth T.D.) which
Reason is as silly as if he had said, because it will not; for we have already
as much as God thought sufficient, God did not give order for any more then
them we have to be our Rule (what Order he gave for any writing at all to be
the Rule or Canon will be seen anon, or whether man did not give order for the
Canonizing of that, that is Authorized, as the Rule) but how appears it that
God gave order for some Holy Scriptures, and not some? some Holy men's Writings,
some of Paul's Epistles, and not othersome? hereby (quoth T D.) Read Job.
20.30.31. and many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Discip'es, which are not written in this Book, but these are Written that ye
might believe, etc.

Reply. In which Scripture T. D's. Reason why Paul's other Epistles are
Authentic and Canonical, but that of his to Laodicea though as legitimate as
the rest must not be so, lies so close hid up, that a man may sooner find the
way of a Bird in the Air, or of a Serpent upon a Rock, or a Fish in the Sea,
then find it, or any thing that has the least Iota of a Reason of such a
matter: Quis nist mentis inops, etc. Who but a man besides his wits, can see
either Sense or Reason in this Reason? John says Christ did more things then
he Wrote of in that Book, therefore Paul's Epistle to Laodicea i, not so
Canonical as his other Epistles: But (to take it as it comes) consider first,
John speaks of that particular History that he was then in hand with; Secondly,
He speaks of Signs and not of Scriptures; Thirdly, Though he affirms that more
were done by Christ, then were written in his Book; yet many might be, and were
Written by Matthew, Mark, and Luke that were not by him; so that every way that
Scripture makes against T.D. For first, If John's Writing that Book were
Exclusive of any of Paul's legitimate Epistles, it must be of them all, and of
all legitimate Scripture that was wrote after this, and so of his own Three
Epistles, and of his Revelation also from the Canon; what mad work will T.D.
make that way? and what a fowl flaw will he make in his Canon, by meddling to
exclude one Book of the New Testament, excluding well nigh all; John's Book was
sufficient, therefore no more need be written; this is the Inference according
to T. D. and not John's was sufficient, therefore Paul's to Laodicea only so
illegitimate that it must have no room in the Rule, nor standing in the
Standard, though all other his Epistles now extant may.

2. John speaking that all the Signs Christ did, were not written, is no
Argument to prove that all that was Written by the Spirit, was not as equally
useful as some of it, and all alike designed and ordered to the same Ends, so
that if some were intended for a Rule, the rest must be; yea, faith not the
Scripture thus, Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 18.11. Whatever was Written aforetime was
Written for our Instruction, that we by it might have Hope; Says it not, All
Scripture ((...)) is profitable for Doctrine, Exhortation, Instruction in
Righteousness, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. and 2 Pet. 1.20. Says it not that no Prophecy
of Scripture (which with I.O. is the Scripture of the Prophecy) must be
Interpreted as private Discourses, that all Holy men of God spoke as moved of
the Holy Spirit; Was not all then that was Written before Christ, and since
intended to one and the self same End, though all that was done was not Written?

I understand not therefore the force of this Argument of T. D.

All that was done, was not Written:

Therefore much of that which was Written is of no use, or not intended to the
same use to the Church as the rest was.

3. It perfectly confirms against T. D. what we Assert against him, viz. That
Pau's Writing to Laodicea, and whatever else of Holy men's Writings that were
(...), and can be found have ( Caeteris Paribus) One as much Authority as the
Other, being all alike legitimate; For John says, of what ere is Written (if
T.D. will stretch John's saving beyond the bounds of that individual Book he was
then writing) it was written All to the same End, ( i.e.) That men might
believe, which with you (not us) is as much as to say to be a Rule of Faith.

One thing more I must not let slip here, though T. D. did in his Account of
the Dispute, viz. That when T.D. had no more to say against that Argument from
Paul: Epistle to the Laodiceans, one of his Associated Assistants; R.
Wilkinson, asked, Whether we had more Scripture in the Greek Tongue now extant,
then is in their Greek Testaments? For that to Laodicea being here but
Englished it would not down with them. Reply was made, Yea; so naming a Verse
between the 5 and 6 Verses of the 6 Chapter of Luke, which is in some Greek
Copies, not theirs, (and a Verse of the Original Text wanting, makes still
against I. O.'s Arch-Assertion; of the Scripture of both Testaments remaining
in the Copies they now have entire to a Tittle, as it first given out without
any loss, page 173.) I repeated it in English thus out of the Greek; in which
Greek Tongue I have also read it; Jesus seeing a certain man Working on the
Sabbath day, said unto him, O man, If thou knew indeed what thou do, thou
were happy; but if thou know not, thou art accursed, and a Transgressor of
the Law.

And so I have proved against T. D. That there is much Scripture of Holy men,
which was as much designed in its first giving out to be the Rule, as (...)
which is in modern Bibles, wanting and lost, some whereof yet is Extant in some
Bibles at this day, in which Confutation of T.D. I.O. is further Confuted as to
all those many places of his Book, wherein he avers over and over again with
exceeding earnestness his Arch-Assertion, viz. That not one jot nor Tittle of
divinely inspired Scripture is lost, but every Apex, and Letter of it, as at
first Writing is Transcribed downward to us, and preserved without any loss in
the Copies we now have, page 13 19. 173. And so this might stand for a final
Answer to I.O. and T. D. both as to that matter of the non entirenesse or
perfection of the Letter, which was given out upon Inspiration, and of its
Integrals to this day, and an Answer to I O's. Confident Positions and
Challenge concerning the Uniformity of all Bibles without variety in the least,
which to his own Confutation I here set down in his own words, of which yet
more use that way may be made hereafter.

I O. Page: 319. Neither the Care of God over his Truth, nor the fidelity of the
Judaical Church will permit us to entertain the least Suspicion that there was
ever in the World any Copy of the Bible differing in the least from that which
we enjoy, or that those we have are corrupted, as is pretended; the Authors of
that Insinuation cannot produce the least Testimony to make it good. And page
317. Let the Authors of this Insinuation prove the Assertion; Name'y, That
there was ever in the World any other Copy of the Bible differing in any one
Word from those we now enjoy: Let them produce one Testimony, one Author of
Credit, Jew or Christian, that can or does speak one Word to this purpose: Let
them direct us to any Relick, any Monument, and kind of Remembrance of them,
and not put us off with weak Conjectures, etc. and it shall be of weight with
us: And Epist. page 27, 28. We evidently find various Lections n the Greek
Copies which we enjoy, and so grant that which Ocular Inspection evinces to be
true; yet none of them are able to show out of any Copies yet Extant in the
World, or that they can make appear ever to have been Extant, that ever there
were any such various Lections in the Originals of the Old Testament.

And so I come to take my leave of T.D. again for a while till I meet him again
(as I must do where he meets in one with I.O. in many other places) and return
to walk on a while with I. O. about the Enclosure and Bounds of his Synodically
composed, and Humanely Constituted, and completed Canon, which he takes it for
granted by Tradition before it be given him by the true Anti-Traditionaries,
that it was Closed and Bounded by Divine Authority.

And as concerning this Consignation, Signing, Sealing, Setting out, or
Authorizing of the Canon as to the Measure of it, or number of Books so
Canonized (the Nature of which as a Rule or Canon is anon more spoken to) I
say, as above, I am yet to learn that Lesson which I. O. who by road Repeats it
for Truth, as if he had it at his fingers e^ds, never yet learned himself (I
believe) by root of heart, nor can ever Teach me, that by divine Authority, or
any otherwise then Iure Synodico, by mere men's Will, Wisdom, and Imag^n^tion as
they sat in Council together, not standing in Gods Council, the Light in the
heart, taking Counsel but not of him, nor at his mouth, but each from other;
and Covered with a Covering, but not of his Spirit, it came at first to pass,
that some (...), or Holy men's Writings by the Spirit must pass for Current
Coin, and stand as the Standard, and Reign as a Rule and Command in the high
Authority of a Canon as the Word of God, as truly as that very Word that comes
immediately from Gods own mouth to holy Penmen, or that Word it self, which
the Letter writes of, and other (...), or Writings of Holy men, yea, some of
the self same men that wrote some of the rest, and those as legitimate too
(according to T D's Hypothesis) as the rest should be spurned out as spurious,
so far at least. that they must not inherit with their fellows, that conceited
Immortal, Inmutable, and Everlasting Crown of that Solemn Canonization.

I. O. I am sure, upon his Principles, must grant me thus far, that if the
Bible of Scripture, which he confesses to be his Canon, Lydius lapis, and
Touchstone to try all by, does no where Testify any such thing within it self
of it self, that such Books, Prophesies, Stories, Epistles, Letters, Psalms,
Proverbs, and other Writings as are Bound up in it, are of Gods; and such as
are not there Bound, though born Testimony to there, as of as divine Original
as the rest, are not of Gods own Canonization, then it must be counted that
that precise Consignation of the Canon (as Consistent of such only, and not of
such Books) had its Original being from some Convocations or Sessions of mere
men, that were neither Prophets nor Apostles, but some that doted (as Doctors
do now a days, being none themselves) on the Prophets and Apostles Persons,
and such Writings of theirs as best pleased them; Out of the Scripture I know
not where I. O. can pore for proof of any thing, who looks awry upon the Light
and Spirit it came from, saving into that Thing, which he so often calls his
own Thoughts, all which with me are not worth Three-half-pence as to the
begetting of any infallible unfeigned Faith; And if he will allege it is so,
that this that's in our Bibles and Copies only, is the Rule of Gods own
Consignation, and none of the rest mentioned there, must come into it, he is
Certain of it, he thinks so (to which Tune he frequently Sings in his Second
Treatise, or heap of uncertain Assurances, or most Assured Uncertainties about
the Points) he may keep his Think to himself if he will, and never thrust that
forth as an Argument to evince any thing to us by; its labor in vain, for we
verily believe that in the most things at least that he gives us his Thoughts
about, he does think it to be as he says he thinks it is. But what is what he
thinks to other men? Is there any reason that we believing our own Eyes, should
believe the Testimony of a man of no Credit with us, Asserting that for Truth,
which we know to be utterly false? I appeal to J O. Epist. Page 20.

But if he will say the Scripture speaks any where of the Bounding and
Consignation of its Canon by so many, or so few, or by such and such Books as
are Extant only in your Bibles, and no other, I would fain know where it
mentions any such, or wherever the Apostles in any of their Synods or
Sessions had any hand in any such matter; and if not, I judge I O. to be past
such a Child, as to believe that what the Synods of succeeding Ages
Constituted, Authorized, Canonized or Established, was done purely Per jus
Divinum, or Apostolicum either.

Yea, what I O says to the Quakers in the Case of Calling to the Light within,
Ex. 3. S. 32. Proferant Fanatici vel unum sacrae Scripturae locum vel udum
caelitus demissum Testimonium, quo ad eorum sidei and obedientiae Regulas seu
directiones mittimur, etc. and causam non dicimas quin triumphant serio, etc.
which Challenge of I. O. I am to Answer him in elsewhere. So say I to I.O. T.
D. or any other Thinkers or Seemers to themselves to see. Proferant Fantastisi,
etc. let these Pretenders to the Vision of this matter produce but one place of
the Holy Scripture, or any Testimony from Heaven (but such a one from above
they cannot, who deny Gods Spirit so speaking in these days as of old) wherein
God, Christ, or the Apostles set out the distinct bounds of their Canon,
Directory, or Standard of the Old or New Testament, by such a precise parcel of
Books as are in your Bibles, and exclusively of any other holy Writ, whether
mentioned or not mentioned therein; and weel not say but they have Cause in
this Case (though if 'twere as they say they must hang down their heads with
shame in 20 more) to triumph in earnest* Si autem de suo tantum loquuntur
mendaces sunt neque verum est eorum Testimonium; if they talk of their own
heads of things about the Scripture, which the Scripture Testifies not of it
self they are Liars, and their Testimony is not true.

As to the Canon, as ye call it, or Standard of the Old Testament, there is not
the least Tittle of Tendency to any such thing hinted there, that it should
consist of so many Books, and such shall stand in it, and such other, though as
legitimate, and mentioned to be of God therein, as well as the rest, shall be
shut out, and stand by: And in very Ezra alias Esdras his days when there was
such a Paucity of Copies as thou well say I.O. Page 177. That in very deed
the who'e Law was burnt (as to the Originals its like at least) 2 Esdras 14.
21, 22, etc. The Care of him, and his Companions, was great as thou say, as
to the Restoring of the Scripture to its Purity when it had met with the
greatest Tiyal that ever it under-went before, insomuch that what Books could
be gotten together were copied cut, or else written de novo by the light of
understanding kindled in Esdras his heart by the Lord, and many excellent thing
done as to the Recovery of the Law into more purity in the very Letter of it
out of the Babilonish rubbish, etc. but what is all this as to the settling of
this, and that, and the other Prophecy into the distinct measure of a Standard by
divine Appointment, and dis-Canonizing all others save such as are in your
Bibles called Canonical, whether those of the Seers, Gad, Nathan, Iddo and the
rest abovesaid that are specified in your Bibles, or those later which are
allowed a room and standing in your Bibles, though not a room and standing in
your Rule and Standard thereof, called Apocryphal, of which some were Esdras
his own as well as some of the rest.

Besides it is evident, that Esdras and his Companions, if the Consigration and
Bounding of the Canon were in their days, or by their Sanydrim set a work, and
ordered by the insallible Spirit of God therein, wrote a number more of Books,
2 Esdras 14. 42. 44. then are now Extant in your Bibles, which if all lost, it
makes against I.O. still, that says not an Apex of what was by divine
inspiration, is lost; and so his great Engine out of which he shoots short
against the Truth, his Standard and Canon comes still lame, and short, and
halting home. And also though Esdras and his Company Compiled many, yet the
last Volume of the Psalms is more credibly supposed, if I would enter into I.
O's. Work of Answering Conjecture with Conjecture, to be trussed up together in
the days of the Maccabees, but all here is uncertain, and carried to and fro
by Conjectures, and so there is nothing sure on I. O's side.

And as to the newer and later Scripture since Christ, where is the least touch
of such a business of Constituting some few certain Books of those many more
then we have, which were then written, into a Canon, and discarding othersome,
whether such as we want, or such legitimate ones as we have, as that to
Laodicea from within the Coasts and Quarters of your Canon? Nay, rather the
Scripture of the New says, as in the places above Cited, Romans 15.4. 1 Cor.
10.11. 2 Timothy 3.16.17. 2 Pet. 1.20.21. That all Scriptures that are (...),
given, or written by Inspiration of old time, were to the same purpose that any
at all were; so that if any of it all, then all of it is to be listed into that
Lydium Lapidem, and to be Confederate with the rest, and to come by right into
the Confines of your Canon, all what ever was so written being alike written
for our Instruction, alike profitable, alike public, and none of it of a more
private Interpretation then the rest; Does that of T. D's. Citing, and I. O's.
also, Ex. 3. 26. (viz.) Job. 20.30.31. prove any such thing? If that be
Exclusive of any Scripture at all, it must be of all that which was written
after it; forasmuch as, according to T. Ds. Exposition of it, it intimates a
sufficiency in that which was already written; and (if weel be befooled with
his sinister senses, and mindlesse meanings on the Scripture) that when he had
written that, there was as much as God himself thought sufficient to be written
at all as a rule of Faith, or in order to men's believing, page 28. These are
Written that ye might be'eeve, and have Life; as if he should say, Here Is
enough, what need more? And as the Preacher said of old, Of making many Books,
there is no end; by these be thou Admonished, they are words of Truth, therefore
heed no more, Eccles. 12.10.12. Will any of you say that in John (yet T. D
twines it such a way) will bear such a Construction as to be Conclusive of some
Scriptures of Spiritually Inspired men into the use of a Canon or Standard, and
exclusive of others as much of God as those? On this account, as one might
Interpret Solomon, as cutting off from the Canon all the Prophets Writings that
succeeded his in the Old Testament Scripture; so one must Interpret John as
Excluding out of the Standard of the New Testament all ensuing Writings of Holy
men but his own, and his own Epistles and Revelation also, which were
Posterior, or Successive to his History then in hand, as utterly useless and
superfluous. Credat Apelia.

Does that Gal. 6. 16 As many as walk according to this Rule, or Canon, do it?
which blind Guides and People so hastily patter over, as if that mentioned the
whole Bible and all that Writing, and not a Tittle more then what is bound up in
it, besides the Apocrypha; when I shall show in its proper place, its spoken of
no External Scripture of Writing at all; I say, will that prove some to be
Authorized of God for the Standard, and some even of the same Holy men's
Writings though yet extant, not to be so? Is there any such distinction in the
sound of that Term [ This Rule] whereby (if it were meant of Scripture, as its
nothing less) to give us to discern that Paul in that Expression includes his
Two Epistles to Corinth, and that one to Ephesus and this to Galatia, and the
rest of his own and other Apostles Writings, even the Revelation it self, that
was not wrote in his days, that are Concincinated in your Copies as intended
of God to be the Standard, and excludes his first to Corinth, his first to
Ephesus, and that to Laodicea, as not intended of God to stand in the Standard,
but to stand below it to be tried, and judged by it?

Or by ( this Rule) did he mean no more then what was already Written, which of
you Wise men that render in your Interpretations that Term (Rule) there of an
outward Letter, can Riddle me this? If so as ye say, then he quite cuts off
what should be Written after this, either by himself, for any other Inspired
Writer, and so all John's Epistles, and his Revelation rom coming into that
right it has to Rule as the Standard among the rest?

Or if no, then that place (and indeed it does not) makes not at all to I. O's.
purpose; who yet quotes it in proof of his Canon as carelessly as others do, for
customs sake, among a vast Company of other Texts that he crowds on a heap one
a top of another, not one of which proves the Point he there Propounds, viz.
Scripturam post completum ejus Canonem esse Regulam, perfectissimam ita ut
nullae Revelationes sint admittendae; That the Scripture is so perfect a Rule
or Canon, that after the Completing of its Canon (which was not when Paul
wrote to Galatia, if John's Epistles, and the Revelation be a part of it) [mark
that] no more Revelations must be admitted, See Ex 3. S. 25 26. not one jot
more then the Green Circle, that is seen about it in some misty Nights, proves
the Moon to be made (as they say) of Green Cheese.

And now I am upon that Term of thine I. O. Post completum ejus Canonem; let me
take it while it is in my mind, I much muse what ye mean by this so often
Completing and Bounding of your Canon; and marvel what Epoche Iuncture and
Period of time this perfecting of your Canon and Standard as to all its
Integral parts must take its being and beginning (as such) and be counted from,
so that before that time it cannot be called a perfect Rule or Standard: If it
be from that time which I. O. calls the Close of the immedia^e Revelation of
Gods Will, Page 28. made when John had written the Revelation, after which I.O.
thinks nothing more was ever to be added by way of new Inspination (which
Thought of I. O's. I shall think to talk with hereafter) it from that time I
say, and not before, then it was not complete it seems when John wrote that Job.
20.31. nor yet when Paul wrote that Gal. 6.16. And so neither of those Two
places cited by both I.O. or T.D, do prove their Rule-perfect as to its
Integrals, and complete already, when Paul and John wrote them: And yet for all
that I can find by I.O. and T.D. both, they not only count their Canon complete
and perfect at the time of the Writing of those Two verses, but likewise
produce those very Two verses, viz. I.O. both and T D. one of them, viz. Joh.
20.31. and expressly and in effect the other, to prove their Rule to be a most
perfect Rule and complete Canon already long before the supposed Close thereof
in the Revelation; yea, (counting from the time of the Penning of that place,
Ioh. 20.30, 31.) we have already (quoth T.D. Page 28.) as much as God thought
sufficient; as if that History of John had pined the Basket, and brought up the
Recto all the whole Standard of outward Scripture, and completed it al^e^^y as
sufficiently as God thought fit it ever should be; yea, so sufficient, as that
all that should be written after, should be held superfluous.

No more then a most perfect Rule, it is now, a complete Canon, sufficient
Standard, adaequate to all Cases that come to be tried by it, inalterable
Touchstone, immutable Measure to measure all Spirits by, to which nothing may
be added (and I confess, if the Writing be the Rule, Standard, Measure, true
Word of God; which its but a Writing of, it ought to remain from the first to
the last, ad amussim, exactly the same, as to its Measure as well as to its
Nature, and to have not one jot, not an inch, not a tittle added to it to make
it larger, longer, or wider then at very first Canonizing and Authorizing into
its Office, it ought to be steady and standing stedfast^y the same within it
self, as well in its Quantity, as Quality, as a Substantive and not such an
Adjective, as cannot stand by it self without more, and more, and more Words and
Writings still from time to time newly adjoined to it, to show its sense and
signification about those things its to measure, determine, and to be the All
in All, even both the Rule and the Judge of, as ye make it) I say it can be no
more now its thus completed, as it is by successive Additaments from Moses
himself to the Revelation, and not one jot less, it was (according to you
conceited Canonizers thereof) before John or Paul, or any of the New W^iters
ever wrote; no less then a perfect Standard, that had its Consignation and
Canonical Bounding, and its borders, so set out, that what came not to hand,
what appeared not at the Session of that Sanydrim, that sat in Ezraes days,
to Try, and Judge on, and Authorize what was fit to be the Judge and Rule for
themselves, and all after Ages to be Tried by, must be Condemned as Apocryphal
for ever; and no less then so that little was, that was in the days of
Isaiah, before himself, or any of the Prophets after him had Written: To the
Law, to the Testimony (cry out Anti-Testimonists from Isa. 8. 20. like Rooks
and Frogs, that gape and croak all alike for Compan^es sake, to the same Tune)
as if that were that little of the Letter only that then was, which I shall
show anon, was another matter; and no less then a completed Canon that little
was that was in David's days, which was little more then the mere Five Books of
Moses (if Joshua, and Judges, and Ruth were then written) the Word was a Light
to David's feet, the Law, the Commandment of God David said was perfect,
converting the Soul, enlightening the Eyes, rejoicing the Heart, giving wisdom
to the Simple (say the Simpletons of these times) never heeding that that
Commandment is the Lamp, Prove. 6.23 and the Law that Light in the Heart the
Quakers speak of, Ma^th. 25.8. Lu^e 12 35. and that Word, by which the young
Man was to walk and cleanse his way, and that was a guide and a Light to David's
Paths, was not the outward Letter only of Moses Law (for Moses Scriptures and
Writings, and David's too, did only Testify of it, Deuteronomy 30. 14. 18. Romans 10.8
Psalm. 119. 9105) But the Word that was nigh in the Heart which David had, and
hid also within him, that he might not sin against God, Psalm. 119. 11. yea, no
less then a Canon, that had its complete Consignation and Bounding, for all
Truth, which was the same then as it is now (substan^ially) to be Tried by,
when no more then Moses Five were extant, so long before it was enlarged into
such a Volume as now the Bible is, by adding to the Old Word, were the Letter
that Word of God, that's the standing Measure; I know not what to make of all
these Additions to the Word, if the Letter be the Word, which have been made
from Moses downward to this day, but matter of Plagues, Woes, and Reproofs to
the Adders of their Writings to the First Writings; but this I can say to the
Excuse of such as call Moses Five only a complete Canon, and in complete
Authority as a Standard, and a Rule, and the Word of God, and such like, full
well may Five, or any one Book of Moses, or any one Chapter, or one Verse,
never so small, in either his or any other Prophets Scripture be so, when if
weel believe I. O. when he Lies, every Tittle and Iota of any of these outward
Writings is not only Part of the Word, but The Word of the Great God, as Page
168.169. Yea, every Apex of it equally, Divine, and as immediately from God, as
the Voice wherewith, or whereby he spoke to, or in the Prophets; and is
therefore accompanied with the same Authority (i.e.) as the whole is, both in
it self, and unto us, Page 27. so then every Tittle is no less then a
completely constituted Canon, and the whole is no more then so.

And further, as to the New Testament (as ye call the Letter of it) as there is
not the least Evidence, that any such thing as the specifying of what, and
whose Scriptures or Writings the Canon should consist of, and what not; so can
any of you, that stand up so stiffly for your (fancied) stable Standard, show us
where any Order is given out by Christ or his Apostles to such as should
succeed them, to take Care to gather up their Writings, and Judge and try which
of them they thought fit, and which not to own as their Rule, and Judge, and
accordingly digrading the rest, to Canonize such as liked them best, to submit
themselves to the Trial and Jurisdiction of, into the high Names and Authority
of the Word of God, the Judge, the Rule, the standing Canon both to them, and
all the world, and all after Ages of it to the Worlds end? Does 2 Timothy 3.13.14.
(twice at least cited by I O. for fear of failing viz. Ex. 3. S 26.31.) prove
it? And does 2 Timothy 2.2. which is without either heed or wit urged, and by
heedlesse I. O. as well as others, quoted (though mis-quoted) in the Margin of
Page 166. to that purpose, prove in the least any such matter? If it do, then
say I am a Dunce; if not, then see whether they are fit to be Doctors or
Teachers in Divinity, that by reason of the beam in their eyes cannot behold,
but divine so darkly besides a business that is as clearly contrary to what
their brain conceives about it, as if it were written with a Sun beam: For the
words of Paul to Timothy are these, viz. The things that thou have heard of me
among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be Able
to Teach others also: And in the other place these, But Evil men, and Seducers,
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived (and so they do at this
day, for all their scufling for the Scripture) but continue thou in the things,
which thou have learned, and been assured of knowing of whom thou have learned
them. Whence it is by many, that would look upon themselves as wronged, if not
looked upon as learned, as hastily concluded, as the places are handover head
alleged. That Paul bids Timothy take the Scripture first committed to him by
himself, and commit it downwards to faithful men, that must commit and continue
it downwards still to others, and so successively to the worlds end as a
Common, Continual Permanent, perpetually remaining Canon and only Standard for
all Nations, and Spirits. Gods, and Man's, and Doctrines, true and false, to
stand or fall by, from thenceforth even for ever.

Which what a crooked Consequence it is, who, but Ignoramus, can be ignorant,
whenas, if the Scripture had been the subject spoken of there by Paul, either
it had extended no further then to his own Scripture to Timothy, which is but a
petty Portion, and poor Pittance of Paul's Epistles, or if to all the rest of
his Epistles, then it had been conclusive of that to Laodicea, and his first to
Corinth and Ephesus, which have no being in your Bibles, which you say Contains
all your Canon, and are by T. D. excluded from any Claim to it; but in very
deed there is no such thing at all as the Scripture or outward Text there, either
talked on or intended; but the things Timothy had learned and heard from Paul by
word of mouth, as well as writing, which though I own to be Truths and
Doctrines, and things which are evermore according to the Scripture (the
Spirit, from which that was, never contradicting it self) yet were another
thing then the (...), that is, the Writing or Scripture it self; Paul says not
those Scriptures, which thou had of me, etc. commit to faithful men to make a
Standard of, but those Doctrines Truths, which thou have heard of me, commit;
(and those Truths were concerning the Light which Paul was sent to turn men to,
and not the Letter, for he says God made him, and the rest, Ministers not of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, Act. 26.18. 2 Cor. 3.6. And the Gift of God
within Timothy, which he bids him stir up, 2 Timothy 1.5) Neither did Paul go up
and down testifying to the Scriptures as a Standard, and telling men, which
should be the Touchstone and which Scriptures not, but the things, which were
Witnessed to there, testifying no other things, Quod Essentiam, to be believed
or done then what were written in, and spoken by the Law and the Prophets, Acts
24. 14. and 26. 22. And those things Timothy heard, learned, and was assured of
from Paul's both Words and Writings; As also the things the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. had delivered to them partly by Paul's Preachings, and partly by
his Epistles, and were accordingly to stand fast and continue in, but they were
not the bare Bible it self, or Writings, or Scriptures themselves, which were
not then by Paul or any bundled up and carried about in a Book to take a Text,
and Talk out of for Money, as Ministers do now adays.

And if I. O. insist upon the next words, viz. 2 Timothy 3.15. which place
mentions the Holy Scriptures, and is mentioned I know not how many times over
in I. O's. Book, in proof of that, which it in no wise evinces, and must be
more plainly spoken to by me in due place.

Rep. I Confess that next Verse does mention the Scriptures, but more against,
then to J. O's, purpose, and more disproves then proves what he draws from the
other; yea, it assures us, that it was not the Scriptures in any wise meant in
the 14. Verse, for Paul says to Timothy, That from a Child he had known the
Holy Scriptures (i.e.) of the Old Testament, for those of the New were not as
yet Canonized, nor All Written, if any of them were at all Written in Timothies
Nonage; but the Things he had heard and learned of Paul, and was bid to
continue in, and commit to other faithful men to Teach, were such as he had
come into the Knowledge and Assurance of after he was taken by Paul (Acts 16.1,
2, 3.) to Travel with him, which was not till he was grown past a Child; If
that Expression, Knowing of whom thou have learned, Verse. 14. be granted to
relate to Paul, which (yet for ought you Literatists are able to gain say) may
rather relate to the Lord himself by the Gift of whose Grace (i e) the Light
and Spirit in him, Timothy was (and yet according to the Scriptures) taught
both more lately, 1 Timothy ^.14. and from a Child.

So that neither of these two Texts teach any such matter as any of the outward
Text of the New Testament Scriptures being either Canonized by the Apostles in
their days, or ordered by them to be stated as a Standard in the Councels of
succeeding Ages: And whatever men did (de facto) that way in the Second or
Third Centuries, the Antiquity whereof (as venerable as it is to some
Anti-Scriptural, and Anti-Spiritual Antiquaries) is with us but Novelty and
Superstition, if it appear not to descend (de Iure) from the first; yet we
Quary still (quo Iure) by what Authority from God, Christ, or the Apostles, the
Synods, and Men that so Authorized and Canonized what Scriptures seemed to
them, as Challenging Hoc N^men (viz.) Verbum Dei Proprium) sibi Vendi^at
Scriptura; I. O. Ex. ^. S. 1, 2, 3, 26, 27.
so high a Title and Office, as the Word of God, Rule, Foundation, Canon,
Standard, and such like, secluding other Writings, as Holy as these, were
Authorized, or Commanded so to do themselves?

Nevertheless, how weakly does I O. (Confessing first, That it does not appear
that the (...) of the several Writers of the Scriptures of the New Testament
(and the same say I of the first Manuscripts of the Old, which were burnt and
lost, and scambled away before Ezraes S^nydrim, if the Consignation and
Bounding of the Canon thereof was done by him and his Companions, as I.O.
says) were ever gathered into one Volume, there being now no one Church to
keep them for the rest; and that the Epistles, though immediately transcribed
for the use of other Churches, Col. 4.16. (as I. O. thinks at least all were,
because some were) were doubtless kept in the several Churches whereto they
were directed; which Confession, if true, as sure enough it is, clears it that
the Original Copies were never viewed together in one Bulk by any Council or
Synod, whereby to put it into a Capacity to Judge and Determine of their
fitness to make a Canon of, but only men's Copies of the Original, which but
that every man will think his Think, and I.O. think as well as may be of it,
For shall we Think (quoth he) Page 168. and so on many pages, etc.
yet who can assuredly, insallibly, uncontroleably tell as I O. sometimes
(though sometimes again he will seem but to Think so) undertakes to do in his
grand Assertion, that they answer the first Original in every Tittle and Iota?)
I say, beforehand Confessing all this, how weakly does I.O. Assert with
Confidence his Thoughts in this as a point of Faith, Page 166, 167. that from
those (...), there were quickly (...), Transcribed Copies given out to faithful
men, whilst the infallible Spirit continued yet his guidance in an
extraordinary manner, alluding to 2 Timothy 2.2. as his only Proof thereof, out of
which Original Copies, or rather Copies of the Originals so Transcribed (for
the Originals themselves never came together to be considered of by any
Council) this supposed Canon was Composed by the Annexing of the Revelation to
the rest by I O. said to be finally Completed, Pa^. 28. God (quoth he) does
Command the close of the immediate Revelation of his Will to be Written in a
Book, Rev. 1 ^^ And so gives out the whole of his M^nd and Council to us in
Writing, as a steadfast Relief against all Confusion, Darkness, Uncertainty,
etc.

Reply. As if, all Canonical certainty were no where but in a Written Letter,
then which in regard of its liablenesse to be altered easily many ways by lewd
Critics, whom I. O. Teaches to do it, Page 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. As also by mere
mis-Transcriptions; mis-Translations, mis^Constructions, nothing is more
uncertain to make a Standard of, unless it be the unutterably erring Breast or
Head of that Harlot that Rides the Beast, and the unwritten Traditions that are
Traduc^d, ad infinitum, from the same.

2. As if the Light and Spirit that shines and breaths in the Hearts of all,
but most brightly and powerfully in the Hearts of such as heed it, were not
more infallibly self evidencing, and certainly, and steadfastly demonstrative of
the Mind and Will of God when looked on in its naked Native luster, then when
beheld through the vail of a Letter, which while Moses put over his face, the
Children of Israel could never see certainly, nor distinctly discern, nor look
steadfastly to the end of that which is abolished, but were blind in their
minds, as our Ministers of the Letter are at this day, upon whose hearts the
vail is untaken away, and ever will be, till, according to the Call of the
Letter, they turn to the Light within, that comes from, and leads to the Lord
himself, Christ Jesus, that Spirit, in whom only the vail is done away, 2 Cor.
3. Per totum.

3. As if the truest and most infallible Demonstration were Non ex veris,
prioribus, certioribus, notioribus and causis internis Scripturae, but Ex
fallibilibus, flexibilibus, posterioribus, obscurioribus and effectis, not by
the internal Causes, the Truth and the Word it self the Scripture came from,
which are before it, more certain and known then it, save to such as are
willingly ignorant of them, but by the Scripture, which is but Effectus per
emanationem, the Effect, that externally flows from it, flexible, fallible, as
alterable at Critics Wi^ls, and unavoidably by men's weakness in Transcribing,
Translating, Expounding, etc. at a Nose of Wax, a Lesbian Rule, more obscure,
yea, obscurity i^le^f in the most plain Places to the Seers, that search it not
in the Light and Spirit, but the dark Lanthorn of their own Imagination.

Ah poor deluded Soul, I. O. whom I pity more really and unfeignedly, then
thou the Quakers, and for pitties sake dare not spare sharpness toward thy
proud-fleshly Wisdom, that interposes and opposes it self against the Light and
Power of God, in a show of Science falsely so called, that thy Spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Thou talkest of certainty of thy Rule, which is the Letter, and of steadfast
Relief against all Uncertainty thereby; Alas poor heart, whence come all those
huge heaps; and whole Chapters of Uncertainty it self, which thy T^o Treatises
does wholly stand in, but from that utter Uncertainty, that is in thy merely
literal Rule, which thou there Treatest upon, that is so far from
steadfastness, that thou art forced to Confess more variety in it at last,
then at first entrance to Treat on its fixednesse, thou wast either witting or
willing enough to do; which Rule or Letter, as much as it has been, and is
capable to be wrested, is not by far at such uncertainty in it self, as ye that
Profess to be Ruled by it, and stand upon it, as your Basis, are at endless
odds and infinite uncertainty in your Conjectures and Guesses about it;
insomuch that it grieves me not a little for your sakes to see your Souls so
sunk over Head and Ears in Confusion and confused Noises about it, in which the
sweet still voice and silent whisperings of the Spirit of Christ within can
have no Audience in that crowd of Pro and Cons, that ye are cumbred with about
your very Foundation, which ye have not found yet, so as to this day to abide
fixed and firm, or to be quiet concerning it in any Academies upon earth, but in
vain Ianglings in all Corners thereof from one end of Christendom to another:
Yea, I profess in the sight of God, that in such grief and bowels I write
about it, that this Page and Passage passes not from under my Pen without being
watered with many Tears for your sakes, whom I see perishing by your own
Iuglings, unless happily ye will yet be pulled as Brands out of the fire; And
in no wise think I.O. that I am so Angry at your Folly (which the Deceit may
suggest unto you) as offended at the Enmity it self, that flies up within you,
and befools you.

And seeing that thou I.O. seems to beg, wish, and hope for such a thing
(Crying out, (...), in case of novelty of Points, and variety of Lections, as
nor seeing any means of being delivered from utter uncertainty in and about all
sacred Truth) that those who have more Wisdom, and Learning, and are able to
look throw all the Digladiations that are like to ensue on these Principles,
would nather take the pains to instruct th^e and such as thou art, then be
angry or offended with you, that ye are not so wise or learned as themselves;
And desiring such as are shaken in mind, to read the useful Miscellany Notes of
(as thou callst him) the Learned Mr. Pocock.

Reply: 1. Not as one Angry or Offended that ye are not so Wise or Learned as
my self. Nor

2. As one pretending to much of that ye call Wisdom and Learning, which lies
more in outward Tongues, Arts, or Sciences (falsely so called) then in that of
the Spirit, for want of which Peter calls men (never so wise and well Learned
otherwise) both unlearned and unstable, and (for all their buste buslings about
it) not Openers, but Wresters of the Scripture to their own ruin which shelly,
shallow Theory into things of that nature, perhaps I have forgotten more of for
the naked Gospels sake, then many of our Preachers of the Gospel for Pay ever
learned, and yet have enough left, whereby to discern many Country Teachers or
Doctors to be Dunces in it, yet what ever my measure is, more or less, further
then as an Earthly Talent, foolish Instrument, or Wooden Tool for a long time
laid aside, and here taken up again to serve the Truth with, against those that
fight therewith against Truth, its utterly lost and become dung and loss it
self to me for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ my Lord that Spirit,
in the Spirit and Truth in the inward parts: And of that aforesaid thin, foamy
Speculation, I acknowledge that many of you have not only much more, then my
long since Countrified self, but much more also then either does good, or does
you good, unless ye had more of the true Wisdom from above, whereby to use it
to a better end then ye do. Page 240. Whilst they keep the Scripture, we shall
never want Weapons out of their own Armory for their Destruction; Like the
Philistims, they carry the Weapon that will serve to cut off their own heads,
quoth I O. of the Jews, and I of himself, and his fellow Students.


Yet, 3dly. As one who have obtained so much Mercy, and Ability from God to see
throw all the Digladations that are likely to ensue on the Principles that are
now in agitation among your selves, as well as between the Quakers and your
selves, I herein take so much pains as is worth so much Patience as ye men of
War are like to have with me for so doing, and tell you in the Name and Dread
of the living God, whether ye bear or forbear; that the shakings of mind that
are among the learned Lievtenants of Antichrist at their Gates of Hell (as
honest John Hus, and learned Luthur styled the Universities) about their own
literal and fallible Foundation, will assuredly end in the final fall of it (as
a Foundation) and all the Digladiations of those swattering Swordmen, who
pretend to be fighting with the Sword of the Spirit about their supposed Sword
of the Spirit (i.e.) the bare outward Letter, which they mistake for the Word
of God, when in Reality they are at it with but the Scabbard about the
Scabbard, will end in no less then the very sheathing of the true Sword of the
spirit in the bowels of the Babel builders, that are so blindly busy about it
in their divided speeches and confounded languages, and in the bringing down
the Babel which ye all agree to build upon it, Quamvis enim ex justo Dei
Iudicio sermo eis non est unicus, imo ita sunt inter se confusi ut vix
intelligant alter sermonem alterius, tamen aedificandae turri e cujus fastigio,
fastu quodam Giganteo, signa inferant adversa lucis Perfectioni solio illi Dei
(literae scilicet) in terris suis, summa consentione una omnes incumbant; See
I.O. Ex. 3. S. 2.
whereby to overtop the light and Truth it self the Letter talks on, the fall
and coming down of which Tripple Tower of the Tripple Tribe of Levi, the Clergy
or lot (as they call themselves) of the Lords own Inheritance, has already
raised from their Thrones all the Kings of the Nations, and moved Hell from
beneath to meet them, Isa. 14.9. And what work more will attend this great
Catastrophe of that Chaos, even the Old Heaven and Earth, the worldly Rudiments
of which begin to melt, and the frail foundations thereof to shake, that they
may remove, and the New come in place, that must remain, will (as the Lord
lives) make the Ears to tingle in a little time to come, that now refuse to
hear of it from the Tongues and Pens of the Lords Prophets, to whom it is
revealed, and their minds amazed, and their Hearts shake and shiver that harden
themselves against the troublesome Testimony of it.

Wherefore, if thou art in earnest in thy Enquiry, I tell thee I.O. by way of
Answer to thy (...), that if not only thy Rich Possession (as thou stilest it)
of the Hebrew Punctation, and that non-variety, or unity, and indentity of
Lection in thy Copies, but also all the Copies of the Original that are in the
World, and Translations too, come utterly to moulder, perish, and pass away,
as the Originals themselves have long since done; yet Truth is the same that it
was before any Letter or outward Text of it was, both Quoid Essentiam, and
Quoad Explicationem also in the Hearts and Consciences of all men in a measure,
and in such a measure in the minds of such as love it, and walk in what of it
is therein by the Light and Spirit of God made manifest, that there is no such
need to them, as there is to thy self and others, who yet hate the Light, of
such piteous Outcries as thou make upon the Hypothesis aforesaid, nor of
such direful Affrightments and Amazements as over take and ^u^prize thee and
all the Hypocrites and Sinners in Sio^, whose Manition it self is now nothing
but Magor Misabib, fear round about; while theirs, who walk up ightly by the
Light, and live by i^, which leads into the substance of the Lite it self the
Letter calls for, is the Manition of Rocks, and Salvation it self, which God
appoints to them for Walls and B^^warks; yea, these dwell with that devouring
fire and everlasting burnings, which are now kindled by the Worlds wickedness,
and burning down to Hell, to the consuming the very Foundations of the Earth;
and with God himself, who is a consuming ^re to the stubble, and C^ass, and
Briars, and Thorns, that are now set against him to battle, and their daily
bread is given them, and their Waters shall be sure, so that they shall not
need with the Wicked, whose Trust is in man, upon whom the Curse of the Heat
comes, who inhabit the parched places of the Wilderness, and must not know
when the Good comes, nor taste of the streams that flow in the Desert, nor of
the Brooks, nor of the Floods of Honey and Butter, to send such hot and hasty
Hae and Cries, as thou do, after a long since lost Letter to live upon, to
see if any can tell Tidings of every Tittle, Apex, and Iota thereof, or else
all Life of Truth is lost for ever, if all these dead Things be not found,
restored, recovered and revived to that Life they never had, and Rendezvouz'd
again out of the Romish Rubbish: What shall such as follow the Lamb wheresoever
he goes, and have come throw great Tribulation with him, and washed their R^bes
white in his Blood, and been thereby Redeemed from the Earth, and Tongues, and
Kind eds thereof, and stand with him on Mount Sion, and hear his voice, as his
sheep did of Old, become such Babes and Idiots again, as to think with thee,
and thy fellow Thinkers, That all Truth's lost, if one Tittle of the Text of
your Transcripts have been s^^^t by fallible Scribes in their Transcribings of
it; and to wander over the World from Library to Library, Author to Author so
their Thoughts, from Academy to Academy with you universally betwa^ed
university Wonderers after (...), and Boys Toys, and Cou^ters, and Tags, and
Pins, and Points, and Tittles, and Iotaes, and such Rich Possessions, infinite
Inheritances, gilded Horn-book-geer, Primer Promises, Psalters, and Old
Testaments, and Bibles, and Books, which they could read as perfectly as your
selves long since, as to the literal sense thereof, which ye labor so about,
that ye have no leisure to learn and look into the Mastery of the holy matter
it self; and many more such Gay Trimmings, and Trappings wherewith (like
Children that think themselves fine when they are bestangled and hung with
Points) our Academian Adorers of the dead Corpse of their (Conceited) to a
Tittle entirely true and exactly corrected Copies, deem themselves above all
men to be Adorned? Shall we (because thou see none) see no means of being
delivered from utter uncertainty in, and about all sacred Truth it self, if the
Text, wherein its but (...), be Translated totally away, or but
mis-Transcribed, or misTranslated in some Tittles, or but taken away from the
Points, that men at several Periods have put to it?

What silly suppositions are these to you (supposed) Seers, or (deemed) true
Teachers (for shall we think our Learned Divines do not certainly Divine the
Truth? say the young Students and stupid starers upon the (...) and stones they
take Council at) who when all is done are but mere de^^^s and supposers, and
such as can Treat out no more but your thoughts about either that Sacred
Antiquity of your present Punctation, p. 211. or your so absolutely Asserted
Integrity and Identity of your naked literal Text, without any corruption of it
by any mis-transcriptions, or variety of Lections in (...), page 13.317.

Yea verily, whether we consider either one or the other of these two bottoms
that thou think all Sacred Truth and certainty of it is so founded upon,
that if they fail all falls remedilesly for ever, p. 18. Thou I. O. make no
provision for so much as the probable proof of these, but leavest them both,
notwithstanding al thy seruple about them (on the certainty of which thou
make all Truth everlastingly to depend) as uncertain at least as they were
without thy talk for them, or, if there be any alteration at all in the case of
their uncertainty, thou have by thy hosty bandling of that matter made it more
certain and out of doubt to me, then it was before, that the points are Novel,
and not Coaevous with the Consonants, and that the letter is abundantly altered
and corrupted in the very copies of the Original Text itself.

Take but a Review I.O. of some few of thy Thoughts upon these two matters, and
thou will discern, if thou be not blinded, that all the World may see thy
overlashing Positions (viz. That the points are coaevous with the first
manuscripts, and that the Text remains entirely the same in your Transcripts as
at first giving out, without any loss, alteration or corruption to a Tittle)
are supported with no more then solely thy suppositions.

CHAP. IV.
FIrst, for the Punctation, what positively thou affirmest of it in a Note
above Ela, is to be seen in thy Epist. Page 19. 20. 25. and in thy Book Page
211. 216. 220. 225. 294. and throwout the whole Four and Five Chapters of thy
Second Treatise: At present, we will see how piteously thou underproppest thy
Opinion about it with the putting in of thy mere Imaginations to other men's,
and not to say Imposing, but Opposing thy Suppositions, taken from the mere
suppositions of such Learned Authors as thou sidest with, against the (more
solidly) grounded suppositions of such as were, are, and are confessed by thy
self to be Learned, as well as they: and how thou confessest thou Answerst one
Conjecture no otherwise then with another, and standst thrusting with thy weak,
wonted Weapon of ( Shall we Think) Page 168. against others strong Arguments to
the contrary.

First, It is urged, and that with no little show of Truth, that the old Hebrew
Letters being those the Samaritan Pentateuch is written with at this day, and
that the Samaritan Letters having always been, and still being without Points,
it must follow that the Points are an Invention and Innovation of a later date
then the change of the Letters, which was not till Ezraes days, and not
Goaeuous with the first Scripture, Page 260. in which the Consequence being
undeniable, thou make bold to think the Antecedent may be false; and among a
deal more of doubtful stuff to say, that it is most uncertain when, and in what
Character the Samaritans received the Pentateuch, P. 261. and that the Letters
thereof were the Ancient Hebrew Letters: As for what Eusebius, Hierom, and some
of the Rabbis Report, it seems to thee on the best Enquiry thou art able to
make a groundless Tradition and mere sable, because though Eusebius affirmed
it was so affirmed, yet tells not on what ground; And though Hierom himself be
positive in it, yet he might be mistaken in this as well as he was in some
other things like to it, as Page 234. he saw not all things; and that the
Talmud is of no weight with thee.

Reply. What pedling Disproof is here of I.O. pushing against Two Ancient
Fathers Positions, and the Testimony of the whole Talmud of the Rabbis, with
no more then the Bean-stalk of his own Suppositions and slender Sayings, It Is
of no weight with me; It seems to me a Tradition, page 262. and, It does not
appear to me, whence this Change of Character should arise; The Jews are
thought, and said in the Captivity to have forgot their own Character, and
learned the Caldean, so as to adhere to it in their Return, but that the men of
one Age should forget the use of their own Letters is incredible.

Yet say I more then Credible; yea, certain it is, that though the Ancients
alive at the burning of the First, and building of the Second Temple, did not
likely forget their own, yet in and after the Captivity the Chaldean Character
was used, witness the Books of Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Ester, in which much is
written in Chaldee; I say then, what straw and stubble, and unsteady stuff is
all this, which our Doctoral Students in Divinity stand so upon as to stiffen
themselves by it against each other in their sturdy Disputes about their
stupidities? yet so far are solid Saints from putting any stresse, much more so
much as I.O. who states and trusts no less then whole sacred Truth thereon,
upon such Ticklish Pinnacles and Points, or from strengthening themselves in
their Faith toward God thereby, that its even a stink to them to see any so
senseless, as so to do, on either hand, Page 263.

2. The Argument for the Novelty of the Points from the Ancient Iudaical Coins
found with Samaritan Characters upon them, is refel'd with the Rush of thy own
ridiculous and reasonlesse Fancies; which since they are too frivolous to
Rehearse, I refer the Reader, that is minded to be so foolish as to follow thee
in that high Road (as thy self there callst it, and so savest me the labor of
sprinkling it into that Name) of Forgeries and Fables, in which thy self, as
well as those thy Opponents are altogether, to Page 264, 265, 266, 267. where
he may Read thee Rendering of simple Supposition against Supposition, or rather
against Position, disproving Ignotum per magis ignotum, dubium per magis
dubium, pelting back out of thy Pot-gun such brown Paper as this at the
Probable Arguments of others, (viz.) May we not think, etc. It is not
improbable that it was so old, nor is it improbable that 'twas so, etc. I
cannot think the Greeks of old used only the Vncial Letters, which yet we know
some did, etc. I shall crave leave to Answer this Conjecture with another, and
grant that such a Change was made, yet this prejudices not them in the least,
who affirm Ezra, and the men of the Great Congregation, to have been the
Authors of the Points; Nay, it casts a probability on the other hand, namely,
That Ezra laying aside the Old Letters, because of their difficulty, together
with the other introduced the Points, to facilitate their use.

And Lastly, To bring up the Reerward of thy manifold Fictions foisted out
against the urgings of that probable Proof from the Characters upon the Coins,
after thou had prosecuted them a while passim testaque lutoque, thou
Concludest thus, viz. Now let any man Judge from this heap of Uncertainties (of
which say I I.O's. there accumulated, are I know not how many, to one of the
other) any thing can arise with the face of a witness to be admitted to give
Testimony; on either hand, say I, much less on I.O's. whose own heap of
confessed uncertain Conjectures is manifold more Massy, then that of his
Antagonists, yea, as weighty as the very Wind it self.

He that will part with his Possession on such easy Terms (quoth I.O. there)
never found much benefit by it.

And, say I, He that will part with much Labor and Pains to find out the
Antiquity of this Possession of Hebrew Letters, Points and Tittles, and think
to get much benefit by purchasing it to himself therewith, as R^ch and Ancient
an Inheritance, as I. O. pretends it is, Page 252. 318. and as many Millions as
he says Page 176. looked on, and enjoyed it for many Ages as their chiefest
Treasure, Page 163. he shall assuredly have his labor for his pains.

And if I may crave leave to interpose so far as to Answer I.O's. many
uncertain Ones, with one more certain Conjecture, I tell I O. that he has
himself Conjectured away the very thing he Conjectured for, and tossed his own
Cause so long to and fro among the multitude of his uncertain Thoughts,
Conjectures, and Suppositions, till unawares to himself, in the Crowd thereof,
he has lost it altogether, and supposed it into the very bosom of his
Opponents; for if Ezra, and his Congregation were the Authors of the Points,
and introduced them (as he says the Argument from the Characters on the Coins
renders it probable that they did, Page 266, as is abovesaid) then proculdubio,
for certain and of a Truth it may both be Conjectured, and must be credibly and
infallibly believed, that they are so far from being Coaevous with the first
Manuscripts, that they were invented and introduced (though before the Tiberian
Massorites) yet after all that he owns as the Canonical Scripture of the Old
Testament was first written; and so he gives it in for granted that they are a
Novelty, and not a thing that was from the beginning of the Scripture, which is
that he is to prove, or else it comes short of his purpose, so as to add an
inch to his Arch Assertion of a non Alteration of the Text, as at first given
out in any Tittle, and so, as if he had not, in Page 211. to the contradicting
of his own mere Conjecture and Conceit of their Coaevousnesse with the
immediate Manuscripts, said thus, I no ways doubt, but as we now enjoy the
Points, we shall manifest that they were completed by Ezra and his Companions,
and so confounded himself enough; he has by this Reiteration of the same
self-confuting. Conjecture about the Points, overthrown himself as to that
Point altogether the first Writing of the Pentateuch, being by his own
Confession, Page 5. a thousand years elder then Ezra, and according to himself
all the rest both written and lost before Ezra the Scribe and his fellows
days, who he makes but the Transcribers and Restorers of them; So Page 27. out
of Azarias he ascribes the Figure and Character of the Points to Ezra, and the
restoration of their use to the Massorites; Whether then the Points be from
Ezra, or the Tiberian Massorites, is much at one to the Root and Bottom of thy
business I. O. which is to evince, that the Text stands entirely the same in
your Pointed Copies to a Tittle, without variation from what it was, when first
Written, and that the Points are Coaevou with the Scripture it self: And thou
talkst that according to the general belief of the Jews they are (if not from
Moses, yet) at least from Ezra, not denying the use and knowledge of them
received a great reviving by the Massorites, when they had been much disused,
Page 247. from which Massorites yet (for ought thou clearly, or any more but
Conjecturally, and very uncertainly makst appear to the contrary) they might as
well receive their first being, according to the Testimony of Elias Levita who
(as thy self say, Page 248.) was the most learned Grammarian of the Jews in
his Age, and Assistant to Paulus Fagius in his noble promotion of the Hebrew
Tongue; and the Testimonies of Luther, the renownedst Reformer, in his time, as
ever Europe had, and of Zainglius and others then that embraced his Opinion,
and of Capellus whom thou stilest a Learned Protestant Divine; and of that
Learned Professor, Dr. John Prideaux in his Public Lecture at the Vespers of
your own Oxonian Counitia, on that Subject; which Dr. I.P. its no disparagement
to Dr. I.O. to Confess to have been in his time far before himself, as to
School Divinity, though we know that O. stands preferred a little before P. in
the Horn-book, Page 15, 16, 17, 18 of thy Epist.

And to Capellus his Argument that ' it was likely. Elias spoke on Principles of
Conviction of Truth, because against the common interest of all his People,
which seems to have weight in it, how pedlingly thou Replyest and Pelletest out
thy Putations to the contrary, Page 248, 249, 250. a very Boy may behold; the
most material of which is this, viz. That the Testimony of this one Elias
should be able to outweigh the constant Attestation of all the learned Jews
to the contrary, as Capellus pleads, and as is insinuated in that Prolegomena
is fond to imagine; To which I say, Why so? Elias thou Confessest to Assert
what he did in such honestly, as not in way of sleighting the Points, nor the
Scripture, any more then if they had been the Work of Ezra, from whose days,
and no higher, thou derivest their Pedigree (but since thou can not do it from
Moses, thy Antiquity is but Novelty with us) So, why may not the Testimony of
one learned and honest Elias now outweigh the Testimony of many Jews, now
(whose general Testimony thou sleightest, and them too, as wicked, when they
speak against thee) as well as the Testimony of one Elias of old out-weighed
that of 950 of the Prophets of Boal, and the Groves, 1 King, 18?

Thirdly, And as to the Argument from the Jews keeping a Copy without Points,
which they adore in their Synagogues, thereby little less then implying the
Points to be of man, and not of Divine Original; Which Argument is of weight,
for, if the Letters were the Word, and the Points with them a part, of as
Divine Original as the rest, they durst not diminish ought, much less so great
a part as the Points, knowing the Curse denounced in it against all detracters
from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. This thou resellest as falsely, and self-confutingly as the
rest, saying, Page 267, 268, 269.

1. Its the constant Opinion and persuasion of them all (Elias only excepted)
that they are of divine Extract.

Reply. Which if it were as certain to thee, as it but seems so, on the
Conjectures of such, as thou sidest and consultest with; yet Elias (ur prius)
might be right, and they all wrong, being all under the Curse, as well as some,
so that their Testimony about Scripture, though they have it among them, is no
more to be heeded with thee, where it makes against thee (and why it should be
more when it makes for thee, a reasonable man cannot see) then Aesops Fables, as
to the use of the whole Talmud of the Robbins in Christian Religion, Page 236.
240.

2. To let pass the rest as pedling, thou tellest that and the Reason why the
Jews (who have, for ought I find, more Books without then with Points) have
their Canon and Standard without them, is (as they allege) the difficulty of
Transcribing Copies without any failing, the least rendering the whole Book, as
to its use, in their Synagogues, profane.

Reply. To which say I, If it be so difficult, then how dare thou date so
deeply as thou do on the unquestionablenesse of the Transcripts of the Bible
with Points being as entire to a Tittle as the first? This is ( ad hominem)
enough to confute thy own vain Confidences about the non-corruption of the Text
throw all Ages to this day.

And again, Because the least failing renders their Standard profane,
therefore they will make their Standard of such a Copy, as shall fail altogether,
as to the Points, as divinely Essential a part with them ( secundum te) as the
very Consonants themselves: Credat Appella: he that believes not that
Conjecture about the Scripture, shall never come into Condemnation (as I.O.
talks some shall for not owning the whole Letter and its Tittles as the Word of
God) for his damnable unbelief, I dare assure him.

3. That the Jews end seems to be this in not Pointing their standing Copies,
viz. That none be admitted to read or sing the Law in their Synagogues until he
be so perfect in it, as to be able to observe all Points and Accents in a Book
where there are none of them.

Reply. Which is another Whimzy of thy own brain, for I have often seen and
heard their Service Read and Sung in their Synagogues by young Boys, as the
mouth of the whole body of 7 or 8 years of Age or little more, however at utter
incapacity to observe all Points so exactly as thou speakst of, where there are
none.

And to the rest of thy Answers throw that whole Chapter to the other Arguments
against the Coavousnesse or Connaturalnesse of the Points, from Elias his
Testimony, the Talmuds silence about the Points, the Keri and Ketib, from the
number of Points and vowels, beyond that of differences of the sounds assigned
to them, the Ancients silence about their Use among the Hebrews, which are
cogent enough to any but such as thy self, who buildst all sacred Truth upon
the uncertain bottom of these Apices and Points, and thereupon are foolishly
afraid, that all the Word of God must go out of the World, if thy Fancies about
them be not owned, See Page 314. The Distemper pretended that there are
corruptions he allen the Text by varieties from the (...), is dreadful, and
such as it may well prove mortal to the sacred Truth of Scripture.
they are made up of such a dirty deal of Tittle Tattle and frivolous
fabulosity, that as very a fool as I have become for thy sake and the Truths,
to meddle so much with these immaterialities, and rake so far as I have done
into this Pudle of thy Pedantick Prate for thy so highly-prized Points, yet (as
thou, p. 32.) I shall forbear, having better accounts to give of my time and
hours, then to be mad in that manner, and shall insanire cum ratione; and
though I have turned my self a while with thee to behold, and take a view of
some of thy madness and folly, yet I shall wade no farther after thee into any
more particular Consideration of thy many vanities in that Chapter, but after a
while return to things of more worth among wise men, telling thee this for
Truth I. O. That the dark and dismal Dreamings of thy ( selfdevised) Dangers
hanging over the head of all Sacred Truth, to the making Havoc thereof, which
have entered and centered themselves in thy Imaginatory mind, and of that
mischief which thou conceivest will accrue to your carnal, Clerical
C^n^e^nments and earthly Interests, Honors, Profits, and Preferments, in case
the Scripture and its Transcripts and Tittles, which is the Commodity ye mainly
Trade in, be not kept up in that over-high Account it has been in, in times of
Ignorance, and thereby poor People kept still in Dependence on your University
Doctorships, under blind Conceits, that they cannot learn the Mind of God but
by your Expositions, page 268. And that great Uncertainty which thou (not
seeing yet thy self, but jeering, as Doctorem infallibilem, the only true
infallible Doctor or Teacher, the Light and Spirit of God within) see and
confessest, page 292. ye shall be left unto in all your Translations and
Expositions of the Scripture, without the owning of these Points to be of
divine Original; and thy knowing that ye must, to the shame of your selves, and
the shaking of your kingdom in the very Foundation thereof, confess and grant,
as ye are loath to do, which yet is no more then the Truth, viz. That if the
Points be but Novel your (professedly) incorrupt Copies are not a little
corrupted and different from what the first Originals were, throw the failings
of Transcribers, and so, failing in your (falsely so called) foundation, must be
forced to begin again, and lay the true one with the Quakers, which is that of
Christ himself, the Light, which rather then do, since you have so much
persecuted and disowned them, ye will rake your brains to the bottom to find
something to say against the Truth, which is so tedious; This is the grand
Cause and whole profound mystery of this Business of thy busy busling and
brawling so much for the necessity of the Points being owned, as of so high an
Original, which else there is no necessity at all of owning either at all as of
such importance as thou pleadest, or any otherwise then as the mere handi-work
of Man.

Having therefore given this taste of the fallibility of thy flashy shallow
Shufflings off what is more warrantably and weightily urged against the
pretended Antiquity of the Hebrew Punctation as Coavous with the Scripture and
Connatural with that Language, I shall here Glean up some other scambling
sayings of thine about the Points, from several Quarters of thy Book, worth
heeding upon no other account then the crudity, absurdity, and Ridiculousnesse
of them, and make some Miscellany Replies to, and Notes upon them, that I may
rid my hands as fast as I can of that rusty stuff and moldy matter, now I am
upon it, wholly, and not have occasion to handle it much more in other places.

I. O. Thou say, page 252. That it is not thy design to give in Arguments
for the Divine Original of the present Hebrew Punctation, neither do thou
judge it necessary so to do, while Buxtorf about that lies unanswered.

Reply. Then (I say) thou have hung thy Reader up in the Air, and there left
him among Gapes and Stares; for page 153. thou pretendest to plead and
undertake to vindicate the Letter to be as it was given out, and handed to us
without alteration, which put me into an expectation of something of that
nature, but parturiunt montes, etc. A long-Tays'd-Tale runs out of a great
mountain of Talk for many pages together, to prove the wickedness of the
Massorites, on whom the points are fathered, which is all of it (as thou
Confessest of some part of it, nothing at all to thy purpose, page 235.) but
neither one Tittle of so much as a Topical Argument to clear the business, nor
a nomination of one out of Buxtorf: But Nil dat quod in se non babet, had
thou had any to produce, it had been more useful then all thy babbling, to
evidence the inalterablnesse of the Bible, which was thy business to prove,
and is so necessary that none but fools will by thy flood of Words be
flim-flam'd into thy Faith, without such Arguments to evince the Truth on it in
that point, which thou are never able to urge in proof of it: Howbeit Two
Considerations thou addest at the end of that Chapter of thy Second Treatise,
wherein thou treatest of this Point of the Hebrew Points, as of weight to thee
[to add weight to all that light, scanty-measured matter, that went before]
propounded in such an indigested, mangled, hampered, tediously tangled manner,
that he must be wiser then I, that can well tell what to make of them, or find
in them so much as Top or Bottom, or plain Premises, or clear Consequence, or
any kind of Conclusion at all save that they are the Conclusion of that
Chapter; So that though there is a talk in them of Grammar and Rules of Art, and
the world of Points not coming together by chance, and of the Chaldee
Peraphrast, and many more matters, yet they seem to me to be a couple of
confused Chaosses, that came to pass more by chance then by any Rules of Art,
and a world created by a casual concurrence of Antic Attomes, more then any
wisdom of either God or Man Consisting of the Circumference of no less then
wel-nigh 7 pages together; I shall therefore, rather then puzzle my self in
prying too much into such an orderlesse, boundless piece of Prate as that is,
keep what I know of it within my own bowels, and not send out an Answer to I
know not what, and to that which ends I know not where, and runs I know not
whither, taking the Council of the Poet, who said, Ne immittas pecus tuum in
pratum ubi non est sepes:

I. O. Thou say, Epist. page 19, 20. That thou dare not mention the
desperate Consequences of that Opinion concerning the Novelty of the Hebrew
Punctation, being affrighted among other things, by a little Treatise lately
sent thee, wherein the Author who-ever he is, from some Principles of this
nature, and unwary Expressions of some learned men among you, labors to eject
and cast out, as use'esse, the who e Scripture, or Word of God.

Reply. Which Scripture, say I, had it never been, nor were it more to be (as
it must moulder once, though, as I told thee above, I am free it should stand
its time, for such service, as to cast out such men, as useless, that have cast
off the Light and Spirit) yet is the Word of God as useful still as 'twas
before, and ever will be; being that by which all is upheld for ever, when the
Scripture, that yet testifies of it, shall moulder and come to naught, as thy
scribbling Scripture, that testifies to that more holy Scripture shall do; And
as for thy frights I cannot blame thee for crying out, (...), when thou see
thy Foundation sink, and fail, and crack under thee, which is but a fallible
Letter, a Sandy Seat, a brittle Bottom; but such as stand on the Rock of Ages,
which the Scripture witnesses to, will stand in the approaching storms, wherein
thou and all thine will fall, Mat. 7. And some see the end of that, thou
know not the Mystery of.

I. O. That had that Leprosy or Opinion about corruption of Scripture,
undermining the Authority of the Hebrew verity, kept it self within that House
(i.e.) the Synagogue of Rome, which is throwly infected, it had been of less
importance, it is but a farther preparation of it for the fire, but it is now
by the subtilty of Satan crept in, and broke forth amongst Protestants also,
with what design, to what end and purpose thou know not, (...) and the day
will declare it, Epist. page 13, 14, 27.

Reply. Yea, and does declare it to many already, though ye that are of the
Night and darkness, where nothing but Error and Terror is, see no Truth, and
are afraid of your own Shadows, and in the guilt of your guilful gailed
Consciences and benighted minds, fear what it will grow to, and what mischiefs
and inconveniences will ensue on searching too critically, too near into your
own Rule of Scripture; but though ye ^ommend (as thou do, Epist. page 20.)
the knowledge of the Tongues, and the use of that knowledge in Critical
Observations, and that Study and Employmen^ as unexpressibly, advantageous and
helpful in Explanations of sundry difficulties, yet feeling your own and your
fellows mind (measuring others each by himself) to be exceedingly vainglorious
curious uncertain after a door of Reputation and Renown is once opened, as
ready quickly to spread over all bounds and limits of sobriety; ye are
afrighted to think what will now come on it to have learned men exercise their
Critical Abilities about the Scripture, for fear they find your Foundation
faulty and fallible, and full of flawes, and so had rather believe it to be
sound at a venture, seeing ye know no better to stand on, then to have it
sounded, and found to be so unsound as it is, Epist. page 20, 21.

J. O. That it is not imaginable, what prejudice the Sacred Truth of the
Scripture.

Reply. The Truth told in it, I tell thee, is the same for ever, and cannot be
changed let the Scripture become what it will, and suffer the loss of its
whole self.

J. O. Preserved by the infinite Care and Love of God, has suffered already
hereby.

Reply. And (as if not enough) thou teach Critics and tellest ways to make
others Critics that never meant it, whereby instead of thy helping hand (such
is thy Wisdom in the handling thy own business, like an ill Bird that bewrayes
his own Nest) to Recover it, its likely to suffer more.

J. O. What it may further suffer for thy part, thou can not but tremble to
think.

Reply. Yet to be sure it suffers nere the less, but rather much more for
thee; and though thou art not more afraid then hurt, yet some are not afraid,
nor hurt, who dwell higher then thou do, whose place is the munition of
Rocks, who see the end of that which seems a terrible gulf and praecipice to
thee, viz. That when Thieves fall out, true men will come by their Good, and
all things by their proper Names and Nature.

I. O. Thou say, Epist. 25. That thou ca^^^ not but tremble to think what
would be the issue of such a Supposition, that the Points, Vowels and Accents
are no better guides to us then may be expected from those who are pretended to
be their Authors, page 220.

Reply. Therefore the best way is, to suppose nothing at all about them, it
matters not much whence they come, there they now are; and thy carking will not
prove them to be of these men, or those, Novel or Ancient; and then all thy
often tremblings about that Toy will be taken away: Nevertheless, whether thou
leave, or cleave to them, its much at one to thee, tremble thou must at the
true Word of God when all is done first or last, what ere becomes of the
Scripture of it.

I. O. That lay but these Two Principles together, namely, That the Points are
a late Invention of the Jewish Rabbis (on which account it; confessed there is no
reason we should be bound to them) and that its lawful to gather together
various Lections by the help of Translations, thou must needs cry out (...)
Where shall I stand? as not seeing any means of being delivered from utter
uncertainty in and about all Sacred Truth, page 25.

Reply As if the Light and Spirit were lost, and all Certainty lost if the
Letter be; and all I O's. rich Possession perished, if Points fail: And yet
what uncertainty soever ye come to thereby, certain enough 'us, that there are
various Lections, and of the two, for ought thou make appear to the contrary,
it is more certain that the Points were an Innovation and Invention, and not
from the beginning of the Writing, then otherwise; and as certain it is that
I.O. himself, if he could see it, or would confess what he confesses, does
little less then confess it so to be, while he can say no more but that As he
shall not oppose them who maintain them Coaevous with the Letters, which are
not a few of the most learned Jews and Christians (against not a few learned
Jews and Christians by I.O's. Confession ( viz) Elias Levita, of whom he
testifies, page 284. That he was the most learned Grammarian of the Jews in
his Age, Assistant to Paulus Fagius in his noble Promotion of the Hebrew
Tongue; Capellus, whom he calls a learned man and a Protestant; Io. Prideaux
who is before I.O. Luther the renownedst Reformer in his time, as ever Europe
had; Zwinglius and others) So he no way doubts but that as we enjoy them they
were Completed no higher upwards then Esdras his time, by the men of the Great
Congregation, guided by the infallible direction of the Spirit of God, which
was after all the Old Testament was written, and a thousand years after some of
it; and so, page 211. 220. See also page 247. 259. where he says, The Jews
generally believe the Points as Old as from Moses on Mount Sinai, or at least
(quoth he) from Ezra ( so he is in doubts) not denying but that they, as to
their knowledge and use, received a great Reviving by the Massorites, and
Gemarists.

I. O. That the Word of God (i.e.) Scripture has been hitherto (...), as to
its litteral sense, and reading, the acknowledged Touchstone of all
Expositions; render this now (...), and what have we remaining firm and
unshaken? page 219. See more page 217. 218. of Uncertainty.

Reply. The Light, Spirit, Word it self, and the Kingdom and things thereof,
which cannot be shaken, but must remain when the worldly kingdom of worldly
Priests, and their Foundation, and their rich Possession of Letter and Hebrew
Points, and all their Religion, Faith, Worship, House, Bottom, and whole
Building and Fabric that stands thereon, and the old Heaven and Earth and all
the Works of man that are therein, and their Writings, and Tomes and Talmuds,
etc. ut alibi, and such like (in which I O. is exercised in his Second Tale of
a Tub) and Sea and Land, and all Nations, Formalists, and their Forms,
Professors, and their Professions, Doctors in Divinity, and their false Dreams
and Divinations, and not only Popes, Cardinals, Mount-Seniors, Monks, Friars,
Jesuits, and all that Rabble of Rabbis, and Deans, and Chapters,
Archbishops, Deacons, Deans and their Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and
all manner of spiritual Persons of that spawn; but also all sorts of those
narrow mouthed Bottles, that have none of the new Wine in them, and are as long
in letting out, as in getting in what they have of their old Wisdom, as well
within University Liberties as without, and all Masters, and Prebends, and
Deans of Colleges, and their Christ's Churches, and all their beggarly Elements
must be on fire about their ears, and melt away with fervent heat, and be burnt
up and shaken down, as leaves from the Fig Tree, by the mighty Wind of the
Lords Spirit, that now blows upon all flesh, that it withers, and is as the
Grass and its Flower, and utterly like a Cottage, which after much reeling to
and fro, must be removed for ever, and for ever.

I.O. Thou say, page 221. That thou had rather all the Works like to the
Biblia Polyglotta, which yet thou acknowledgest the great usefulness of, and
art Thankful (Owen) for it, were out of the World, then that this one Opinion
of the Novelty of the Hebrew Points, espoused to that great work, Epist. page
17, 18, 19. should be received with the Consequences that unavoidably attend it.

Reply. The Consequences that unavoidably attend the receiving of Truth are
dangerous to thee, but of no other then good concernment to such as dwell not
in the Scriptural Skirts and mere literal Suburbs of it (as thou do, who
being without the Salvation it self, which God appoints to his for Walls and
Bulwarks, startest at the news of every storm and the shaking of every Leaf)
but in the holy City, and in the substance of the Truth it self: The Cup of
trembling must be taken out of their hands, and put into the hands of thee and
thine, that have hated and afflicted them, and Rid over them, and said, Bow
down thy back that we may go over, and they have laid their backs as the street
for you, while in your wrath and fury you have passed over them.

I. O. Thou say, page 216. That by this conceit of the Novelty of the Hebrew
Punctation, the Adversaries Hope with Abimilecks Servants, to stop the the
Wells, or Fountains, from whence ye should Draw your Souls Refreshments.

Reply. Poor Souls, Poor Wells and Fountains, Poor Refreshments, if ye go down
no deeper then the Letters to draw your Water; for they are but the broken
Cisterns which ye follow, and that with the tottered Buckets of your own
Brains, that hold not the water of Life: The Letter does but declare of the
fountain of living waters, which ye have forsaken, viz. God himself, Christ,
and the Spirit, the fountain (shut up and sealed to you yet indeed, Cant. 4.
12. but) set open to the House of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for
sin and uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1. The Well of Salvation, out of which they
that inhabit Sion, in the midst of whom the holy One of Israel is now great, do
with joy draw Water, out of whose bellyes flow Rivers of Living Waters, which
it is out of the Reach, and past the Strength of the Philistims to stop any
longer, for there is now Rehoboth, or room, yea, the Water thence given, whilst
your Euphrates is drying up, is as a Well of Water springing up in them to
eternal Life.

I.O. That give this liberty to the audacious Curiosity of men priding
themselves in their Critical Abilities, and we shall quickly find out what
woeful state and condition the Truth of the Scripture will be brought unto; and
if hundreds of words were (as it is said by Capellins) the Critical Conjectures
of the Jews, what security have we of the Mind of God, as truly represented to
us? seeing that its supposed, that some of the Words in the Margent were
sometimes in the Line; and if it he supposed as it is, that there are
innumerabl^ other Places of the like nature standing in need of amendments,
what a door would be opened unto curious Pragratical Wits to overturn all the
certainty of the Truth of the Scripture, every one may see, page 308.

Reply. Every one may see therefore what Certainty and Security ye are in while
ye stand on no bottom but a broken Letter: And how will thou help the case with
all thy prate, or hinder Pragmatical Wits from using their Critical Abilities
that way? Who shall ponere obicem, put a stop to them, and impose upon all
others his Thoughts, that things are so or so? Shall I.O. who in so many places
Confesses he gives men but his Thoughts? nay, does nos I.O. Confess, page 217,
218. that none must give a Rule to the rest? the door is opened man, and thou
can not shut it, even an effectual door for the Sheep to enter the fold by,
even him, who is the Light as well as the Door, opened, whereby to see into the
uncertainty of your torter'd Transcripts, much more, ten fold more totterred
and untrue Translations, much more, twenty fold more to and fro Expositions, so
that though Truth is where it was before the Letter was among them that love
it, and security and certainty no where but there, where it is only, and ever
was and will be ( viz.) in the Light, and Spirit, and among the livers there,
but not among the Talkers of it, that are Livers and Walkers after the flesh.

I O. Thou say, page 294. That let the Points be taken out of the way, and
let men lay aside that advantage they have from them, and it will quickly
appear what devious ways all sorts of such Persons will run, scarce a Chapter
or a Verse it may be, or a Word, nor a Line would be left free from Perplexing
contradicting Conjectures, the words being altogether innumerable whose
significations may be varied by an Arbitrary supplying of the Points (for who
shall give a Rule to the rest?) what end of fruitless Contests, what various
and pernicious Senses to contend about? yea, to expect Agreement is fond and
foolish, and this gives but an humane fallible persuasion that the Readings
fixed on by each is according to the mind of God: Besides, who shall secure us
against the Luxurant Spirits of these days, who are bold on all advantages,
(...), to break in upon every thing that's Holy and Sacred, that they will not
by their Huckstering utterly corrupt the Word of God? (i.e.) Scripture: how
easy is it to see the dangerous Consequents of contending for various Lections?

Reply. Is your Word of God possible to be utterly corrupted? ours is not; Is
your Foundation, Rule, etc. so rotten, such a Nose of Wax? how easy is it then
to sore-see that it must melt before the fire of the Spirit? And of what
dangerous Consequence is it for you to stand on no surer ground, then that
which is so easy to be changed? for does thy Perplexing Prate make it the
less alterable, or free it from men's Perplexing contradicting Conjectures,
while thou objects but thy Conjectures to theirs, none of which must Rule the
roast, or be a Rule to the rest? and does your Interpretation, which is
variable both Rerum and Verborum, were your Transcripts never so steady, give
any more then mere fallible persuasion that your Readings and Sense, which is
all the People have, is right? Ah poor men, who labor in the fire, and weary
your selves for very vanity in screel-scrawls about your Scripture, while by
the Spirit the Earth is filling with the knowledge of Gods Glory, without such
absolute necessity of the Letter, as the Waters cover the Sea.

I. O. Thou say, page 211. That the Points are of importance to the right
understanding of the Word of God.

Reply. Ah poor People, as well as poor Priests too, if it be so, not one among
a thousand of the one, nor one among twenty of the other, being capable to read
Hebrew either with Pricks or without; I trow, which way must these come to the
understanding of Gods Word? from the Rabbis mouths, or Gods own? For my part I
am far from believing such necessity of Points to understand Scripture by
(seeing it is, as to the Substantials of saving Truth, rendered pretty well into
plain English, that poor people that with honest hearts read it, may see how to
be honest) much more to understand the Word of God it self, which is not the
Scripture, which yet I. O. intends by that term of the Word: But on that which
is uttered in every heart from his own mouth, out of which Wisdom it self
says, Prove. 2. there comes Knowledge, Wisdom, and Understanding, there shall I
wait with thousands more that are there waiting, and no^ upon the Dreaming
Doctors, while they divine out their mere Dreams, Thoughts, and Opinions about
their Po^nts and Puncta^ions; Besides, Riddle me this I.O. if thou can,
Whether the Scripture were never rightly read, nor understood by Holy men, that
did read it in the Spirit without Points before Ezraes days? from which only
thou traducest thine own Orignal of the Points, which thou make of such
importance to a right understanding of the Scriptures.

I.O. Thou say, page 252. That to be driven out of such a Rich Possession as
the Hebrew Punctation upon mere Conjectures and Surmises, thou can not
willingly give way nor Consent.

Reply Poor man! Is that thy rich Possession, that so much benefit comes by as
thou say, page 267? the chiefest Treasure the Church of God has for many
years enjoyed? as thou say, page 163. the Inheritance which (even every
Tittle and Letter of which, as thou say, page 176.) many Millions have
looked on, as Theirs, with such high account, that for the whole World ^ther
would not be deprived of it? Do the Riches, the Ornaments, the Excellencies,
the Enjoyments, which thou art so extraordinarily afraid to be Kobbed, Spoiled,
Plundered, Driven out, Deprived of, that your Consolation seems so much to
consist in, that who so does, not so much as totally bereave you of, or
nullify, but only under-value, so as barely to Novellifie and deny the
Antiquity and Necessity thereof, does no less then utterly stop the very Wells
and Fountains from whence ye should draw all your Souls refreshment, as thou
say, page 216. Do they, I say, stand in such Counters and Pins, and Pins
heads, and Points, and Point Tags, and Childish Toys and Trash as these?
Indeed, when I was a Chi^d. I did as a Child, thought as a Child, spoke as a
Child, understood as a Child; but when I became a Man, I put away these
Childish things; which yet University Doctors are very deeply doting on to this
day: Like Boys, that ly brawling about Bawbles, which they prize above, and
will not part with for far more serious and precious matters; blessing
themselves more in a Bag of Cherry-stones, and fearing more to lose, and caring
to keep them, then wise men do theirs, whose Riches lies in that which cannot be
lost; So does I.O. busy himself with fear and much trembling about these
perishing Points, Vowels, Accents, about his Cametz's and Patack's, Tsere's and
Segols, Chiricks and Cholems, Sheva's and Sciurech's, Athnach's, Kibbutz's and
Cametz Catuph's, hoping he is rich and increased with Goods, and has need of
nothing while he enjoyes them, thinking within himself, -- Populus me sibilet
at mihi plaudo,
Ipse domi simulac numinos contemplor in arca;
Not knowing, that for all this, being out of, and against the true Light, he
is poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked; whose Poverty I
pity more, then I prize such uncertain Riches, of which I may say as the Poet;
Formidare malos fures, incendia, servos,
Ne se compilent fugientes, hoc Iuvat? Horum
Semper Ego optarim pauterrimus esse bonorum.


Howbeit I.O. Possession being eleven points of the twelve, that thou will not
part with it willingly I cannot much blame thee, considering how it is with thee
upon thy Principles; it is a rich Possession indeed in one sense, as poor as
it is in another; for by that, and your (as costly, as cloudy) Interpretations
of the Letter, which thou say fails, if that be not upheld in an Antiquity
as Ancient as the Letter, ye have your Wealth, making a Trade out of it; yea,
your whole Kingdom of Heaven here on Earth, and your Dominion, Dignity, Glory
and Authority, and all ye are worth stands upon these ticklish Points, so that
take them away, and (in thy conceit at least) ye know not whither ye sink, down
ye drop, and must be fain to go a begging to the Quakers, (...)? Tell me where
I shall stand; Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone ^ut; let your Light
and Sun shine on us, for our Candle is gone out in obscure darkness, we have
wearied our selves in the greatness of our way, in the multitude o^ our
Thoughts, in the infiniteness of our Imaginations, to hold up our Forms, and
Professions, and Faith, and Christian Religion, and Righteousness, and Life,
and all by the Letter, counting your Lives madness, and your End without
honor, that talk of A Light within, but now we see it is we were the fools, and
blind, and the madmen, and the poor and deluded ones, and deluders of each
other, and of other People as well as our selves, who have hung all their Faith
upon our Fancies about the Letter, upon ou^ high Conceits about our Copies and
Transcripts, which we deemed infallibly to be the infallible Word of God, when
all Translations (which is all they have, that know not G^eek and Hebrew, to
trust to, unless they take our words) are untrusty and untrue, and a Nose of
Wax, which men have made to stand which way they pleased, and no stable,
steadfast, firm Foundation; And the Light of the true Righteousness has not
risen upon us.

I. O. Thou say, page 220. That thou can not but tremble to think what
would be the issue of this Supposition, that the Points, Vowels, and Accents,
are no better guides unto you, then may be expected from those, who are
pre^ended to be their Authors.

Reply. I t^ought ye had not been Quakers, but against Trembling and Quaking,
because ye jeer at it so in the Quakers, who profess and pretend to Trembling
at nothing but at the Word of God it self; but I see ye are Trembling at
smaller Matters out of the sense of the loss of Toys and Trifles; now the day
of Jacobs trouble and trembling begins to pass over, and he to be saved out of
it, Trembling it seems begins to take hold on the House of Esau, who must
assuredly come into it in his stead; and that with a witness, and to some
purpose, when they who yet stop the ear shall hear the Word of God, who is the
Strength and Salvation of his People, roaring out of Zion, and as a Lion
uttering his voice from Ierusa^em to the shaking of the Heavens and the Earth,
and not be able to flee out of the reach or sound of the terrible roaring
thereof.

2. Do you expect such eminent guidance as ye here seem to do from these
pidling Pricks and Points into the Kingdom of God, and Salvation, so that the
Terrors of Hell take hold on you at the very time and thought of the loss of
no more, then that mere imagined Antiquity and pretended divine original of
them from mount Sinai, that some fillily ascribe unto them? Suppose ye could
prove them to be derived from Mount Sinai (which is that, where there were
Quakings, and Tremblings, and Blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest) will they
lead, guide, and conduct you from Condemnation to the safety, rest,
refreshment, and consolations of them that are come to dwell on Mount Sion? Ah
miserably bem^ped men, and benighted Ministers! It grieves me to see how poor
People wait upon you for guidance, who are groaping up and down for the Wall
your selves, like such as have no eyes, after such small Apices and
Scintillula's, indiscernable, and incomprehensible Attomes as these, which are
of such infinite variety, vanity, and uncertainty, that it is as profitable,
Capere muscas, to catch Flies, and sit and peel strawes, as to spend time to
find out either their Authors, or Differences, or Services, or Uses. For so
verily are the Hebrew Accents, as useless as numberless in their Offices;
insomuch that the Learned Christian Ravis of Berlin, Professor of the Oriental
Languages, does in his Grammar not only utterly deny them (as others do) to be
Coaevou^ with the Consonants, or to be written by Moses, but also not to be so
ill handled by the Authors, who ere they were, as to cast so many unnecessary,
idle, unreasonable, superfluous, useless Fancies upon them, as our Doters on
them do now a days.

I Confess (quoth he) we cannot set down the Time, Place, Method, Authors, and
Crooked knots, punctually, which were never set down; but it is as old to have
Bibles without Points, as with them.

They are not the same in Hebrew, Samaritan, Chaldee, Syriack, Arabi^
Aethiopick.

The Graecians at first were content with a, e, o, for vowels.

Persians, Turks, Tartars, Mogul great and little, and Malay, could be content
to this day without Pricks instead of vowels.

What think you then (quoth he) was there a Curse of God upon the Jews and all
the Prophets, that they nor could nor would understand the Writings one of
another, without so many superfluities? And what a Malediction will you cast
(quoth he) upon Gods Word, that when many Hundreds can understand (and that
without any Haesitation at all) thousands of other Books without these P^icks,
they should not be able to understand Gods Book, without such ado?

If that Infinity of Pricking and Stroking every Line and Letter, were in the
Bible, were it not the greatest injury that could be done to it, to have it
once Printed without them?

How would the JEWS dare to Offer such Sacrilege so Inexpressible?

Must the JEWS find out an easier way then GOD himself, to leave out Pricks?

What an absurdity is in all the Accents, not one excepted? Athnack stands in
an hundred places as a Boy or Servant?

Truly I pity (quoth he) all those Great Men that are become Boys and
Children, playing thus for the Vowels, Accents, and Diacritical Notes, that
they Write whole Books about Fancies and Childish-stuff, given over to
Reprobate minds, and without the B^essing of God.

The Pricks added to the Consonants are various, according to the Fancies of
the Inventors in various Countries of the Orient; in Hebrew, Chaldee, Arabic
and Aethiopick are there naturally none, because superfluous.

The Strokes and Pricks are not of the Essence of this Tongue, therefore only
in the Bible, and are set to the Bible without necessity.

Only I wished that the Vowels and Sheva's (quoth he) had no greater Credit
then the Accents have, which by the most learned in Europe for almost 150
years, were still left out, and not cared for, even by them that Translated the
Hebrew Bible; nor can I well blame them, as if they had mightily mistaken in
the Translation, because of the ignorance of these Accents, as if only by their
Order the true Connection and Distinction of Senses could be had.

Therefore let no English Man (quoth he) think he has not learned the Hebrew
Tongue How contrary is this to J O. pa. 294. who says, Nor let men please
themselves with the pretended facility of Learning the Hebrew Language without
Points and Accents, and not the Language only, but the true and proper Reading
the distinction of it in the Bible.
if he know not these Accents, and the infinity of work in them, but rather
with me pity the pains of those painful Germans and Scots upon such rotten
Principles, and learn hereafter of them, to labor upon a sure ground, or to
think that God has laid a Curse upon his labor, Sysiphi Saxum, a stone that
will give him an endless and unprofitable Work; and I wish this painful man,
and Buxtorf, and all those that are so busy about the Pricks ( and will not
believe that excellently and exceedingly learned Author Capellus, French
Professor at Lamar in his Arcanum Punctorum Revelatum, Printed in the Oriental
Printing House, his own at Leyden, 1625.) that they may bestow their pains upon
^etter work then about these Trifl^s of the Points, and the Samaritick Letters,
if they or those wherewith the Bible is now Printed be the true old Hebrew
Character, when as both are of the same Essence, and one no more true then the
other; all that can be said for Accents, is that one Accent may do the
business* lifting up the syllable where it is: They are unreasonably, and
without sense, called Grammatical and Rhetorical, for Rhetoric speaks not of
Accents. And much more from page 172. to page 174.

Alas poor Souls, have ye no better Guides then Points, Vowels, Accents, no
marvel ye have been no better then blind Guides to the Blind, who are no better
guided your selves into the whole sacred Truth, and secret Council of God, then
by such dimunitive twinkling sparks as these, that ye have kindled, and
compast your selves about with, and walk by the Light of, which are so far from
rendering other things discernable, that ye cannot yet distinctly discern
either what or where they are your selves. Do ye expeand infallible direction
from such a Will-with-a-wisp, or Walking Fire, that leads you into such Brakes
of Contention, and Bogs of Uncertainty, that ye are fain to Confess ye know
not well where ye are, but in a Wood, in a way and business wherein all things
are carried to and fro by utter uncerta^n Conjectures, page 330. while ^e are
beating your selves about after it, and beating one another about it? I tremble
to think what will become of you indeed, and what will be the issue of this
Supposition, that Letters, and Tittles, and (...), that ye are tattling
endlesly about, and Points, and Vowels, and Accents, and such Accidental
Attomes, as are not Essential to the Text, much less pertaining de esse to the
holy Truth, should be for Guides. But, in general, this I know, that till ye
come to the infallible Spirit and Light within that leads (if your Letter lie
not) into all Truth such as follow it, whether they be such as have skill in
your Points Vowels, and Accents, yea or no; ye may walk on in the Light of your
own fire, and the sparks that ye have kindled; but this you must expect at last
from the Lords own hand to lie down in shaking, shame, and sorrow.

One thing more I.O. and more remarkable then the rest of thy confused and
pedling Work about these Points, is the flat Contradicton that thou give to
thy self herein, as well as often in many more Points, and that thy own sayings
concerning them in some places give to what thou utterest of them in some
other, which I shall here set before thee and the World, as it lies in thy own
words, that thou may see how rawly thou runnest forth in have to render thy
self ridiculous to all men by thy indigested doings, in which thou art justly
left of the Lord, to run in rounds, for thy malicious medlings against his
people.

Page 217. Speaking against the asserted Novelty of the Hebrew Points, Vowels,
and Accents, thou writest thus,

J. O. I shall manifest it is fit they should be all taken out of the way, if
they have the Original assigned to them by the Prolegomena.

Reply. Yet two Leaves after ( viz.) page 221. (to go round again) thou writest
thus, Grant the Points to have the Original pretended, yet they deserve all
Regard and are of singular use for the understanding of the Scripture, so that
it is not lawful to depart from them without urgent necessity.

And yet (to go round again) page 244: thou writest Semi-diametrically
Oppositive, thu^f I must crave liberty to profess, That if I could be throwly
convinced that the present Punctation were the Figment and Invention of these
men, I should labor to the utmost, to have it utterly taken away out of the
Bible, n^r should I in its present station make use of it any more: To have it
placed in the Bible, as so great a part of (Secundum Te) the Word of God, is
not tolerable.

Here Is a pretty Triangular piece of Work, two Corners of which, square a
squint with the third, in which I.O. dances the Hay, up and down, in and out by
himself alone, like Three Kites, in the Clouds of Confusion.

CHAP. V.
AS to the matter of the Scripture remaining entire to a Tittle in the outward
Text of it as at first given out, what a fidling and pidling make thou to
prove and make it good? what Figures do thou cast in thy Fancy throw that
part of thy Second Treatise, wherein thou treatest for it, for the defending of
it, and to fence off that fault of falsehood from falling upon that thy
Arch-Assertion, having once over-shot thy self-so far, as in thy First
Treatise, as false as frequently to affirm it; and yet when all is done, after
thy tedious Tracings to and fro in thy wonted Wood of uncertain Talk,
Conjectural Discourse, and in the toylsome Thicker of thy own untrusty
Thinking?, thou art fain to Confess enough to the Confutation of thy self, and
the Contradicting of That thy Position in the strictness thereof, wherein thou
tooth and nail Contendest for it, as no less then a very Fundamental part of
That Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints.

But that I may not seem to wrong thee by Representing thy ArchAssertion in a
stricter way, or by stretching or extending it, in my Animadversions on it,
beyond the exact measure of thy insert and meaning in it (unless thou will have
us to judge thee one that speak one thing, and meanest another [as T.D.
says God do^] which is as bad) let the Reader, together with my returns
thereto, take it in thy own terms, as it lies spread and sprinkled up and down
in sundry Expressions, sounding out (in sum) the same thing, as to thy purport
in them, over many parts, and in many particular pages of thy Two English
Tractacles.

I.O. Page 14. The whole Word of God (that is, Secundum Te still, the
Scripture, Text, or Writing of it) in every Letter and Tittle, as given from
him by Inspiration, is preserved without Corruption (i.e.) variety from the
first Original Manuscripts in the Copies we have.

Page 137. The whole Script^re entire, as given out from God, without any
loss, is preserved in the Copies of the Originals, in ^h^m all, we say, is
every Letter and Tittle.

Page 10. The Word (i.e.) Scripture with thee still (for thou denyest the words
coming any other-way to your selves, or any now) is come forth unto us from
God, without the least mixture, or intervenience of any medium. obnoxious to
fallibility, as is the Wisdom, Truth, Integrity, Knowledge, and Memory of the
best of all men.

Page 13. We have not the (...) of Mo?es, and the Prophets, the Apostles and
Evangelists, but the (...), we have, or Co^i^s contain every Iota that was in
them.

Hebrae^ Volumina nec in unica dictione, corrupta intenies. S. Page (...),
Matthew. 5. 18.

To which Answers that, Page 316, 317. Does not our Savior affirm of the Word
that was among the Jews (i.e.) Scripture (Secundum te still) That not (...) of
it should pass away or perish, where let the Consonants themselves, with their
Apices, be intended, or alluded to in that expression, etc.

And Epist page 27. None are able to show out of any Copies yet extant in the
World, and that they can make appear ever to have been extant, that ever there
were any such various Lections in the Old Testament.

And page 319. Neither the Care o^ God over his Truth, nor the Fidelity of the
Judaical Church, will permit us to entertain the least suspicion, that there
was ever in the world any Copy of the Bible differing, in the least, from that
we enjoy, or that those we have are corrupted.

And page 317. Let the Authors of this Insinuation, prove that there ever was
in the World, any Copy of the Bible Differing in any one word from those that
we now enjoy, let them produce one Testimony, ne Author of C?ed^ J^w or
Christian, that can, or does, or ever did, speak one word to this purp^se, let
them direct us to any Relick, any Monument, any kind of Remembrance of them,
and it shall b of we^ght to us, etc.

Many more exceeding and extraordinary, high, strict streins thou deliverest
thyself in, in other places about the non-corruption, non alteration of the
Text of Scripture in one Letter, Tittle, Iota, or Syllable since the first
giving it out, so, but that in the Copies extant to this day, there is an exact
Unity, and entire Identity with the first Originals; a kind of Summary,
Collection, and C^pitulation of which thou make, page 153. speaking to this
purpose thus, viz.

I O. The Sum of what I am Pleading for, as to the particular Head to be
vindicated, is, That as the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament were
immediately and entirely given out by God himself, his Mind being in them
represented unto us without the least interveniency of such mediums, and ways
as were capable of giving Change or Alteration to the least Iota or Syllable;
So by his good and merciful Providential Dispensation in his love to his Word
and Church, his whole Word ( alias, the Scripture with thee) as at first given
out by him, is preserved unto us entire in the Original Languages; where
shining in its own beauty and luster (as also in all Translations, as far as
they faithfully represent the Originals) it manifests and evidences unto the
Consciences of men without other foreign help or Assistance, its divine
Original, and Authority.

Reply. This is the Capital, Cardinal, General Assertion, or Position, which
branches it sel^ into several Particulars, or petty Propositions, viz. The
immediate coming forth of the Scripture from God to us; its self evidencing
power to evince it self, by it self alone, to be of God, and his Word; its
descending to us at this day entire to a Tittle without corruption by
alteration in the least Letter, Iota, Vowel, Point, or Syllable; its
uncapablenesse of such Change and Alteration in its coming to us (so are thy
words here and page 10.) to the least Iota, or Syllable.

Unto which General Head, and its branches, the Ramu^culi, lesser twigs, or
little Sentences scattered here and there throwout thy Book, are Reducible, and
each to its own suitable Branch respectively.

That which I am here under Consideration of thy pi^tiful Plea for, is both its
non-Alteration (de facto) as its handed down by Transcribers from the first
Scribes of it to us in these days, and its Unalterablenesse, or Uncapablenesse
of Alteration (which (if thou mean as thou say) thou here Assertest) to the
least Iota or Syllable.

These are to thee (as thou say) such important Truths, that thou shall not
be blamed in the least by thy own Spirit, nor, thou hopest, by any others, in
contending for them, judging them Fundamental parts of the Faith once (but (say
I) thou know not when) delivered to the Saints.

Reply. Though I, who cannot hold thee, because I cannot find thee guiltless,
in either thy hasty holding, or thy heedlesse, unhandy handling thy weak
vindicatory piece of Probation of them at so high a rate, do advise thee to
praise a fair day at night, assuring thee, that if ever thou come to learn the
Truth in the plainness and power of it, as it is in Jesus the Light, of whom
the Letter testifies, thou will find these no Fundamental parts of that One
Faith, which Paul and Jude speak of, Ephesians. 4. Jude 3* which was One even of old
from Abraham, Enoch, Noah, and downwards from the beginning, before the Letter
was delivered to, and earnestly to be contended for by the Saints; and wilt
find thy own Spirit also, however it now seems not to blame thee in the least,
blaming thee nor a little for thy ignorance in due time; and howbeit (being
bolstered up for a while above it, by the Aerie Academical Applauses,
Gratulatory Euge's, J O's. Hic est's, and such like blessings of thy blind
Brother literatists, that are (as the rich man's wealth to him, Prove. 10.15.)
thy strong City, thy Murus Abaeneus, a high Brazen Wall to thee in thy own
conceit) thou feel'st no Check, and seem Nil Conscire tibi, nulla Pallescere
Culta.

Yet let others, and thy own heart also Clear, Cheer and Cheat thee as it will,
thou will once know, that as to every work there is a time to do it in, and a
Judgment after it; so thy whole, lame, Anti-Scriptural work about the
Scriptures, as well as thy other part of it against the Quakers, though fenced
in the Frontispice with the fair formal pretense of, A Vindication of the
Purity and Integrity of the Hebrew and Greek Texts; and, Pro Scripturis, and
such like, must come to another account then that I am here taking of it before
the world, even to a Judgment from God within thy own now blinded Bosom, and
closed Conscience, as the Book thereof comes to be opened by the shining out of
that Light in it, that lies yet smoothered; and then thy misery will be so
great upon thee, that (as I told thee above) what thou say of the Pope for
his misuse of Scripture, will be verified not on him only, in so much the
greater measure, by how much his Vilislations and Violations of it may be
greater then thine, but in some measure also upon thy self; so that as thou,
together with me, say Papae, so say I, Et Tibi Tempus erit quo magno
optaveris Emptam,
Scripturam intactam.


It will once repent thee not a little in thy own Spirit, that ever thou
appearedst in public in such a proud and peevish Prate against its purest
Friends so pretensively only, but not properly for, and so piteously and
unpolishedly about the Scriptures.

Now as to thy Vindication or Plea it self, for the present Integrity, and
Indentity of the Text of your Copies, with those Original Copies that were
first given out, which thou positively had before Asserted, thou failest and
fallest short, so in thy Confidence of what thou had so peremptorily
propounded for Truth, in ipso limine, at the very threshold and entrance
thereinto, as to style it no other then an Account of thy Apprehensions, a
delivery of thy Thoughts, and a running the Hazard of giving out thy Thoughts,
and of what thy own Thoughts suggested to thee, page 146, 147, 149. 163 and a
discovery of thy Thoughts, 151. As also thy First Treatise, wherein thou talkst
of the samenesse of the Letter in every Tittle and Iota to what it was at first
so Authoritatively, so Positively, so Impositively, so seemingly Infallibly and
Uncontroulably; a publication of thy Thoughts (Though I had thought a Minister
of Christ, or Doctor in that thing called Divinity, especially about the
Foundation of all his Faith, and in that Chapter where he lays the Basis of
his Business, and of h^s building, should have b^ thought himself better
beforehand and have sa^e down and counted his cost, and cast it in his mind
before he Printed his Propositions out in such peremptory terms, as thou do
in this case of nonAlteration of one jot or Tittle of the first divinely
inspired Scripture, page 13, 14, 28 whether it would hold it out in such a
height for certain or no, without parching it up with [ So I think] and such
loose Conjectures, and Imagina^ions, as are attended with such great
uncertainty, that himself confesses (as thou do, page 297.) They ought not to
be admitted to any Plea or Place, one way or other, in so w^ighty a cause; and
Propound things that are false, as boldly, as undoubted Truths, and then pu^s
off such as expect hi^ p^oof, with weak Conjectures, and his Conceits; ^e^t men
mock him saying, This man began to build, but was not able to finish. Yet now I
bethink my self, thou pretendest to be no divinely Inspired Prophet, nor one
that owns any such to be now a days, but one of those Other men thou speak
of. page 9. The Pigment and Imagination of whose hearts are the fountain of all
that they speak, and so no better can be expected from them.

2. Thou grantest that ye have not the (...), page 13 Nay. It is granted
(say thou, page 163.) that the Individual (...) of Moses, the Prophets, and
the Apostles are in all probability, and as to all that we know utterly
perished and lost out of the world; As also the Copies of Ezra, the Reports
mentioned by some to the contrary are open fictions; The individual Ink and
Parchment, the Ro^es or Books that they wrote, could not without a Miracle have
been preserved from mouldring into Dust before this time; Nor does it seem
improbable that God was willing by their loss, to Reduce us to a nearer
Consideration of his Care and Providence in the Preservation of every Tittle
contained in them; Had those individual Writings been preserved, men would have
been ready to adore them, as the Jews do their (...), in their Synagogues.

Reply. How like a Child do thou talk in that groundless guess of thine
that God was willing to let the loss of the (...) be, for such an end, as in
thy foolish vain mind thou imaginest and fondly fanciest! What a bawbling and
blerting do thou make of thy boyish bolts out of the Cross bow of thy crooked
Conceit, both here and elsewhere up and down thy Book? Who told thee that
trifling Tale, which thou tellest for probable Truth, that God let all the
first Writings be lost for this end, to reduce men in the latter Ages to a
nearer Consideration of his Care in Preserving every Tittle till now that was
contained in them? When yet we know (as I told thee above) and prove by and
from that little of the first Scripture that has happened to come to our hands
(which ten parts to one of the World never saw neither) that not Tittles only,
but many whole Books of the first divinely inspired Scripture, that belonged to
the Bulk of Holy men's Writings by the Spirit, are not preserved, but perished,
for ought thou know, both the (...), and (...) of them also: Did God himself
tell thee this to tell for Tsruth, or did the Serpent suggest it to thy
Thoughts, that suggests a legion more o^ the like lying vanities? Even he
surely insinuated this into thy Imagination, that crowded those other crude
Conceptions and Conjectures, which thou have, and hold out to such Tom of
Bediams, as will take them for Truth from thee. So in page 12, 14, 34. where
perking up into Gods privy Council, as if thou were one that fate in his Bosom
from which thou art yet as far (being from the Light) as the Rich G^utton was
from Abraham's, where poor Lazarus sa^e, whom he despised (saving that the gulf
was fixed against his passage, whereas there is hope concerning thy coming
thither, if yet in time thou tern and take hold on Truth) and intruding thy
se^f into what thou have not seen, vainly puf^ up in thy fleshly mind, thou
proudly falst a Pratin^ (...) Propounding, for Truth, what swims and floats in
the Cock-boat of thy Fancy, (viz) page ^2. That the Writing was the product of
Gods Eternal Council for the preservation of the Doctrine after a sufficient
discovery of the Insuffiency of all other means for that end and purpose.

Reply. Into which piece of Gods Eternal Council, I trow who, or what Spirit,
or Scripture, or Key of any kind, did ever let in I. O. who Proposes it so
peremptorily in his Preachings; as if God had discovered something by
experience, after a while, that he was not so well acquainted with before,
namely, that manifesting his mind by Dreams, Visions, Voices, Word of Mouth,
was, after his trial thereof, sufficiently ^ound by the Lord to be an
insufficient means to save his Word from loosing, which means he intended once
to that end and purpose (howbeit sometimes again I O tells us (truly enough)
that what ever means God appoints to any end, it is sufficient thereunto, and
thereupon not imperfect, but perfect Ex. 3. S. 24. Discipline cujusuis
Perfectio consistit in relatione ad finem, eaque perfecta habenda sit quae
sufficiens est respecta sinis sui proximi, ea vero imperfecta quae finem
Propositum assequi potis non est.
) and so fearing, belike, to loose his Word and Doctrine, and not knowing any
other way (all others failing save that of Pen and Ink) in his Providence,
betook himself to that way of Writing, which Providence also saw it self
concerned to this day, to preserve entire Copies to a Tittle of all that
Writing (much of which yet is lost) both to reduce men to a Consideration of it
self, in that one particular; and also that his Word (not a jot of which, I
confess, can ever fail, though all Writing in the World come to perish) might
be secured for ever from perishing, and altering, by that most alterable and
perishing way of Writing; which, if it should happen to be all lost, he had no
way to save his Word, Doctrine, and sacred Truth from dying irrecoverably, by a
very dreadful and mortal Distemper, page 314. So seems I.O. summarily to say
out of the sacred Secret of Gods Council, which was never with any, save such
as fear him more then I. O. does, whose Position of it Credat Apella.

So Page 14. God by his Providence, preserving the whole Text entire, suffers
lesser variety to fall out in or among the Copies we have, for the quickening
and exercising our diligence in our search into his Word.

Reply. O nescio quo horrendo percusse Sentomate! Whence came this whiffe and
whimzy within the Circumference of thy Figmentitious Fancy? Who told thee this
Toy, which thou preachest out for positive Truth? Do thou teach this for a
true Doctrine of Christ, if so, from what Text? Or will thou own it to be but a
mere Tale of thy own, a Tradition of I.O. which it thou will, then own it, that
in vain thou worshippest God, while thou art Teaching for Doctrine thy own
Thoughts, and the Traditions of thy self, or any other men; Thou talkest
sometime at such a rate as if thou would make all the World believe the
variety of our Copies were absolutely none at all, no not in the leaft, not in
one Apex, Tittle, Iota, not in (...), which, how contradictory it is to, or
consistent with that lesser variety here talked on, who is so silly (save I. O.
whose own silliness and self. Confoundings are never seen by himself) as not to
see? But to let pass that ordinary matter of self-contradiction (sifh its as
Common with thee almost as to Talk at all) and to take it as it falls. Is this
the end why God, who (as thou say, who know not whether thou have the
half or no of what was by Inspiration written) preserved the whole entire,
suffered that variety that is in your Copies, to quicken your diligence in your
Search into his Word? If that be the end (as indeed it may well enough be, of
the total loss of so much of the Letter as there is, and nonIntegrity, nor
Indentity of your Transcript Texts that remain) that ye should diligently
search into his Word, it were happy for you that there is so much variety and
uncertainty as there is in your Copies, and nere the worse, had you none of
them at all, so ye would betake your selves to the Hearing of the Word of God,
and the receiving it more immediately and purely from his mouth, which the
Letter of it tells you is nigh in your own hearts and mouths, ^o that ye need
not go any where ad extra for it, that ye may both hear and do it: But alas
poor men, by the Word ye mean the Letter still, the External Text, or Writing
of it, and then so far is your so diligent searching and poring, and striving,
and scribbling one to another (as the Scribes of old did, Job. 5. that never
heard the Voice and Word of God it self) from being any end of God at all in
giving it out at first, or in deriving that part of the Scripture, ye have,
down to you, whether fully the same with, or falsified from the first Copies,
that he loathes and detests your long Tales about its Tittles, and your idle
Treating away your precious time in such Trivial talk as this, That the whole
Word of God, and all saving Doctrine, and sacred Truth is lost, and fails for
ever without* Relief, Remedy, or Recovery, if every Tittle of the Text without
loss or variation be not upheld and preserved Entire to this day: which yet is
some (not to say the sum) of that unsound Doctrine, the proof of which is
driven on by thee I. O. As in page 18. 314. and many other Pages is to be seen
throwout thy Book, as well as by other Doctors and Divines.

So Page 34. speaking of the Scriptures uncontroulably manifesting themselve so
to be, that on pain of eternal Damnation, men are to receive them as the Word
of God, thou say that they afford unto us all the divine Evidence of
themselves (and that's none at all, as I shall show anon of their being his
Word) which God is willing to grant us, or can be granted us, or is any way
needful for us.

Reply. Another odd Conceited saying this is, as like thy self (who ur^erest
thy self Doctor-like still, as to thy usurped Authoritativenesse, but seldom as
to the truth of thy Assertions) as if it were spit out of thy mouth: Who told
thee this Untruth that thou so uncontrollably utterest here for truth, that God
is not willing to grant more divine evidence of the Scriptures being what thou
falsely say they are, or where they are indeed, and that more neither can or
need be granted then what the Scriptures themselves do afford? say thou this
of thy self, or did others tell it thee of the Scripture? of thy own head
surely, or very likely at least, and neither from God nor the Spirit, nor the
Scriptures, no nor the Synods, nor the Congregational Churches of England to
which thou belongest, nor the Doctrinal Catechismes of late Divines; for these
thy brethren (though erring with thee, in stiling them the Word) tell thee of
another (not humane only) but Divine Testimony or evidence, that may be and is
needful to be granted, and that God is willing to and does also grant of the
Scriptures being what they call it, beside that which thou here so absolutely
assertest as the only one that must or can be afforded, viz. the Testimony of
the Spirit of God in the heart, and not that of the Scripture alone concerning
itself, or of the holy Spirit speaking without us ad extra only in the
Scripture, which is the dream wherein thou drawest aside not only from the
truth, but also (if it were a truth that the Letter is G^ds Word) from the
joint Testimony of thy fellow Testifiers to it, for they say the Testimony of
the Spirit within us also, and not (...) ^^stimony without u^, and only in the
Scripture, divinely evidences the Scripture to be what ye all falsely say it is,
that is, the Word of God: Witness not only that so much esteemed Divine in his
days, viz. Ball in his Catechism, but also the Confession of Faith of the
Assembly of Divines presented to the Parliament, and that of the
Congregationals, which is verbatim the same also therewith, who all unanimously
in that Article of the Scripture, wherein they falsely affirm it to be the Word
of God, declare thus in the fifth head, viz. by the heavenlinesse of the
matter, efficacy of Doctrine, majesty of the style, excellency and perfection
of the whole, it does abudantly evidence it self to be the Word of God, yet
notwithstanding our full persuasion and assurance of the infallible truth and
divine authority thereof [i.e.] of the Scripture, is from the inward work of
the holy Spirit, bearing witness by and with the word in our hearts.

But thou in page 90. and thorowout thy fifth chapter of thy first Treatise
excludest the witness of the Spirit immediately in the heart at all, or at
least the usefulness, much more the necessity of any such Testimony making as
here page 34. the Authority of God shining in it self alone, and exclusively of
the spirits and words witness in our hearts, the sole medium of all that
evidence which man can have of its being (what ye call it) viz. The Word of
God; but as for God and the Spirit, who within do give all the evidence that
they give at all of the Scriptures, being what in truth is is, viz a true
writing of the truth, what if they are willing to grant an evidence within, and
to afford more then thou talkst of? will thou bind, limit and forbid them so to
so, who (...) unlimitedly here declarest that God is willing to afford and
grant no more? must not the Spirit blow where it lifts without thy leave, or
acquainting thee, first, who art no Prophet, with what he will do? And this may
serve as a sufficient Answer to thy vain Opinion in it (it being worth no
better) to that whole Chapter of thine concerning the Testimony of the Spirit;
though whether it shall or no, so that I Will say no more to thee about that
Chapter, is more then I Will tell thee here, that I may be at liberty to do as I
see occasion: Only thus much is spoken to that saying of thine, above page 34.
to show how Majestically still for the eternal Truths of God, thou tellest thy
own mere trashy, untrusty Traditions; of which sort, I say, is that above, p.
163 which I am yet in hand with (viz.) that God probably suffered the loss of
the (...), to reduce us to a Consideration of his Care in preserving every
Tittle, that was in them, to this day in the (...), or Copies we have.

But I O. seems to take another Reason out of the bottomless pit of his own
infinite Fancy and Imagination, why God was as willing to let the first
Manuscripts perish, as careful to preserve every Apex thereof, in their adored
Transcripts, and successively Crowned and Canonized Copies to this day (viz.)
left if the immediate individual Writings had been preserved, men would have
been ready to adore them, as the Jews to adore their (...), in their
Synagogues.

Reply Which if it be Cogent or have any Reason at all in it to prove a
willingness in God to let the first Writings be left, has it not as much to
the full to evince God; Regardlesnesse of your so copiously regarded Copies,
upon (if there were no other) the very self-same Account, as he was so
careless of the other? But I. O. is so totally Talpified, that (as Eagleeyed
as he is abroad to spy a hole in the Jews Coat) he cannot see that Jewish
Idolatry nearer home? For if God, to prevent Adoration of that Brazen Serpent,
and Idolized (...) of the Scripture, was so regardlesse of it, as to permit it
to perish and be brought to nothing, is there not as much reason why he should
be as Careless of your remote, tottered Transcripts, and false Translations ye
are so carkingly careful of, as to let what will become of them,
notwithstanding your uncessant pining and whining, and whoring after them, and
solicitous scoldings and tearings one of another so much about them? For as
much as though ye Confess ye have but the (...), yet so it is, that ye Adore,
and even Idolize them as much as ye would, or likely could the (...)
themselves, had you them to bustle and busy your minds about, and as much as
the Jews (though ye advance them the Right way no more then they do theirs, as
I have told you at large above) do their (...) in their Synagogues. Suppose ye
had here the very Hand writings of Moses, and the old Prophets, and the
individual Letters, and Stories that the Evangelists and Apostles penned with
their own hands; yea the very Two Tables of Stone, superscribed with Gods own
finger (which was a Figure and Type of that Handwriting of his Law in the
fleshly Tables of your hearts by his living Spirit, the Truth, and Antitype,
of which ye as little heed, as ye heedlesly overvalue the other) What could
you Ministers of the Letter, and not the Spirit, and your Literal and Formal,
more then Powerful and truly Spiritual Professors say or do more (unless you
would down on your Knees to them so soon as ever ye see them) in way of outward
Honor and Adoration thereof, then ye do to your falsified Transcripts, and
your People to the more unspeakably false Translations, which they take for
Truth, but by Tradition and mere implicit Faith from your selves? Lets Reason
and Reckon with you here a little while about your Transcripts and
Translations, which are all that are extant and enjoyed at this day; the first
by you that have skill in Hebrew and Greek; the second by your Independent [on
God] but (on their Priests lips) dependent People; As for the (...). Memorandum
(Oh all People, by whom these presents shall ever happen to be read) I. O. has
quite quitted the World of them, Confessing they are all utterly perished, and
long since past away and lost; So that it is opon Fiction, or miracu^ous with
him for any one to affirm, that there is any one individual Role, Writing, or
Book that was Penned by the Holy men, that in their several successive Ages,
wrote the Scripture now alive, and not mouldred into dust: So that the World
has done with them, and they with us, so as never to come within our Ocular
Inspection more, whereby to try whether our Doctors and Divines Adored
Transcripts do to a little agree (as I. O. absolutely affirms they do) with the
Touchstone, yea or nay, so as to believe our own eyes, or any otherwise then as
I O. (who first positively Asserts it) does after as improbly conclude it from
what is suggested to his own Thoughts from Hearsay, and other men's Talk to and
fro, and Tradition, and (as he Confesses all along) ^ heap of Uncertainties,
and Conjectures; so that all the tumblings and tossings, snapings and snarlings
of even the Protestant Divines about their Scriptmre, is but about their remote
[ Transcribed, I cannot say well neither, for most Transcribed Copies too are
out of the way since Printing came up, but] Printed Copies of the Text, which
are all not more liable in any thing to be, then in many things they are
already falsified, which since the Primitive Copies are concluded to be gone,
and the infallible guidance of the Spirit, by I. O. T. D. and all Divines
excluded out of the World also, though they tell us Translations must be
Rectified by their Transcriptions, yet if they happen to be (as an hundred to
one they are, and none knows in how many) in any things crooked or various from
the first, there is no means of Rectifying or Reducing their supposed Rule to
Conformity to the first literal Rule, nor of amending it, any otherwise then
uncertainly, for ever. But suppose, I say, ye had the Primitive Copies, could
you make more ado in Adoring them, then ye Doctors, and your People that dote
on you, do about your various respective Transcripts, and more various
Translations out of them into sundry Tongues and Languages, which Translations
yet are all in somethings not more several in their sorts, then the Tongues
into which they are translated, and divided into as many Senses, as the many men
that Translated them thereinto; which said numerous untrue Translations also
are, as to the Letter [if they look not to the Light within, and live not by
that] all that the poor blindly guided, misled, Priest-befoolled People, who
ken not Hebrew and Greek [many of whom cannot read English neither] have to
trust to, whose Faith about the Scripture it self, which thou callst, page 155.
the Foundation of that Faith and Obedience God requires at their hands, and
whose belief of the Truth or untruth of this or that Translation, is as much
pined upon the Priests sleeve here in England still, as it is at Rome it self,
in this and some other matters; for there they Believe as their Church [alias]
Clergy believes, and take things on Trust being not suffered, if they were able
[as here, though suffered, they are not able] to try the Truth hereof, and by
mere Tradition from their illiterate Purblind Priesthood; and no otherwise do
they here, as to their Tratsl^tions, then upon Tra^i^ion, ^rusting to the
fidelity and to that infalible certaines of their supposed learned leaders the
Ser^^es, then whom no men are more humpered in a heap (...) uncertainties about
the Scriptures What would ye do more to the very writing, that was inscribed
with Gods own finger, if you had it, in way of homage then ye are doing to your
respective doted on, derived copies? Do you not dance about them as Israel
about their Calf, saying these are thy Gods O England, that brought thee out of
bondage to thy sin, (to which yet they committing it they remain servants to
this day, Job. 8) and must save thee and lead thee into life, and are perfectly
sufficient without the light and spirit within, the Quakers talk of, as that
which the letter came from, and alone can do it, to instruct thee in the
knowledge and worship of God, and thy obtaining of everlasting Redemption? Do
you not Canonize and crown them with the Titles of the only Perfect Rule,
Foundation, Light, Witness, Living Word of God, the Lydius Lapis, Unaltered,
Unalterable Standard, Touchstone immediately come forth from God to us, without
the least interueniency of Ways, or Mediums obnoxious to fallibility, or
capable to give Change to the least ^ota or Syllable? Are not these as high
Titles as ye could give to the (...), if they were here? Do you not say, and do
this, and much more to your (...)? And the People to no more then their mere
Translation? Yea, do the Jews say or do more in way of Adoration to their
(...) in their Synagogues, then beautify, adore, guild, lift up in their
hands, ex^al them with high Applauses, Hug and Kiss them, as ye do when ye
Swear upon a Book, and such like outward magnifyings and makings honorable of
them, which is the utmost that I have seen them do in their Synagogues throw
many Nations, without living that substantial Holy Life the letter calls for?
And do you do any less, as to outward Adoration, or any more, as to inward and
real Observation, toward your Bibles?

Yea, do ye not all, as well the People that have no better then their
uncertain, yet certainly untrue Translations from you, as so many of you of the
Clergy, as can read the Copies of the Originals (for many cannot read the
Hebrew Text at all, and some the Greek as ^etle as that, as necessary as these
Tongues were made a while since to the very esse, or being of Christ's
Ministers) who have no better ^hen your uncertain Transcriptions, cry up your
several Transcribed and Translated Copies respectively that best like you, and
every one hug his own at least, as most insallible, however crying down
others as corrupted* And how beit if any one of them were so, as none of them
at all are, yet all of them cannot be right, as each one faith that is, that he
takes to^ Are ye not all noysing it out as the Jews at ^e^usa^em, and the
Gentiles at Ephesus, Jer. 7. Act. 19. of their Respective broken Reeds the
Temple and Diana, to which they trusted, Great is Diana The Temple of the Lord,
The Word of God, The Word of God Inspired, The insallible Word o^ God are
these, The perfect Living, Li^e giving Soul saving Word, the very Power of G^d
unto Salvation? Are the Jews more mad upon their (...), the^ People are upon
their untruly Translated, and you Divines upon your untruly Transcribed, and
both on the more Kreanously yet Trans-printed Sculptures? Talking and Treating
up your Respective Texts into the Throne, where Christ the Light, and Living
Word alone should sit, making little less of your Copies, then some (...) (or
Cornu-Copia) Deo forsan quapiam melius? For what are all the Ephesian like
Glamours, eager Outcries, loud Noises of the people here for against the
Quakers? Are they not for the bare Bulk of that Book called the Bible, the
outside of which they are at great Care and Cost to Paint, and Guild, and
Bind, and Beautify, and Adorn, and Adore, while the Truth exhibited in the
Writing or Text thereof lies trampled under their feet? Saying, the Ru^e, the
Foundation, the infallible Standard, the Word of God, of no more then their (by
the self Con^essed in many things) corrupted Translations; counting the Quakers
not fit to live in the Land, any otherwise then Out-lawed, because they cannot
own, nor hold their I^o in that height of honor as they do,. nor fall down and
worship that golden corruptible Image, that they set up, though they honor the
Truth that's told in the Scripture, and submit to it as the everlasting powerful
Word of God? What are thy high English Transcendant Treatises about, and thy
exceeding ample Apologetical Latin Exercitations, and thy many Execrations,
Anathcmaes thundered out, and Subpoenaes, page 31.34. 56. 59.60. 81. sent abroad
in those and sundry other Pages of thy Paper, Summoning and Requiring all men,
as from God to the Subjection and Submission of Soul to the Scriptures, which
is due only and alone to the Word of God, on peril, pain, and penalty of
inexcusablnesse, in damnable unbelief, damnation, eternal damnation, eternal
displeasure of God, eternal Ruin, etc. in case it be not owned as so? What are
all thy excessive Commendations, and direful Comminations, and Condemnations
denounced by thee against all that Commend it not, so ignorantly as thy self,
and thy many needlesle Negotiations, and pitiful Proofs, and Pragmatical
Pratings, and prehemine^t Pleas for its Reception in Comparison with, and
Opposition to all other ways of coming to the knowledge of God, and Attendance
and Submission to its Supreme uncontroleable Authority, page 57.58 upon the
account of its (...), or divine inspiration, as being the most perfect Rule,
firm Foundation, staple Standard, infallibly true Tou^hstone, entirely in every
Tittle to the least (...), the Word of the Great God, the Writing that comes
immediately from God to us (who live to many (...), after the mouldring of the
first Manuscripts of it) without the le^st interveniency of any medium
obnoxious to fallibility, or capable to give Change to the least sota or
Syllable of it, page 113. The Book which God wrote, or at least immediately
indicted, and commends men (it thou could tell where) to receive, as his, under
the penalty of his eternal displeasure, which Book makes a sufficient discovery
of it self to be his, page ^20. reveals and ^clares and professes it self from
the beginning to the ending (that no where, (...) I shall show anon) to be
unquestionably the Word of God, page 140. And avers it self in every place (and
that every place with 7 0. himself is 1.0 place at all, if Ex. 1. Self 28 be
true, as will be seen anon) to be the Word of God, page 117 the most glorious
Light in the World above t'e Sun dearer to God then all the World besides, and
scores more of wonderful strict strains of Talk in which thou stretchest the
Text and letter beyond its live, and screwest the Scripture within Diana's
Shrine, till thou crack'st thy own Credit with uttering ten times more then
thou art ever able to stand under the trial of, or any wise man is to
understand.

(...) what is all this Adoratory ado, thou make, about? Is it not the (...),
page 57. the Writing? And what Writing? Is it not the (...) only, confessing
that all the (...) is long since lost? And if thou should spend so much time as
to Talk to this Age of that, as the Rule, Foundation, Touchstone, Standard that
is not now standing but fallen, and that, as the inalterable incorruptible Word
of God (and yet whether the Decalogue of Gods own Writing were not as
incorruptible as thy cobled Copies of it, let who will judge) that is already
altered, yea, corrupted wholly out of the World, thy folly would more fully
show it self; Is it not (if not the totte^ed Translations, which the people at
least magniste, and make a God of, as much as thou of the other) thy mere
Perigraphy, or rather Typography that passes from under, not the Pens of
careful, faithful, infallible Transcribers, but the Presses of careless,
fallible, falsifying, faithless Printers, whose hands few Pamphlets pass
without need of an after Errata sic Corrigas?

Thy mere Typographically correctible corruptible Copies of the Text, are the
Common Theme of all thy Laudatory labors, and truthlesse Treatises, and
Theses that are thrust out about them.

As for all Translations (that I may not wrong thee, but give thee thy due)
thou give them their due, I confess, in some measure, so as to slate them a
little lower then either the true Word of God, or the first true immediate
Manuscripts of it either. Yea, I must needs say that (though by some
EXPRESSIONS and DENOMINATIONS thereof, as namely that of the Word of God
(partly at least) thou set them above themselves) yet thou pullest them
down so far below thy Idolized mere imperfect Images of the frost Writings,
that, to say the Truth, within a little thou as much disparagest the very best
of them (as they are commonly counted) as beyond measure thou manifiest thy
own, insomuch that well-nigh the whole Scene of Sections in thy last Chapter of
thy Second Treatise seems to be set to drive on no other Design then a louder
decrying of all Translations, then that of theirs, whom thou cryest out on, for
decrying thy Transcriptions, or then thy own crying up of them; Yea, thou do
not more strictly and absolutely avouch that untruth concerning the absolute
unity of your Copies of the Original both with the first Originals, and among
themselves without any discrepancy in the least, then in that Chapter
principally, and partly elsewhere ( viz.) page 15. thou avowest and purtest thy
self to prove that vast variety that is in all Translations among themselves,
and that deep discrepancy that is in them also from both the first Original
Text and your Transcripts of it; which variety, discrepancy and corruption yet,
that is in them, thou art so far from covering from the view of the Vulgar,
whose Souls Interest lies mainly in Translations (they being not able to read
the Original Text) as their Soul [sayst thou] and bodily Interests also [say I]
are concerned in your Transcription, that thou openly proclaimest it, that all
may see it, as it were upon the house top; and lest any should be startled at
so strange a sight, as thou presentest them with in that Chapter, as that vast
variety of Translations of the Text from the Originals of it, and each from
other, and begin to question whether that be the incorruptible Word of God or
no, which so many Corruptions could creep, and are crept into, thou art so
shameless as to help an Old lame Dog ore a style (as the Proverb is) so as to
render these so many mis-representations of the literal sense and meaning of
the Original Words, which the Translators moped into, till they have torn and
twined the Waxen Nose of your naked Letter [whereby ^e may see what a sixth and
firm Foundation, true Touchstone, stable Standard, inalterable Rule, infallible
Guide, incorruptible Word of God, ye have among you while you trust and stand
to no other Word then your outward Letter, defying that within, in the heart,
which the Quakers point you to] into more then twice, if not twenty times
twenty several shapes, as an eminent help (Oh horrid) to the manifesting of the
mind of God unto men, witness thy own words, page 310^ at thy very entrance
into that thy Talk against Translations, which are these;

TO. To have it Represented to us at one view, the several Apprehensions and
Judgments of so many worthy and learned men as were the Authors of these, and
of the various Translations upon the Original words of the Scripture, is a
signal help and advantage unto men enquiring into the mind and will of God in
his word.

Reply. Was the like odd conceit ever heard of, or digested with the receipt of
it for Truth, any where but among onr Academical Conjecturers, and Adorers of
one another silly thoughts? that not unity but variety in the Translations of
the letter, occasioned by the various thoughts and opinions of men that
Translated one, about the spirit, sense of the same words, should be signally
helpful toward any thing, but the confused fightings that the world is filled
with about their many senses and meanings on the letter, and that our Ministers
fill the World with, as well about their diverse Transcriptions, as different
Translations, is much more then folly, and little less then madness to
imagine.

Ah poor common people, you of the Tongues, Nations and Kindreds of the earth,
that understand neither the Language of your Academical Canaanites, nor yet the
true language of the Land of Canaan, It pities me for you still to see how all
things are carried in the clouds out of your sight, for, not standing in the
counsel of God, the light in your own heart, nor asking counsel of God, but at
your Stoical Students, Stocks and Stones, you know not the mind of Christ that
way; And as for your untrusty Turn-Coats that Talk of Truth to you for Tyth,
but turn Truth out of doors, and turn all things up-side down, whose doings in
that kind must be esteemed ere long as the Potters Clay, Isa. 29. As for these
I say they dig deep to hide their Council, not only from the Lord, who yet in
his People sees them well enough, but from you also their own People who own
them, so that all their works to you-ward are done in the dark, so that ye
behold not what strange Transpositions, Transcriptions, and Translations of
things there are among them; and such as tell you plainly how they wrest the
Scripture like a Nose of Wax, which way it may best serve their Interests, they
hate, so that of those that have tumbled in the same belly, and sprang from
same ( University) Mothers womb and bowels, with them, whose breasts the suck
at, Vel Duo. vel Nemo, my self, and very few more are escaped thence alone to
tell you; They make you believe that that is the Word of God in your Bibles,
which is seen with your bodily eyes even the very Letters, Syllables, and every
Tittle of Writing, which ye there see, which Writing we confess testifies of
that Word of God which gives the Life; but alas, is the Word of God so
flexible, alterable, that it can be changed (which is indeed eternally the
same) into as many shapes and senses as there are men, setting their senses on
work to Transcribe, Translate, and Expound it? Nay, Friends, Gods Word is
stable and permanent, and not a Tittle of that can be turned besides it self,
by the Tattling Tongues, and pidling Pens of men, that for Money make it their
whole lives business to Transcribe, Translate, Interpret, and give you their
Thoughts upon this, and that, and 'tother Text, till throw the throng of their
Thoughts, and the mists of their Meanings, and mis-representations, and
mis-interpretations, ye can see little of that they have Translated for you out
of their uncertain Transcripts, which yet they make you believe are in steadfast
Unity with the Originals, and each other, though they Confess your
Translations (to good use and purpose too, if you will believe them) are all
unspeakably differing both from the first Copies of Scripture, and each other
also.

As to the State and Condition of Translations, which it is I. O's. drift, to
discover the Corruption of in Order to the upholding the Credit (as to
non-Corruption) of his Transcriptions, he takes and gives a view of the chief
of them as they lie in the Biblia Polyglotta.

Of the Arabic he tells us, page 325. That should be gather Instances of the
failings of this Translation open and gross, and so proceed with the rest, be
thinks he might make a Volumne near as big as that of the various Lections
afforded in the aforesaid Bible.

Of the Syriach, he says Page 327 That it was made, hfe knows neither when nor
by whom, and that in sundry places it evidently follows another corrupt
Translation, passed throw the hands of men ignorant and suspicious, against
whose frauds and follies, by reason of the Paucity of Copies, we have no Relief.

Reply. Observe by the way, how I. O. when he speaks derogatively of
Translations, he vilifies Translators as full of fraud, folly, ignorance,
suspicious as if they were untrusty, and not fit to be heeded, as if they were
full of Oscitancy and Negligence, occasioning miscarriages and mistakes in
their Translatings, as if they were such as had nothing to do with God, but
with Heathen Authors in Transcribings; but when he speaks. Arrogatively of
Transcriptions then page 168, 169, 171. the Transcribers, considering that what
they Transcribed was, every Tittle and Iota of it, the Word of the great God,
wherein the Eternal Concernment of their own, and others Souls did lie, and
knowing they had to do with the Living God (belike the Translators considered,
and knew no such thing, that the Work under their Hands, was of the same
concernment to souls) shall we think that men in transcribing Tully, Homer,
Aristotle, would be as careful as they? we think it not tolerable in a
Christian to argue so; we scarce think the Roman Pontifices going solemnly to
transcribe the Sybils verses, would do it either negligently or treacherously,
or alter one Tittle from what they found written, and shall we entertain such
thoughts of them, who knew they had to do with the living God, and that in and
about that which is dearer to him then all the World besides? why then do
thou entertain such course thoughts of Translations J.O.? had not they to do
with God in the same, that was (as thou cloudily conceivest, for though the
word is, yet the latter is not so) dearer to him then the whole world? yea and
sometimes when thou talkest of corrupt novel Transcripts, thou have the same
ill thoughts of Transcribers, and accusest them, when their Copies are quoted
against thee, to prove various lections, for malicious depraving, as much as
thou excusest them at other times: yea thou can not think the Roman
Pontifices would mistranscribe Sybils Prophecies in one Tittle negligently or
Treacherously; yet do entertain such thoughts of them about the Scripture, in
which, who has to do, has to do with the living God, whether in Transcribing,
Translating, or Interpreting, and inveighest against them, as betraying,
falsifying, vitiating, interpolating, altering, adding, detracting, and what
not? to the corrupting of the Scripture. Ep. p. 13. Oh the pure ^rounds that I.
O. runs' in! Of the Samaritane Pentateuch he says the places instanced in by
Morinus do prove it corrupt, p. 329. of the Chaldee Paraphrase he says p. 334.
That seeing it did not lie under any peculiar care, and merciful providence of
God, whether innumerable faults and errors, as it happened with the
Septuagint, may not be got into it, who can tell (Says I. O. himself) and (say
I) who can tell that this or that Transcription lay more under the peculiar
care, and merciful providence of God, which I. O. so much insists on, then this
or that Translation? yet I. O. will be telling out his thoughts still for
absolute truths. Of the vulgar Latin, that its of an uncertain Original, its
Corruptions, and Barbarisms, its abuse so much has been spoken of, and by so
many already, that it were to no purpose to repeat it, p. 33^. Of the 70. that
all things about it are uncertain, and nothing almost manifest concerning it,
but that it is woefully corrupt. p. 335: and p. 15: that Translation i. e. the
70. either from the mistakes of its first Authors, or the carelessness, or
ignorance, or worse, of the Transcribes, (mark how here I. O. shrewdly suspects
Transcribers of carelessness, or Gods carelessness over them, whom at other
times he says shall we think they were Oscitant or negligent, lying under a
merciful aspect, and providence of God) is corrupted, or gone off from the
Original in a thousand places twice told, and that its a corrupt stream, a
Lesbian Rule. On the account of which, and some others, no whit better, or
scarce so good, are exhibited; 1820. various lections, with insinuation of an
infinite number more, and p. 339. if the ability of the Authors be urged. and
granted, an unlikely to err so much, what security (quoth I. O.) have we of
their principles and honesty?

I say as much as we have of either the ability principles and honesty of thy
(so implicitly trusted to) Transcribers; what warrant more have thou to hold
all Transcribers more trusty then these, that were, for ought is kuown, the
first, and the most emine^t Translators in the world, insomuch that whether
translated or mistranslated, m^st Priests do^e more on it then on your Hebrew
Copies: yet thou citest Cardinal Ximineus (whereby we see Popish Authors, when
siding with you, are cited by you as Authentic as others) as^erring of this so
much adored, and even Idolized Translation, that it is sometimes Supersluous,
and sometimes Wanting, p. 340. and Cardinal Bel^armine Let T.D. consider this
quotation of two Ca^dinals by I. O. who would argue me to be a Papist for
saying a Truth which he said Bellarmine wrote, whom I never cited at all; which
T.D. will hardly conclude I. O. to be a Papist, though he quote two Popish
Authors, whereof Bellarmine himself is one, and makes use of their Testimony
against his fellow Protestants, whom he fights against: but me mutire ^efas,
and if I mention but any truth that any Papists hold though I, cite them not,
yet its enough to subject me to suspicion of Popery, among our senseless
suspecters. truthl. fle thinkers, and groundlesly confident conjecturers; but
no marvail, fi^h (as the Proverb is) among such evil surmisers, Some men, whose
Brothers will never say they are thieves. may more securely steal a ^orse, then
some true men peep over the hedge.
also whom thou citest, and creditest, that it is as a corrupt Translation out
of the Text, so it felt corrupt and vitrated. and p. 341. eiting Hierom, as so
saying, thou say it is corrupt, interpolated, mingled, and that there were
so many copies of it, and they so varying, that no man knows what to follow:
and if a Translation may so be, why the Original it self may no so be by many
various Copies, he must be a wiser man than I that knows, of the AE^biopian and
Persian Translations, of the New Testament, he says p. 342. that he supposes
it may sately be said, they are the worst, and most corrupt that are extant in
the world; and of the AE^biopian he says, p. 243 it is no whit better, but a
novell endeavor of an illiterate person, and of all in gross, he says thus
in the same page, that would be make it his business to give instances of the
mistakes, ignorance, falsifications, errors, and corruption of these
Translators, who ere they were, Jews or Christians, his discourse would swell
into a Volume; And lastly p 174. also thou, without exception of any,
depr^ssett all Translations, which is all the people have so far below
Transcriptions which ye Linguists have, as to say thus of them viz.
Translations, con^ain the word of God, and are the wo^d of God, perfectly or
imperfectly, according as they express the sense and meaning of those
Originals, and of the Transcriptions ye Linguists have: to advance any, all
Translations as concurring into an Equality with the Original, So to set them
by it, as to set them up with it on even Terms, is to set up an Altar of our
own by the Altar of God, and to make Equal the Wisdom, Skill, and Diligence of
Men, with the Wisdom, Care, and Providence of God himself. So says D. Featly
p. 2. of his Dipters d^pt, the Bible translated is not the undoubted word of
God But so far only as it agrees with the Original which (as I am informed,)
none of you understand, quoth he to Will. Kiffis, and the other Russet Rabbis
he disputed with.

Reply. First then observe, that by your own confession, all that poor people
have, which is bare Translation is but an Altar of your own setting up, among
them, and not Gods Altar, for thou call Transcription the Altar of God, or
the Issue of the Wisdom, Care, and Providence of God himself; but Translation,
an Altar of your own, the Issue of the Wisdom, Providence and Diligence of man
only, that must not be reckoned on as Gods Word, nor stand in equal esteem
with the Scriptures ye Scribes enjoy.

Alas poor people, you and yours must be thrust out still, (as Christ was) into
the manger, for whom there was no room in the Inn, ye must be content with
shame, to keep at your distance from your Doctors, and Lordly Scholars, and to
take the lowest room; they must have a dominion over you and your faith too,
and you must never fare and feed so high as them, but in the stable as
Rusticks, or but Russet Rabbis among the Bruits, and be glad to snap at a
crust, and be fed at their dispose from their pens, and mouths with a bit, and
a bite, if you put not into their mouths, and pay not you shot well too for
that short Commons, and poor pasture ye have from them: those Scriptures they
or some one of many among them can read in Greek and Hebrew, are (quoth I. O.)
entirely to a Tittle preserved without loss; (though but remote Transcriptions
by fallible men) answerable to the first immediate manuscripts, that were
written by inspiration from God, the Word of God perfectly, duly advanced into
an Equality and even terms (for I remember not where in all his Book he puts
the Transcripts, though I know, and he acknowledges, that in some things there
are varieties among them too, below the first manuscripts) with that given out
at first, every Apex of which Tr. 1. chap. 1. S. 22.
is equally divine, and (if a man be to be believed when he speaks falsely, or
foolishly, for want of fear or wit) as immediately from God as the voice,
wherewith or wherein be spoke to or in the Prophets, but this is mear for your
Masters, or little less then forbidden (at least hidden) fruit from you, who,
what light soever ye have from God, yet have not learning enough to let you
into an intermedling with the ( open) secrets of their (living) dead letter; as
for your Scripture which is but Translation out of theirs, hear what they say
of it; who exalt it far above it self into a participation, (thy the halves) of
the same high prerogatives with Theirs, and a taste of that glorious Ex. 1. S.
3^
Title, the Word of God, yet so as that it must know it self too, and not
intrude further into it then they give leave, by their right or wrong
renditions of it, ont of their for ever to be adored right-wrong Copies, who in
the blinduesse of their busy brains, vanity, and follishnesse of their
thoughts, and fleshly wisdom, that is enmity against God, and enters no farther
into the inside of the Scripture, than the Eyesight of a Mole into a millstone,
may render it as it seems best to themselves, and you Lack lingua's little the
wiser: and if they give your Scripture an Inch, it must take heed of taking an
Ell; for as there is a Bit, so there is a Knock, if it presume too far; its
admitted to be the Word of God with theirs, but not on even terms, theirs
wholly and every Apex of it, yours but by the halues, or so far only as it
corresponds with theirs, from which if it offer to vary, by theirs it must be
corrected, castigated, in order to its amendment in time to come: theirs being
perfectly the word of God, yea every Tittle of it the Living Word of the great
God, though but transcribed (as yours is but translated) in the Wisdom, Skill,
and Diligence of men: yours imperfectly and perfectly too, perfectly or
imperfectly, according as yours express the words, sense and meaning of their
Origina's, so that though it can be counted no Robbery for Theirs (which is but
the fruit of man's Wisdom, Skill, and Diligence). and (as now transcribed) was
not (as is confessed) received immediately from God, Tr.^.ch.2.S 1
to be made Equal with that which was at first received more immediately from
him, as the fruit of his Wisdom, Care, and Providence, yet its Robbery for
yours, that comes but as theirs does, through the Skill, Wisdom, and Diligence
of Men; and within a small matter as immediately from God as Theirs does, to be
equal with Theirs, and howbeit they may lawfully, without pride, set up Their
mere Transcriptions, so as to make them sir cheek by chole with the first
hand-writings, and set up their own Altar, or Altered Copies of Hebrew and
Greek, with that higher Altar of God, even the Letter, or first Copy, and set
up Man's posts by Gods posts, even both the first Manuscripts, and their own
tottered Transcripts too, into an Equallity of Titles, Honor, Power,
Perfection, Authority, Necessity, etc. with the True living Word of God, which
the first and truest Scripture that ever was, was at best but a true Scripture,
writing or declaration of, yet your Posts, and Altars, and Scriptures must keep
aloof, and not come so nigh Theirs, as Theirs to Gods, without a check. By all
which, that's here written in this Apostrophe to you, O poor deluded people, ye
may see what a low condition ye are deprest into, till you betake your selves
to the light of God within, which was before any letter to writing was without,
which the Scriptures cry up and call you to, while your Scribes cry it down,
cry out against it, and call you from it; ye may see how ye are thrust out with
a Pueri sacer est locus extra meijete, meddle not here ye Mechanics, ye
unlearned Laics, from the lines of their communication, by your Fanatical,
Fantastical, high flown, haughty Haebricians, and greedy Graecians, that for
filthy lucre take the oversight of, or rather over you, and that take upon them
by force, to be your guides, before whom you are fain to stand like some poor
stupefied Peasant before his Prince; to whom if the one say but Rex sum, sic
uolo, sic jubeo, So I mean to have it, the other has no more to do, but ineak
away, nor to say, but Amen, so be it, nil ultra quaero plebeius.

It follows then, that none but Scholars have the undoubted word of God, for
people understand not Original tongues, nor many Priests the Hebre^: and so
though they say Hear the Word of God, they have no undoubted Word of God to
preach out of it; while they take their Texts out of English Bibles. So people
and blind Priests, have no undoubted, infallible Rule, touchstone to try Truth
by: for if this he so, how is the Scripture (as they have it) the most perfect
Rule to them? both people and illiterate Priests must either get Hebrew and
Greek, or else confess that they live as much by tradition in England, taking
things on trust from the Priests, without trial, as they do at Rome; for what
difference between having Scripture and no Scripture in the mother tongue, when
(notwithstanding that which is so had) men cannot be sure which is the Word of
God, which not but as the Priests tell them so: and if Priests be minded to
deceive them, they may Translate it to their own turn as they please, and
people never the wiser, and so make the Scripture, as a nose of wax, to stand
to themselves, and lead the world by the nose as they have ever done, which way
soever they will.

So I confess I. O. that I see the Scriptures, as taken for the Translations
set somewhat lower by thee than the first Manuscripts, and then your
Transcriptions in the place above quoted (yet entitled too with the name of the
Word of God in part) but your Transcriptions, to an Apex, are equalized with
the first Manuscripts, and both these elsewhere wholly with the light and
living Word.

It is then the mere Transcripts, and neither the first Manuscripts nor
Translations, that thou talkest so exceeding strictly for the non alteration,
or non-corruption of in a Title, the (...) being lost out of the world, and
Translations, excluded the lists o^ thy Apologetical vindication of the
Scripture in the external Text thereof, in vindication of which Transcriptions
of the Hebrew and Greek Texts, (not appearing at all for the English, save
quatenus agreeing with the other p. 153.174.) thou talkst on Argumentatively as
follows.

Arg. 1. To prove the whole Scripture (memorandum of old and new Testament) to
remain entire to this day without ablation, or alteration of it in one (...) or
Tittle thou urgest p. 175. the providence of God in taking care of his word,
which he has magnified over all his name, as the most glorious product of his
Wisdom and Goodness, his great concernment in this world, answering his
promise to this purpose.

Rep. This leads the Front of that Ragged Regiment of Arguments, which follow
it at the heels, in p. 175. 176. 177. being no less than 12. in number, or a
whole Jury impannel'd to Try this Case, of which this is the Foreman, that
speaks more then they all, for its insisted on, or hinted at over and over and
over, in I know not how many places of thy Book, as if thou laydst more
stresse, and purrest more trust in this, than in all the rest, and indeed
though it is a most piteous poor one, yet seeing I know no better, it may be
called (as its rank'r before the Rest) the very best in all the pack.

Let Us see then what force this consideration (viz.) the love, providence,
care, and promise of God, to his Church and Word, Engaging for the
preservation, and continuance of it to a Tittle, without loss, has in it to
evince the entirenesse of the Hebrew and Greek Text to a Tittle.

That the Love. Care and Providence of God is to or ore his Church, and so ore
his Word for his Churches sake I deny not in the least, and that his Word he
speaks he magnifies ore all his Name, as the most glorious product of his
Wisdom and Goodness, as his great concernment in this world, dearer to him than
all the world besides, which his Promise is for the continuance of it so
inalterably entire and incorrupt, that Heaven and Earth it self shall pass
away, as Christ says, Matthew. 5.18. before, one jot and Tittle thereof shall
fail or pass away; and that not one Apex, Tittle, or Point of that has yet
failed, or been altered, or is liable for capable to be altered or corrupted:
All this I grant, for his Word is the incorruptible Seed that lives and abides
for ever. But what is all this to thy purpose I. O. whose talk is only about the
outward Writings, Image, Copy, Letter, Text, which talks of that Word, and who
producest all this to prove every Tittle of that Text to be entire?

Will thou never learn to put, or at least to keep that difference, which
sometimes, when thou art deliberate, thy self pu^test between the Word that is
written of, and the Text, which is the mere Writing of it? Do not thou p.
12.13. (though I know thou blindly blendest them together both there and
throughout thy Book) make the (...) the Writing, the Book, the Letter one
thing; and the Faith, Word, Doctrine declared in it, another? Do thou not
distinguish now and then (as every wise man does ever) between the Text it self
that talks of the Truth, and the Truth it self which the Text talks on?

We know the Truth, and Faith, and Doctrine, and Word of God, which is but One
and the same in its Nature, Essence, Being, and Substance, whether written or
not written of, whether clothed or not clothed in this or that outward,
accidental form, whether displaying it self through the vail of the Letter, or
showing it self more immediately in its naked Native luster, is to a Tittle the
same now that it ever was, in Substance though all the shadowy Discoveries of
it wax old. and vanish, and as a vesture are folded up and changed, and Pass
away as a Scrole that is Roled up, and grows out of Date, when all Letters and
Literal Appearances of it shall be mouldered away. The Word was before the
Letter was, and is neither more nor less what it was, now the Letter is, and
will be no less than it was of old, or what now it is, as to its preservation
in every point, when the Letter shall be no more.

So that what are all thy Propositions about Gods Promise, and Providence, and
Love, and Care of his Church and Word to evince or prove the entire
preservation of every Jot and Tittle of an outward Text, or an old uncertain
Transcript of what was by the Holy men of God some thousands of Years since
written? between which Word and the Writing, or Light and the Letter which
leads only to it, there is no more proportion (as I may show thee more anon)
than is between the Lanthorn and the Light, the Glass Window and the Sun that
shines through it; or then (as thy self intimatest) there is between the Ark
and the Testament or Covenant, that for a while was used to be kept in it. Do
not thou count the Letter the Ark, p. 236. saying, the Jews have now the
Letter, as sometimes they had the A^k among the Philistims to their further
ruin, and p. 315. For my own part I am sollicitous for the Ark or the sacred
Truth of the Original. Yea such proportion say I as the Ark, that kept it, bore
to the Letter of the old Testament that was laid up in it, the same does the
Old Testament it self, the whole (...) or bare Letter, or Shadowy Dispensation
bear unto the Light, Word of God, or New Testament, which is not a Literal, but
a Spiritual Administration

Now as it would be f^lly and absurdity in the abstract for a man to Argue the
Light to be the proper name of the Lanthorn which exhibits it, the Sun the
proper Name of the Glass it shines through, and the Writing or Letter of the
old Testament the proper name of the Ark, in which it was laid up, and then to
affirm all the Properties that appertain peculiarly to the Light, Sun, Letter,
belong to the Lanthorn, Glass, Ark respectively, and to plead from the
unchangeableness of the Light, the permanency of the Sun, the long duration of
the Letter. (Some of which in some uncertain Copies abides to this day) that
the Lanthorn is unalterable, the Window inviolable, the Ark abiding the self
same, and not one jor or inch of it is lost or altered to this day; but in all
points in the same that it was when Moset made it, because some Copies, Imagess
and Pictures of it are found painted on Walls, and Printed in Books, or so, to
this day, Semblably as Ridiculous it is to the full to Argue the Letter is
immediately come to us from God without interveniency of any Medium obnoxious
to fallibility, the Text is not capable to be altered, not is altered in one
Tittle so, but that its entirely the same that it was at first in every Point,
Syllable and Iota, because the Light, Faith, Doctrine, Truth, and Word, which
is as the Sun, the same still and preserved in the Providence of God, full,
firm, and sure, as all the Ordinances of Heaven are, whether it shows it self
through a Glass only or without it.

Now then howbeit we own all that which I. O. tells of the Providential care
and Promise of God as to the preserving of his Word to his Church to be true,
as told of his Word, yet as spoken of the Letter, as Gods great Concernment in
this World dearer to him than all the World, the most glorious Product of his
Wisdom and Goodness, and such like, and as urged in proof of the Text, and each
Tittle of that to be Entire and Eternal as the Heavens; I say (as so) every
Tittle of it is false.

And I would fain know of I O. what Text of Scripture God ever made such a
Promise in concerning the Text or the Scripture, that he would in his Care and
Providence preserve every Titt'e of that outward Writing, for his Church and
his Words sake, which was written at the motion of his Spirit, so that it never
should be so mis-transcribed in any Tittle of it, but that in the Greek and
Hebrew Copies (not English (mark that) nor any Translated, but only Transcribed
Copies) he would keep it from being so adulterated, vitiated, altered,
depraved, and interpolated as not to be every jot the same verbatim as at
first: I say I. O. where is that Promise so made to this purpose, which his
Providence is so engaged to answer? Is it in Isa. 59.22. the place thou quorest
together with a whole nest of others to the same end. p. 155. (viz.) Matthew
5.18. 1 Pet 1.25. 1 Cor. 11. Matthew. 28.20. not one of which make one jot of
mention of the Letter, Text, or any Tittle thereof at all?

That in Isaiah there cited is hinted at, and harp: upon to the same Tune in 7,
or 8 pages in thy 2d Treatise, viz. 155, 167, 168, 169, 273, 317, 319. In all
which more or less, in whole or part thou talkest much of the Transcribers
lying under a loving and careful aspect from the Promise and Providence of God
in beir transcribing, alluding all along to I^ 59.12. as if God had there
engaged himself by Promise, as it were, to guide their hands that they should
not err in a Tittle for his Word and Churches sake: but is there the least
Tittle of such a Promise there made? and look it ^ore again, and see if there
be such a thing touch upon in the least, either expressly or implicity, (...)
(as thou speakst) or by consequence either immediate or far fetched: the words
are these to the Church, under the new Covenant or Gospel: My words which I
have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of the Mouth of thy seed, nor out
of the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth for ever: Here I confess is a
promise to keep his words in the mouths of his Servants under the Gospel in the
latter days especially, so that they shall by word of mouth, and writing, bear
Testimony against the world to his Truth and Name, even the whole seed of the
Righteous successively for ever, without fail, as now they begin to do, even
^abes and Sucklings, out of whose mouths and stammering lips the Lord is
speaking, to reprove the world, and the proud Doctors, Pharisaical, selfseeking
Teachers, and to convince all ungodly ones of their ungodly deeds and hard
Speeches they speak against him in his Saints, in whom he comes to Judgment:
but what is this to the preservation of I. O's. Greek and Hebrew Texts to a
Tittle, without alteration? This is not spoken of the continuance of any
outward Scripture, but of that word of Faith, in the heart and mouth, which the
Apostles Romans 10. preached to turn men to, telling them 'twas nigh, and they
need not look without for it: was ever man so bemoped, as to draw such a
Conclusion as thou do from that Scripture, (viz.) that every Tittle of the
Text of Scripture given out of old, should be secured without one jot of loss,
to the worlds end; and if that were the promise there made, it was never made
good since (as is showed above) the Scriptures of sundry whole prophecies and
Epistles, written by inspiration, are lost since then: nay rather, and indeed,
that Text produces a Truth, which thou deniest, that in the last days his word
and Spirit shall be (de novo) so poured out, shed abroad, and planted in the
hears of his handmaids and servants, Sons and Daughters, that they shall
Prophecy, and reach as of old, by word of Mouth his word, as put into them by
God himself; Yet I. O. I know not how often betakes himself to that Text, to
make good his talk of the eternal Entirenesse, to a Tittle, of his outward
Text, in the Greek and Hebrew Transcripts thereof, without which the word is as
true entire, and secure, (as it is when the Text is entire) when the Text is
torn to pieces, and every Tittle of it mouldred away. Beside, if that were a
promise of preserving the Text, it must evince the Text, is to endure for ever,
world without end, as the word it self does, for its never to depart for ever,
from the seed that it is there promised to, but I. O. confesses, the Scripture
is not to abide for ever, in its use; which is only faith he, Ex. 3. S. 39.
presenti statui, etc. suited to our present state, and (say I) as it shall
cease, as to it is use, so once to its esse or very being.

Obj. And if I. O. urge, as he does in effect, that it is true, the Word, and
Doctrine, and Truth, is the thing promised to be continued for ever primarily,
but consequentially the Letter and it is Tittles, for as much as without it be
preserved in that, and that be preserved entire to a Tittle, the word it self
cannot be preserved from corruption.

Rep. He had as good have told me, (and as soon I should have believed him in
it) that because Moses by Gods appointment made an Ark, to lay the Book, Tables
and Letter in, the two Tables and Letter written on it could not last any
longer then the Ark, or be kept from being lost any where be not kept so
entire, that not one bit or scrap of it be broken or lost, there is no hopes
that ever the light should shine out or be kept alive, or be beheld, yea if one
inch of horn, or a nail, or the least Pin about the Ark had happened to be
shattered, or got any knock, or any odd corner of it be broken off with being
carried, jumbled, or tossed to and sro between Israel and the Philistines,
there had been no means of preserving the Letter from being lost; or as if one
should say, the glass window is set up that the Sun may shine through it,
therefore suppose that to be cracked, or to have any flawes in it, or to suffer
the loss of but one little piece of a pane, there is no likelihood of enjoying
the clear bright Beams of the Sun, more distinctly, or at any certainty, nor
can I be satisfied unquestionably, that the Sun it self remains inviolate,
unless ye can assure me that there is every barley-corns breadth of the
glassewindow, without any loss, as it was at first setting up, though yet we
see now the Sun both is the same, and is better seen, when beheld without a
glass then thorough it, and is most clear when the glass window is taken
down, and it beheld more immediately in the light that shines from it self, he
were fit to be Canonized for a fool, that would count him a very wife man, at
least; as to that affair, that should so affirm; so let who will esteem of I.
O's wisdom in this point, yet I am not such a fool yet, or not so wise, or
something, as to believe him: howbeit, who e're believes, or believes him not,
in such wise as this aforesaid, he talks in effect; while p. 12.13. he says
thus, without proof (as he does most things) according to his own vain
thoughts, as follows, viz.

I. O. The Providence of God has manifested it self, no less concerned in the
preservation of the writings, then the doctrine contained in them.

Rep. Which is a loud one, for many Holy Prophets writings are lost, but not a
Doit of the Doctrine.

I. O. The writing it self being the product of his own eternal Council, for
the preservation of the Doctrine, after a sufficient discovery of the
insufficiency of all other means, for that end and purpose.

Rep. Which is another, for the Doctrine can never perish, if every Tittle of
the Text should.

I. O. The malice of Satan has raged no less against the Book, than the Truth
certained in it.

Rep. Which is a third. For Satan will allow people Bibles and Texts enough to
talk of Truth out of, so they walk not in Truth.

I. O. It was no less Crime to be Traditor libri, then Abnegator fidei.

Rep. Which is a fourth false Tale, for the burning the Book cannot murder the
faith as having the light does, which with it is fellows, I have disproved, and
given Reasons against, above; and while p. 17.18.19. in answer to Capellus his
honest Grants, that the Saving Doctrine of the Scripture, as to the matter and
substance of it in all things of moment, is preserved in the Copies of the
Original, and Translations that do remain, J.O. assenting first to it as Truth,
to the overthrowing of himself (as he often does) that notwithstanding all the
errors and mistakes in the most corrupt Translations, yet every necessary,
saving, fundamental truth is found, sufficiently Testified to therein (or if
he deny that of Translations, let him do it, and see what a pickle he puts poor
people into, who upon the account of that denial, will be found not to have all
saving Truth in their Bibles) he asserts.

I. O. That it is not enough to satisfy him, that (in his doted on Transcribed
Copies of the Original) the doctrines mentioned are preserved entire, every
Tittle and (...) must come under Care and consideration, or else injury is done
to the Providence of God toward his Church, and care of his word, and that it
will not be found an easy matter, upon a supposition of such corruptions of
the Originals, (in Tittles and points etc. as is pleaded for against him) to
evince unquestionably, that the whole saving Doctrine it se^f, at first given
out from God* continues entire and incorrupt.

Rep. Oh gross, as if the entirenesse of the eternal Truth, that was before
all external Text was, was now so subjected, as to depend on the entirenesse of
a tottering Text for its security, or else is lost for ever; and yet yielded to
be preserved entire in Translations, that are corrupt in more then Tittles, but
not possib^e to be kept entire in Transcriptions, if any Tittle be
mis-transcribed therein.

I O That the nature of the doctrine is such, that there is no other principle,
and means of its discovery, no other Rule, or measure of Judging and
determining any thing about or concerning it, but only the writing out of
which it is taken.

Rep. As if the Doctrine comes from the writing, when as the writing came from
the Truth and Doctrine.

I. O. It being wholly of divine Revelation, and that revelation being expressed
only in that writing.

Rep. Absit absurdum, de quo vere dicitur quod posito uno sequuntur millia. As
if Revelation were not made more truly, clearly, distinctly, and immediately
by the light and Spirit, then ( mediante litera) by the mediation of the
letter, that comes from it, in which thou say Revelation only is made, before
which yet the doctrine was revealed.

I. O. That upon any corruption supposed in the Transcript Copies of the
Original, (but not the Translations) there is no means of rectifying the
Doctrine.

Rep. No, by no means its like, as if the Spirit and Light could not now
possibly reveal it, as easily as at first, and as if Truth were not as equally
by the Spirit exposed to the understanding of men in all ages, as in some: and
as if pure Revelation were not made now by the light, and Spirit of Truth,
which depends solely on Revelation, as it ever did, and not on a letter that
came from it.

Thus much to the first of those Scriptures urged by thee I. O. to prove the
promise of God to preserve the Scripture, even! every Tittle of the external
Texts in Transcripts, (not Translations), for Ever, and the second is like unto
it, (viz) Math. 5.18. where though Christ talks of not one (...) or Tittle
failing, he that shall understand him speaking there, of the outward writing,
and outward Tittles of the Law of it, many Tittles and Books, of which were
lost before that, and not of the light it self, which is that Law, the Letter
is but a Copy of, and of the word it self that Christ speaks, which is that
that is heard by his sheep only, in the heart, and that comes immediately from
his own mouth, understands neither what he says, nor whereof he affirms; yet
in three places I. O. quotes it to evince the Integrity, and Identity of every
Tittle of the Text, as 'twas at first, (viz.) p. 13.155.317.

The Third is as little, alias not one jot not Tittle to I. O's purpose,
(viz.)1 Pet. 1.25. where Peter speaks no more of any outward Texts or
Transcripts, then if he had said nothing at all: nor of such a corrupting thing
as Manuscripts, Texts, and Transcripts, Titles, and dead Letters are, but of
the incorruptible seed, the Word of God, that lives, and endures for ever,
ver. 23. Even the word of the Gospel, which was that word of faith Paul also
writes of, Romans 10.8. which was preached by the Apostles, and Testified to by
them, and their Scripture, and Moses Scripture, Deuteronomy. 30.14. and all outward
Scripture, that its nigh within, in the heart and mouth.

The Fourth, viz. 1 Cor. 11. no verse of which is quoted, is so far from adding
a cubit to I. O's cause about the Scripture, that there is no mention made of
any Scripture at all, thoroughout the whole Chapter; so that what verse he
should infer or scrue any thing from, to evince the Scripture to be entire to a
Tittle, I cannot imagine. Paul tells of things he had delivered to them before,
which-whether it were by word of Mouth, or Epistle, he intimates not there; but
whether it were by Orall preaching, or writing is much at one to I. O. for if
by writing, which serves I, O. most, yet he means not the writing it self, or
Epistle, but (...), the things he delivered, as he did to the Thessalonians, 2.
These 2. by word, or Epistle, and if I. O. will have it so, that it was by a
former Epistle, then he serves me against T. D. and himself, more than himself
against me, acknowledging the first Epistle of Paul to Corinth (which he wrote
before the first of the two we have, and mentions 1. Cor. 5.) to be Authentic
and Canonical and so that a whole Canonical Epistle of that holy Apostle (and
that is more than a Tittle, or (...)) is utterly lost.

The Fifth, viz. Math. 28.20. Teaching them to observe whatever I command you,
and so I am with you always, even to the end of the world: which way I. O. can
from thence conclude a promise for every Tittle of inspired Scripture to be
preserved for ever entire without loss, or alteration, I see not; but I see
one thing, that if I. O. hobble but upon a Text of Scripture, he thinks at a
venture it must serve his Turn, about the entirenesse and integrity of the
Text, and its Tittles, though there be no mention of Scripture made at all in
it* for here is none in this, in which Christ bids them, Teach the Nations to
observe what he commanded them, and that they did, and he promised then to be
with them always, to the end of the world, as he was, and is ever with his
people, by his light, word, they being turned to it themselves: but what is all
this to the Tittles of Hebrew and Greek Texts? unless I. O. say they are the
Christ that he meant, when he laid I will be with you; never did I see men in
two Books so miserably wrest, and mis-interpret Scripture, on pretense of
vindicating Scripture, as T. D. and I. O. do. Yea I. O. there is scarce any, or
but very few, of all the Scriptures thou quotest in all thy Books, but thou
pervertest them more or less, as T. D. does the most, if not all he meddles
with: whether about the Scripture, or the word, or foundation, or Rule, or what
ever else.

And as for these five last examined, if thou had not sent me to them to that
end, I should as soon of my self have gone to seek a Dolphin in the woods, as
looked into any one of them to find God promising in his love to his Church, and
Word, and in order to the preserving of them both, to be careful to set his
providence so on work, as to lay the Transcribers of the Scriptures in the
Hebrew and Greek Tongues (but not the Transla^ors of them into other tongues,
in which yet his care, and Love to his Church, though not to the Clergy, that
trade out of their Original Texts, would as much appear, and his Truth, and
most men's souls are as much concerned, and more too, then in Hebrew and Greek
Texts, if the Scripture were the only way to life) under his loving aspect, so
as to see they should not miss, nor falsify in a Tittle; though he would
leave Translators out of the lists of that loving aspect, to err and corrupt
as much as they would: for howbeit I ken not the mystery of I. O's mind, in
this, nor any Reason why (if God love his Church and Word) he should not in his
care to preserve both, oversee, with a loving Aspect, that Translators should
not mis-translate, as well as Transcribers not mistranscribe, yet I. O. allows
the loving Aspect of God to Transcribers, but (whether God himself do so or no,
I dare not say) denying that great favor as in which his Church is much
concerned, as in the other, to Translators. for p. 334. speaking of the Chaldee
Paraphrase, he says thus, viz. Seeing it has not lain under any peculiar
care, and merciful providence of God, whether innumerable other faults be not
get into it, and errors, not to be discovered by any varieties of Copies, as
it is happened with the Sepmagint, who can tell? No promise, nor providence,
nor mercy, nor loving aspect, to the poor peoples Scripture still, which is
that of Translation only, for they cannot read Hebrew and Greek, their part
may go whither it will, God looks not after it: but such darlings do our
Doctors and Clergy men deem themselves to be with God, that his love, care,
oversight, promise, providence and all, is toward every Tittle of their
Transcripts, that they may trade with their Text, and mete out what they will
to men for money from it; should any Qua. make such mad conclusions, their
Books would be good enough to be burned; and thou I. O would Judge them no
better.

Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla refertis
Tuque liberque tuus, magnum and memorabile nomen.
Having foild the Front-Guard of that Ragged Rout, the Rest that have far less
Reason in them, (if less can be) are soon Routed.

Arg. the Second, is the Religious care of the Church (not of the Romish
Synagogue say thou) to whom these Oracles of God were committed.

Rep. What Church then (if not the Remish Synagogue) has had that Commission
of the Scriptures to her, and that Religious care thou here talkst on, to keep
every Tittle of the Text entire, without loss or change? I do not say that the
now Roman Harlot has now or ever had in her Apostatical slate, such a
Commission of the Scripture to her, as she pretends to, as if they were the
only Trustees, to whose care and custody the Text was committed of God, for as
to their proud prate, and peculiar claim, to such a preheminent power, to be
keepers and preservers of the Scripture, I deny it, nay with thy self in the
2.3.4.5. pages of thy Epistle. I disown and damn their deceitful pretense, to
such a trust reposed in them: and if they had enjoyed any such, they have (as
thou say truly) manifested a treacherous mind, and falsified their Trust
egregiously, and so cannot stand in Judgment, if called to account upon their
own principles, having indeed so far as they have had to do with the
Scriptures, altered, added, detracted, depraved, vitiated, interpolated, and
done what not? to corrupt them, during the long time of their Dominus
fac-totum-ship, in whole Christendom, about Scripture, and every thing else ad
extra, that had any pretense toward the Truth; and while the Scripture of the
Old, but the New Testament, more specially (seeing the Jews reject it) lay
locked up from all the Laity, within the lines of her conclavical, clerical
Conemunication; for though de jure they ought not so to have impropriated it,
but were Arrogant usurpers in so doing, yet that de facto they had the grand
Custody of that ye call your Canon, and changed it as they pleased, I should
judge thee more silly then I am willing to do, if thou should deny it, there
being no visibly constituted Christian Church, as to outward Order, in all
Europe, that was other then a member of that blind, Babylonish Body, for at
least a thousand years together.

But if that Church had not (as I say they had not) can thou tell me what
Church had the exact Tale of so many Books of the Scripture, as ye talk on, and
call your Canon, committed to her of God, any more then they? or if thou say
the whole True Apostolical Church of Christ, under the Gospel, had that
Scripture we count the Canon, and no more, committed to it, where was there
ever such a thing done? by whom? or when? can thou tell us any of this thou
talkst on? or give us any Testimony of Scripture for this, or trusty Tradition,
or any ground whereupon to act divine faith in this (with thee) so fundamental
a matter, save ^he fiction of thy own fancy, and thy own mere untrusty
thoughts, and blindly confident Conjectures? thou think that in 2. Tim. 2.2.
will serve thy turn in this case, but I have overturned that already: and if
ever there were such a divine Commission of so many writings, as a Canon by
Christ or his Apostles to the Gospel Church (though I abhor that paultry,
novelly pretended Primacy of Rome, over other particulars) yet while it
remained in its Primitive Apostolical Purity, it had as deep a share, as any
other, in that Commission of the Canon to her; and so thy two Questions, Ep. p.
3. what Scripture was this they say was committed to them, and when was this
deed of Trust made unto them, have full as much in them (but that plane
nibilest) to answer thee withal, as thou have to answer me, who of the Church
to whose care and custody thou say the Scripture was committed since Christ,
and by him, or his Apostles; do here ask thee, what Church is that (for thou
amazest thy own, and seek'st (as Priests do) to stun other men's minds with the
name of the Church, the Church) but what Church is that, whose care is said by
thee to be so great, whilst Rome's was so little, to keep every Tittle of the
Text entire, and to whose care and custody it was to that end committed, and
entrusted? and (in thy own words to Rome, so) I to thee, propound, what
Scripture was this, or where was this deed of Trust made unto them?

And since it was not the Church of Rome (as I freely agree with thee it was
not) what Church was it? or where lived it, or by what name or Title, beside
that general blind people-confounding name of Church, do thou call it? was
it some one universal, Catholic, visibly constituted, true Christian Church,
that had such a constant, clearly visible continuance, and successive outward
orderly being in a Body, as that Roman Harlot has ever seemed to have from
Christ, downward to this day? was it your (what should I call it?)
mingle-mangled Episcopall-Presbyter-Independant Church, that is run out from the
Womb of that Babylonish Bawd, through the loins of your late Fathers, the
Prelates, and Scottish Presbyters, into that Ragged, Patcht Posture, wherein it
now stands, like a Participle, that is neither this nor that, nor Noun
Substantive, that can stand by it self, without the Magistrates help, nor Verb
that betokens either doing or suffering, any great matters for the Truth, but
most like an Adjective that leans upon Parliaments, and earthly Powers to
uphold it, partaking with all sides, as occasion is, and of all forms
something, yet is just nothing, but some Participle, or
PapalPrelatical-Presbyterian (...) (i.e.) vere nihil but a mongrel?

Was it this Church, that is one, not individually, but specifically the same,
with what yours is, at this present, derived downward, and carefully receiving
the Scripture downward entirely, in all its Hebrew and Greek Letters, Accents,
Points, Tittles, and Iota's, without change, or loss in the least? is so show
us but some few footsteps of such a thing through the time of the Catholic
Apostasy, as a visible constituted Church, which might have been known by the
distinction of Elders, Bishops, Deacons, etc. in the dark days of Romes
dominion, (except that of Rome it self) that had the Canon constituted of no
more nor l^sse, but just so many Scriptures, Letters, Stories, Tittles, Iota's
(as thou trislingly tatlest) by the Apostles, and so committed to their care,
and as carefully handed down to you Linguists, in every Letter of the Original
Languages, without alteration, addition or diminution?

But I more than suppose thou shall as soon find, and follow to a hairs
breadth, the very way of a bird flying, or an Arrow shot through the air, as
decypher such a matter: and if the Papists should put the Question, de novo, to
thee, as they did long since, to the Protestants, where was your Church before
Luther? if thou could prove the Pedigree of thine so high as Luther (though
witnesses to the Truth more or less, in all times, suffering in sackcloth, in
the most dismal days I own,) yet thou would be as much puzzled to prove any
other constituted Church, that kept so entire (as thou talkst) thy constituted
Canon, in all Christendom, beside that of the Romish Synagogue, that corrupted
it, as that namelesse Author was, who wrote an answer to it, 1624, entitled
Luthers Predecessors, who though he quits himself well in proving downward from
John Wicklisse, who was well nigh 200. years before Luther, but 1370. after
Christ, a company of particular successive sufferers, for some truth that began
to shine out again from under the Romish smother; yet can instance no higher
then Io. Wicklisse for at least a 1000. years upward, any thing at all, but an
universal dominion of the Church of Rome, confessing that if the Papists will
tie him to prove any visible constituted Church beside theirs, before Luther,
the Task is unequal because the records are wanting, and also because the
Church was not in the long time of Apostasy, nor yet was to be always in such
a manner visible; which is the very Truth, for the true Church was to be, and
was according to the word of Prophecy: Rev. 12. in a waste, suffering,
afflicted, desolate, forlorn, widernesse, condition, trodden under feet by the
Gentiles, coming into the out Court, the outward name and profession of
Christianity, Rev. 11.

And as when in her primitive glory she was clothed with the Sun, and a crown
of twelve stars on her head, i.e. the doctrine, truth, word of faith, the 12
Apostles Preached (and not simply those few of their naked writings, and
Letters, and Texts, and their Tittles, and thou simply contendest) on her head,
and the Moon, i.e. all changeable things, such as all Texts, and Transcripts,
and Tittles, and Iota's are, under her feet, so when she came into her forlorn
solitary state, in the time (which was while the Whore, or Clergy began to Ride
the Beast, and fit upon the Waters, Tongues, Nations, Kings, and Kindreds of
the Earth, and to cry Ecce duo gladii hic, to claim both swords and to become
supreamly (as she made her sub-sub, or Magistratical Power, that bore her up
subordinately to her) not only Custos utriusque Tabulae, Vice-preserver of
both Tables, but pretendedly, Custos utriusque Testamenti, chief Commissioners,
Trustees, and keepers of both Testaments) when she was driven to and fro, and
chased like a Roe, or Sheep, and kept under, and domineered over, by the said
mystical Whore, and hunted, as well as by the Heathen Emperors, in the first
three hundred years, or ten first persecutions, she was in her several
witnesses massacred, murderd, hanged, burnt, headed, fried, flead, tortured in
all the ways that Tyrants could invent; though you that have no changes, and
therefore fear not God, and sit at ease in your Ce^ls, and are not shifted from
vessel to vessel, and so like Moab, have an ill sent settled in you, can have
time to talk to each other with your Tongues, and in your Treatises about your
Texts, in several Tongues, and your Letter in this Language, that and the other;
yet the True Church, which, but that the care, and Providence, and Presence of
God was with her according to his promise, full hardly kept, and had much ado
to keep the Truth in the inward parts, and her self from the outrages committed
on her) had other weightier matters to mind, and look after, and meddle with,
then the seeking out, and looking up, and keeping, and preserving of such
toys, as ye are now taken, and wholly taken up with; that is to say, the
integrity of the Hebrew and Greek Texts, the Points, Vowels, Accents, trivial
Tittles, and Iota's: and where thou find'st the Spouses care, according to a
Commission given her from God, to be so extreme, as thou intimarest about these
matters (excepting in thy own nfinitely forging fancy) no wise seeker shall
ever find.

Arg. Thy third is the care of the first Writers in giving out Authentic
Copies, of what they had received from God unto many, which might be Rules to
the first Transcribers.

Reply. OF cur as hominum, etc. from whence did thou fetch this false and
foolish piece of faith, save from the old fathomlesse fountain of thy own
fancy? which, if something as good as nothing may serve (as easily it may to
fasten falsity upon fools) will find something to say for every thing that it
finds occasion to fain; where read thou that the first writers of every
corner of thy (so called) Canon, (which thou must Adaequate thy proof to, as
well as to the whole, or else thou Syllogizest short of what thou aimest at)
took such care to give out Authentic Copies of what they wrote, as from God,
unto many, to ^^is end, that they might be Rules to the first Transcribers?
Alas poor imagining man, they that were Ministers not of the Letter, but the
Spirit, were not so full of Care, as ye are, and as ye (measuring the
enlargednesse, and copiousnesse of others, by your straightened, narrow, sca^ty
selves) conceive they were, about such emptiness, as Copies of what they
wrote, Transcripts, Texts, Tittles, Points, I^ta's, V^wels, Accents, and such
accidental stuff, as is not de esse to the Kingdom and Gospel of it, which
they published: if any of them did as once Paul did, will that the Colossians
should let Laodicea read what he wrote to them, and read from Laodicea what he
wrote thither, whether in^a Transcript, or the Original Copy, which might pass
between two near Sister-Churches, who knows? yet how many Copies, and to how
many did he give out Copies, of what he wrote to particulars, to be
transcribed, and kept, and committed to the whole Church of God, as a Rule for
future Transcribers, and a Rule of Faith and Obedience, and such like, to all
ages of the world for ever? his first to the Corinthians, and to Ephesus, and
to Laodicea, for all his desire it should be read by the Colossians, happened
to miss your Bibles, to be bound and bundled into which I know it was no more
intended, then sundry others that are there, which he wrote to particular, and
some private persons, about private, particular, and personal affairs; some
wrote more general Epistles to all Saints, then in being as Peter, Jude,
James, John, and they might be (but between might be, and necessarily must be,
there is great difference) as generally read as they could be, where e're they
came, as being of more direct and general concernment to all, as in that
capacity of Saints; and some wrote more particularly, as occasion was, and they
were moved by the Spirit, (in which they did all that they did at all, and not
in the movings of the flesh) letters to private persons about private matters,
as John's short letter to Gaius, and Paul's to Philemon, and Timothy about the
bringing of his cloak he left at Troas, with Carpus: but did either one or
the other of these give out Authentic Copies of these two private letters to
many, to be a Rule to the first Transcribers, and Rules to all Saints, to the
worlds end: it is true, they are in your Bibles among others, that were got
together, and it pleases me well that they are there, and should, if you had
all that ever the Apostles and Prophets wrote, whereof if you have the 20th. or
100th. part, its more then either you or I, or any man now knows, and much it
matters not for the certain knowledge of such an uncertain, unprofitable thing,
but what of that, will it follow, that these about Onestmus his being received
into his Master Philemons service again, and John's telling Gaius, he would not
write more to him now with Pen and Ink, but hoped to see him shortly, were ever
intended by them to be the Canon to the Church of God in all ages, which must
be committed to the Care of Transcribers, to be successively Copied out to a
Tittle, so that on supposition of any corruption, or change of a Letter, in the
writing them over, the eternal faith of God would Cernally fall to the ground,
and the word of God not be preserved from being lost, (as thou dotest) much
more, if those whole Letters or Epistles themselves should be lost, then actum
est, etc. no other means of discovery, nor recovery of the whole substantial
Truth, but that would fail together with them? must those be also submitted to
so strictly, that he that should not believe every external Tittle of the Text,
there Transcribed, to be the word of God (as thou tellest us) should be left
inexcusable in his damnable unbelief, and be in peril of Eternal damnation, and
such danger as I. O. dreams, and would draw all men into the dream of, together
with him? Scilicet is superis labor est, ea cura quietos
Sollicitat:
As if the Saints of old, and they now that live at rest in God, (...) witness
God dwelling in them of a Truth, had nothing to do but belabour themselves, and
cumber one another minds, as our wife Clergy does, who are wearied in the
greatness of their way, and are Mole Ruentes sua, as Suis and ipsa a Roma
viribus Ruit, with continual wrestlesness, and as endless, as easelesse Care
and thought of a e i o u Tittle, and such Nugacyties as these, that are ^atcht
in I. O's head piece: whom I here give to understand, that while they, like the
Tiberian Massorites, at their do-little Academies, are so seriously doing of
nothing, and as childish in serious things, yet nos nucibus facimus quaecunque
relictis.

Arg. thy Fourth is the multiplying Copies to such a number, that 'twas
impossible any should corrupt them All wilfully, or by negligence.

Rep. Nugae! why Impossible to corrupt them All? if not by wilfulness, yet by
negligence, was it impossible that there should be variation in Tittles and
Iota's, (which is corruption with thee) in them all? have thou any more
infallible security against the mis-transcription of them All, then thou have
against the mis-transcription of some only? surely a man well in his wits
would have Argued thus: It was possible to every individual of the Copies to be
mis-transcribed through negligence, or wilfulness, or weakness, and against
the will, or something of the Transcribers (none of them being any more then
fallible (as thou say p. 167. though never so honest) therefore it was
possible at least, and not impossible, but that they might be all
mis-transcribed* and so corrupted.

^^^^^ver might be spoken of every individual Copy, as to its lyableness to
^^^^^ation ( caeteris paribus,) supposing All the remote Transcribers to be but
f^^lible as well as some) may be said of All the Copies, as well as of any one
of them: and if the ability of some Transcribers, might be greater then that of
other some, yet (as thou say of the 70 Translators* p 339.) thou having no
security of the principles, or honesty of the Ablest^^^s them, for what thou
know, what ere thou think, they might be A'l mis-transcribed, as well as
any one, and however seeing thou veildest, some might be, if All could not, it
would puzle thee not a little to d^clare to him that Asks thee, which is right
and which wrong, and in which possibly the Transcribers might be mistaken, and
in which it was in ^^ssible they should ^e so, and which do, and which do not
agree with the Autograph^, none of which are left to correct it by; there being
no more then the Apographa now remaining.

But assuredly what mistake wa^ possible to befall my one of the Copies, was
not impossible so befall every of them, and so far art thou from denying it to
be possible, that some mistakes and v^^iations might befall some Copies, for
all thy peremptory pronouncing it impossible, that variations should befall
them All, in regard of the number of Copies that p. 191. upon that self same
account of the multitude of Transcriptions, thou pronouncest it utterly
impossible, that All the Transcriptions should be made without some variations
and mistakes; thy words there being these, (viz.) that so many. Transcriptions,
most of them by private persons, for private use, having a standard of
correction in the public Asse^^lyes ready to relieve their mistakes, should be
made without some variation, is (...) or impossible; O ye Ridiculous Ringles
and Round Os that I. O. makes and runs in! he complains of Capellus, p. 15. for
Asserting variations in All the p^esent (...), or Transcriptions of the old
Testament, upon merely uncertain Conjectures, yet upon as merely uncertain
Conjectures himself asserts, that they are not All corrupted; yea he says (a
he thinks) that its impossible there should be mistakes and variations in All
the Transcriptions, and yet that it is impossible but that mistakes and
variations should be in many of them.

Quis legate haec? min tu istud ais? quis non ni i nemo.
Arg. thy Fifth, is the preservation of the Authentic Copies, frist in the
Jewish Synagogues, then in Christian Assemblies with reverence and diligence.

Rep, What Is all that in proof, that there is no variation in Copies of the
Hebrew and Greek Text, in so ^uch as in Tittles and Iota's? if thou could
prove, as thou do b^t only propound it, as thy opinion, that Authentic
Copies were kept with such Reverence and Diligence downward to this day in
Christian Assemblies, which Christian Assemblyes (unless thou count upon those
of the Romish Synagogue as such, which only remained in an outward way of
Assembling) were not kept in the posture of constituted Christian Assemblyes
themselves, much less then Authentic Copies of the Original Text entire in
them, for a thousand years, and upward; But when they were in Assemblies they
rather look^ each at their translated Copies their several Mother Tongues,
then at the Hebrew and Greek Tittles, and Iota's, that thou so openly Tatlest
for with such earnestness, as if all divine Truth, as to our knowledge
thereof, did entirely and eternally depend upon them; what dribling doings are
here for a Doctor?

Arg. thy Sixth, is the daily Reading and Studying of the world by all sorts of
persons ever since its first writing, rendering every alteration liable to
immediate observation and discovery, and that all over the world.

Rep. What Is this to the purpose? when was there more Reading, and Studying the
Scripture by All sorts, all the world over, and Tumbling to and fro to
wearisomnesse by the Scripture-searching Scribes, that never hear Gods voice,
nor come to Christ the Light, that they may have Life, and more close and
curious prying, and Critical observing of the Points, and Vowe^s, and Accents;
by Syllabical and Punctual Schoolmen as at this very day, in their Academical
entercourses, and interchangeable pro and con prate, about punctations, from
one nation to another? yet when more variety then now in the Copies of their
Texts, which the more they dive into the more discovery they make of the
diversity of their Transcripts? but the matter is not mended for all that, nor
the multiplication of errors and various lections and mistakes of more then
Tittles, in writings, or printings, and reprintings, and why much reading and
study should be a means to prevent mistakes of old, that is none now, though
more forcible then formerly, if any efficacy were in it at all that way, either
I have not reason enough to render the Reason of it, or rather there is no
Reason for it at all, and that indeed is the very Truth.

Arg. thy Seventh is the consideration of the many millions that looked on
every Tittle and Letter in this Book, as their inberitance, which for the whole
world they would not be deprived of.

Rep. What people be those that looked on every Tittle and Letter in the Bible
as their inheritance, which for the whole world they would not part with one
Tittle of? for my part, I look upon them as never the wiser for that, if they
were as many millions of millions, as thou say there are millions of them;
for my part I love the Bible as much as I do any book in the world, and upon a
true and just account, and in a right way honor it as much as any man does, I.
O. himself not excepted, for all his high unjust Adorations of it; and as for
the holy Truth that's declared in it, I have bought and paid so dear for that,
that no less then All that I had in the world, of what sort soever, lust,
pleasure, honor, riches, or righteousness of mine, is gone for the sake of
it, and to have all that ever I lost for it I would not sell it again, yet All
the Tittles and Letters, Accents, Iota's and Points (which I. O. counts his
such a rich possession, p. 252.) that are in All the Hebrew Bibles and Greek
Testaments I have, and I have more than one of each sort; any one shall have of
me for five pound, and less money (and the Books themselves to boot) and that
is less then the whole world, and yet I shall hope to enjoy not a Tittle the
less of the word of Truth, that is therein told, if I sincerely attend to the
light the Letter calls to, though I should never neither buy nor so much as
look into any outward Copy of the Original Text more while I live.

And whereas I. O. says, p. 163. somewhat sutably to what he says here, that
the Church of God, does now, and has for many ages enjoyed the Copies of the
Original Languages, as her chiefest Treasure. I say that is one of the chiefest
untruths that have been told yet, among those many that he has Treated out of
that whole Treasury of Tales, and va^in thoughts that are in his heart, out of
the abundance of which evil Treasury his mouth speaks, and pen brings forth
evil things: for though the Churches of man's constituting, of which I. O. is
yet a member, and the Ministers of men's making at the Universities, do now
rejoice in Transcripts, Copies of the Hebrew and Greek Texts, and Iota's and
Points, and Tittles, and such like Toys and Trappings, and fruitless
furniture, as their chiefest Treasure, rich possession, and inheritance, which
they glory and bless themselves in, and for the whole world will not he
deprived of, knowing that they must be deprived of all their worldly
excellencies, if they come once to part with them; and do cry out (...), that
all Truth tumbles to the ground, if any jot and Tittle of their Original Texts,
and Hebrew punctation fail, and they see no way to be delivered from utter
uncertainty in and about all sacred Truth, Ep. p. 25. (in such wise as the
Antichristian Churches did in darker times behind us, and do still in the dark
places of their several habitations, count old moldy Latin mass books, and
new molded Eng^ish Liturgies, Letanies, and Scottish Directories) meliori
^ute, of a little better mould yet then the other two, a thousand fold before
the best of which yet I prefer the Scripture Directory, whether in its Original
Transcripts, or but Translations) their chief spiritual treasure, crying out,
that all true faith, worship, Church, Word of God, Religion, and all is like to
be utterly lost, if these be taken away till the Remove of which Religion was
never rightly found.

Yet the Church of God, which is now the some that it was in substance, before
any Scripture at all was, in rerum natura, both ever did, and does still count
Christ the Light and Life, of whom the Letter only Testifies, her chiefest Joy
and Treasure, Luke 1.57. Joh. 8:56 and not the outward Text that does but talk
of him, much less the mere Accidental Adventitious parts thereof, quae possunt
vel adesse vel abesse sine Scripturae interitu, which as the whole Scripture it
self may be either present or absent from without the corruption of the
substantial Truth or word.

But whose Treasure the Scripture is, or is not, it is little, yea nothing to I.
O's purpose, to prove a non-mis transcription of the Scripture: we see I. O.
and many millions more, make much of, and more ado, about every Tittle and lota
of the Text, then they need do at this day, and yet, with a non obstante to all
that, the variety of Lections are a thousand times twice told in Transcripts
and Translations, and if we will believe I. O. p. 16. frequent insinuations of
an infinite number more are yet to be collected.

Arg. the Eighth, as to the old Testament in particular, is the care of Ezra
and his companions, in restoring the Scripture to its purity, when it had met
with the greatest trial that ever it underwent in this world, considering the
paucity of Copies then extant.

Rep. Ezra and his companions care was as great no doubt, as man's could well be
in that case, but ultra posse non est esse, they could do no more then they
could do, as to the restoring the purity of the Scripture when corrupted (and
that is Questionable, whether they restored it so perfectly, as not to leave out
some Tittles or Iota's, yea and whole Books too, because they could not find
them, witness all those forenamed whole Prophecies that are wanting) but what
if their endeavors had succeeded so, as to set all to rights as perfectly and
exactly to a Tittle, as 'twas at first giving our* might it not as likely, and
much more be corrupted, vitiated, altered, in points, Tittles, and Iota's,
between Ezraes days, and now through the many Tumbles, Catastrophes,
Revolutions, and greater changes of times and things, then that of the
Babylonish Captivity that have happened, then in the days of its so long
steady standing, while it was reserved within the bounds and confines of the
Jewish Church only, and yet here thou intimatest it to have been then
exceedingly charged, depraved, and defective, or else how could Ezra and his
fellows be said to restore it to its purity? thou art very hard put to it for a
proof of the present integrity, and purity of the Hebrew Text to a Tittle, that
go two thousand years backward, asserting that it was restored to its purity
then, and thence concluding, that it stands as entire to a Tittle now, as then
it did; thou might as well have gone a little higher, and argued thus from
before Ezra, (viz.) the Hebrew Text was at first written by the Holy Penmen,
Moses, David, Isaiah, and the other Prophets truly, and according to the mind
of the Spirit, therefore it stands so entihe (...) this day; but thou seeing
(for all the Jews great care to keep it, thou make such an Argument of) it
was much corrupted before Ezra, therefore beginnest thy account of its
integrity to a Tittle no higher then him, in whose days thou deemest it was,
de novo, most perfectly rectified, ad amussim, reckoning rashly (as thou mostly
do) and in no wise considering that thou have no more, but much less
security against its alteration from Ezra downward, to this day (not knowing
what heedlesse hands of careless Scribes it has since come under) then there
was from Ezra ^^^ards, from the time of its most pure giying out, in which
juncture yet it so fell out, that as that which they found of it in Ezras
days, was by thy own confession much corrupted, so not a little of i^ was lost
altogether: But (to knock this Argument more fully on the head) thy self
confessest that (as great as the care of Ezra was, to restore the Text of the
old Testament to its purity, and to complete the Points) it has since then
slipped so far out of order, that as to the Points according to the Jews general
faith, it received a great reviving, and restoration to their Right, and
knowledge by the Massorites, when they had been much dis used, quoting R.
Azarias in proof of it. p. 247.271. and so have routed thy own Argument with
thy own hands.

Arg. thy Ninth, is this the care of the Massorites from Ezras days, and
downwards, to keep perfect and give an account of every syllable in the
Scripture, citing Buxtorfius.

Rep. Here thou supposest thou put in sufficient security for its
nonalteration in a Tittle to this day, but of the Massorites care if I doubt,
thy Word and Buxtorfs are not a ground to beget a divine faith in me, or
another about it, who are bold in imposing your own Conjectures; but if I own
them to have been as careful as thou conceivest them to be, yet in the days
of those before Ezra who were as careful as these could be, it came not-off
without loss, much less is it likely it did to this day, if those Massorites
before Christ had been ten times more careful then they were, forasmuch as thou
rendrest both Jews and Papists, between which two sorts of men the Hebrew Text
has been reserved to this day, both of them generations of men so hardened in
hatred against the truth, as not to be worthy to be counted faithful Trustees
about the Scriptures, besides as I said to the Argument last above, thy self
grantest the points so have been dis used, so as to have been rectified by the
Tiberian Massorite, 600 years since Christ.

Arg. thy Tenth, is the constant consent of all Copies in the world, so that on
sundry learned men have observed there is not in the whole Mishna, Gemara, or
either Talihud, any one place of Scripture found otherwise read, then it is now
in our Copies.

Reply 1. What a piece of Idem per Idem is this, wherein the self same thing
that is to be proved, is Argumentatively urged in proof of it self? the thing
to be proved is, that there is a constant consent in all the Copies of the
Hebrew Text in the world, so that there is no Copies read otherwise in any one
place then ours, or that do vary from ours in one Letter, Apex, Tittle, or
Iota; to prove this the medium, I. O. uses is this, (viz.) the constant consent
of all Copies in the world, without any variation in any one place; I say here
is not so good as ignotum per aeque ignotum, but Idem per Idem, the same proved
by the same; the thing affirmed evinced by affirming it ore again: Siccine di
putant Academici nostrates? many an acute Academian would answer no otherwise
to this bald business, then by telling, the Doctor he is out, and forgets what
he has in hand, bidding him begin again, but such a Co^ntrified Russet-Rabby,
as Dr. Featly says the Apron-Levites are, and such a Rustic Respondent as I
am must submit, and take it as it comes, without much talk, lest I be talked
with for it, therefore I shall do it so much honor as to put it up, and to
Reply to it, and so pass it by and pass on.

2. If there be and have been such an universal, constant consent of all copies
in the world, and not so much as one Hebrew Copy read otherwise then in ours,
in any one place of the Bible (for so large are thy words, that thou art often
fain to pinch them in again) how is it that so many Copies are with Points, and
so many wholly without any punctation at all? or if thou say all pointed Copies
are alike among themselves, and all unpointed ones are alike among themselves,
how is it that thou, to the contradicting thy self in this place, confessest
various readings in many other? yet the very three next pages, (viz.) 178. 179.
183. are well nigh wholly spent in nothing but concessions, confessions, and
acknowledgements, that there are and have been various lections in the very old
Testament as well as the New, and there thou grantest, that some of those that
are thou know no more of, (viz.) the various readings of the Eastern and
Western Jews, save that they first appeared (it appears then there are some)
in Bombergius his Bible, professing thy present ignorance of them, and
unwillingnesse for hasts sake, to enquire after them, yet wishing any that know
ought of them to inform thee further (but thou should have informed thy self
before thy rash and blind bold Assertion, and not say a thing positively, and
then say, had I wist, and enquire when thou have done whether it be so or no;
and moreover thou denyest not, but that more various lections then yet thou
know, may be gathered out of ancient Copies of credit and esteem; And thou
instances in particular, in those called the Keri and Ketib, which thou make
such a puzling of thy self about, up and down in thy Book, that thou vainly
spendest one whole Chapter ( viz) the last save one of thy second Treatise, to
prove them to be of no moment, which yet when all is done, are varieties from
the first Manuscripts, at least ( nemine contradicente) though how they fell
out at first none knows, and thou guessest they were gathered by Ezra, p. 302.
and grantest that they are the face and appearance of various lections, p. 304
and that they are no less in number then 840. in the Bible p. 296. and that
thou art not able to satisfy thy self about the Original, and spring of all
that variety that is in the Bible by reason of them, p. 301. and that unless
ye should suppose; (which yet thou seem not to dare to do) that the word was
so received fo^m God, as to make both necessary not knowing the true cause of
this variety, or difference, between the Scription, which is in the Love and
the Lection which is in the margin ye have nothing to blame but your own
ignorance, (...) being not the only case, (and I confess thou speak the
Truth in that) wherein ye have reason so to do; p. 30^. all which,
notwithstanding 1-st the consideration of this To Keri, and To Ketib, or vast
and numerous variety of different Scriptions, and Lections which are welny in
thousands of words, whereof some of them in the margin are supposed to have
stood sometimes in the line, being most groundedly conjectured to be no other
then mere Critical amendment, of the Jews, should, together with the
supposition and suspicion that is now begotten in the minds of many learned
ones, impeach that security which thou supposest at least thou have of the mind
of God truly represented to thee in thy crooked Copyes, and so a door be opened
(as it is already not more to curious pragmatical wits, then plain, honest,
Truth telling, downright dealing, upright- hearted, light loving souls, to
overturn this ticklish foundation, and all that thy simply supposed certainty
of a true entire, and to a Tittle exact conformity of this Hebrew Text of
Scripture, with that which was penned by immediate motion, p. 308. and so seem
to der^gate from the universality of this rash hasty Assertion, concerning the
preservation of the Original Copies thereof to this hour, in every Point,
Tittle, and Iota, 296. thou bestirrest thy self what thou can thorough the
whole Chapter aforesaid, in vindication of the said universality and verity of
thy Arch Assertion by diminishing this vast variation that is in the Keri and
Ketib, from the first manuscripts, into a very little matter, too vain to be at
all counted upon, as a various lection they are of so small weight and
importance; though I must here tell thee. I. O. that of as small moment and
importance as thou make both these of Keri and Ketib, as well as all the
other varieties that thy self are sain to confess to, (viz.) those of Ben
Asher, and Ben Nepthali, those of the Oriental and Occidental Jews, those
called correctio Scribarum, or the amendment in 18 places of some sma^l Apiculi
(as thou diminutively stilest them to salve the credit of thy exquisitely crude
expression of thy self often by the Term of Apices, and every Apex etc. p.
27.317.) and those called Ablatio Scribarum, or a note of the Redundancy of Vau
in five places, O thou that art tossed to and fro, and yet thou seem with
the superstitious Jews to hold a Copy to 'e corrupted, or profaned, if but
one letter be but wanting or redundant sometimes, (viz.) p. 170.) yet the least
of all these are of weight and importance enough (for all thy summary saying of
them all together, p. 13.14. they are varieties in things of less, indeed of
no importance) to knock thy principal position on the head, and (howbeit thou
say, not in the least p. 181.) in the least, at least, to Impair the Truth o
thy Arch Assertion that every Tittle and Letter of the outward Text (which thou
till stilest the word of God) remains in the Copies preserved by the merciful
providence of God for the use of his Church to this day; and I must tell thee
moreover, that the more thou stirrest in defense of the universal verity of
that thy unwarrantable and utterly untrue Assertion, the more it stinks and
that rankly too, not only of unreasonable rashness, and Real falsehood, but
also of a mere Diotrephetically impudent and impositively prating Spirit in thy
self, that rather then recant one rashly assented absurdity, will run into a
thousand, to offer so peremptorily to persist int, unless thou could speak
more to the purpose then thou yet have done, or ever art like to do in proof
thereof, in that universality, rigidity, and strictness wherein thou statest
it.

And as to those of the Keri and Ketib in particular the utmost thou say in
all that Chapter wherein thou art wholly taken up about them whereby to refell
the force of what falls heavily on thy Arch Assertion thence from by such as
urge it, to the evincing of variety of Lections from, the (...) or primitive
Text, is as strong as stubble it self to stand against it, with; and of no more
force then foam and fro^b to resell it.

For first p. 297. thou say all the difference in these words, that is the
840. words of the Keri and Ketib, is in the Consonants, not at all in the
vowels.

Rep. In which saying thou give thy whole cause, for if there be little less
then a thousand words now in the Hebrew Text, differing in the Transcripts, in
their Consonants from what they were, as written in the first Manuscripts, what
need any more to prove against thee, that there are various Lections, and that
in more then in Tittles, Iota's, Vowels, Accents, Points, and Apices (in the
least of which yet if variation be proved, it disproves the universality and
verity of thy great Assertion of Identity to a Tittle) and what need the
Authors of that insinuation (over whom thou crowest upon thy own dunghill, and
triumphest before thy time, p. 319.) produce the least Testimony (as thou
falsely affirmest they cannot) that there has been in the world some Copy of
the Bible differing (mark thy words) in the least from those we now enjoy, or
that those ye have are corrupted? thou I. O. provest it against thy self to
their hands; yea that the Consonants themselves are greater matters then Points
and Apices, and of more importance with thy self is intimated by thee, p. 317.
in the eye of any ordinary Reader a yet thou thy self assertest, p. 297. that
840. words are found different from what they were at first writing, in no
less then the very Consonants, what need we then any further witness, since
we our selves have so much confessed out of thy own mouth, or rather extant
under thy own hand? And what need the Authors of this insinuation prove their
Assertion in answer to thy confident universal Challenge of them so to do, p.
317. saying, let them prove that there was ever in the world any other Copy of
the Bible differing in any one word from those that we now enjoy Tu dicis, thy
self I. O. say it, that there are differences from the first Copies, that
were writ^by the inspi el Authors, and that of many sorts, what needst-thou say
let them produce one Testimony, one Author of credit, Jew or Christian, that
can or does, (...) did speak one word to this purpose, let them direct us to
any relike, any monument, any kind of remembrance of them, and not put us off
with weak conjectures, upon the signification of one or two words, and it shall
be of weight with us, is it meet that a matter of so huge importance, called
into Question by none but themselves, should be cast and determined by their
conjectures? does they think men will part with the possession of Truth upon so
easy Terms, that they will be cast from their inheritance by divination?

Bona verba quaeso, Possession of any thing that is counted an inheritance, I
confess is eleven points of twelve, and they that are in it commonly count
that Truth and Right is on their side right or wrong, and the more ado and
harder task they have, who have to do with them to storm them out, but as the
case here stands, it is no great matter, since I. O. the possessour fights for us
against himself. Art thou an Author of credit thy self I. O. whose Testimony
may be taken for Truth? will thou believe thy self if not others? I confess as
thou say p. 102. of the Roman Harlot, the common fate of liars has so
befallen her, for lying mostly in many things she professes, that she deserves
not to be believed when she talks the Truth, p. 225. So I may say of thee,
though I believe thee when thou speak truth, yet thou utterest so many
untruths, that thou scarcely deservest to be believed when thou tellest the
Truth: but yet if thou be of any credit with thy self, and thou will but take
thy own word, then we are well enough, and have wherewith to answer thy
challenge, having thy self in the self same Book we have here to do with,
speaking more then one word at least, and that is enough ( ad bominem) to this
purpose, viz. that there was in the world a Copy of the Bible different from
what we now enjoy in one word at least (and that is in more then Tittles, which
thou, who art Callidus, more then Callidus in thy Re frigida contendest for)
since the Keri and Ketib, those 840. words which are confessed by thee to vary in
their Consonants, from what they should be written with, if what is in the
margin were in the line, are confessed by thee not to have been so from the
beginning, which if not, then, there was once a Copy different from what we now
enjoy, but of this thou will hear more from us by and by.

Secondly, p. 300. thou say, the difference in the sense taken in the whole
context, is upon the matter very little, or none at all; at least each word
both that in the margin, and that in the line yield a sense agreeable to the
Analogy of faith.

Rep. Here thou mendest thy bad cause as well as one can well do, that makes it
twofold worse then 'twas before; for if there be welnigh a thousand words, not
only different in Consonants (which is greater then that of Tittles) but also
such as makes the least difference in the sense of the Spirit, which (how many
so e're the Text may bear) is acknowledged by all (but your selves that make
many) to be but one alone ever to one word or place, then thou thy self
overturnest that certainty and Identity of not only the Text it self thou so
loudly contendest for, but also, in some measure, of the Truth it self
contained therein, which we say is eternally entire, let the Text run which way
it will; but thou here art forced to confess, that in the Keri and Ketib,
there is not only a variation in words, but also thereby in the very sense it
self.

And though thou would fain mend it when thou have done, by mincing the
matter, making as if the Context considered, the difference in the sense is
upon the matter very little, and agreeable, either way to the Analogy of faith
(as ye often speak, whereby if not blinded ye might see, how, for all ye call
the Scripture your Rule of Faith, yet ye more serne the Scripture into the
sense of a suitableness to your modern devised model of faith still, then suit
and model your faith according to the true sense of the Spirit and mind of
Christ in the Scripture) yet that is a mere false sees and ^^gment of thy own,
for in some places there arises from the Keri and Ketib a very vast variety,
not to say clear contrariety in the sense; such as, if the Context be consulted
with, is consistent with the faith but one way only, and not the other; and
since thou put it to the trial, by the variety of those two words (...) and
(...) which are the same in sound, yet most distinct in their significations,
and so, of all the varieties that are of this kind, seeming to thee of the
greatest importance; of which it is observable that (...) whose signification
is [not] is fourteen or fifteen times put in the Text or line instead of (...)
whose signification is [ to him or it] which is set in the margin: I am willing
to be tried by that very variety that is of thy own naming the better to
satisfy thee.

And whereas thou say, that though these seem contrary one to the other, yet
wherever this falls out, a sense agreeable to the Analogy of faith arises
fairly from either word, instancing in some places pick out by thee for thy
own purpose: I say if it do hold, its not worth a pin, or point, to the proof
of what thou say, if in any one of those fourteen or fifteen places it
appear to the contrary; and that it does, let me be so bold (fith thou
instancest in two that are fittest for thee) to instance but one that, makes
against thee, and then, I shall trouble my self no more with thy Keri and
Ketib, which would make one, if not sick, yet at least sorry, for thee to see
how sorrily thou shifts by it: Isa. 9.3. thou have multiplied the Nation, not
increased the joy, say the Ketib, or word in the Text, but the Keri or word in
the Margin is (...) [to it] which marginal Reading (though Translators
following the mistake of the mis-transcribers keep to the Ketib) is undoubtedly
the true and only sense of the Spirit, for the reading in the line, as it is
in both Transcripts and Translation, is (considered with the Context) a piece
of mere non-sensicall contradiction; thou have increased the Nation, not
increased the Joy, they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, as men
rejoice when they divide the spoil; what a jarre does the word [ not increased
the Ioy] make in the sense of that verse; yea it makes it meet confusion and
contradiction, to say the joy is not enlarged, and yet it is enlarged like to
that of men that rejoice in harvest, and at the dividing of the spoil; but read
it by the Keri (...) [to it] thus, (viz) thou have multiplied the Nation, thou
have increased joy to it, or its joy, they joy before thee according to the joy
in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the spoil; and then there is no
discord in the sound, but its all sweetly suitable and harmonious, and agreeable
to the Analogy of the true faith also.

Arg. thy Eleventh is, The security we have that no mistakes were voluntarily
or negligently brought into the Text, before the coming of our Savior, who was
to declare all things, in that he not once reproves the Jews ^n that Account,
when yet for their false glosses on the word be spares them not. And this
Argument is urged over again p. 316 interrogatively thus, (viz.) can it be once
imagined, that there should be at that time such notorious varieties in the
Copies of the Scripture through the negligence of that Church, and yet
afterword neither our Savior nor his Apostles take the least notice of it, yea
does not our Savior himself affirm of the word that was then among them
(Scripture with thee) that not (...), should pass away or perish?

Rep. 1. Leave calling Christ thy Savior, (as thou often do) till thou
witness thy self saved by his grace from thy being a servant to sin, as thou
art so long as thou committest it, or do either (...) or which is all one
(...), and commit it thou do and must while thou live, while thou believe
no perfect remission, or full freedom from the commission of it in this life;
and must in the life to come too, while thou believe no purging there
neither; for thy calling him thy Savior while thou art thus in thy sin, is no
more accepted of him, then when thou call him Lord, Lord, yet do not the
things that he says, and that is as little as if thou said nothing.

2. Varieties and mistakes might befall the Scriptures, thy self elsewhere
confessest, p. 167, 168, 169. through the invincible infirmity of men's failings
and fallibility in such a work as transcribing the best things, and through
mere weakness, when through neither wilfulness, nor negligence, nor
unfaithfulness, and so pass as unreproved, as they are in that case
unreprovable.

3. There might be mistakes of that nature through the Scribes wilfulness and
negligence, perverting Scripture, and those reproved by Christ too, and his
Apostles also, and thou never the wiser, there being many things truly, that
Jesus did and spoke, that were never written in those Histories of him ye have,
and that his Apostles did, and spoke, that are not written by Luke in the Acts,
nor in their Epistles, the which if they should be written every one, the world
it self would not be able to contain them, among which, that such a reproof was
not one, is more then thou know; though thou will vent thy verdict very
vainly and positively still at a venture.

4. If there were not one mistake or corruption through mis-translation in the
Scripture before Christ's time, has there not been time enough for some sailing
to fall out in it, since that time which is 1600, years since, in some one
Point, Apex, Accent, Tittle, or Iota? what security have thou against such a
thing, not knowing, but as thou will be guessing, and thinking, what wicked,
careless, and unskilful hands it has since past under; or rather knowing, that
by Jews and Papists it has been much vitiated.

5. Christ and his Apostles, in their often quoting Scripture out of the Old
Testament, kept to the substance and sense of the words, not always to the
Text, in totidem verbis, verbatim, or to a Tittle, Isa. 42.1, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Romans 11. Romans 15.16. which shows that they minded the substance of the matter,
and not as ye do the empty figure of the outward Letter in every trivial
Tittle, Point, and Iota of it.

6. However, I do not understand this Argument any more then thou that thou
speak on, p. 269. Christ reproved no such mistakes as mis-transcribing the
Scriptures, through wilfulness or negligence 1600 years since, therefore it is
not mis-transcribed in one Point, Apex, Jot, or Tittle, to this very day.

Arg. thy Twelfth is this, (viz.) after Christ the watchfulness which the two
Nations of Jews and Christians had always upon one another, with sundry
things of like importance to this purpose, which might he insisted upon.

Rep. Here Is the Rereward of the whole foregoing Regiment, and Rout of Red coat
reasons, that make a mighty show a great way off, as they lie all together in
Leagure against the Truth; so that one would take them as first glance to be of
some great worth or weight to the matter in hand, but when one beholds them
nigher hand, behold they are a parcel of Ragged, Torn, Thread bare
Tatterdimallions, that are scarce able well to stand on their legs they are so
weak and wanting. And as for this last poor, wretched, miserable blind and
naked Argument, that marches in the Rear, it is so lame, and tired, and
decrepid, and halts so pitifully after his fellows, that it is in a manner pity
to meddle with it, for what importance soever I. O. judges it to be of, I see
it is importance to be so little to his purpose, as to evince every Tittle of
his transcribed Text to be as true as at first writing, that it can scarce well
carry it self clear away, much less import any great matter of danger, or do
any considerable execution toward the offending of the Truth here defended, or
in defense and vindication of I. O's famously false Assertion of the
entirenesse of the outward Text of the Scripture to this day, in every Word,
Letter, Consonant, Vowel, Point, Apex, Tittle, and Iota, as 'twas at first
given out by the hands of the inspired penmen of it; that though more then need
might soon be replied against it, yet I shall say nothing to it at all, but
make it a pass, and let it even go quietly again from whence it comes.

CHAP. VI.
THus far as to I O's twelve Arguments, the rest of his proof of the
entirenesse of his Text is made up of sundry sorts of considerations, Weak
Wottings, and Pidling Putations: all which kind of miscellaneous munition, I
shall here give the Reader an Account of, together with some such observations
and animadversions, as it is meet should be made thereof; and then come to
expostulate with I. O. about the whole case in hand, and to set some of our
surer grounded [ Shall we thinks] against silly shallow [ Shall we thinks] as
he infers, and winds up his crazy conclusion withal, and leave all that read
them to their liberty to think of them what they please.

Such brittle businesses, such starch, straw, and slubbly stuff as I. O.
stiffens and strengthens his strict Assertion with a part ante, and his above
named Body of Arguments, for the certainty and infallibility of the right
writing of every Tittle and Iota of the Text of this day, according to the
first immediate writing thereof from God, in both the Old Testament and the
New, is as follows.

I. O. For the first Transcribers of the Original Copies, and those who in
succeeding Ages have done the like work from them, whereby they have been
propagated and continued down to us, in a subserviency to the Providence and
Promise of God, we say not; as is vainly charged by Morinus, and Capell^s, that
they were all or any of them (...) and (...), infallible and divinely inspired,
so that it was impossible for (...) in any thing to mistake.

Rep. If ye cannot say that, that they were infallible and divinely inspired in
their work, ye can say nothing at all, that at all reaches your purpose, or
pretended proof of your so absolutely Asserted certainty and infallibility of
the entirenesse of your Transcribed Text, and answerablenesse of it (...) every
Tittle and Iota to the Original Text of the Penmen, which answerablenesse if ye
prove not, and that infallibly too, and by more then your own mere guesses and
conjectures, your universal positive Assertion can ap^^ar to be no more then a
supposition, and then, vobis ipsis cons^^entibus; your own selves acknowledging
no less, you have no sound assurance what ground ye stand on; for the stresse
of all sacred Truth is by I. O. put upon the true Transcription or
mis-transcription of the Greek and Hebrew Text, which if not entire to a Tittle
and Iota, p. 17.18, 19. upon any corruption supposed in the writing (and that
may very well (not to say must be supposed) if all the Transcribers, even the
first as well as the latter, cannot be supposed to be as infallibly guided in
Transcribing, as the holy men were in the first writing) there is no means of
rectifying, or recovering, or of discovering, or determining, or judging of
Truth any other way: And so thou give upon a matter thy whole cause, in
granting the whole Series of Transcribers, and Race of writers to this day, to
be but fallibly guided; and thy most perfect, infallible, stable; and to a
Tittle true Touchstone, Rule, Standard, Foundation falls all to the ground, as
a mere falible, uncertain, questionable Basis to build so mighty a bulk upon,
as thou do; according to not others knowledge only, but also thy own
acknowledgements and confessions.

I. O. Religious care and diligence in their work, with a due Reverence of him,
with whom they had to do, is all we ascribe unto them. Not to acknowledge these
freely in them, without clear and unquestionable Evidence to the contrary, is
high uncharitableness, impiety, and ingratitude. This care and diligence we
say, in a subserviency to the Promise and Providence of God, has produced the
effect contended for. Nor is any thing further necessary thereunto. On this
account to argue (as some do) from the miscarriages and mistakes of men, their
Oscitancy and negligence in transcribing the old Heathen Authors, Homer,
Aristotle, Tully, we think it not tolerable in a Christian, or any one that
has the least sense of the nature and importance of the Word, or care of God
toward his Church, Shall we think that men who wrote out Books, wherein
themselves and others were no more concerned, then it is possible for men to be
in the writings of the Persons mentioned, and others like them, had as much
reason to be careful and diligent in that they did, as those who knew and
considered that every Letter and Tittle that they were Transcribing, was part
of the Word of the great God, wherein the eternal concerament of their own
souls, and the Souls of others did lie. Certainly whatever may be looked for
from the Religious care and diligence of men, lying under a loving and careful
Aspect from the Promise and Providence of God, may be justly expected from them
who undertook that work.

Rep. Of the loving and careful Aspect, and Promise and Providence of God, and
how little he stands by any promise engaged, to preserve outward Tittles (as
thou ^atlest) I have spoken not a little before: but if that were as true as
thou say it is, and as it is indeed most false that God were so engaged in
order to the safe guarding his word and Church, to save every Tittle of your
Priests Transcribed Texts, does not his love and care of his word and Church as
strictly call for his careful Aspect over the peoples translated Texts, and
bind him in his providence (according to the supposed promise) to watch over
and direct the Translators in Translating for the use of his Church, but few of
which can Read your Original Texts, as well as the Transcribers in
Transcribing? which Translators if they happen to be one the Church, (saying
that she must take some of her Clergies words for infallible Truth, and as the
sole foundation of her divine forth about the integrity of the Text) is out
also, and has nothing but uncertainty it self, even the uncertain fallible
conjectures of (spiritually) unskilful Scholars to trust to, about the
foundation of her salvation.

Nevertheless thou will by no means allow that the Translators lay under the
same loving Aspect, who had as much to do with God, and as religious a care and
diligence in their work, as Transcribers had in theirs, with a due Reverence of
him with whom they had to do; yea not to acknowledge these freely in them
(which is the utmost thou dare ascribe to the others) without clear and
unquestionable Evidence to the contrary, is as high uncharitableness and
ingratitude (by how much their pains was the greater of the two) as not to
acknowledge the same in the Transcribers: the care and diligence of which said
Translators yet, who must be supposed to be as much in a subserviency to that
thy supposed promise and providence of God (I say) has no more produced the
effect thou contendest for, (i.e) the entire agreement of their Copies to a
Tittle with the first Originals, thou that of the Transcribers has done, which
has not produced the said effect so exactly as thou dreamest.

It is enough to make a wise man wonder (but that Sapiens miratur ^ibil,
because he expects no other then solly to proceed from the foolish wisemen of
this world) to see how thou set thy Transcribers up on high, yet grantest
them not to be infallibly guided of God neither who, if he had no higher way to
express his love to his word and Church, then by saving every Tittle of thy
Transcripts from alteration or corruption, could as easily have guided the
Transcribers infallibly as fallibly, and more easily too, since his Spirit
guides none fallibly so far as I know) and statest thy Transcribers under the
loving and careful Aspect, promise and providence of God, in all they did in
their work about thy Greek and Hebrew Copies, from whom yet no more may be
expected justly then from Translators in the undertaking of their work; for
Translators did consider what every Letter and Tittle that they were
Translating was, as well as Transcribers did, what every Letter and Tittle and
Iota was, they were Transcribing, and to argue them to be as Oscitant,
Neglective, and mis-carrying, and mistaking, as those that translated Heathen
Authors is as intolerable ( ad ^ominem) I speak this, for else I own it,
tolerable enough so to argue, of both Transcribers and Translato^s of
Scripture, for such as Transcribed and Translated Heathen Authors and their
work as well as they could, and such as Transcribed and Translated Scripture
could do no more, and were, thy self confessing, no more infallible nor
infallibly guided then they, only a kind of care in them, and in God over
them, which amounts not to his special spiritual guidance thou tellest ^) I say
as intolerable as thou sillyly say it would be to argue from the ^citancy,
and Negligence, miscarriages and mistakes of Transcribers of Heathen Authors,
to the like in the Scripture Transcribers.

But as for Translators thou pullest them down, and depressest them into a
condition of as great carelessness and negligence, and under as careless
neglect of God, toward, them in their work, as thou statedst the other in great
care and diligence and under a careful Aspect and providence of God toward
them in theirs; saying on this wise, p. 319. of Translators (viz.) the
Translators own indivertency, negligence, ignorance (for the wisest seenetial)
is one among i^merable other Reasons to be assigned of their variations from
the Original; as if there were neither inadvertency, negligence, nor ignorance
in Transcribers, but they, without being (...), were so wise as to see all, and
had nothing but all (...) diligence, and no such weaknesses Translators had.

And again, p. 347. of the Syriak Translation on this wise; It was made (...)
get I know neither when, nor by whom, in sundry places following another
corrupt Translation, having passed through the hands of men ignorant (thou
know who they were, yet call them ignorant) and suspicious against whose,
frauds and folly ye have no relief, and thou questionest whether it may be
esteemed of any great use or importance, as to the end enquired after: As if
the self same might not be said of thy Transcription as if thou knew exactly
when, and by whom they were made, and that they followed (...) corrupt Copies
in any places but all pure ones, and were known to thee to have past thorough
the hands of men neither ignorant nor suspicious, as ^if thou had all the
relief and (...) in the world of all thy Transcribers integrity and honesty
from Ezra and from Christ to this very day, and that they were men that had
neither Fraud nor Holly, whereas most if not all (...) of the Hebrew Copies
have been made by the Jews, against whom when (...) thy turn in any point so
to do, thou talkest as if there were nothing in the world but (...), iniquity,
and, as to the scriptures, fraud and jolly felt in the very (...) of them and
as if it were not to be questioned, but that all the Copier that thou are
pleased to esteem (...) (and no other) were (...) to be esteemed of so great
(...) as to be canonized, as the (...) to the whole world, which is the end of
the Transcribed Copies of the Originals now enquired after.

And again, p. 234 of the Chaldee Paraphrase this, (viz.) seeing it has (...)
under any peculiar care, and merciful providence of God, whether innumerable
faults and (...) as it happened, with the (...), may not be got into it, who
can tell as if thou could tell what and which Transcriptions and Translations
have lain under that thy so (...) on loving, Aspect, peculiar care, and
merciful providence of God, so as to be exempted from faults and errou^s,
besides the primitive Copies, and which have not; who told thee, but thy own
Rambling, Roving, and Conjectural fancy that these have and those have not? yet
beu quam praecoci ingenie, how hastily do thou both take and give it out for
granted here, that such, namely the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the Septuagint
Translations God had no regard to help the Translators in, and as for some and
those sundry Transcriptions too of Original Copies when they like thee not, and
are such as are not Concordane with thy favored darlings; how do thou set
them at thy heels, p. 199. 201. as corrupt novell Transcripts, though of two or
three hundred years, or elder, and as Consonant, for ought thou know by any
thing, but Tradition, to the (...) which are not now in the world, for thee or
any to correct or try by, as some thou so much set by? but the Vulgar Copy
ye use thou call (by Tradition only received from thy Forefathers, and so
upon no truly divine but humane account, if it be the Truth) the public
possession of many generations, and that which upon the Invention of the Art of
Printing was in actual Authority throughout the world, with them that used and
understood that language (an implicitly confident, broad, blind, bold speech,
yet like thy self) as far as any thing appears to the contrary (that was well
put in however, if thou had added (to I. O.) at the end of it) yea this thou
very imperiously and impositively give the word of Command for the Canonizing
and Authorizing of, saying let that pass then for the Standard which is
confessedly (in foro privatae tuae phantasiae saltum) its right and due.

Thus King of Babylon-like among men, so I. O. majestically behaves himself
among the many Transcribed and Translated Copies of the Scripture; Authorizing
and Dis- Franchising which he pleases, and as the other with persons, so I. O.
with patterns of the Text, patronizes as he lifts, Dan 5.19. which he will he
slayes, which he will he keeps alive, which he will he sets up, and which he
will he puts down; and if he be asked why this and not that is under Gods
careful Aspect? Stat pro ratione voluntas.

3. And whereas thou say that the Transcribers care and diligence in
subserviency to Gods promise and providence has produced that effect thou
contendest for, (viz.) the entirenesse of the Text to a Tittle at 'twas at
first, do thou not say this as thou do twenty things more, merely on thy
own head? and if that have produced that effect, why does not the same cause
produce the same effect in all Transcribers, as well as such only whose work
thou set the Crown on? and in Translators as well as Transcribers? seeing
thou have no more security of the ability, faithfulness, honesty, care, and
diligence, of such whose Transcriptions thou talkest up, then of such whose
Transcribed and Translated Copies thou talkest down, as altered, varying from
the first Originals, and apparently corrupt; neither can thou charge the one
more then I can the other justly (though unjustly thou will be doing so) with
inadvertency, carelessness, and negligence, they being all alike unknown to each
of us; yet thou ownest the Transcriptions of some such as spurious by
superfluity, and redundancy of unnecessary, and deficiency of necessary words,
as corrupt, p. 200.201. and such like; All which proves against thee variety in
Copies too (but that thou will not see it) in Points, Tittles, and Iota's at
least which variety (if any at all) cannot be in less matters then these.

4. And though thou say not any thing further then the said Religions care
and diligence of Scribes is necessary to the said effect of Identity with the
first Copy to every Iota and Tittle, without infallible guidance from Gods
Spirit, do thou say that in earnest? If thou do, I say in earnest, thou
well know not what thou say; for let there be never so much honesty
fidelity, care, and diligence used, yet unless there be an infallible
guidance, or writing by that immediate inspiration, which thou ascribest to the
holy penmen but denyest and dare nor ascribe to thy first Transcribers, the
mind and, will of God (if I. O. be to be believed when he speaks against
himself) is not represented to thee (as thou say it is, p. 153.) without the
least interveniency of such mediums and ways as were capable to give change or
alteration to the least Iota or Syllable, without the least mixture or
interveniency of any medium obnoxious to fallibility, (as thou say it is: p.
10.) for in the very next words p. 10.11. thou utterest enough to the
confutation of thy self in this, while, (according to thy wonted manner of
running round as one borrendo percussus Scotomate) thou say the wisdom,
truth, integrity, knowledge, and memory of the best of all men, is obnoxious to
fallibility, and consequently (say I) capable to give change in the most
careful Transcription that can be made by man's hands, that is uninspired, in
much more then the least Iota or Syllable; thus art thou contrary to thy self
still.

5. But I say for all thy reasonlesse rounds, and self contradictory conceits,
more then Transcribers care and diligence is necessary thereunto, (i.e.) to the
producing of Copies infallibly conformable in every Tittle, Iota, and Point to
those of the first Penmen, and to the begetting of the divine faith (which is
more then mere humane fallible persuasion) that thou oughst to have about the
soundness, universal incorruption, certainty, integrity, invariablenesse and
infallibility of that thou call thy foundation, even that immediate
manutenentia Dei, or undeceivable direction and divine inspiration of God,
which if it be wanting (as thou confessest it was from the first to the last of
thy Transcribers) such is the weakness of men, where never so much
carfulness is in Transcribing of Books, that there may be miscarriages and
mistakes, which if, there be in the least Iota or Syllable, it is great enough
to lay thy universal grand Assertion to the ground, and all thy proof of it
from the foresaid care and diligence will prove not worth a pin to thy purpose.
But alas what do I talk of weakness, where either the leading of the Spirit of
God is wanting, or a willingness in men to be led by the holy Spirit, as it is
in all that assert (as thou do) his infallible guidance to be gone out of the
world in these days; there is not only much weakness to such a weighty work
as thou make the Transcribing the Scripture to be, but (as thou say, p.
104. so I in this case about the Scriptures) so much vanity, foolishness,
falsenesse, unfaithfulness, negligence, ignorance, and sloth, love of money
(for which many write at others appointment, being well paid for their plains)
more then of the matters they are writing, as well in Scribes as Printers of
the very Scripture it self, carelessness, adding, detracting, unsuitablenesse
of their Spirits, and minds to spiritual things, loss of all remembrance of
what they are, and what they do, etc. that I can give very little credit to
what I have nothing but the Authority, Ability, Integrity, Wisdom, Knowledge,
Truth, Memory, Care and Diligence of such to rely upon for, without evidence of
their being divinely and infallibly guided, which guidance thou denyest to thy
Scribes; nor can any wise man groundedly believe any other, but that the Books
of Scripture passing through the hands of many such Transcribers, have upon
them the marks of their neglects, ignorance, and sloth, and have had (as hard
of belief as thou seem to be of this; p. 206.) the fate of other books.

Yea I. O. let me but ask thee this, Is that faith thou have that thy Greek and
Hebrew Copies are to a Tittle so uncorrupted (as thou contendest) a divine
faith or a fallible persuasion only? if the Latter it is not worth, a fig, if
thou have no bettr faith then so, and art not more infallibly assured then so
of the infallibility of that which thou call thy most perfect Rule, and
infallible foundation: If the former what is it must beget this divine faith in
this thing, that there is not a Point nor Tittle varying in thy now Canon
standard or adored Copy from the first Copy of the Text that ever was? will thy
vain confidence, hopes, conjectures, good conceits of thou know not what
Scribes, that wrote thou know not when, give thee such a faith or the
Traditions and Authority and Testimony of honest men, saying so and so,
downward for many generations? or some infallible ground of certainty, that
they were guided to write every word by divine inspiration?

Not the first, for thou utterly disclaimest that, as no ground of divine faith
about the Scriptures, by saying thus, p. 105. if numbers of men may be allowed
to speak, we may have a Traditional Testimony given to the blasphemous figments
of the Alcoran. But the constant Tradition of more then a thousand years,
carried on by innumerable multitudes of men, great, wise, and sober, from one
generation to another, does but set open the gates of hell for the Mahometans,
and thus, p. 114.115. though I should grant, that the Apostles and penmen of
the Scripture, were persons of the greatest industry, honesty, integrity,
faithfulness, holiness, that ever lived in the world (as they were) and that
they wrote nothing but what themselves had assurance of, as what men by their
senses of seeing and hearing, are able to attain; yet such a knowledge and
assurance is not a sufficient foundation for the faith of the Church of God, if
they received not every word by inspiration, and that evidencing it self unto
us otherwise then by the Authority of their integrity, it can be no foundation
for us to build our faith upon.

Not the latter, for thou disclaimest that, and dare not ascribe any such
thing as infallible guidance, or divine inspiration to thy Trustee
Transcribers: so where the divine faith about the firmness of thy foundation
it self stands founded, and bottomed unless it be in the bottomless pit it
self of thy own fancy, he must have more Rope to fathom with then I have, that
will ever find.

Will thou not then I. O. say of the first Transcribers of the Scriptures, that
the were infallible and divinely inspired? (I do not say thou do ill in
refusing so to say, nay rather thou do very well, and somewhat honestly and
ingenuously in that, for indeed we cannot tell, nor say safely that they were
so) but art thou then freely willing in very deed to yield it to us that they
were fallible, and that 'twas not impossible for them to mistake? This grant of
thine, we are as free to accept of as thou art to give it, and make good use of
it too, not so much against as for thy self ( viz.) to show and instruct thee
from thence, that there is rottenness at the very root of all your Religion,
and a fearful flaw of fallibility that is in the very foundation of your faith
and believing, in which thou say ye are built on the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, T. 1. c. 2 S. 4, that so ye may (which is the worst that
we wish you) come to be better built on a firmer foundation, and both you and
your foundation and faith and all may stand fast, and never (as now ye must do)
fall any more from thenceforth for ever; even the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets it self, which was not their writings, for these were not their
foundation, nor were given to be ours; for if they were, then they had been
built upon themselves, and we are to be upon them, which is absurd to say, for
neither their own preachings nor writings were their own foundation which they
were built on, nor are we to build only upon them, but both they and we upon
that which all holy men, were built on from the beginning, before any writing
was at all, (viz.) Christ Jesus the light, the corner stone which the blind
builders refuse, on whom whoever builds and believes, if he never come to read
one Tittle of any outward writing, shall assuredly never be ashamed.

In this one grant then thou have given both the Qua. and all others thou
contendest with no less then the very cause thou contendest for ( viz.) that
the Scripture or Letter is infallibly the infallible word of God, and every
Letter, Tittle, and Iota of it also; one Jot or Tittle of which can no sooner
fail, then Heaven and Earth can pass away, and that every Iota and Tittle that
was in the outward Letter as at first given forth from God by inspiration, is
preserved to this very day without corruption, and remains in the Copies
preserved till now for the use of his Church: that the whole Scripture entire
as given out from God without any loss is preserved in the Original Copies yet
remaining, yea in them all is every Letter and Tittle: For this is the cause
thou have taken in hand, in which thou will find, when once thou awakest, that
thou have hold on the wrong end of the staff, and these, and much more of the
like sort are thy own words and absolute assertions about it, up and down in
thy Book, T. 1. c. 1. S. 14. T. 12. e. 2. S. 7. 9. which if they cannot be made
good (so high thou runnest) but that there be any corruption to be supposed in
your present Original Copies and various Lections (though it be granted by
Capellus and others, that the saving Doctrine remains sound as to matters of
moment) yet this shall not satisfy nor afford thee relief enough, but thou will needs give up all thy cause, as lost (even further then thy own opponents
would have thee) confessing and professing that all your Doctrine is corrupt,
not continuing entire, no means of its discovery, nor of its recovery from a
lost condition, no means of rectifying it, or determining any thing about it,
see T. 1. c. 1. S. 16.17. yea so as to yield your selves to be at such a loss
as not to know what ground ye stand on: yea in thy Dedicatory Epistle, page 25.
lay but these two together, first that the Points are the invention of the
Tiberian Massorites, which by all thy proofs to the contrary thou leavest as
uncertain as thou foundst it, and little less then yeild'st that it is but
uncertain 2 That its lawful to gather various Lections, etc. and then (say
thou) for my part I must needs cry out (...) tell me where I must stand, as not
seeing any means of being delivered from utter uncertainty in and about all
sacred Truth, and so thou go on, desuing to be instructed by such as see
through the de^adiations that are likely to ensue on these principles, as one
that tremblest to think what will be the desperate consequences of imagining
alterations in the Points, Tittles, and Iotaes of your Originals, Ep. ded. p.
19. now what the issue will be we leave to God, though some know it, yet thou
are too weak to bear the sense of it without amazement, being bottomed no
better then upon a quavering bogge, if it should be told thee, yet know it thou will when it comes to pass, or if thou can bear it take it now. Fiat justuis
aut pereat mundus, the issue (as dreadful as it seems to thee who a^t in
fearlesse dangers of greater mischiefs, and but dangerless fears of this
present object thou so startlest at) will assuredly be no worse then this as I
said above, ( viz.) that while Thieves will fall out True men will come by
their good again, and if all the Divines in the world be in such digladiations
as to draw their daggers against each other about it yet the light, from which
your whole Letter came, will be turned to, when the Letter is found to be but a
fallible uncertain Rule, as falsified by men's mis-transcriptions and
mis-translations, which light is certo certius, vera verius, if ought can be
so, even no less then infallibility and certainty it self, and that very
Equity and Truth it self, which the Letter teaches, and does but tend to; and
for my part sink thou, and thy fearful fellows, boreling Priests and wrangling
Lawyers, that live altogether on men's lusts, trespasses and sins, of which,
when the world comes to the light, and by it to be led into love, honesty, and
peace, as there will be no need, so it will be wiser then to be fooled into a
feeding of you for feeding them in their fightings, I say sink ye whether ye
will, and your Quick sandy foundadations together with you, till both your
selves and them be swallowed up by that greater glory of the light it self, now
arising again upon the world, though they will nor see it; I know some that
stand so fast in this juncture, wherein the old heaven and earth shakes in
order to its removing, as to see thousands fall besides them, and thousands at
their right hand, yet be out of fear of the fearful fall of the Hypocrites
coming nigh them: And as it has never repented me hitherto to see that people
that were Priestbewildred, and hampered in Latin Letanies, English Liturgies,
divine Scottish Directoryes, falling off from their Priests and Scribes to the
search of Scriptures, so it will never repent either my self or many thousands
more, that are turned to a true attendance to the light of Christ, having
witnessed that weakness of the Letter it self to save the souls of men which
the Letter it self also bears witness to, Romans 8 2. to see men fall, according
to the council of the Scripture in that behalf, Gal. 5.16. (such a tall is in
truth not from, but to the Scriptures) from the Scripture it self to the holy
Spirit.

Nevertheless, were I one that did close never so cordially with thee in thy
cause about the Scripture, yet could I not commend, but most condemn the
Course in which thou commend'st it to us, for, as if it were not forward enough
te fall of it self, thou hastenest to handle it down with thy own hand writing,
while thou grantest the very first Transcribers of the Scripture to be
fallible, and also to have erred and failed, though it were but in Points,
Tittles, and Iotaes, and in no less they could fail, if they failed at all;
for is they were fallible, and what they wrote were falsified in the least,
then at least thy Foundation, which is no other then such Transcriptions, is so
far false and fallible as they failed; and so (contrary to what thou say) in
the least at least it impairs the Truth of thy ArchAssertion, that the whole
Scripture, and every Tittle, and Letter, as given out from God, without any
loss, is preserved, and remains entire and without Corruption in the Copies of
the Originals yet remaining, for sure one Tittle, Letter, or Iota, a thousand
to one, may (if they mistook at all) be either wanting or redundant; and if
they failed, who wrote immediately out of that which was first written by
Inspiration, then those that Transcribed downwards, from that day to this,
having none but imperfect Copies to write by, might likely fail, so as to make
them more, rather then less imperfect, for Error minimus in principio, is ever
major in medio maximus in fine, if the first or second stone stand never so
little awry in any building, following that, it will swerve into more and more
crookedness toward the Top; and so what Corruptions, Crookedness,
Alteration, Ablations, Additions, Variations from each other, in more then
Tittles and Iotaes, there may be now in the Copies ye have, there being now no
Autographaes to amend them by, but a bottomless pit and endless heap of
uncertain Conjectures, Contradictions, Scoldings and Scottlings among the
Scribes about it, Pro and Con, some saying one thing, some another, and the
most part they know not what themselves, but as they think and hear from
others, who knows save confident I. O. who seldom looks before he leaps, and so
knocks the Nail on the head, as to hush all the hurries that are about it, and
end the Controversy, and put it out of all doubt, so far as his helpless
Hammer will do it, by First saying positively there is no Variation at all; and
Secondly, proving it so to be, as infallibly as his fallible Conceits can prove
so ambiguous a business by saying, from more uncertain grounds then his
Seniors and Superiors, viz. Doctor John Prideaux (as he was called) Luther,
Capellus, and others say the contrary, that he cannot but Conjecture it so to
be; which proof has as much strength in it as a straw, while thou Confessest
(as thou do) That Religious Care and Diligence in their Work, with a due
Reverence of him with whom they had to do, is all ye ascribe to the first
Transcribers, which not to acknowledge in them, is high Uncharitableness,
which Care they lying under a loving careful Aspect from God, together with the
Promise of God (where he promises no such matter as thou talkest on (viz.) to
preserve the Letter in all its Transcriptions from any Alteration, but to put
his Word into his peoples mouths) and his Providence and Care of his Church (to
which yet, or to the Transcribers of that which was to be her only Rule (as
thou say) thou deniest that he yielded his infallible Spirit to continue
with them ever as their guide) produces the Copies yet extant, and then
inferrest thy Conclusion to this purpose, (viz.) Shall we think that men that
knew that every Letter and Tittle they were Transcribing, was part of the Word
of the great God, etc. should should not be more careful and diligent in their
Work then such as Transcribed Heathen Authors, Homer, Aristotle, Tully, thus to
Argue we think is not Tolerable in a Christian; and to imagine that the same
Fate has attended the Scripture in its Transcription, as has done other
Books, which yet I find some learned men too free in granting, seems to me to
border on Atheism; I say, while thou say but thus, thou say no more then
what deserves no other Answer then this (viz.) That to say, confess, and
grant, that the first Transcribers of the Scripture were not infallible, nor
divinely Inspired, but fallible, and to ascribe no more to them then a
Religious care and diligence in their Work, and due Reverence of God with whom
they had to do, and their lying under a loving and careful Aspect, from a
Promise of God (which was never made infallibly to guide them) and his
Providence (without his divine Inspiration and direction) and yet to Conclude
that their Transcriptions were not attended with the same fate as other Books
(viz.) Aristotle, Tully (whose Transcribers, out of the Reverence they had of
those Authors, or whoever else engaged them in that Work, would be as careful
and diligent as they could without doubt, and no men uninspired can be more)
and much more that in their Transcriptions, it must not be supposed there was
any Corruption or Variation from the first Copies so much as in one Letter or
Tittle in the Copies extant at this day (as I. O. says) seems to me (and I
appeal to all men that are well in their wits to judge of what I say) such an
odd kind of self-Confutation, such a parcht up parcel of Confusion, such an
inconsequent Conclusion, as is no less, but somewhat more, then Atheistical,
having not only nothing in it of either God, Christ, or the Christian, but even
not the common Reason of a man, and so is intolerable both among Christian
men, and others, and bordering upon Atheism, as all unreasonablenesse does:
Yea, I. O. I doubt not as full of Oscitancy and Negligence as thou wast in the
framing of the Fabric of thy Book it self, yet the Reverence, and respect to
thy Doctorship, and such like, would oblige the Printers of it to as much Care
and Diligence in the doing of it, as they can use at this day who Print the
Bible it self, nevertheless what miscarriages and mistakes, and what a
multitude of Errataes (as there are many Printers faults in this of mine) are
at each end of thy Two English and Latin Tractates? And is Transcription by
the Pen more exempted from Errataes then the Press? which sometimes produces
such abominable Errors in the Bible it self, as would amaze some people that
know not the Mystery of that Art to be liable to mistakes, about the
Scripturess as well as in other Writings, to read the flat falsities, that have
been the issue of their failings: Yea, the same fate has attended the
Scripture at the Press as has other Authors, and why it cannot at the Pen I
cannot Conjecture; To instance in one that is more gross then others
ordinarily are, Romans 15. ^9. in one Edition and Impression that I have seen,
these words of Paul, viz. from Jerusalem to Illyricum I have fully Preached the
Gospel, are misprinted thus, from Jerusalem and round about to Illyricum I have
falsely Preached the Gospel of Christ; So that for thee to say the fate in
Transcriptions and Impressions, in which way the Scriptures now altogether come
forth since Printing came up (for there is now little or no Writing thereof at
all) has not attended the Scriptures, as has other Books, Vox sonat haecce
Deum? Ne hominem sonat hac tua ceri?


As for the rest of those yielding Strawes, and weak Weapons, wherewith thou
stand out Pushing and Warring on, in vindication of thy Assertion, which
looses ground more and more, at the tail of which thou again usherest in thy
Conclusion, viz. The Jews silly superstitious sayings and doings, which thou
minglest with thy own, shall we thinks; as if thou did not only justify and
side with them in their Absurdities, but also build much, as to the Evincing of
thy Position thereupon, there lacks little to be Replied as to the Routing of
them, every one that has any little solidity in him, being easily capable to
see and feel the foppicalnesse thereof, yet at least I shall do thee so much
Right, who perhaps placest more in them then many a wise man would do, as to
nominate them.

The Jews (say thou, page 169, 170, 171, 173.) have a Common saying, That
to alter one Letter of the Law, is no less sin then to set the whole World on
fire; The truth is, they are prodigious things that are Related of the Exact
Diligence, and Reverential Care of the Ancient Jews in this Work; Ben Asher
spent many years in the Careful Exact Writing out of the Bible; Let any
consider the things which they affirm to Profane a Book or Copy, One is, if
but one Letter be wanting; and Another, if but one Letter be Redundant; and
shall we think that is Writing it they took no more Care then a man would do in
Writing out Aristotle or Plato? Considering that the Word to be Transcribed was
every Tittle and Iota of it, The Word of the great God, etc. that if any
failings were made, innumerable Eyes of men owning their Eternal Concernment to
lie in that Word, were open upon it to discover it, etc. It is no hard work to
prove their Care and Diligence to have out-gone that of Common Scribes of
Heathen Authors; Even among the Heathen we will scarce think that the Roman
Pontifices going solemnly to Transcribe Sybills Verses, would do it either
negligently, or Treacherously, or alter one Tittle from what they found
written; And shall we entertain such Thoughts of them, that knew they had to do
with the living God, in and about that which is dearer to him then all the
World besides? Let men then Clamor as they please, and cry out of all as
ignorant and stupid, which will not grant the Corruptions of the Old Testament,
they plead, let them propose their Conjectures of Mistakes crept into the
Original Copies with their Remedies, as Capellus, We shall acknowledge nothing
of this nature, but what they can prove by undeniable and irrefragable
instances, which as to any thing done by them, appears upon the matter to be
nothing at all. It can then with no color of Probability be Asserted (which
yet I find some Learned men too free in granting) namely, that there has the
same Face attended the Scripture in its Transcription as has done other Books:
Let me say without offense, this Imagination seems to the to border on Atheism:
Surely the Promise of God for the Preservation of his Word with his Love and
Care of his Church, of whose Faith and Obedience the Word is the only Rule
require other Thoughts at our hands. We add, that the whole Scripture entire,
as given out from God without any loss, is preserved in the Copies of the
Originals yet remaining: What varieties there are among the Copies themselves,
shall be afterward declared; in them all we say is every Letter and Tittle of
the Word.

Reply. Because the Children of the Letter, of the Old Testament, nor of the
Gospel, the Spirit, and the New, are so sortish and senseless, as to surmise
that the bare Copies of the Letters, and Points and Tittles, and lo^aes, are
dearer to God then all the World besides, so that its a greater sin to
mis-transcribe one Letter, by either Alteration, Ablation, or Addition, which
change by Deficiency, or Redundancy, may befall the most Critical, Curious,
Careful Scribe that ever was, does prophan a Copy so that its not the Holy
Scripture (for Profane and Holy, are (...)) and is as great a sin, and a
matter of as much moment as the fi^ing the whole World, and upon such
uncircumcised Conceits, are men Excrementi^ously exact and diligent to very
do^age, and careful of Pins, Points, Vowels, Accents, Tittles, Iotaes, Apices,
and Letters of the Text, ad Extra (not Tantamount to the least of the Truths
therein contained, no not to so ^uch as Tyth, while the Law for it stood, of
Mint, An^is, and Commin) to utter Carelessness of the grand Truths and
reverentially respectful to their Book, as they were of old to their Brazen
Serpent (of as divine Original, and to as divine an end as the Letter is) to
very idolatry, and spending their time in tedious transcribings of every Apex,
to the very total loss of many years from the more weighty matters of
Judgment, Mercy, Righteousness, Faith, and Truth, which the Text does but
testify of, and prodigious to very Superstition; I say, because that blinded
Generation of men ( viz.) the Jews, whom sometimes thou seem to tax for
their undue Veneration of the Letter, and over-weenings of it, page 236. and to
set them at naught, as men feeding themselves all their days with vain Fables,
addicted to figments, profoundly Ignorant, Idolatrous full of foolish
Contradictious Triflings, bewitched with their Dunghilly Traditions, doing how
seriously of nothing, how Childishly in serious things, fools, sots, froth,
smoke, nothing, whose sayings and doings are no more to be heeded then that of
wick'd, blind, madmen, etc. page 236, 239, 242, 243, 246, 247. do so adore the
letter, and dote on the Tittles of it, must thou needs be foolish, and doting,
and sottish, and superstitious, and Idolatrous, and so Childishly serious in
taking up thy Time and Thoughts so totally and piningly after Toys, and
Trifles, and Iots, and Tittles together with them? Vin tu Curtis Judaeis
oppedere, etc. Will thou sometimes flert at the Jews Fancies, and Fopperies,
and odd Conceits, and overcurious Carriages of themselves in Boys Toys, and
at that which is the fruit of their fidling minds, as not fit to be any other
then forgotten, and yet forget thy self so other whiles as to entertain their
vain Thoughts so as to own them as thine own, and own them as thy grounds and
foundations to frame thy Arguments upon, so as both ^o think the same with
them, and from thence to impose upon the thoughts and faith of others? for if
thou judge them ridiculous, why do thou allege them in so serious a Case as
thou do? and if thou justify them, art thou not one with them? and because
thou think, as they so superstitiously think, and from thence thrusts out
thy confident Conclusions, in that thy wonted Interrogative way of shall we
think this and that, shall we entertain such Thoughts, can it be imagined? etc.
or (if positively) then thus, it is not unprobable, it can with no color of
probability be Asserted, this or that Imagination seems to me to border on
Atheism, Gods Promise, etc. require other thoughts at our hands, and such like;
must therefore the Children and Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit run a Whoring with the dead Literatists, back again
from the Spirit to the Letter, from the Son to the Servant, from the
Substantial Word to the Image and Copy of it, from the Living to the dead, from
the eternal, inalterable, incorruptible Truth, to the varying, vanishing,
perishing Tittles of Greek and Hebrew External Texts; Must they that are of the
Light, and of the Day Think, and Dote, and Dream with the light-defying Doctors
of the Night, and of the Darkness?

And because I.O. those Point-prizing Rabbis, and Tittle-trying Textmen, and
thou with them think so, yet shall we think that every Tittle and Iota is the
Word of the great God, and that our eternal Concernment lies in every outward
Apex of thy Canonized Copy, and that such an Accidental Attome is dearer to God
then the who^e World besides? and that every Copy of the holy Scripture is
profane, if redundant or deficient from what at first Writing it was, in one
Letter, and that it is more to mistake so as to alter a Letter in Transcribing a
Copy of the Law, then to burn the whole World?

Shall we think that the writers of Aristotle and Plato, would not for Money,
or for their Credits sake, or something, as most Scriveners do in what they
undertake, Transcribe as exactly as they could? and shall we think that men
uninspired, as thou confessest the Scripture Transcribers were, could possibly
do any more then they could do?

Yet (to entertain the best Thoughts of them that may be) grant their Care and
Diligence to be more then that of Common Scribes of Heathen Authors (to save
thee the pains of proving it) and that a minori ad majus, as the Romans would
not Treacherously mis-transcribe Sybills Verses, so much less would Jews the
Scriptures, having therein to do with God; yet shall we think all that
Transcribed Scripture, and Translated it too, knew not whom they had to do with
as well as some? Yet varieties thou here Confessest are in the Copies among
themselves, and that cannot be but that some of them must differ from the first
Original, and (if at all) in Tittles at least, and (if but so) its enough to
over-turn the universality of thy Assertion; and so what was possible to some
(as mistakes were) was possible to All, and not impossible to any Transcribers;
Shall we think then, because thou so think, that there are no Mistakes crept
into the Original Copies upon they groundless Conjecture, that if it be so
that any be, all Truth it self, fails, as to its certainty, and that without
remedy, or relief? though sufficiently propounded by Capellus, and others, to
the satisfaction of any, save wild I.O. that's resolved to hold the Conclusion,
and is loath to abate of his (once uttered) rash Assertion, but as it is forced
from him by degrees, professing that he will acknowledge nothing of this
nature, but what is proved by undeniable and irrefragable Instances, which
Instances also himself gives; and though he would have others give heed to his
own improbable Probabilities, yet is Adeo infeliciter stupidus ut nulla ratione
neque experentia erudiri possit, quasi tamen ipse solus superer vana
perswasione sideratus, in contemptu omnium audaciter persistit, cum Comico illo
clamans, dicat quod quisque volet ex ha^ opinione non dimovebimur. Etenim, si
seniorum suorum, Cap. J.P. Testimonium, seu Experientia ipsa ullius apud eum
ponde^is effe^ aut momenti, Scripturae lectiones and Transcriptiones esse
vari^s negare verecundaretur, Ex. 2. Sect. 28. i. e. so unhappily, irrefragably
stupid himself, as not by any Reason or Experience to be instructed, but (as if
he alone must impose) possessed it with a vain persuasion pertinaciously proceeds
in contempt of all men; Crying out with the Comedian, Let every one say what he
will, we will never be removed from this Opinion; for if the Testimony of his
Seniors, Capellus, I.P. or Experience it self, were of any weight, or moment,
he would blush to deny that there are various Lections and Transcriptions of
the Scripture.

Shall we think, because I.O. so speaks (a^ he thinks) that it can with no
color of Probability be Asserted, though learned men (as is confessed) do
confess it, that the same fate has attended the Scripture in its
Transcription as has done other Books?

Shall we think (because I.O. says it so seems to him) that so to imagine, and
so on deliberation to Assert, borders on Atheism?

Shall we think, and Conclude (because I.O. Concludes so in his Thoughts) that
the whole Scripture entire, as given out from God, even every Letter and
Tittle, without any loss, is preserved in the Copies of the Originals yet
remaining?

Shall we think (because I.O. without the least color of Sense, Reason,
Certainty, or Probability, thinks so) that the Promise of God, for the
preservation of his Word, and his Love and Care of his Church fails utterly, if
one Jot or one Tittle of the outward Text fails, so as to be mistaken in the
Transcribing? Surely if so, it fails as much through the failings that are in
Translations (not without his permission) for his Word and Church, as to her
knowledge of it (if the Letter were the only way to know it now) are as much
concerned in the right Translation, as Transcription, yet I.O. denies, that God
vouchsafes his infallible guidance in either; but surely the Promise of God for
the Preservation of his Word, with his care of his Church, of whose Faith and
Obedience, not the Letter or Writing of it, but the Word it self declared of
therein is the Rule, and was so before the Letter was, the Preservation of
which, is neither more nor less by the Letters being, or not being, requires
other Thoughts at our hands.

CHAP. VII.
NOw as for what follows that above named Crew or Brigade of Arguments, that
were crowded so close together (for as to what I have spoken to last, it was
but a kind of careless Forlorn Hope that past before them) its mostly made up
of a straggling Number of Grants, Concessions, Confessions, Allowances,
Acknowledgments, and yieldings up of the Case in hand, or the Cause it self by
I.O. so much before contended for; howbeit so, as that I.O. gives the World to
know ( such is [as he says truly, page 191. of others, and himself too] the
vanity, curiosity, pride, and naughtiness of the heart of man, and his
readiness to please himself with his own thoughts of things having once
published them as Evidences of his Learning and diligence, and so exceedingly
vainglorious, curious, uncertain is the mind of man (as I.O. also, De quo
fabula narratur, says Epist. page 20.) after a door to Reputation, and Renown
by Learning is opened in the World, that having once spread himself in his
Expressions over all bounds and limits of sobriety, rather then deny himself
downrighthly, so as to expose himself Obvious to all, as one that has been
ignorant, and that he may render the ridiculousnesse of his lost Labors, as
remote as may be from the observation of the many, let the fruit and Issue be
what it will, he will seem to own, and stand to them to the utmost Apex as long
as possible he can) that he does not Resign up the Truth of his Arch Assertion,
but upon Honorable Terms and with certain Limitations, Restrictions,
Distinctions, Reserves to himself, and upon Articles and Grants back again to
him from his Antagonists, as (though they help not much to heal and cure his
Cause from sinking, yet) shall serve at least (as Drums beating, Trumpets
sounding, Colors flying, Bullet in the Mouth, Bag and Baggage use to do to keep
up the half-crack'd Credit of Conquered Fort-Keepers) to salve the Credit and
Reputation of the wrestling Rabbi.

The said Grants are on this wife ( viz.) Though the Point at first propounded
positively, and treated and insisted on very earnestly to be proved, was that
the (...) or Copies which we have, do contain every Iota that was in the (...),
or first Writing, both of Moses and the Prophets, and also of the Apostles and
Evangelists, page 13. Yea, every Letter and Tittle of the Old Testament,
without Corruption, and entire, without various Lections, page 14, 16, 18, 19.
(and what is spoken thus of the Old Testament, must be affirmed also (quoth
I.O.) of the New, p. 27.) And page 153. The Scripture of the Old and New
Testament are preserved unto us entire to the least Iota or Syllable in the
Original Languages; And page 173. That the whole Scripture entire, as given
out, without any loss, is preserved in the Copies yet remaining; Yet page 167.
he says, It is known, it is granted that failings have been among
Transcribers, and that various Lections are from thence risen, and we are ready
to own all their failings that can be proved, p. 169. so notwithstanding what
has been spoken we grant (quoth I.O. p. 178) that there are and have been
various Lections in the Old Testament and the New.

As for the Old, among the many other he instances in, which I have also spoken
a little to above, he says of these of Ben Asher, and Ben Nepthali thus page
179. ( viz) in their exact Consideration of every Letter, Point and Accent of
the Bible, wherein they spent their lives, it seems they found out some
varieties.

Reply 1. An unprofitable improvement of men's whole Lives, that live no more
according to the Scripture, then I.O. says the JEWS do, as honorably as he
seems to speak here of it, for his own ends.

2. There are some Varities then it seems, though thou can find none, or else
they could not have found them.

I.O. says, Of those Various Readings of the East and Western Jews, that he
is Ignorant of them, and cannot a while to look much after them to inform
himse^f of their Original, and all that he knows of them is, that such there
are, and appear in Bombergius his Bible, page 180.

Reply. Whereby I.O. Confesses himself to be no competent Person to make any
Creditable Censure of them, so that (save that he Credits Capellus, whom he
credits little, when he speaks Truths, that make against I.O.) that they are
not so, they may be very momentary for ought I.O. knows.

As to the New Testament, besides what I.O. says, Epist. page 27. viz. That he
evidently finds various Lections in the Greek Copies which we enjoy, and so
Grants that which Ocular Inspection evinces to be true; His whole Third Chapter
of his Second Treatise, is Totally taken up with Treating of them, in which he
grants ore and ore again, That there are various Lections; yea he is sain to
Confess, page 188, 189 That of the various Lections in the Copies of the New
Testament, Protestants for the most part have been the chiefest Collectors of
them, and that though at first very few were observed, yet now they are swelled
into such a Bulk, that the very Collection of them makes up a Book bigger then
the New Testament it self; And page 190. That there are in some Copies of the
New Testament, and those, some of them, of some good Antiquity, diverse
Readings in things and words of less Importance, is acknowled^ed; And page
191. That so many Transcriptions as there are of the New Testament, should be
made without some variations, is (...) i.e. impossible.

Rep^y. All which, if it be not a point blank giving of the Point and Position
at first Propounded, to be proved, viz. That there is no Change or Alteration
in the least Iota or Syllable, from what they were at first in the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament; page 153. The proof whereof also was for a while
more frivously and fiercely, then forcibly followed and prosecuted; and if
[contrary to the said Assertion] it be not an yielding that there is much
Change, Alteration, and various Lection, then I know not what a Resignation or
Rendering up of a Cause is, or else understand not well what I.O. means, but
mistake him to be one that means as he says, while he says one thing, and
means another matter: Notwithstanding by one means or other (but fair or fowl,
hook or crook, right or wrong, effectual or weak, concurring or
self-contradicting, is much at one with I.O.) he lifts up himself again [but
alittle too late, having perforce once yielded so far] to look after his lost
Assertion again, to recover it, and (if possible) to try one touch more to see
if he can make it stand up in its former strictness, wherein at first he laid
it down: And so in one of his wonted fits of dangerlesse fear, least his giving
way so much should create a Temptation to his Reader, that nothing is left
sound and entire in the Letter, which he falsely calls the Word of God, and his
only perfect Rule, stable Bottom, true and sure Foundation, page 193. He
Summons his Sentence back into its first Rigidity, saying (and that not out of
Hopes but that some may be so foolish as to believe him) that with them that
rightly ponder things (all his own Confessions and other Protestants
professions notwithstanding) there arises nothing at all to the prejudice of
his Assertion: Yea, all that yet appears, impairs not in the least the Truth of
our Assertion, That every Tittle and Letter (quoth he) remains in the Copies
preserved, page 181.

The Grounds which he judges his Assertion (viz.) That there is no Alterations
or various Lections in Tittles and Letters, to stand firm upon, notwithstanding
all his Grants, that there are many various Lections in the present Copies of
the O^iginal, are the small Number, the small Time of standing in the World,
and the small importance of those various Lections and Alterations that are: On
these small and slender Accounts he hopes to slide clear away, and salve the
Censure of Absurdity and Falsehood from befalling his so strictly insisted on
Assertion.

Yea, he never leaves mincing the matter, and pinching it in again, and
prosecuting what passes from him by way of Grant, to get it home again, that
upon the matter his giving of the Cause to his Opponents, aftermuch stiff,
strict, and sturdy standing out in it, is but like that of Egypt, who being
forced to let the House of Israel go after long struggling and reluctance, and
after, being afraid what would come on it, ran out a ter them in much have, but
as little heed, as no good speed, to bring them back again; Let it go then for
Granted (when he saw he could hold it no longer quoth I.O.) There are some
various Lections and Mistakes, but those if rightly considered, are so few, of
so late, and novel, and upstart a standing; and of so little moment, that they
are not, upon a serious Survey of them, deservedly to be counted upon, so far
as to come under the Consideration or Notion of various Lections.

To this purpose are sundry of his Speeches spawned up and down the face of
sundry pages; page 179. Those of Ben Asher and Nepthali, let any one run them
throw (quoth he) he will find them to be so small, consisting for the most part
in unnecessary Accents, of no importance to the sense of any Word, that they
deserve not to be taken notice of: Those of the East and Western Jews, all I
know of them (quoth he page 180.) I wish such as know more of them, would inform
me better, is, That they first appeared in the Edition of the Bible by
Bombergius, under the Care of Fe. Pratensis; they give us no Account of their
Original; Nor (to profess my Ignorance) do I know any that do, it may be some
do, but in my present have I cannot enquire after them; but the thing it self
proclaims their no Importance, they are all Trivia', and not in matters of any
moment. Besides these (quoth he) and the Keri and Ketib, there are no other
various Lections of the Old Testament; If any other can be gathered, or shall
be hereafter out of Ancient Copies of Credit and Esteem, where no mistake can
be discovered as their Cause, they deserve to be considered. As to the Tikun^
Sopherim, or Correctio Scribarum, by which means Eighteen places are Corrected;
all things here (quoth he) are uncertain; uncertain that ever any such things
were done, uncertain who are intended by their Sopherim ( Ezra and his
Companions most probably, page 181.) as to the Ablario Scribarum, these are
only about the use of the letter (...) four or five times, page 185 as to the
Corruption of Psalm. 22.17. where instead of (...) the Judicial Copies, and
Antwerp Bibles also read (...) Simeon de Mues (quoth he. p 185, 186, 187.)
pleads the Substitution of (...) for (...) to be a late Corruption of the
Jews, a^ least that (...) was the Keri, and was left out by them. Jo. ^saac
professes, he saw (...) in a Book of his Grandfathers. Boxtorsuis affirms one
to have been the Keri, the other the Ketib, and proves it from the Massor^, and
blames the Antwerp Bibles for Printing (...) in the Line, with him many agree,
others contend that Cari ought to be retained.

Rep. 1. See, what a heavy Rout here is among the Divines about one Iod or
Iota? what tumbling and tangling themselves, and tearing and pulling here is
among the Text-men, about their outward Tittles and Transcripts, that they may
hide the flawes, that are in their Foundation, from being found, because they
have Asserted, that if one Tittle fail, their strong Tower goes all down? which
yet the more they tamper about it, the more they tell the World of the
Ticklishnesse of it; so the foolish Woman pulls down her own House, and, by her
own brawling, blames the bottom of her Babel building as brittle, yet sees not
how by her loudness and clamorousnesse, she shows what she seeks to cover; He
that hides her, hides the wind, and the Ointment of his right hand, which
bewra^eth it self, Prove. 27.16.

But I.O. interposes, imposes, and hushes all, and contrary to Buxtorf himself
(his honored great Master of all Jewish learning, who is an Oracle with him,
when he can make any use of him to his own Iejune purpose) gives his shorter
Determination (so he styles it) and, flatly contradicting Buxtorf, and all that
side with him, in saying Cari ought not to stand in the Line (though yet he
confesses Buxtorf proves what he says too, from the Massora) in effect affirms
with his so much praised Mr. Pocock, that it ought to be from (...), by the
Epenthesis (...) and the change, which is often used of (...) into (...) in the
Line. Ridiculum caput! 'twere enough to make an Animal Risibile, of one that's
scarce Rationale, to see how I.O. does wel-nigh Iurare in Sententiam Buxtorfii,
so pin his Faith on his for ever honored Buxtorfs sleeve sometimes, and
cleaves so to his Opinion, as if there had been some Transmigration of Old
Buxtorfs Soul into I.O's. Body; and yet here, where I.O. Confesses Buxtorf
proves what he says too, and is backed in it also by five or six other renowned
Authors more, I O. cleaves asunder from him, and all that cleave to him, and
goes by himself, gleaning after the Vintage of his Master Pocock, saying
straitway (since it is better for his turn at this time, and more pertinent to
his present purpose, for all he had been so much in love with the Old wine of
his Master Buxtorfs Wisdom) that his Master Pococks Miscellanean New Wine is
better.

2. How will thou escape the just Censure of Contradiction to thy self I.O. in
that thou having mentioned these Two sorts of various Readings of Ben Asher and
Nepthali, and of the East and Western Jews, thou addeft, page 180. that,
besides these, there are no various Lections of the Old Testament, very
positively and exclusively, not only of whatever shall happen to be gathered
hereafter, but also of the Keri and Ketib, the Correctio Scribarum, or
Amendment of Eighteen places, and the Ablatio Scribarum, or Note of the
Redundancy of (...) five times, as no various Lections; and yet page 13. thou
thy self reckonest up, and instancest in all these three sorts, as such, among
the rest, and concludest the self same thou excludest from it in the other
place under that very Term and Title of diverse Readings, or various Lections?
But this is a Common thing with I.O. to forget himself so, as what he says in
one place, to unsay it again in another: Nor am I without Apprehensions, that
(as he says of the learned Collectors of various Lections, page 196, 197:) in
O^ere longo obrepsit somnus, and that while he had his hands and mind busied
about many Things, sundry mistakes did fall into his Work of Disproving various
Lections.

3. What intendest thou I.O. by that Clause, if any various Readings shall be
gathered, where no mistake can be discovered as their Cause, they deserve to be
considered? Is there any various Lection, that mistake in Transcribing is not
the cause of? Where there various Readings of one Text to be found in the
Writing, as given out from God at first? Was there not Identity and perfect
exact likeness to it self in every Text, Term, and Tittle of Scripture when
'twas written? And if there be any varieties now (as there are not a few) are
not those very varieties (so many as they are) so many mistakes? and is it not
the Position it self to be vindicated by thee against all those, whom in the
wildness of thy heart thy hand is against, that there are no mistakes befallen
the Scripture, nor such miscariages as befell the Transcribers of Heathen
Authors, p. 168? See also 167. and page 171. Let men (say thou) propose
their Conjectures about the Mistakes they pretend are crept into the Original
Copies, we will acknowledge nothing, etc. And page 177. We have security that
no Mistakes were in the Text before the coming in of our Savior. So 191. To
relieve their Mistakes, etc. So 343, 345. So page 18. in all which places, he
whose eyes are in his head, may see how thou make Mistakes and Corruptions,
Mistakes and Errors, Mistakes and Falsifications, Synonomaes, and yet here, p.
180. thou make as if there were various Lections where there is no Mistake as
their Cause; And also page 192. Thou quarrellest with the Appendix to the late
many Tongued Bible, in that therein whatever varying Word, Syllable, or Tittle,
wherein any Book varieth from the common received Copy, though manifestly a
Mistake, superfluous or deficient, inconsistent with the sense of the place,
yea Barbarous, is presently imposed as a various Lection; And page 199. it is
(say thou) against all pretense of Reason, that every Mistake should be
admitted as a various Lection; in which selfsame page thou renderest Copies
corrupted or mistaken as all one. And page 200. speaking of different places,
To what end (say thou) should the minds of men be troubled with them, or
about them, being evident mistakes of the Scribes; as if mistakes of the
Scribes were one thing, and Corruption or various Readings from the first Copy
were another: Was there ever the like piece of Confusion and mere Mangonization
of Matters made before by any Master in Israel, as this, which is here made by
thee I.O. who one while make Mistakes and various Lections one and the same,
and otherwhiles makes them Two Things, so that though they do ever ponere se
invicem, yet often its so with thee, that posito uno non ponitur alterum?
Surely, whether various Lections and Mistakes be in that Text of Scripture or
no, and whether various Lections and Mistakes be all one or no; here is both
various Lections, Corruptions, Confusions, self Contradictions, and abominable
gross Mistakes also in thy talk about the varieties and mistakes of the
Letters Transcribing; and such an uncouth, unhewen, indigested, disjointed,
incongruous, unharmonious, tottered kind of Round-about discourse, as no
reasonable man ever ran in, and no reasonable man can find either head or
raylin, insomuch that should any Quakes have uttered the Tyth of that
Confusion, that thy Speech in this matter abounds with, thou would have said
(and justly too) what thou unjustly chargest them with in thy Latin Letter, ad
Lectorem (viz.) that their Speech is so Crude and nonsensical, that thou can
not well perceive their meaning; I shall therefore here again, as before I have
done, and might do of Twenty more places of thy Book, not without good Cause
bespeak thee much-what in thy own words of the Quakers; Qui^ Sermonem illum,
quo hic uteri^ been intelligat? Quis inconditum illum verborum sonum omni sano
sensu vacuum, quo non tantum omnibus aliis qui veritatem asserunt, sed and ipse
tibi in dicendo contradic^^e videris, mente percipere possit? Epist. ad
Lectorem, and Ex. 3. S. 17. Quaenam sit Tua de diversis Scripturae Lectionibus
haud facile quis declarabit, praea^erquam enim quod Sermones tui inter se non
Conveniant, ita inepte atque odiose in explicando animi tui sensu garris,
dubiae and incertae significationis vocibus ludis, nihil sani sensus aut quod
ab ullis sanae mentis intelligi possit continentibus, ut multo facilius sit
argumenta tua profligare quam mentem percipere; imo cum Turpis and inhonesta
est, vel ipsam non Palam Eloqueris, vel verbis itae consutis and consarcinatis,
ut nibil paene omnino significent, eam mang^nizas, atque ita inscite consilium
Sermonibus obtenebrans, nibil magis cavere videris quam ne intelligaris.

Who is able to make any thing of that raw, self Contradicting kind of Talk
thou tracest to and fro in devoid of all sound Sense, uncertain, doubtful,
undistinct, patcht together, cloudy, foolish, Childish, unsavory, as if thou
tookest care more to hide thy meaning, then to speak it out plainly, or make it
manifest; as if, b^ Foring and Poking so long into Pococks Miscellanyes, thou
had left thy eyes behind thee there, and contracted to thy self some certain
Miscellaneous Spirit, that cannot tell how to distinguish any thing, but
mingles all things together into a disorderly Mass, and immethodically Mess
of impertinent Confusion

But to let it pass, and proced to an Observation of the rest of thy poor put
offs in this kind, whereby, though-thou grantest various Lections, yet, thou
little less then denyest it again, that there are any, that can properly be so
denominated.

How deservedly is this to be Noted to the shame of thy Confusion, and of thy
self Con^ounding self in it, that thou struglest and yie^dest, and struglest
and yieldest, and then struglest again like a drunken minded man, that reeleth
and staggereth to and fro in his vomit, in most places of thy Book, wherein
thou handlest the Point of various lections.

For as page 13, 14. thou first say, That your Copies contain every jot that
was in the f^^st, without alteration of one Tittle, then that its no doubt, but
there are some diverse Readings, or various Lections in the Copies ye enjoy;
Then again, That the whole is preserved without Corruption in every Letter and
Tittle; Then again, That there is variety in the Copies ye have; But then
again, (and that's the final Resolution of the whole matter, which stands to
salve all from sinking) That where there are any varieties fallen out by Gods
permission thereof, its always in things of less, indeed of no importance. So
page 198, 199, 200, 201 after many Grants, that there are many diverse
Readings, both in the Old Testament, and the New, as one afraid thou have
yielded too far to the prejudice of thy Assertion, thou pullest in again what
thou can by speaking so diminutively of the various Lections that are, as if
they were upon the matter just nothing at all. I am not (say thou) upon the
whole matter out of hopes, but that upon a diligent review of all these various
Lections, they may be reduced to a less offensive, and less formidable
number: in which Review thou reckonest as follows.

I.O. 1. Let then the vulgar Copy we use pass for the Standard as it is right
and due.

Rep, Whether this [ let] be Optative, i.e. a begging, that it may by all be
granted so to pass, or Imperative, i.e. a commanding all so to let it pass,
is much at one to me: but as from him it is as much as to say, let that Copy
which I I O. imagine to be most meritorious of that honor, be the Standard for
all Copies and things besides it self, and it self also to be tried by, as
which agrees to every Tittle with the first immediate Manuscripts, and let all
that agree not with it, stand but for so many Ciphers, and be no more accounted
on then if they were just nothing at all, grant me this, and there will no such
varieties appear, as we are surprised with, and my Assertion will stand good;
so far at least that we have a Copy of the Scripture, that is to a Syllable
exactly agreeing with the first Manuscripts, in which there is no error nor
deviation therefrom, and that the same fate of mis-transcribing has not
befallen the Greek and Hebrew Texts of Scripture, as has done other Books; to
this effect I.O. says, to whom in short say I (as the Proverb is) if wishes
were Horses, then (Lord) Beggars would Ride: but that must not be, left they
grow so proud as to know themselves less then yet they do, who are so haughty
and wise in their own con^eits, as to know themselves in all reason too little
already; we may not grant thee I.O. for all thy Question-begging demand of it,
that your vulgar Copy can claim such a high thing, as it is right and due, to
stand down as an unalterable Standard for all truth and doctrines, and all
other Texts of Transcript Copies to be tried by, till thou have proved it to
be, to a Tittle, entirely agreeing with the first Manuscripts, which since thou
confessest they are all long since perished, there remains nothing but thy
thoughts to try it by, whether it square in every Iota with them, much less
can it be proved to be it is due to be canonized, as the standing Rule, whereby
to prove or disprove the exactness of all the rest: nor is the reason thou
rendrest for it is right, in that kind, as here under follows, worth a rush.

I.O. Let it be remembered it was the public possession of many generations,
and in actual Authority throughout the world.

Rep. 1. Not thorowout the whole world of Christendom it self, which is but a
corner in comparison of the world, nor yet thorowout the whole Protestant
world, which is but a corner of Christendom so called, and has not been many
generations yet in actual being it self, much less has had your vulgar Copy
so long in actual Authority thorowout it; yea (as I have shew^ed above) there
have been and are Bibles written and printed, that have in them Books of
Scripture ( viz. that of Paul to Laodicea) which your vulgar Copy wants.

2. But were it so yet (if thou may be believed when thou speak as often
thou do, in contradiction to thy self) thy reason that the vulgar Copy ought
to stand ( de jure) as the Standard, because ( de facto) it has stood in
actual Authority so long in the Christian world, is rendered by thy self a very
reasonlesse reason, who in another place and case say thus, p. 105. If
numbers of men may be allowed to speak, we may h^ve a Traditional Testimony
given to the Blasphemous figments of the Alcoran; but the constant tradition of
more then a thousand years, carried on by innumerable multitudes of men, great,
wise, and sober, from one generation to another, does but set open the gates of
Hell for the Mahometans.

As therefore I own not the Alcoran as a Standard, upon the account of I.O's.
Reason for his vulgar Copy, viz. the Catholic, owning, receiving, and
possessing it in time and place: so, though I prize the Scripture above the
Alcoran, as much as I can do writing by divine inspiration above that which is
but man's invention, yet I cannot own the vulgar Copy of it as the Standard,
upon such an account as it is universal reception; for what he gives for the
vulgar Copy, the same can I give (if it were a sound one) as a Reason for the
Alcoran, viz. memorandum, or let it be remembered, that the Alcoran has been
the public possession of many Generations, and in actual Authority among men,
as a Standard thorowout the whole world of Mahometanism, yet is not therefore
to pass upon any ones entreaty or command, saying (as I.O. of the other) let
it pass for the Standard as its right and due.

I.O. Let those places be separated from the name of various Lections, which
are not sufficiently attested to, so as to pretend to be various Lections, it
being against all pretense of Reason, that every mistake of every, obscure,
private Copy, perhaps not above two or three hundred years (or if elder) should
be admitted as a various Lection; men may if they please inform the world
wherein such Copies are corrupted, or mistaken, but to impose their known
failings on us as a various Lections, is a course not to be approved.

Rep. How I.O. what against all pretense of Reason, that every mistake in every
obscure Copy, though of two or three hundred years, or more, should be
accounted a various Lection? is it not rather most unreasonable in thy self, to
account it otherwise? does the obscurity, privacy, or novelty of a Copy, though
more then three hundred years old, make the various Readings, that are in it
from the first Original Copy, not various Readings? are not various Lections
various Lections, where ever they are found whether in a more ancient, or in a
later Copy? are they ever the less various Readings, because in Copies, which
thou call novell, private, and obscure?

Nothing it seems must be notable in the world, but what comes within the
narrow ken of I Os. cognizance and comprehension, its private, obscure, novell,
though known to never so many, till it obtain some Patent from I.O. (who, when
he knows any thing, thinks that he is the first that knows what then he first
knows) to pass for public and ancient among other folk, though no less then
two or three hundred years elder then himself: on which account how Apishly
angry is he with the Authors of the Appendix to the late Biblia Polyglotta, for
counting the differences that are in later Transcripts as various Lections, p.
192. whatever varying word (quoth he) Syllable or Tittle could by any be
obse^ved, wherein any Book, though of yesterday, varieth from the common
received Copy, though manifestly a mistake superfluous, or deficient,
inconsistent with the sense of the place; yea barbarous, is presently imposed
on us as various Lection; so p. 194. How peevishly complains he that all
differences that could be found in any Copies printed, or written, are equally
given out as various Lections; many differences that have been formerly
rejected by learned men, for open corruptions, are here tendered us again (quoth
he) adding, it is not every variety or difference in a Copy that should
presently be cried up for a various Reading. A man might with as good color
take all the printed Copies he could get, of various Editions, and gathering
out the Errata Typographica, print them for various Lections.

I answer why not? do not all Errata, whether Apographica or Typographica, make
various Lections from the first (...) in some degree at least, whether they be
fewer and lesser, or more and grosser ^ whence come those few errors that thou
thy self ownest for various Lections, but from the failings and mistakes of the
Scribes in Transcribing, or the Compositors at the Press, from whence all the
rest come, which by no means thou will admit to be called by that name? yet
those that others call corruptions and various Lections on the self same
account as thou call those few, which thy ownest as such, thou turnest them
off with, To what end should men's minds be troubled with them, being evident
mistakes of the Scribes; do thou grant then, that in many places of your
Original Apographical Copies, there be evident mistakes of the Scribes? in so
doing do not thou grant all that is contended for against thee, which is,
that in your Transcriptions of the Original Text, thou so much talkest for the
entirenesse and integrity of, to every Letter, Point, Syllable, Tittle, and
Iota, the Scribes were evidently mistaken, so as to mis-transcribe, and the
Printers, through whose hands the Bible comes mostly or altogether now, were
evidently mistaken, so as to mis-print many words, Syllables, Letters, Tittles,
Points, Iotaes, to the manifest corrupting of the Scripture in the Greek and
Hebrew Text thereof, as well as of the Text in other Tongues, whereby it is
undeniably evident to any but obstinate I.O. that the same fate both has ever,
and still does, and therefore may (since quod fieri potuit potest) attend the
Scripture in its Editions by Transcribing, as has done, does, or may do any
other Books, and may well be asserted so to do, without thy sottish,
senseless, unreasonable, Atheistical supposition and censure of its bordering
on Atheism so to imagine, and for all thy foolish and false affirmation, p.
173, that the promise of God for the preservation of the Scripture to a Tittle,
require other thoughts at our hands.

I say why should not one various Lection by a mistake in the Transcribers or
Printers, be counted and called a various Lection, corruption,
mis-transcription, alteration of the Text, as well as another? a lesser as well
as a greater, a later as well as one more ancient?

2. I wonder whose Reason but Reasonlesse I. Os. it is against the corruptions
in Copies of so great Antiquity, as two or three hundred years, should not be
numbered among others that are much elder?

And since many mistakes and corruptions are confessed to have crept into Copies
of later times, by the Oscitancy, Negligence, Ignorance, Wilfulness, or
something of the Scribes, who knew as much of late as they did of old, what
they were about, and with whom they had to do therein, and were under as much
promise, aspect, and care of God, whose providence and love to his Church and
Word, is as great for the preservation of both in these last ages as ever (if
his un-erring guidance of Scribes and Printers that Transcribe and Print the
Scripture be such a non such expression thereof, as I.O. would make it) I
wonder what warrant and security I.O. who denies inspiration and infallible
direction to all Transcribers from the first to the last, can give us, of the
honesty, fidelity, integrity, ability, and against the erroneousnesse,
carelessness, unskilfulnesse, and aptness to mis-transcribe of the more
ancient, more then I can of and against that of the later Transcribers, whether
Jews or Christians; since they who know not the Spirit, are all as zealous now
of the letter as ever, and more Tender, and Talkative, and T^tling, for every
Tittle of their Text, then ever they were since the world stood (witness I.O.
himself) yea when was there more care and curiosity, and critical consideration
about the exact writings, printings and reprintings of the Bible then is now
adays? yet no Editions ever come out so carefully corrected and copied out,
but that a man may fill a page with its Errataes in more then either Tittles or
Iotaes; and if now, and two or three hundred years ago, why not in days of old
I know not, nor any one else I believe, but that I.O. says otherwise, and is
more ready to believe his own Say^soes, and suppositions, then the naked Truth,
and to be believed by such as dote on his Doctorship, then to be disproved, or
proved a Liar.

But finally, that I may at once remove this sleevelesse pretense of I. O. out
of the way (at his command and our own leisure) let those obscure, private,
novel Copies (as he counts them) and their corruptions be separated and removed
out of his way, since they trouble him so much; we can abate him them, and
afford and spare him the setting apart of them, and more too, and yet carry the
cause against him too out of his own mouth; nor will his plea and pretense of
the privacy, obscurity, and novelty of these, if we allow it him, prosper to
the proving that there is no various Lections in his Original Texts, since we
have it professed, publicly passed (and consequently proved against himself)
under his own hand, which ever and anon pulls down what it builds up, and soon
after builds again what it once destroyed) thus viz. p. 190.

I.O. That there are in some Copies of the New Testament, and those some of
them of some good Antiquity, diverse Readings in things or words of less
importance is acknowledged; the proof of it lies within the reach of most, in
the Copies that we have, and I shall not solicit the reputation of those who
have afforded us others out of their own private furniture.

Rep. These being I.Os. own words, whereby he has overturned his the other Talk,
I need talk no more on it, for I cannot set his Babel more perpendicularly with
its Bottom upwards, then it stands already, as himself has set it.

Yet for all this I. O. may think he has qualified and salved this saying of
his, from the censure of a contradiction to the other, by the inserting of this
clause into it (viz.) [ of no importance] and indeed that is the second of the
general heads, whereby he seeks to heave his high Assertion up into its health
again, after he had half knocked it on the head, and laid it a bleeding by his
own many grants against the Truth of it.

I.O. 2. ly quoth he let the same judgment (i.e.) of no various Lections pass
upon all those different places, which are altogether inconsiderable,
consisting in Accents, or the change of a Letter, not in the least intrenching
on the sense of the place^ to what end should men's minds be troubled with them?
they are but evident mistakes of the Scribes, and of no importance at all.

Rep. 1. Observe how this by I.O. is spoken to clear it up that there is no
considerable corruptions nor various Lections crept into the Copies of their
Text and Transcripts, by the mistakes of the Scribes, and in every reasonable
man's understanding, it is just as if he should have thus said (viz.)

There is no Reason that men should surprise us with the sense of so many
varieties of Readings as they do, through the evident mistakes of the Scribes,
for though I confess there are many, yet what should they be counted on, as
considerable, as Corruptions, or mistakes of the Scribes? being they are no
more then evident mistakes of the Scribes, and so of no importance at all;
whereas the very Question it self that is pleaded by us against I. O. and
pleaded for against us by himself, is whether the Scribes have been mistaken or
no in their writing over the Scripture, so as that various Lections are from
thence crept into the Copies of the Originals? Bare us but all those different
places (quoth I.O.) which are but evident mistakes of the Scribes, which are of
no importance, and then let us see how many various Readings you will find in the
Scripture, to the prejudice and impeachment of our Assertion, viz. that the
Text of our Original Transcripts are written entirely, to every Apex, Tittle,
and Iota, agreeably to the first handwriting of the holy men that were moved
to write it?

Here Is petitio principii, again, such a base begging of the Question as is
utterly unbecomming any Junior in his Humanity much more a Senior Doctor, in
his Divinity disputations, yet a course as fowly as foolishly made use of by
I.O. in his Scribe-like disputings for the Scriptures; grant us the Scripture
to be the word of God, (quoth he) under that very formality let us consider it,
and then I Will prove it so to be, or else my proofs will be left naked, and
utterly divested of that Authority and Efficacy that I plead i^ in them, p. 71.
grant me that the evident mistakes of the Scribes are not evident mistakes of
the Scribes in their transcribing of the Scripture, and then i will prove
evidently enough that the Scribes were not so much mistaken as ye say they were
in Transcribing it.

But 2 ly. as to the diminutives, upon which I.O. perhaps will plead he puts
the prime stresse in the case in hand, somewhat must be said, lest I.O. judge
himself slighted, if they be answered with, nothing but silence (for as little
importance as they are of to his cause, and as little importance as he would by
them make our Assaults to be of against his Arch Assertion, yet it is like he
sets so much store by them, as to suppose them to be strong supporters for his
small matters, and pidling propositions, which to him (as he says p 153.) are
important Truths, to stand steadfast upon) away with all those different places
(quoth he) which are altogether inconsiderable, consisting in Accents or the
Change of a Letter or so, not in the least intrenching on the sense, of no
Importance at all, lest these pass as no alterations, or various Lections, and
ye shall see anon what a little corner your corruptions ye charge upon our
Copies will be crowded into.

Rep. 1. Observe how diminutively I.O. delivers himself concerning the many
mistakes, errors, and corruptions, faults and falsities that are sound to have
befallen his Transcriptions; when he talks of Translations, in which the Word
and Churches interest lies, and in which the souls of poor people that are not
Book-learned, any further then to read the Letter in Lingua vernacula, is much
more concerned, then in the Greek and Hebrew Texts and Transcripts (which the
Linguist only Labors so much about, as if all men's souls, and all Truth lay
at stake, and were eternally to live or dye at the Priests mercy, shutting out
or letting people into the light of life by their lips, as laborinthically, as
laboriously unlocking of that humane secret) then I.O. magnifies, multiplyes
the mistakes, errors, and corruptions thereof, as is showed above, rendering all
Translations (for his own ends) as much mistaken, and mis-rendring the Literal
sense as may be; yea p. 325. to 343. and so all along in his last Chapter of
his second Treatise, and from thence to the very end of it, speaking of the
Arabic and other Translations, he expresses himself Hyperbolically, on this
wise, ( viz.) would I make it my business to give instances of the mistakes,
ignorance, falsifications, errors and corruptions of these Translators, my
discourse would swell into a volume; and of the Chaldee Paraphrase, p. 334.
thus, Seeing it has not lain under any peculiar Care, and merciful providence
of God, whether innumerable other faults and errors ( as it happened with the
Septuagint) be not begot into it, who can tell? and of the Septuagint it self
(which some Clergy men cry up as high as he can do his Transcript Copies) p.
335. 336. thus All things here are exceedingly uncertain, it is rise is
uncertain, some call the whole story of that Translation into question, as
though there had never been any such persons in Rerum natura, etc. nothing
almost is manifest concerning it, but that it is woefully corrupt, and p. 15.
This Translation either from the mistakes of it is first Authors, or the
carelessness, or ignorance, or worse (mark If Transcribers might go of 2000.
times from the Original, in Transeribing a Translation, why not once or twice
so as to corrupt it in more then Tittles in transcriptions? No quoth I.O,
credat Apella.
of it is Transcribers, is corrupted or gone off from the Original, in a 1000.
places twice told, it is a corrupt stream, a Lebian Rule p, 15.16.

But when I.O. talks about the mistakes, errors, corruptions, falsifications,
failings of the Scribes of his curious courted Copies, having once so
critically commended them in his have, as to deny any corruptions in Tittles
and Iota's to be crept into them, so as to occasion various Readings, then he
Minifies, then he Nullifies, as far as his little or nothing to the purpose can
do it, either there is none at all, or if any but novell, or if Ancient but in
small matters, or if in any matter of moment, but very few, or if never so
many, but evident mistakes of the Scribes, or in spurious Copies, or mere
superfluities and redundancies of unnecessary and deficiencies of necessary
words, or risen out of some apparently corrupted Copies or other, or Copies
corrupted by the old Heretic, to which heads most that are (quoth he) and (say
I) all that can be in any Scripture, are reducible, what should men mind such
little things for at all? Vau (quoth he) is a Letter redundant but five times,
Cari is for Caru once, ^ for ^ by a late corruption of the Jews, who left out
the Keri, that is Caru, and instead thereof wrote Cari, which is the Ketib, as
Isaac says, who in his Grandfathers Bible saw Caru in the line. As to that of
the East and Western Jews, I know nothing of them (quoth he) but that such
various Lections there do appear; but I am in too much have to look after them
(as if because he professes his own ignorance about them, he seemed to desire
that such as know them would wink and not note them, or see but say nothing of
them as various Lections, but let them pass for none among all the rest,
because I. O. sees them not. A little trifling notice I. O. seems to take also,
as if there might be such a thing (but as much as he can in a mist he carries
it) as the correctio Scribarum, or 18. places, confessed by Elias to be
corrected by the Scribes, but (quoth he) p. 181. all things here are uncertain
that ever any such things were done, uncertain who are intended by their
Sopherim, thus he white-limes it over, and washes it off as well as he can, in
that sleighty way, which is so thin that they are sore and sorry eyes indeed,
which do not see his sore through it and his sorry shifts, for if it be
uncertain whether there be 18. places first corrupted and then corrected by
un-inspired Scribes in his Text, he so talks for the integrity of to a Tittle,
yea or nay; then it is not certain to I O. that there are not, yet so it must
be, or else his foundation of all (as he calls it) is found flawy and faultry
in not so few places, but that (by his own confession) that his Anti-fanatick,
Fantastic Fabric falls all into confusion, and is founded on a sandy,
uncertain bottom, for what is utrobique incertum non est vel hinc vel illinc
certum, quod tibi bac incertum est non tibi certum est illac, that variety
which is uncertain, whether it be so or no, I know certainly is not certainly
known not to be so: But put case it be so, the old Miosis must make up the
matter, if there be 18. places of the divine Text by men amended, it is but the
amendment of some small Apiculi (quoth he p. 13. by which saying in order to
the amendment of his own bad matter, he has fell into a worse unawares, but
alas he sees it not, as he might easily do, if he were not exceedingly blinded,
or more then half asleep, for if it be, uncertain to him whether there be any
such amendments or no, as he says it is, and that the particular places
enumerated, discover no such correction, how can I.O. tell what they were, and
that they were but of certain Apiculi, or smaller Tittles? yet he will be
Tittle-Tatling still of what he confesses he knows not, and that it is uncertain
to him.

Ob. If he say, as he does, they are all in particular considered by Glassius,
and the matter is determined by Buxtorf, his renowned Masier of Jewish learning.

Rep. I say if the Testimony of Buxtorf which I.O. himself sets down as written
to Glassius in that matter be to be credited, it overturns I. O's^ saying that
'twas but of Apiculi only, for Buxtorf mentions them as things, which did
Textum sacrum in literis et sensu corrigere: see I.O. thy own quotation out of
him in thy 183. page; Thus when men think to scrue their wits to show
themselves wise in their way against Truth, they often are lest of God to bewray
themselves (as I O. and I. D. R. B. and I. T. too in other cases do) to be very
fools; for this of I O. is much what like that Testimony which the wise
Highpriests of old hired the Soldiers to bear against Christ's resurrection,
who came to testify, as Eyewitnesses, of what was done while they were
asleep, saying, his Disciples came and stole him away while we slept, in which
sleep it seems they could see his Disciples come, but not awake out of it,
though a Court of Guard to rescue him from them.

So say I.O. contrary to Buxtorf whom he quotes, The amendment of the 18.
places was but of Apiculi, and yet confessing it is uncertain whether there were
any amendment of 18. places at all, yea or no: if he knows what was corrected,
then the (...) is certain that there was a correction; but if he know not
whether there were any such correction made or no, then 'ti^ not certain to
him, that 'twas but of such diminutive Tittles, as he would make it.

But this is the strain he strikes up in now, and the string he hangs all on.
True (quoth he) mistakes, mis-transcriptions, various Lections there are but
none considerable, or of importance, but consisting in Accents, or some Letter
not altering the sense, where there is any variety it is always in things of
less, indeed of no importance p. 14. and there quoting Buxtorf again, he says
thus, Hebraei V. T. codices ubique sibi sunt similes, si forte exiguas quasdam
Apiculorum quorundam differentias excipias quae ipsa tamen nullam varieta^em
efficient, the Hebrew Bibles are every where agreeing, except some small
differences in some small Tittles which yet make no variety.

Thus the Translations (being though more for the Peoples and Truths, but less
for the Priests and Tithes turn) I. O. is no great friend to them, but leaves
them to shift for themselves, and inhaunces all the Errors in them to the
height, and represents them through a magnifying and multiplying glass; But
Transcriptions (being the Linguists Letter, whereby he lives more to himself
and the world then God and Christ) I. O. patronizes them, and pleads and
pinches all their impurities into Parvulas and Pauc^las; Translations are none
of the Doctors darlings, therefore he Defies rather then Deif^es or Dignifies
them, so much as he does the other.

At Pater ut gnati, sic nos debemus amici,
Si quod sit vitium non fastidire, etc.
As fathers call the deepest defects of speech in their children lisping, and
their blear-eyed Children blinkers and pinkan-eyes, so I. O. makes the best and
the least of his Letters legible corruptions; Transcriptions of the two being
his best friend, that most helps and holds men up in Academical advantages, as
T. D. uses to epitomize all the hol^ Hypocrites iniquities into the diminutive
denomination of the Saints infirmities, so I.O. diminishes all the gross open
faults of his Transcript Copies into frivolous failings of no force. Therefore
let all these abovesaid be removed from that pretense, let not every, nor any
varying word, Syllable, or Tittle in any Book that varieth from the common
received Copy, though manifestly a mistake, superfluous, deficient, consistent,
or inconsistent with the sense of the place, yea Barbarous, be imposed on us as
such, it being not every variety or difference in a Copy that should presently
be cried up for a various Reading, p. 19^. 194. (for that were to create a
Temptation, that nothing is left sound and entire in the word of God, and so
overthrow our Assertion which we stand so strictly to maintain) and so to them
tha rightly ponder things there will arise nothing at all to the prejudice of
our Assertion, p. 193. yea then 'twill quickly appear, p. 181. 201. 202. how
small the number is of those varieties which may pretend unto any consideration
under the state and Title of various Lections, and of how very little
Importance they are to weaken in any measure, or impair in the least the Truth
of my former Assertion (quoth he) concerning the Care and Providence of God in
the preservation of his Word, that is the Scripture with I. O. and every Tittle
and Letter thereof.

In all which sayings collectively considered, I.O. had as good have said in
short, do but yield it, that all the varieties, mistakes, corruptions,
barbarisms, of what sort or notion soever, fewer or more, greater or lesser,
hurting or not hurting the sense of the place, old or new, by superfluity or
defect of words, crept in from Heriticks, or however, are not varieties etc.
and then our Assertion holds good and true ( viz,) that there is none at all;
or thus, count not such as are of more and less importance, prejudicing or not
prejudicing the sense, for corruptions, and then there will be found few or no
corruptions in our Copies at all; or thus forasmuch as they only deserve to be
considered as various Lections, where no mistake can be discovered as their
cause, and these not to be admitted (as such) which are occasioned but by
mistakes take away all that were but mistakes from that Title of various
Lections, and all such too as were not mistakes, but evidently intended, as
Expository of difficulties, or supplied purposely to make out the sense of the
places, p. 180. 181. 206. and then there will appear to be few or no various
Lections; or in a word, excepting all those that are, there is none at all: As
if a man that owes but twenty shillings, should say to his Creditor, bate me
but twenty shillings and i will pay you all.

But we must not let it go so I.O. by whole sale, though (as Lot pleaded for
little Zoar to be spared that his soul might live) so thou for sparing the
imposition and imputation of little impurities to thy Copies, that thy grand
Assertion (which else must dye) may live, which is that in the least Syllable,
Tittle, Letter, and Iota, thy Transcripts are true and entire, as the first
Manuscripts, yet we must not separate from our Anti-Assertion the mentioning of
the mistakes in Iods and Vau's, and Tittles, and Iota's, and Syllables, and
Vowels, and single Letters, and such like, unless thou will remove from they
Arch-Assertion, thy strict positive affirmings, that your (...), or Copies
contain every Iota and Tittle that was in the (...) and that Haebraea volumina
nec in u^a dictione corrupta in^enienda sunt, and that (...), etc. not one Jot
or Tittle of the Text passed from what ever was written by inspiration under
the Law, and that ye have all, every Tittle without any loss, or any change,
or alteration to the least Iota, or Syllable, and much more id genus, p. 13.
153. 173. 317. and if thou recede from, and recant that Reasonlesse Rigidity of
thy Position about the truth of thy Text in Tittles, we shall supersede from
our reasonable Reply to thee concerning the corruption and mistranscription of
thy Text in sundry Tittles, in which it seems thou art forced to confess to us
that some Tittles are amiss; for while thou stand so strictly upon the
entirenesse of each Tittle, as thou say of the Jews, p* 240. so I of thee
while thou keep the Scripture we shall never want weapons out of thy own
Armory for the destruction of thy haughty Assertion, like the Philistine thou
carryest the weapon that will serve to cut off thy own head; for while I.O.
asserts the Text to be entire to every Tittle, we will tell I.O. out of his own
Book, that I.O. tells an untruth in that, for if I. O. be to be believed by
himself, he over and over confesses mistakes in Tittles, Iots, Vowels,
Syllables and single Letters

But if I. O will agree to a cessation of Arms, and Arguments about Tittles,
then we shall Restipulate with him there, and because he does little less then
cry Peccavi in that, and keeps such an imperious Begging and beseeching, that
all varieties in Tittles, that are of no importance at all, may not be reckoned
on as various Lections, I here (...) him to wit, that we can here also afford
well enough to abate him all different places in mere Tittles and Accents, that
entrench not on the sense, and yet have enough left to lay sure siege with
against his Assertion, if he will hold it about matters of importance only, and
such as are inconsistent with, and entrench on the sense of the place, and that
no further off then I.Os., own Book, which ever furnishes us wherewith to
answer him out of his own Armory, for in that p. 193 he writes thus of variety
(viz.) those which are of importance have been already considered by others,
especially Glassius; and thus, p. 200. Let those be removed and not counted on
that are deficient in words evidently necessary to the sense of their places,
it evidently imports no less then this, that I.O. owns some varieties to be of
importance, and such as do entrench on the sense in their stations, and so if
we seclude all that are of less, or no importance with him, he stands still
where he did, (...), condemned and confounded every way where ever he flies, or
follows in the service of his Arch Assertion, if he had no man to fight
against him besides himself: And if he say those of importance, and that
entrench on the sense are but few: I say if any at all they are many enough
(upon his predicted principles) to pluck up all the fabric of his form of
Religion, faith about Truth, and the very foundation it is all framed upon by
the roots, as to any certainty that he has of his standing, while he stands
leaning to no more but his naked Letter, and can plead their Original no higher
then from the ticklish Transcripts of his pretended Original Text.

And that this may appear, let what follows be serious considered by any, who
have not utterly lost their understanding.

1. That the main Assertion I O. makes so much ado about the maintaining of is
this ( viz.) that though the first and immediate Manuscripts, and individual
writings of Moses and the Prophets, the Apostles, and Evangelists are all
utterly lost, and perished out of the world, p. 13. 163. 164. yet the Hebrew
and Greek Copies of them that remain ex^ant at this day, do contain every
Letter, Apex, Syllable, Accent, Iota, Tittle, Point, that was in them, without
any addition of the Points, ablation, alteration, variation, change or
corruption, by mistake or mis-transcription in the least, notwithstanding the
hands of so many Transcribers as they have passed through; and that the Text in
the Original Languages has been both promised to be and accordingly has bin
providentially preserved in Gods Love and care to his Word and Church, so that
the same fate has not attended the Scripture, as to mis-transcription or
alteration any way in the Original Copies of it, through any miscarriages,
mistakes, oscitancy, negligence, ignorance, sloth, carelessness,
unfaithfulness, much less treacherousnesse in Transcribing thereof, as has
attended other Books in their Editions and Transcribings. p. 13. 14. 153. 155.
156. 164. 168. 170. 171. 173. 177. 203. 206. 213. 317. 319. in all these pages,
and many more where the particularities of it are sprinkled up and down this
general grand Position is to be apprehended as affirmed by him, and undertaken
to be vindicated to a Tittle.

2. That this position is not only thus punctually propounded by I.O. for
Truth, but also avouched with that extremity, rigidity, and strictness, that
its made the very Basis of all true Belief, and of all that whole business
that he calls divine, saving, sacred Truth, Religion, Worship, Knowledge,
Service of God, duty of man toward him, etc. so that in case these his
Thoughts, Apprehensions, Position and Assertion (as he often calls it, p. 146.
149. 163. 181. 193. 202. 203.) proves not true, firm, sound, but false, faulty
and faultring, and if it ever appear that there are corruptions crept into the
Text of Scripture by either the addition of the Hebrew points, Accents, or
punctation since the beginning of the first writing thereof immediately from
God, as a late novell invention of some Iudaical Rabbis, viz. the Tiberian
Massorites by whom they are judged to have been added, or else by the
oscitancy, carelessness, negligence, ignorance, treachery, weakness, or
wilfulness of the Transcribers, mistaking, mis-transcribing, and thereby
occasioning variations in the Copies of the Original, so that the Text of
Scripture is not wholly pure and entire, or that we may if we please reject the
Points and read otherwise, Actum est, Imus, Imus praecipites, what pernicious,
what devious ways must men run, scarce a Chapter, a Verse, a word, left free
from perplexing contradicting conjectures, nothing but Fruitless Contests,
nothing but humane fallible persuasion to be fixed on for the sense; A
firebrand is brought into the Churches bread-corn, the consequences are so
desperate that he dares not mention them, he cannot but tremble to think what
is the issue of this imagination of such a supposition, that the Points,
Vowels, Accents, are no better guides then so; it renders questionable the
foundation of all, ejects as useless the whole Scripture, it is a pestilent
poysonsome undervaluing the Originals, crept in now among Protestants
themselves (though this comfort is left, yet that the generality of learned
Protestants are not yet infected with this Leven) but if it should by a change
of Judgment break in so on the Protestant world, as to be avowed in public
works, the end will be a frightning poor unstable souls, into the hands of the
pretended infallible guide, a return to Rome under the pretense of the
Scriptures corruption in the Original Text, as there was a passing from thence
under the purity thereof, yea it is not known whether this inconvenience will
grow; yea once suppose corruptions crept into the Original Text, and the
pretended novelty of the Hebrew punctuation, and then the wells and fountains
from whence ye should draw all your souls refreshment are utterly stopped, Ep:
p. 19. 20. so p. 196. 206. 207. 208. 209. 212. 213. 214. 215. 216. 218. 219.
220. 221. better all the works like to the Biblia Polyglotta were out of the
world, then this opinion of the ^Texs non-integrity to a Tittle, or the novelty
in Points should be embraced with its consequences that unavoidably attend it,
that if those seeming difficulties of Scripture to reconcile, which some look on
as (...) or irreconcilable, though some learned Jews and Christians have been
well exercised, to reconcile and give fair account of them, may by a liberty
given be looked on as corruptions, how ye shall be able to stay till ye come to
the bottom of questioning the whole Scripture, he knows not, p. 347.

3. Let it be considered how eminently he stands concerned upon the confession
that his foundation is not firm, in case a Tittle of the Text be wanting, or
the Points added to it since its first giving out, to make it out, not probably
only, but unquestionably clear and certain, that the Text has every Tittle
and Iota, and that the Points are no novelty, but of equal Antiquity with the
Text it self, or else begin again with the Qua. at his A.B.C. in the things of
God, and lay a surer bottom for his building and foundation for his Faith, then
ever he has laid to this day.

4. Whether I. Os proof be infallible; or but fallible, of Divine certainty or
mere humane conjecture, self-conceit, thought, apprehension, and imagination
only, and whether the Text be so firm and entire to a Tittle, as he affirms it
to be, yea rather that it is not, let it be considered by all, who read my
examination of it, in this now welnigh ended exercitation, wherein the contrary
is both apparently and abundantly evidenced; his whole Regiment of Reasons by
him rendered in proof thereof disproved, and all that defensive straggling straw
that hangs about them dispelled as chafe, as not only falling short of
infallible scientifical demonstration, but also as not amounting to so much as
a probable evidence that either the Points are coaevous w^^h the Consonants
(which is sometimes no less then asserted) or so high as Ezra (which is
undertaken to be manifested) and are not rather a novelty, no elder then the
Massorites) which with such affrightments at the consequences of such a
Clergy-confounding conclusion is denied, and yet (as to that reviving thereof,
whereby we now enjoy them) acknowledged also by I O.) or that the Text is in
its most Original Copies wherein we now have it, is the same as at first it
was, without any various Lections, or unchanged.

Thus I have traced after I.O. in his Treatings and twinings too and fro, in
vindication of the integrity of his Greek and Hebrew Text, and have evidently
proved that there are not only many whole Books of that Scripture, which holy
men were moved to write both before and since Christ, wanting to his completed
Canon (as he calls it) but also that there are many mistakes in those Books
that are, out of his own hand writing, which is no better then snares and
bands, a certain piece of contradictory network of his own composing, to the
catching and binding down himself, wherein he hangs hampered, entangled, and
tumbled up and down in his own fruitless contests, fallible persuasions, and
perplexing self-contradicting conjectures, so that there is scarce a Chapter, or
so much as a Lection in it, fully free from, or rather not fully fraught with
some or other of his uncertain conceits, and certain confusions about the
defending of his Assassinated Assertion, one while Asserting and striving
stiffly to maintain it in the very rigidity, universality, and utmost
strictness of it, that (...), etc. not the Jot or Tittle of the Original Text
is added, altered, lost, mis-transcribed; sometimes Assenting to the contrary,
only begging that all various Lections (of what sort soever, one or other
without exception) may be excepted from the account of various Lections, and
then Asserting that his Assertion (on that condition) will stand entire,
concerning the entirenesse and integrity of his Text to a very Tittle.

Now then since it is so (...) at the outward Letter of the Scripture not only
in its Translations, which I.O. himself Asserts to be so universally altered
and corrupted from the Originals, but a little also in its Copies of the
Original is by I.Os. own confession both so abundantly altered by the addition
of the Points since the first writing, and the Variations of so many several
kinds as himself enumerates, and at best so easily so infinitely alterable, as
that at the wills of men exercising their critical faculties about the Text, it
may by Transposition and Transcription of one Letter for another, or
supposition, and subscription of one Vowel for another, be turned diverse
contrary ways, and subverted in its sense so exceedingly, that some one word
(instancing in that word (...) Ep. p. 24.) may (as it may be pointed or printed
by (...), and (...), and (...), and (...), and (...) afford no less then eight
several senses as distant from one another as life and death; seeing also,
that there is no relief against all that huge heap of uncertainty, that is
found among the founders that are continually confounded within themselves,
about their sickle foundation (unless they will be persuaded to come to that
firm in^allible sure foundation, and inalterable Rule of all Truth, the light,
word, and spirit of God in the heart) but their own vain, empty groundless,
confused thoughts, imaginations, conceits, fancies, fallible persuasions and
opinions, taken up by Tradition from each others Tomes, Treatises, Targums, and
Talmudical twatlings, as if there were neither Light, nor Spirit, nor word of
God throughout the whole world, whereby any soul saving Truth can possibly come
to be known, or entertained at any certainty, further then the Text-t^ining
Text-men tell and teach it forth, either by their Oral^ Talkings for Tithe, or
manifold Translatings of it out of their (falsely supposed) entirely
Transcribed Copies.

Shall we then think because I O. to the contradiction of himself so thinks,
and imposes his own thoughts on us as uncontrollable proofs, that there is no
variation in the Copies we have from the first Manuscripts of the Scripture,
but that they are come to us without the least interveniency of any such
mediums or ways as are capable of giving change or a^teration, or obnoxious to
fallibility in the least Syllable or Iota, p. 10. 153. or that the some
varieties that I.O confesses R. Aaron and R. Moses found in their exact
consideration of the Bible, were small and of no importance to the sense of any
word, p. 179* especially since with I.O. (if a body might take his Tattle for
Truth) every Letter, Tittle, Iota there Transcribed was a part of the word, yea
no less then the Word of the great God, wherein the eternal concernment of
all souls doth^l^e. p 168. 169? Shall we think because I.O. thinks so p. 17.
that there is not any color or, pretense, nor any tolerable evidence from all
the discrepancies in the Copies themselves that are extant, that there ever
were any other in the least differing from these extant in the world?

Shall we think, because I. O* so thinks, p. 181. 193. that all that yet
appears impairs not in the least the Truth of his Assertion, that every Tittle
and Letter that was in the Original Copies remains in the Copies of the
Original to this day without any loss, or any alteration, or passing away of
one jot thereof, and that with them that rightly ponder things abovesaid, there
thence arises nothing at all to the prejudice of that his so often over and
o^re again affirmed Assertion? And if men must deal by instances in this
case(as he says) and not by conjectures (though himself gives us no instance
of any one Copy, of which he can say, unless he had the Autographa by him,
that it agrees every Accent and Syllable therewith, upon any better ground then
his own bare conjectures) yet if I had not given him instance enough of whole
words, verses, books, prophesies, etc. lost of inspired men's Scriptures, does
not I.O. himself give us instan^es enough of variety of Lection, to the
assuring us of the falsenesse of his first Assertion? which instances of his
own insisting on are obvious to all Readers of his Book, and believed by us to
be true, rather then his idle talk to the contrary, of his Texts integrity to a
Tittle: And is there any reason (as he says of himself and his adherents, Ep.
p. 28) that we should be esteemed Ridiculous, because believing our own eyes we
will not believe the Testimony of I.O. imagining otherwise then the case is
according to his own instances, dealing by conjectures against his own
instances, a man deservedly of no credit with us, running in ridiculous rounds,
and asserting that to be Truth, which we know from his own Book to be utterly
false?

Shall we think that the literal Text in the very Transcripts he so talk^ for,
is any other then he calls it, as to its most ancient Translation, a corrupt
stream, a Lesbian ^ule p. 15. 16 or any other then some call it a nose of wax,
no certain stable (...), or standard to try all Truth by, and guide throughout
in the knowledge of the will of God?

Shall we think, because I.O. thinks so strangely, that so corruptible and
corrupted a stream as the mere Letter now is, since vitiated and interpolated,
can be judged a fit means to judge the fountain by ( i.e) the Light Word and
Spirit it came from? and a fit measure to correct, and authoritatively to
examine and determine those Originals by?

Shall we think, because I.O. has and utters such high and hyperbolical
thoughts apprehensions and affirmations of his Transcripts, and Greek and
Hebrew Copies, and the absolute integrity thereof to a Tittle, that the sole
and final dissolution, determination and discovery of all saving doctrine, and
distinct discerning, and knowledge of all sacred Truth from cunningly devised
fables, does d^^^rd ^holly and alone upon the outward Greek and Hebrew writing,
and Scripture of it, and that so necessarily and eternally, that upon any
corruption supposed therein, that Truth and Doctrine cannot unquestionably be
supposed to c^^^^ue entire and incorrupt, but must be consequently supposed to
be without any other principle, means, rule, or measure of judging, recovering,
rectifying it, and to be for ever; ^medil^sly brought to naught, p. 18. 68.

Shall we think, because I O. so thinks, and s^lli^y supposes so, that to
suppose corruptions to have befallen his undoubtedly, yea confessedly corrupted
Copies, and the same fate to have befallen the Hebrew and Greek Bible in its
Transcribing, that has befallen other Books in theirs, is a Plea unreasonable
in it self, devoid of all real ground of Truth, injurious to the Love and Care
of God over his Word and Church, in a high degree, and an imagination bordering
on Atheism, asserted on deliberation, p 18. 173? Surely the improvidence,
oscitancy, negligence, ignorance, unskilfulnesse, and carelessness that may as
groundedly be supposed to have been (if there was never so much care and
diligence in others of them) in some of the Scribes that have copied out the
Scriptures, as well as in some Printers that have printed them, and in some
Transcribers of Heathen Authors, and the non-evidence of any promise of God to
take any of the Scripture Transcribers under such a loving Care and Aspect as
I.O. ascribes to them; and I O's own concession of them, being not any of them,
(...), or (...), infallible, but under possibilities of mistakings, and I O's
confessions, and grants, and acknowledgements, that known failings have been
amongst them, and that various Lections are from thence risen, 167 169. and
that some of those are of importance, consisting of superfluity, and redundancy
of unnecessary; and deficiency of necessary words, which is destructive to the
sense, and arising out of Copies apparently corrupted, and notoriously
corrupted by old Heretics, and many more matters then are fit to repeat over
again, do require other thoughts at our hands.

Shall we think because I.O. so thinks, and very cogitantly (but little
cogently to us) conjectures that if the Points be man's invention, and the Text
under alteration (as undoubtedly it is, and therefore all the Priests Religion,
who live on the naked Texts, and their own Traditions, and not the Truth it
self is at a loss however) that then all is likely immediately, utterly and
remedilesly to perish for ever, viz. Church, Word of God, Doctrine, Truth,
certainty of the Gospel, Gods promise, Providence, and care of his eternal
incorruptible, good and acceptab^e mind, will and pleasure, Life, Spirit,
Light, Law? yea that all this and much more is little less then eternally
undone, (as to our knowledge of them) so that God himself can find no other
sufficient means (having tried already, quoth I.O. the insufficiency of all
other before) to save all these thing from corrupting, but that of a perishing,
uncertain flexible, at man's will fallible, changeable, mere dead, to the light
novell, corruptible, mou^d^ing, and in its first Manuscripts already long since
mou'dred, moth eaten and corrupted Letter? p. 12. surely the promise of God for
the preservation of his word (which was before the Letter, and will be after it
enduring for ever, so that (...), one jot or Tittle of it shall never fail,
what ever become of all the jots and Tittles of the Letter) and his Providence,
Love, and Care of his Church, of whose faith and obedience that word of his in
the heart and not the Letter, both was, now is, and ever will be, the only
Rule, require other thoughts at our hands, p. 173.

Shall we think (because I.O. fa^sly so thinks) that such a fallible, flexible,
alterable, and corruptible thing, as the Letter is, by I.O's own confession not
in its Translations only, but in the very Original Transcripts, which is the
only business he is so busy about, and so bestirs himself to bustle for, is
that which can justly claim and supreamly challenge to it self those
preheminent Titles, excellent properties, extraordinary effects, peculiar
prerogatives, mavelous successes etc. which I.O attributes thereuunto
throwout his first English Treatise, and Latin ^hes^ also? wherein, under that
glorious name of the Word of God, by which yet (as by that which he undertakes
to prove to be it is proper name, he as, if not more ordinarily denominates it,
then by its own and one^y proper name of Scripture) he magnifies the Text, as
to those Hebrew and Greek Copies of it he is pleased to crown as the Canon, and
set his stamp upon as the Standard (while he stigmatizes not only all
Translations as men's own Altars, and altered things, that must not stand as the
Standard by the Posts, and high Altar of his said unalterable Copies, but other
Copies also, as novel, spurious, and no^^^iously corrupted;) above all that
has any being under God, insomuch that he cannot likely utter more concerning
it in way of exaltation, unless he should extol it so far, as to style it God
himself.

So I have done at present with I.O's unprofitable prate, about the
preciousnesse, profitablenesse, and divine Original of his high prized
possession of the Hebrew punctation; and with his peremptory Post^^n, and
absolutely absurd Assertion, of the non-corruption of his Canonized Copies of
the Original Text to a Tittle, which howbeit I have scarce gone above half so
far as I might, in discovering the deep dotage and folly, that is to be found
in his mingled management, and miserable mang^nization of those matters, yet I
have gone farther by the hall then I should have done, considering how far off
all such husky, chaffy accomplishments, as those Pedantick parts of the Letter,
are from that wherein the Life of God chiefly lies, viz. the Spirit, Light, and
Word that is nigh in the heart, and how little concernment the more substantial
parts of the mere outward Text are of thereto, in comparison of them, much more
such Accidentals, as the mere figure of the Accents and Vowels, But only that
I found I.O. manifesting his foppery so far, as to render these Ticklish things
of such eminent Tendency to the saving knowledge of all sacred Truth, as to
give them out to be the most real Rule, stable standard, Gospel guides, grand
ground, chief infallible foundation of all; in which respect, though otherwise
it is little less then loathsome to me to leave the life I live in the
en^oyment of my self with God, to meddle so much in such muddy matters; yet, in
service to the Truth, and in love to the souls of the Schoolmen and Scribes,
that they may see the sandy fickle f^undation they build and found all their
faith upon in the business of eternal consequence, which is no better then the
uncertain thoughts, conceits and conjectures of men, about shapes of Letters,
Points and Iota's. I was (contrary to my own first intentions, carried forth to
such prolixity in this matter, which I conclude in this manner.

Where the foundation of the faith is utter uncertainty, there the faith can be
(according to I.O.) no more then mere fancy and uncertainty.

But so are the Points, as to their Original, and so are the Transcript Copies
of the Original Text, as to its entirenesse and integrity (I appeal to I.O's
own Book, and all rational Readers of it and mine) which Points and Text are
by I.O. and his School fellows made the Canon, Rule, Guide, Touchstone,
Standard and sure foundation, p. 154. 155. of all that faith and obedience,
which God requires at their hands.

Therefore their faith toward God, as yet, is no more then mere fancy and
uncertainty.

The Third Apologetical, and Expostulatory Exercitation.
CHAP. I.
THough much more might be said I.O. to many of thy matters behind mentioned,
yet having sufficiently swept away sundry of thy Figments and false Aspersions
of the Qua. in vindication of them, and turned thy lies in plain English upon
thy self, which thou laidst in Latin upon them, about their rejecting of the
Scriptures, and taken some useful notice of the bounds and first constitution
and consignation of that ye call your Canon, and of what thou foolishly and
falsely affirmes^ of the Hebrew punctation of the Bible, and the entireness of
the Text to a tittle, as at first: I shall come to some consideration of many
more of thy cloudy, crooked conceptions of it, and of those many false tales
(whether not as much to the dishonoring of it in truth, as to the honoring of
it in pretense, since thou placest it unduely in the Throne of Christ, let the
Reader judge) thou very confidently tellest for Truth of the Scripture it self;
which seeing thou art first appearing in the field against the Qu who are its
true friends, my business, who appear also for it as well as thee, and to state
it in as high Authority as ( Salva Christi ipsius eminentia) it may honestly
stand in, without High Treason to the Supremacy, Crown and Dignity of Christ,
and his Light and Spirit, will lie mostly in reducing it from that Throne and
supreme Seat of Judicature on which thou set'st it utterly against the will of
Christ revealed in it, into its due place of a subordinate servant in the
Church, where, as a Writing, it summons all to come to him, the Light, the
only Judge, Lord and Lawgiver, that is able to save and destroy, who by his
Light sits in the conscience of all, to try all for life or death, searching
the heart and reins, to give to every one according to their ways, works, and
fruit of their doings, and t^en what thou displacest will stand all in its due
rank and proper order.

Thy Grand Assertion then of the Scripture, unto which all almost of the other
that thou predicatest of it is, as it were, but subordinate, and some of it
subservient to the proof of; as also it is subservient to the proof of some of
that, whereof yet some is so promiscuously, in such a confused way of mingle
mangle, treated out, that one cannot tell well whether it be proprounded in
proof of the Scriptures being the Word of God, or the Scriptures being the Word
of God, is made demonstrative of that; yea the same things are sometimes
interchangeably praedicated in mutual proof of each other: For to prove the
Scripture to be the Word of God, thou urgest its self evidencing efficacy and
power, and to prove it to be living, efficacious, and powerful, thou urgest its
being so from places, that speak only of the Word of God, not the Letter of
it; and many more such like ratelled pieces of proof there are in thy unhewn
handiwork; But I say, the Grand Assertion thou prosecutest the proof of
thorowout thy first English Treatise, and much what in the first Exer^itation,
is this, viz. that as to Name and thing the Scripture properly is THE WORD OF
GOD: And having housed it under this high title, and in thy own crooked conceit
of it, crowded it by fowl, more then fair means, and by force of Arms, [as I
may say] more then force of honest Arguments, under the starely Canopy of that
super-eminent Compellation, thou afterward call it on that account, many
things more, so much as one of which it is not; yea consequently, any thing,
every thing that the Word of God it self alone [and not the Scripture] truly
is, and by right only is to be called.

First then, thou I.O. affirmest of the Scripture, the Letter of it, that it is
the Word of God, in esse Reali, and in esse cognoscibili, i.e. not only so,
but known so to be, and that as to name and thing, [i.e.] That as in its nature
it truly and properly is so, so that glorious title of the WORD of God is its
own due Right, true proper Name, which the Qua. denying to it, and seeking to
draw it [ in discrimen nominis] into a difference in name from, do no less then
divest and spoil the Scripture of its proper Name: And this thou say, Ex.
L.S. 2, 3 is the work which the Quakers rejoice at that it is committed to them
by Satan, for which only thou take them to do, as if thou had no more to
do with them, nor they with thee, then de Scripturae nomine proprio, as thou
there speak, and as if the Qua. did yield the Scripture to be the Word of
God, and had nothing against its being so, as to its proper nature, and yet
would not endure to allow it to be called by its own proper Name, that is most
answerable to its own Nature.

Rep. Not too fast at first [Friend] least what thou writest in haste, thou
come to repent by leisure: Thou mistakest thy self very much as to thy busy
busling with the Qua. who may possibly find thee more work then thou art aware
of, before they whom thou beginst to lash, and lash out against in thy Latin
Cover-Cloath, have done with thee: They seek not merely to bring the
Scripture, to which they ever allow its own proper name, ( in discrimen
nominis) back to its own Name, from those many new-found-names, not due to it,
but to the Word, its the Writing of, from which Word in the Night your
Forefathers have stole them, to style it by; but also [ in discrimen Rei] to
manifest it to be what it really is, and no more then what it is, to you and
others, who not only call it, but count it to be what it truly is not.

The Qua. are not such Idiots yet, as to rob any things (as you do many) of
their own proper Names; nor so foolishly Fanatical, and Fantastical, as to
spend their time in inanibus logomachijs, or onomamachij^, so, but that if thou
can prove the Scripture to demonstrate it self infallibilite^, Ex. 1. S. 1.
infallibly and uncontroulably, page 34. to be the Word of God, as thou
undertakest to evince, but ad Graecas Calendas, to morrow come never [as they
say] thou will do, and not before, they will then freely grant it to be called
so, whose work with thee and all men, is to have all things first known to be
what they are in their proper nature^, and then called by those proper Names
that are agreeable to those natures.

Though then we deny the Scripture to be called by that of The Word of God, as
its proper Name, yet it is upon this account, because neither thou nor any man
in the world is able to prove it to be so in its proper nature; whereupon,
howbeit we eternally own the Word of God properly so to be, and infallibly, and
incontroulably evidencing it self so to be, and that it ought (as by its own
proper name) to be called the Word of God, which (if thy tottering ragged way
of Argumentation, wherein thou ten, if not twenty times over, and more,
inadvertently, and contrarily to all Rules of true Disputations, transposest
thy t^rms, making the Word of God both thy subject and the praedicate also,
which thou often praedicatest of it self, be well observed) thou belabourest
thy self to prove against I know not whom to be evidently, and to be called
properly the Word of God; and howbeit we also own the Word of God to be all
those other things, viz Foundation, Rule, Light, Touchstone, Witnes^ of God,
only means, of the saving knowledge of God, most effectual means of bringing
men to repentance, quickening power, power of God to salvation, and many more
by which thou denominatest it: Nevertheless that the Scripture, or outward
Writing, or external text, of either your Copies of the Original, or the
Original Copies, which you have not now in the world, much more that the text
of any Translation thereof into other tongues, or the English tongue either,
which is all that poor English people have, who are no higher learnt, as to
Earthly Languages, then their Mother Tongue: much more that every tittle, Iota,
and Apex of any of these, as thou Apishly contendest it is, in your Transcripts
at least, page 168, 169. is either the Word of God, or any ^ther of those
things, or properly to be called by that of the Word of God, by which yet thou
streinest a point to call it, and do over and over, either under that term,
the Word, or that of the Scripture, which is only properly its own; this is
that which I am here entering the Lists with thee about, and am to the
undeceiving of both Powers and People of this Nation, who by your sophistical
sorceries are bewitched into a blind Opinion about both the truth, and the Qua.
who hold it out in that particular, notwithstanding thy pretensive proofs to
disprove against thee.

Nevertheless, before I can yet come immediately to the examination of thy
proofs in particular, in order to the disproof thereof, or to thy own holding
out of any thing to the contrary; so many, great, and gross are the absurdities
and illegalities of thy manner of Disputation in proof of this business, viz.
that the Scripture, both as to name and thing, is, and is infallibly and
undeniably known to be the Word of God; that I may not honestly pass on here
without a discovery to all men of thy most illegitimate and downright dishonest
dealing, in thy driving on of thy Argumentation in^order to the evincing
thereof in sundry particulars, which I shall exhibit to the view of all men
under this one general head, viz. thy unworthy Begging of the main question in
hand, which thou take upon thee to prove, as well in thy English Treatise
upon that subject, which thou say thou had preached on, which [as
published] is a Dispute too, for the Scriptures, as in thy Latin illogical,
and Theological Disputations, or Apologeticals pro Scripturis, in both the one
and the other of which, thou never keep close to thy main terms, which ought
never to be altered in any legal Disputation, but both changest and confoundest
them together, even the Grand subject, that is, the Scripture and the Grand
Praedicate of it, that is, the Word of God, almost as often as thou have to do
with them; insomuch that thy Tr^ctations and Transactions for, and about the
outward Letter, or Text of the Scriptures, which are the subject from whence
thy Latin, and thy English works in their Title. Pages both bear their main
denominations of Vindication of, and Apologies for the Texts of the Scripture,
the proof of which, to be the known, pure, perfect, powerful, living,
spiritual, saving, necessary, unalterable, unchanged, uncorrupted etc. Word of
God, is thy main professed work, scope, drift, and intent thoroughout them, are
such an indistinct, term-transposing Argumentation, such a ^^agonized mess of
male proof, such an underboard piece of double-dealing, as proclaims its
Author, as well to such as know him by neither, as to such as know him both by
name and face, to be one that dur^ not play above-board, but dug as deep as
he well durst, for fear of being too much dis^ryed in his deceit on the other
hand, to hide his counsel, that he might be the less noted in his turnings of
things up-side-down, that having once put apart as two specifically different
things, the Scripture or its Doctrine; whereof one was to be his main subject,
the other his main praedicate throughout his disputation, durst not keep them
clearly asunder, as he should have done all along in his premises, till he came
to his Conclusion in which only if at all) they were by right to be joined,
nor speak of them constantly Sigillatim, as of two things formally, separated
in their nature, and to be separated in their names, till the one he infallibly
or plainly proved to be the other, ( viz.) the Scripture to be the Word of God,
and the Word of God to be the Scriptures; But being jealous whether things
might grow to the disadvanta^^ or hazard of hi cause in question, and utter
loss of his positive assertion of the Scriptures to be the Word of God if he
should, was afraid to speak plain: and so I believe thou I.O. art to utter thy
meaning too openly, or speak thy mind out too distinctly, and so chusest to
prosecute thy proofs the more promiscuously, and to carry thy ill cause on the
more confusedly, by the shifting and changing of thy terms ever and anon, and
to beg the question in hand, or take it for granted before it be given thee,
that the Scripture is the Word, and to supplant and forestall thy Reader with
thy often, or ordinary crouding of these each under the other's Name, and
indifferent denominatings of them each by the other, as Synonomae^, before thy
time: ( i.e.) Before thou have proved the name of the one at all proper to the
other, by the one's true participation of the others essential properties or
nature; so that ^ like the Fis^ Caepia, that being pursued by its adversaries,
flings a flood of black inky stuff behind it, to hide it self from being seen
and taken) by a blind blending, and cloudy confounding of things together,
which being treated of formaliter, and discoursed of divisim each under its own
peculiar form, and proper name and nature, both thy own folly, and the
falseness of thy propositions, should be discovered, yea by pidling and
pedling, and playing fast and loose, thou seem to puzzle the minds, and put
out the eyes of such as shall ever prosecute thee for thy rotten principles:
insomuch that I may truly say of thee, what thou untruly utterest concerning
the Qua. page 69. of thy Latin Tract, viz. Quaenam sit horum hominum sententia
haud facile quis declarabit, etc. And so mutatis mutandis turning all thy Verbs
out of the 3 d. person, Plural, into the 2 d. person, singular;) I may safely
sing back to thee in thy own words, as follows, viz.

Quae nam sit tua ipsius sententia de ha^Questione, an Scriptura (...) verbum
Dei? Hand facile quis declarabit; preterquam enim quod tocum non convenias, ita
inepic ^rque odiose in explicandis animi, misensibus garris, dubiae and
incertae significati^nis vocibus ludis, peregrinis quibu^dam phrasibus, quae
imperitos homines, aut re^eant, aut illi^ia^, nihil sani sensus, aut quod ab
ullis sa^e (...) intelligi possit, continentibus, uteris, ui multo facili^o^r
sit Argumenta ^ua pristigare quammente^ percipere. Imo cum ^^pis, and inh^nesta
sit tua sen^entia, quae emuleate exposita remo^i^ strophis atque sucis, ipsae
sibi apud prebos omnes, etiam non palam improbos satis esset ad exiti^m data
opera qu^ imposturam facia^ vel ipsam non palam Eloqueris vel verbi: i.a
consutis and consa^cinatis, ut nihil pene omnino significent, eam mangonizas
atque ita consilium sermonibus obtenebrans nihil magis cavere videris, quam ne
intelligaris.
What thy mind J.O. is in this Question, Whether the Scripture be the Word of
God, or no, one can hardly declare; for besides that thou agreest not with thy
self, thou do so foolishly and nauseously prate in the opening of thy mind
and meanings, and playest about in words of an uncertain and dubious
signification; and usest for the most part certain foreign phrases, containing
no s^und sense that can well be understood by any that are well in their wits,
which are enough either to astonish or bewitch unskilful men; so that it is more
easy to confute thy Arguments, then conceive thy meaning; yea, when thy
Opinion is so foul and dishonest, that if the fair pretenses and covers be
removed, and it distinctly unfolded, it sufficiently destroys it self amongst
all honest men, that are not openly dishonest; endeavoring what thou can so
delude, either thou speak is not out openly, or else manglest it to pieces
in such a sticht and patcht up form of speech, that can signify well-nigh
nothing at all; and so darkening thy Counsel by words without knowledge, thou
seem to be afraid of nothing more, then least thou should be understood.

In such wise as this I.O. do thou proceed in thy present Paper Works that
are now under Examination, having in thy have heedlesly uttered forth some
faucied high-flown falsities about the bare Letter, and mere outside of the
Scriptures, and every Tittle and transcribed Iota thereof, viz. That these are
the true spiritual Light, and Authoritative, Powerful Word of God, and such
like; and after fearing the falsehood of such forward expressions, from which
(as most of thy fellow wise men are in the like case, who though they are
foolish and ignorant enough, yet of all things in the world are loath to seem,
and even abhor to be accounted so to be) thou art ashamed totally to recede and
recant, so as altogether to go back, which rather then do, when ye are once
over Shoes, thou and thy generation choose to be over Boots also, thou
staggerest and reelest now this way, now that; and to mend and moderate the
rigidity of thy Positions about the Scripture, for the saving of thy credits
sake, as far ( Salva cel^itudinis ac celeberrimae sapientiae t^ae gloria as is
consistent with thy credit another way, thou wheelest about, and frequently
foisting in the Predicate into the place of the Subject, and that Term, the
Word of God, in the room where this Term only, viz. the Scripture should stand,
even while thou art but in thy proof of the Scripture to be the Word, thou
darknest thy counsel by words utterly without knowledge, and rendrest thy self
ambedextrously and ambiguously, that thy Reader may not well read thy meaning
in what thou writest, nor whether when thou avowest the Scripture to be the
Word of God, and powerful, etc. thou intend'st the Scripture it self, that one
individual thing called the Letter, or Writing, which alone is the very
formality of the Scripture, or the other individual thing, which is not at all
the outward Scripture, though so called often by thee, viz. That Word of which
the Scripture only speaks; for one while thou singlest out that grand subject
of thy Dispute, i. e. the Scripture, and setting it apart from the Doctrine,
Faith, Divine Truth, and Word it writes of; seem as if all along thou
would discuss the things thou praedicatest of it, under that single notion
of its being an external Writing, apart from the Doctrine, and Word of Faith
written of therein, as Tr. 1 C. 1. S. 12, 13. expressing thy self thus, viz.
not only the Doctrine in it, but the (...), the very writing, writings, book
it self is so, and so; thereby leading thy Reader up and down by the Nose, up
into the air, into a high expectation of thy handling the Scripture formally, (
quatenus Scripta) as a Writing, as written, which is the only subject promised
to be treated on, and for, in the Title pages, and of thy proving it as such^
to be the Word, and mighty power of God; from whence thou tumblest him down
again, and frustrating those his former expectations, other while, conjangletim
thou jumblest these two as Synonomaes into one, in many such, or the like
expressions, viz. the writing, or w^rd written; the (...), or the Doctrine as
written: and Tr. 1. C. 4. S. 2. the Scripture, or written Word of God: and S.
6. Now the Scripture, the Word of God is light, the innate Arguments that the
Word of God is furnished withal for its own manifestation, contain the full or
formal grounds of our answer to that question why we receive the Scripture,
[see how these terms are twisted one into another] to be the word of God, Tr.
1. C.4. S. 1. Thus thou usest them so promiscuously, as if they being with thee
entirely one, 'twere indifferent, and no matter at all which of the two thou
expressest thy self by, saying sometimes the Scripture is a light, a moral and
spiritual, not a natural Light, as Tr. 1 C. 4. S. 8, 9. The Scripture makes a
proposition of it self as the Word of God, Tr. 1. C. 4. S. 14. for the proof
of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, if the Book be brought to him or
them that acknowledge it not, etc. the Word [there thou go off again] left
with them, it will evidence it self, S. 15. The Scripture it enrolled among
things that are able to evidence themselves, S. 16, 17. I^ ( i.e. the
Scripture) is absolutely called the Power of God, S. 18. The Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament do abundantly, and uncontroulably manifest themselves to
be the Word of the living God; so that merely upon that account of their
proposal of themselves to us in the Name and Majesty of God, as such, without
contribution of help or assistance from any thing else without themselves, we
are obliged upon the penalty of eternal damnation, as all are to whom by any
means they came, or are brought to receive them with that submission of soul
which is due to the Word of God, T. 1. C. 2. S. 5. The Scripture being brought
unto us, it does evidence it self infallibly to our Consciencet, to be the Word
of the living God, T. 1. C. 4. S. 2. If the Question be, Whether the Doctrines
proposed to be believed, are truths of God, or fables, we are sent to the
Scripture it self, and that alone to give the determination. T. 1. C. 3. S. 16.
Surely men will not say the Scripture has its power to command in the Name of
God, from anything but it self, T 1. c 2. s. 6. Them that own the Book whereof
we speak, to be the Word of God, T. 1. c. 3. s. 12. How know we that the
Scripture is the Word of God? How may others come to be assured thereof? the
Scripture, say we, bears testimony to it self, that it is the Word of God, T.
1. c. 4. s. 31. And in thy two Treatises which treat all along of the Text,
thou tellest it more loud-lye, that every letter and tittle that they were
transcribing, and to be transcribed of the Old Testament by the Jews, was part
of the Word, nay the Word of the great God, wherein the eternal concernment of
souls does lie. These, and much more, ejusdem furfuris, are the ways wherein
thy mind makes out it self sometimes; sometimes again as if thou were somewhat
sensible of having not a little overshot thy self by thy too too eminent
expressions, and lofty undertakings for the naked scriptures, which can never
possibly be made good of them, to palliate all thy proud boastings, and broad
shows, and too too ample settings out of a bare body, or bulk of Letters, and
^^ward Writings, thou drawest thy neck out of the Collar wherein it hung,
slily flink'st away, and shrinkest back, standing like Caesar at Rubicon, with
one foot over he Dote-fel, and the other on this side, saying, Yet I may go on;
and by and by, Yet I may go back, not resolved which way to betake thy self,
whether to go on in thy high and hasty undertakings for the Scripture upon that
old single score of its being but barely Scripture, least thy proof should not
hold at so high a rate; or whether to double thy files by bringing them two
both into one again, that were sometime sundred, viz. the Scripture, and the
Doctrine or Word of truth it treats of; the outward Writing, and the Word of
Faith within that is written of, which could not be made appear, considered
sigillatim, or apart, to be both of them the Word of God; and at last, though
that be bad enough, there being no better way in the sight of one that loving
the praise of men more then the praise of God, is loath among men to be mocked
at, as the builder that begins, and cannot carry it to an end, having another
string to thy Bow, thou strengthenest thy weak business what thou art able,
and furtively clapping a greater glory, light, power and honor in respect of
titles, about that dark, dead, weak and naked body of the writings, then that
which considered by it self, it can duly and lawfully challenge
[Notwithstanding thy unwary assertions not only elsewhere, but also Ex. 1. S.
26, 27. viz. That scriptura hoc verbi Dei nomen sibi vendica^: The scripture
challenges this Name of the Word of God, unto it self] even that of the inward
living Word of God it self, to which alone all that glory, and those glorious
Names by right are due, and not to the Letter, and were due before the Letter
was; when thou have laid the true, unchangeable, inward truth, and Word of God,
instead of the Letter, the outward, and thy outwardly beloved Changeling, and
subtly shrouded it under that name and notion of the Word of God, which is
the very thing in question, and the name to be disputed on, whether it be due
to it or no, and is as much still denied by us, as it is by a piece of
sophistical thievery taken by thee to be its undoubted right, before it be
either proved by thee, or by us, or any but Ignoramus himself, granted to the^^
Then O come let us sing a new song, thou marchest forward again (...), driving
on thy self same Old Dispute, concerning a new stolen different Subject, which
is now pressed to serve as both thy Subject, and thy praedicate, and to supply
the proper place of both, which being denominated and praedicated all along of
it self, all thou say of it is most undoubtedly true, and uncontroulably
thou carryest all clear before thee, crying it up to this purpose, viz. that of
a truth the Word of God is a light, the Word of God is living, the word of God
is perfect, of Divine Authority, the Word is the most glorious light in the
world, a shining, illuminating light preferred ab^u^ that of the sun, etc. T.
1. C. 4. S. 7.
the Word of God is furnished with innate Arguments for its manifestation of it
self, i e. to be the Word of God; T. 1. C. 4. S. 1.
There is in the dispensation of the Word, an evidence of truth commending it
self ^^ the consciences of men, some receive not this evidence, is it for want
of Light in the Truth it self? No, that is a glorious Light that shines into
the hearts of men: T. 1. C. 4. S. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Wherever the Word comes, by what means soever, it has in it self a
sufficiency of Light to evidence it self to all, that Authority of God its
Author: (Which Authority is with I.O. its power to command, as the Word of
God.) The Word makes a sufficient proposition of it self, where-e ver it is: He
that has the witness Which witness of God the Word is, ^^ confess, and thou
needst not prove it: But that word is not the Scripture, but that the Scripture
writes of.
of God, need not stay for the witness of man: Which witness of men for God as
moved, the Scripture i^, and no more, as will be seen an^n.
for the Witness of God is greater. Wherever the Word is received indeed, as
it requires it self to be received, and is really assented to, at the Word of
God, it has its power of manifesting it self so to be, from its own innate
Light; thy Word is Truth, etc. s. 14. Thou have magnified over all the Name,
the Word thou have spoken: the Name of God is all that whereby he makes himself
known, yet over all this God magnifies ^his Word etc. T. 1. C. 4. sect. 15.
Leave the Word with men, and is it evidence not it self unto their consciences,
it is because they are blinded. In all which sentences, and many more that
might be mentioned, there is no mention of the scriptures by the old true Term
of the scriptures, though that Name is interwoven too, in wel-nigh every page,
to denote, that although the Discourse that is in proof of their being the Word
of God, is driven on in their behalf under that new Name of the Word of God,
yet by that word, the Word, we may know that by I.O. the Scriptures are still
intended; but as if the sole use of that single Name of Scriptures, might prove
too weak a term to venture the stress of the whole Cause upon, and too empty an
Engine to carry it by, its carried along also under that more trusty term of
the Word of God, by which Name I.O. by a thing called Petitio Principij,
granting himself leave to call the Let ter before it is given undertakes to
prove it to be the Word of God, and most uncontroulably proves it so to be, so
far as the Letter he calls the Word of God, is really so, though (for all his
seeming to himself to have won all) not one jot farther then its so indeed, and
that indeed is not at all; having gotten such a noun substantive as the true
Word of God is, which can stand by it self under its own Name of the Word of
God, without objection, in all propriety of speech and signification, and is
every way able to evidence it self to be the Word of God, and is seen, felt,
heard, of them that heed it, and understood and not denied so to be by the Qua.
to stand by his noun adjective assertion of the scripture so to be, which
cannot stand by it self under that Name, in any propriety of speech, or sound
sense, reason, or signification, then he runs an end ( nemine c ontradicente)
none opposing or withstanding him in his progress, nor (however reserving
always a liberty to themselves to dissent as they see occasion from his
meaning) so much as once gainsaying him in his terms with a hideous Hue and
Cry for the Word of God, striving to restore it by his over-often repetitions
of it to that title, which it never lost among the Qua. who being begotten and
born again into the Image of God by it, are by whom only it stands truly
justified ^ the children of it, and of the Truth; scribbling it over with all
his might, the Word of God, the Word of God, the Word of God is a Light, and
the Word of Life; the Word of God is the powerful and living, and efficacious
Word of God, the Word of God is the Word that dwells and dives within the
heart, the word of God does evidence it self to be, and therefore is without
control the Word of God: yea thus with a non obstante to all that deny the
word to be the word, which are none at all, J.O. if it may be first granted him
that the Scripture is the Word will undertake to prove it beyond and without
all further question, to be the word. Thus JO. howbeit by that term the Word
of God he means the Scripture all along in his book, saving in one place, where
he calls the Word essential and effective, yet as if he had utterly forgot that
his business is to prove the Scripture to be the Word of God, and, as if he had
remembered himself after he was entered, that his proof would not hold out,
without a palpable appearance of piteous weakness, if he should have prosecuted
it throughout under that term of Scripture, takes his predicate and makes that
his subject also, and in terminis goes all along asserting and assuring us the
word of God is un doubtedly the word of God: yea Tr. 1. cap. 2. sect. 14. he
goes on to prove that the word of God does evidence it self to be of God, and
is of as much, or more excellency and efficacy then his works and innate light
to reveal God, and give the knowledge of his will, not so much as once
mentioning the letter or Scripture at all, which is the subject he there takes
on him to speak of, in all the following sections to the Chapters end, so be
laboring him all along to prove another question then that he affirmed, viz.
that the word is so and so, when his business was to have proved the Scripture
to be the known word of God, for who denies that the word of God is assuredly
his word? but that the letter is that word is that which is denied, and by him
undertaken to be proved, yet on he goes in his wonted blundring manner upon
that term the word of God, the word is undoubtedly evident to be the word,
making that both Suject and Predicate; whereas he should have said all along,
if the light and Gods outward works do so, much more does the Scripture, or the
letter evidence it self to be the Word of God, so giving his Reader no more to
understand what his meaning is, but that we know it some way else, nor which is
which by any distinction in his found, or showing when he speaks of the
Scripture which is the Copy of it, or the word it self, which is that in the
heart, declared of in Scripture, which he was to prove the Scripture to be,
then the Welch-man that being to give evidence before a Court between two that
were fighting, who began, and was most in fault, answered no otherwise then in
this confused manner, viz. If Him had struck Him, as Him did Him, either Him
had killed Him, or Him Him, without any indignation of which of the two he
meant, either this or that, by any, or by all of his many Hims.

In this confused indistinct manner do thou J.O. dispute for the Scriptures
being and appearing to be the word of God, so that none, but folk, knows what
thou pleadest for, viz. whether the Scripture it self singly and formally
considered, about which the controversy is, whether it be the word of God or
no, or the Word of God it self, about which no controversy i^ at all with the
Qu.^ who own Gods Word to be his Word; yea draw up all thy Rambling matter into
a closer form, and thy Arguments, which though thou call but some of them
Inarteficial, and the rest Arteficial, yet are in truth the most inarteficial
ones, that ever I saw fall from the hands of an Artist, or ever heard called
truly by the name of Arguments, into a nearer compass, and set them in a true,
fair syllogistical form and order, and they will appear either most false, or
foul, or disorderly, or sophistical, or deformed.

(Reader) for a taste take one or two of J.O.'s. mediums (letting alone the
examination of the strength and force of his Arguments, whether such as he
calls Arteficial, or Inartificial) and of their true consequence or
inconsequence, as to the Scriptures appearing to be the word to its due place^
and see what a mamock^ kind of matter they make, or amount to, as J.O. orders,
or rather disorders his matters, by his impostural intruding of one subject in
place of another, and thrusting in of that term the Word of God, which is the
main thing predicated of the Scriptures, to stand instead of that term the
Scriptures, of which it is by him predicated, and to be proved (both in esse
reali and cognoscibili, Ex. 1. sect. 1.) that they are, and are assuredly known
to be the Word of God, and so properly to be called. Having first in T. 1.
cap. 1. sect 25. laid the divine original of the Scripture, as the Basis of all
his Babylonish building, and as he says, T. 1. c. 2. s. 3. opened the manner
of the Words Mark how he intermingles these two terms in his discourses
coming forth from God, to prove the Scriptures of the old and new Testament to
be the Word of God, much of which makes against himself, at large in a long
Train of perplexive prittle prattle throughout his whole second, third, and
fourth Chapters, from the self-evidencing property and efficacy of the
Scriptures, which aforehand still he calls the Word of God; but to shut it all
up together in short, to this purpose, viz. That which evidenceth it self to be
the Word of God, that is, and is known assuredly to be the Word of God; But the
Word of God does evidence it self unto us to be the Word of God, therefore the
Word of God is, and is known assuredly to be the Word of God.

The minor in this Syllogism, none denies, it being true in those terms it
here stands in^ yet it is false and sophistical, as falling from him, who by
that term the Word of God in the sore part of the Proposition, means the
Scriptures, the utter falsehood of which minor, and so consequently of the
conclusion (which is now true, but aliud a negato) would have too plainly
appeared, if he had not sophistically placed that subject, i.e. the Word of
God, as it stand foremost in both, in the room of the right subject, i.e. the
Scriptures, or if he had not changed his minor term, but expressed himself thus,
viz. But the Scriptures do evidence themselves to be the Word of God, therefore
the Scriptures are, and are known assuredly to be the Word of God: And to prove
that minor, J.O. uses another medium, viz. Gods magnifying his Word above all
his Name, by which a minore ad majus, i.e. from the self-evidencing power of
smaller matters (as he counts them) i.e. the Works of God, T. 1. c. 2. s. 12,
13, 14, 15.
and the Light in the conscience, the Law written in the heart, and the notions
inlaid there with his own finger, which he calls the voice of God in nature
(for these are low ^ dark, obscure principles, and means of revealing God and
his will with J.O. in comparison of the writings and letters that are inlayed
in parchment and paper, with the finger of mere man, which low principles yet
are able to plead their own divine original, and evince them to be of God) he
argues at large that the Word of God ( Scripture again he should have said)
does much more evidence it self to be his Word; and (to put his lax and loose
words into a narrower room, and into a more Argumentative or Syllogistical
posture) thus, viz. If those inferior Names of God, whereby he makes himself
known, even his works without, and his Light, his Law written in the heart and
conscience, Mark what J. O. here ascribes to the Light in the Conscience, the
Law in the heart, concerning which he makes so strange sometimes, that he will
not believe there is any such thing at all: Nescio quod Lumen, etc.
to which there need be no other Witness; that when they testify God's
Righteousness, or Holiness, and call for moral obedience, which is eternally
and indispensably due to him, they speak from God, do evidence themselves to be
what they are, and to be of him; then much more his Word, [the Scripture he
should have said] which God magnifies over all his Name, Which Word, that God
magnifies over all his Name, is Christ Jesus, whom God has highly exalted, and
given him a Name above every Name that is named, of things in Heaven, Earth,
and under the Earth, that at his Name every knee should bow, Phil. 2. And not
the Scriptures, unless J.O. will say the Scriptures are exalted above Christ,
and so make God a liar.
must evidence it self to be his Word: But those inferionr Names do evidence
themselves, and therefore much more does the Word of God [the Scriptures again
he should have said] evidence it self to be the Word of God.

Rep. What a strange story is here, as if a man should tell a tale of two
things, a Cock and a Bull, metamorphos'd into one, whereof the one having been
as confidently, as untruly avowed to be assuredly known to be the other, viz.
The Cock to be a Bull, is [being denied] as Ridiculously, as Reasonlesly
profer'd to be proved in this illegal, and illogical way of Argumentation, viz.
That which evidenceth it self to be a Bull, both is, and is assuredly known to
be a Bull; but the Bull [ alias, the Cock, for so he means, and should say]
evidenceth himself to be a Bull: Therefore the Bull [or the Cock] both is, and
is assuredly known to be a Bull.

In this shameful manner and sorry sort, does I.O. having once audaciously
avouch't it, go about to prove the Scriptures to be, and to be assuredly known
to be the Word of God, by Anticipation, sophistically substituting that
subject, the Word of God, in his disputation for it, in the room of the legal
subject, i.e. the Scriptures, taking it, perforce, from such as give it not for
granted, that it is so, while to them-ward its yet no more but the thing in
Question, and utterly unproved so to be; which question I.O. not only begs,
but also begs so unworthily and basely, that I never saw the like to it, but
once And that was by the Truths Opponents, at the Disputation at Ashford for
Infants Baptism, on the 27. of the 5. Month, by the Heathen called July, 1649.
who in the Preface to their own falsely called True Account thereof extant, with
my Answer to it, confessing not only their own defects, and their zeal of
Infant Baptism to be more then their abilities to maintain it; but also the
weakness of their Arguments on its behalf, fall a beseeching people in their
charity to cover the weakness of them.
before in all my life, and the like to it cannot likely be seen again, unless a
man should beg it on his knees, little less then plainly, confessing that
unless it be aforehand granted him that the Scripture is the Word of God, he
cannot possibly prove it so to be: What wise man, that is as willing to do the
Truth Right, as thee I.O. no wrong, can make any better construction of thy own
words, as they are to be read in the ^. sect. of the 4. chap. of thy first
Treatise, where, professing that in the remainder of thy Discourse thorowout
that Treatise (which is all in proof of the Scriptures being assuredly the word
of God) thou shall endeavor to clear and vindicate the self- evidencing
efficacy of the Scripture, and the grounds thereof, by such common Mediums as
shall as well reach the Reasons of such men, as acknowledge not the Scripture
to be the Word of God, as of such as do, thou desire in effect only to have
thus much first granted thee, that thou may have leave (the Scripture being
that out of which thy proofs for, and grounds of this self-evidencing efficacy
of the Scripture to be the Word of God, are to be taken) to consider the
Scripture as it is the written word of God, or else all thy proofs will be weak,
and able to prove just nothing.

This only (quoth I.O. to recite his own words) I shall desire to promise,
that whereas some grounds of this efficacy seem to be placed in the things
themselves, contained in the Scripture, I shall not consider them abstractedly
as such, but under their formality of being the Scripture, or written Word of
God, without which consideration and resolution, the things mentioned would be
left naked, and utterly divested of their Authority and Efficacy pleaded for,
and be of no other nature and importance, then the same things found in other
Books: Which is as much as to say, Being by the Scripture to prove the
Scripture or writing both to be, and to evidence it self to be the Word
written, or the written Word of God; let such as deny it, deny that their
denial of it, and but first own it with me, that the Scripture, or writing
formaliter, is the written Word of God, and let us but under that name, nature,
notion, and formality consider it, and then let me alone to prove it to them so
to be, or else I must acknowledge that all I have to say, will be just nothing
to the purpose, and of no validity at all to the proof thereof.

Reply. But stay a while I.O. and take thy answer from us along with thee,
though we love thee more then we are beloved by thee, and are loath to deny
thee in any Reasonable Request: Yet for the Truth's sake, which we love, and
prefer before thee, and which is not ours to give away, we may not give way to
thy Petition of the main Principle from us, though thou crouch down to the
ground to petition for it, we must not give thee leave to run away with the
Cause, so as to consider the Writing, the Scripture, under the false formality
of its being the Word of God written, the Verbum Scriptum, while thou art but
in the mere way of proving it, till thou have as infallibly proved it so to be,
as it is infallible to us, that it is impossible for thee to prove it: For this
is the thing, sub judice, whether the Scripture be formally the Word of God,
or no: And since thou confessest thou can not prove it, unless we, upon thy
begging of it, yield it to thee beforehand so to be, thou were better grant it
to us that it is not so: Nevertheless, (not unlike to thy Forefathers the
Bishops, and thy fellow-Clergy-men in other Cases) so bold a Lord-Beggar thou
art, that if we give it not, thou will take it by force, though thou crack thy
credit for it, and get to thy self less of that earthly Honor thou so
hastenest after, with thy having it by stealth, then thou would gain of that
heavenly Honor from above, by an honest confession of thy former ignorance,
and a repentance to the future acknowledgement of the truth; For upon that
score thou resolvest so to go on in thy proof, and accordingly do run rashly
on, like him who as aforesaid proves a Cock to be a Bull, or like one who,
because he thought so in the dark, having ignorantly asserted an Horse to be a
Man, will (rather then recant) as impudently go on to prove it to all denyers
of it, by begging of them first to grant it, and if they will not, by beating,
what he can, the belief of it into them, by his often calling the Horse a Man,
and bearing them down that he is a man, before he begins, and under that very
Name and formality of his being so, begins and proves him to be evidently so in
this following form, viz. That which does evidence it self to be a man, is a
man; but a Man (Horse he should say, but then the naked untruth of this minor
would be too manifest) does evidence himself to be a Man: Therefore a man, (
alias, Horse) does evidence himself to be a man.

Risum tenoatis A-cade- mici? For my part if I were now, as sometime formerly I
have been, Petulanti spleen cachinno, I should hardly hold from laughing at the
nugacity of I.O.'s Arguments? But now nucibus faciens quaecunque relictis,
being turned into that, which leads into more sobriety and seriousness then so,
I shall dare to laugh no further then it is allowed the saints to do at the
proud Assyrian, that haughtily exalts his voice, and lifts his eyes on high
against the holy one of Israel, and his holy ones, Isa. 37.22, 23. But as for
many of those juniors, [what the Seniors may do, I know not] or younger sort of
Students and Gown-men in the University, to whose use and instruction thou
dedicatest part of thy Book, though [thou being once a man of some Authority
among them] they may possibly not be so bold, nor so loud as to laugh out at
thy hum-drum doings, and at thy Idem per Idems, yet they will scarce forbear
laughing at them in their sleeves: Yet this is thy sophistry I.O. called among
Scholars Petitio principij, or a Begging of the Question before one begins to
prove it; a taking of that to be a Ground, Principle, or Foundation to build
on, which is not yet granted, but to be debated; nor another thing from the
thing debated, or inquired after, but the self-same thing, which is in
controversy, and as unknown as that, that is disputed.

For the Question between thee and the Qua. is whether the Scripture be ( in
essereali and cognoscibili) the Word of God or no? we deny it, thou, being to
prove it so to be, would have it first granted, or at least take it
ungranted so to be, and then out of it self, it being granted thee so to be,
thou will undertake to prove it so; without which concession, consideration,
and resolution, thou even grantest the things thou art to allege, will be
naked, and utterly inefficacious to that purpose; out of which way of Sophistry
it seems thou can not prove it, and in which way though, de jure, thou
ought not, yet de facto, thou do prove it, as much, and no whit more,
then (as is said above) the Cock is proved to be a Bull, and a Horse a Man,
whilst thy Argumentation in many places is no better than this, viz. that which
is the Word of God does evidence it self to be the Word of God: But the Word of
God (Scripture or writing thou should say, but do not every where, lest
thy nakedness too much appear) is the Word of God; Therefore the Word of God
does evidence it self to be the Word of God. In which Syllogism (which is thine
if the long loins of thy loose dispute, and that straggling multitude of thy
matter of proof be girded up close into its own mifigured form) thy minor has
subjectum aliud a substrato, a different subject from that, which was of right
to stand there, and to be proved to be the Word of God, viz. the Word of God,
which is Idem cum predicato, the self-same with that, which is predicated of
it; and thy conclusion infers aliud a negato, quite another thing then that
which is denied; for that the Word of God is by it self evidenced to be the
Word of God is as much undenied, as it is undeniable by us, but that the
writing in which the Word is but held forth and declared, is the Word of God
that is held out and declared by it, this I shall make as bold, and as
warrantably against any one to deny, as I should against such a Sot, as
following a Foolshead of his own should assert such a thing, that the Glass
window thorough which the Sun shines, and the Lanthorn thorough which the light
of the candle shows it self, are of a truth and in very deed (respectively) the
very Sun it self, or Candlelight it self that display themselves through the
said Glass or Horn, or that the Cup-glass by which the Wine gives its color,
and is handed out that men may drink it, is truly and properly the very wine
itself, that is given out to be drunk of, and that sparkles and gives out his
goodly color in the Glass; or that the picture of a Prince, or eminent person
is in esse reali and cognoscibili, and in all propriety of speech so to be
called, the very Prince or person him self it is but the Image of, or the Map
of the City London, Rome, Jerusalem, is the very City it represents, so that he
bereaves it of its proper name, that will not allow it to to be any otherwise
but figuratively so called.

Now as to the Scriptures being the Word of God, and evidently known to be so,
or evidencing themselves to be so, and that of right, and properly they are to
be so called; all which thou J.O very absolutely averrest, I do here as
absolutely deny, confessing, that if they be so, or can be evidenced so to be,
they ought accordingly so to be called, or else not, for tum demum proprie
dicuntur resfieri quoad nos, cum incipiunt patefieri, what is not so, is not
known to be so, much less can challenge that as its proper name; so that if, in
essereali; they can be made appear to be the Word of God, then I give the rest
for granted, or if I make it appear that they are not so, then all wise men
that (not for want of ignorance of it) yet do not, will once grant that they
are not so infallibly known (as J.O. avouches they are) to be the Word of God,
and that the Word of God is not the proper name of the Scriptures, so
distinctly and abstractively understood as is above said.

And seeing that thou J.O. art first out in the field appearing for them, its
but meet that I should first examine what thou urgest in way of evidence for
their being the Word of God, and so subjoyn what I have to say truly of them
against what falsely thou have said.

And seeing that which thou thy self layest, as the very basis and foundation
of thy whole brittle building, and of all that divine Authority ascribed by
thee to the Scripture of its being owned and sub paena to be submitted to as
the Word of God, on peril of eternal damnation is its Divine original, and is
best also to be first meddled with, that, the bottom being shaken and showed to
be unsound, the body of sticks and straws thou buildest thereon, which is torn
and shattered not a little within it self, as it stands untouched in the eye of
any intelligent and observant Reader, may yet with the more ease, and less
labor be shaken to the ground, I shall enter first at the front of thy
Formidable forces, and begin to undo where thou beginnest to do thy Do, which
yet will not be so much in one sense to undo, as truly to do Right to the Truth
about the letter, which thou wrongest in uttering so many utter untruths
concerning it as thou do.

J. O. The whole Authority of the Scripture in it self depends solely on its
Divine original, page 2. This Original is the basis and foundation of all its
Authority, page 28.

Rep. As to the Divine original of the Scripture, which is the first and
fundamental matter that in the very original or first Chapter of thy first
Treatise thou pleadest on its behalf, as in proof of its Divine Authority or
Right to be owned as the Word of God; I deny not but that it is of Divine
original, and so one way or other is every thing else, that has a truly good
and honest being, yea the very Devil himself, as a creature of God, though
neither any of his deeds, which are sin, which is deceit and defect, nor
himself, qua (...) as he is a Deceiver, and as immediate an original from God,
as any mere writing or Scripture in the world has, this Scripture has, and
some little of it such an immediate emanation from God, as neither the most of
it self has, or ever had, nor yet the best that ever any holy man of God was
the Penman of, now has or ever had, I acknowledge that Scripture which is the
present subject, had at its first giving out to men; for a few words of that
outward writing the mee^ writing or letter of which yet, though the matter
still remains, and ever will when all writing fails, is lost and perished out
of the world, as well as the original manuscripts of the holy men who wrote the
rest) was written more miraculously at first then with the hands of holy men,
namely, some with such Fingers as came out from the wall by God^ appointment in
Belshazzars carousing Room, Dan. 5.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and some with no less
than the Finger of God himself, Exodus 32.18. 16.32. 15, 16. 34.1.28. Deuter. 9
10. 10.12.

But what of all this? that the mere Transcripts of that Text, which was so
immediately (though little or none of it so immediately from God, as J.O.
contends neither, or at least none at all of it immediate unto us) that our
modern Transcripts I say thereof, which is all that is immediate to us, and
which J.O. who confesses all the (...), or first writings to be lost, busies
himself to prove to be so, are at all immediately come forth from God to us, or
that that letter, which was most immediately penned from Gods own hand is
thereupon evinced to be truly, and in proper location the Word of God, or any
more then externa mera, licet vera, Imag^, (...), a mere though true, outward
copy, expression or express Image, as vox omnis is, and Scripture too ad intra,
of the Word of God, which is that only that is written of, and not the writing
of it.

This I both dare and do deny again J.O. or any other that asserts it: yet what
a deal of stress does J.O. put upon his strict and strong Asseveration of this
throughout his first Chapter, insomuch that he lays the whole load of his
cause, and makes all his labors to lean upon this weak Reed, and broken Basis,
the falseness, shallowness, and sandiness of which, as he manages this matter,
viz. the manner of the Scriptures coming out from God, by then I shall have a
little examined, it will show it self unable to bear up the weighty Fabric of
the Scriptures being the Word of God, which is the Babel that he builds upon
it, against a storm.

I shall here take notice of some at least of J.O.'s foolish, false,
fictitious, and self-contradicting talk about that prime Prop and Pillar, on
which his grand Proposition, that the Scripture is assuredly and infallibly
known to be the Word of God, and all his proofs thereof are grounded, viz. The
Divine Original of the Scripture.

CHAP. II.
I Shall consider this matter of the Scriptures Original both Absolutely,
taking notice of a few of thy false and foolish fancies about it; and also
Relatively, as it is laid by thee as the Basis of the Scriptures Divine
Authority, or being the Word of God.

J. O. The Laws, Doctrines, Instructions, stories, Promises, Prophesies given
out by the Writers of the Scripture, were not their own, conceived in their
minds, nor formed by their Reasonings, nor retained in their memories from what
they had heard; nor by any means beforehand comprehended by them, 1 Pet. 1.10,
11. But were all of them immediately from God, so as that there was only a
Passive concurrence of their Rational faculties in their reception, without any
such Active obedience to, as by any Law they might be obliged, page 5, 6.

Rep. Many things in this Parcel are utterly false, being uttered [as they are]
of the whole Scripture, and all its first Penmen [for what is said of the Old,
as to the immediate manner of its giving forth, is said also [saist thou, page
9.27.] of the New] insomuch that its not only very fond, but savouring also of
no small ignorance, both of, and in the Scripture, for any such Minister of no
more then the mere Letter of it, as our Divine^ are, much more below the
Ministers of the Spirit to hold out for truth, or so much as to imagine within
themselves; and as they are utter untruths, so much less are they of force to
evince that false Assertion to be Truth, which thou J.O. would conclude from
thence, viz That their Writings are uncontroulably known to be the Word of God.

1. What a crude conception of thy vain mind is this, that the Laws, Doctrines,
Instructions, Stories, Promises, Prophesies written (which I confess were not
their own formed, as many, if not most of thy false Doctrines and strange
stories about the Scriptures are thine own, formed by [unreasonable]
Reasonings) were not so much as conceived in the minds of the Penmen? Were
they not conceived in them by the Holy Spirit? And ^ly. by them, so as that
(for the most part at least) they understood, knew, and believed them as
Truths, before they committed them to Writing, as they were moved by the Spirit
of God to do, for the use of others? And though they wrote not but at the Will
of God, and his spirit pressing them thereunto; and under the burden of the
Word of the Lord that lay upon them, till they had discharged themselves of it;
Whereupon some Prophesies were styled, The Burden of the Word of the Lord.
yet art thou so silly as to conceive they delivered things before they were
conceived in them? So far at least they were conceived in and by them too, as
to prove thy saying little less then senseless and absurd.

2. Whereas thou say, they were not retained in their memories from what
they had heard, nor by any means beforehand comprehended by them: Is not that
as absolutely absurd and false as the rest? Did they in writing declare things
for truth, and teach Doctrines, and give out Instructions, and tell stories, and
relate passages, before they had so much as heard of, or seen, or believed, or
embraced what things they wrote and rehearsed, or entertained them as such, or
by any means beforehand comprehended them? Is not this directly contrary to
what the Apostles say, who had, and wrote from the same spirit of Faith with
them of old, who write thus, 2 Cor. 4.13. As it is written Psalm. 16. 10. I
believed, and therefore have I spoken; so we also believe, and therefore speak,
etc. 1 John 1.1.3. That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
look's on, and handled, declare we to you. And when Isaiah wrote things of
Christ, did he not see his glory? Isa. 6.1. Job. 12.40, 41. and Lev. 1.2.11.19.
Is John commanded to write anything in his Book but what he had seen? And did
he write or bear record of the Word of God, or the Testimony of Jesus, that he
did by no means beforehand comprehend, or of any things but those he saw? And
is not seeing one means of comprehending?

3. Since thou say, The things they wrote were not retained in their memories
from what they had heard; Did they first hear, and see, and believe, and
comprehend, and entertain them into their memories, and then not retain, but
let them slip, and quite forget them before they wrote, and then began to write
when they had, and not before they had remembered to forget them? For of the
things thou writest, this is the sum; the whole sum of which, though 1 Pet.
1.10, 11. is cited to add weight to it, which gives not the least dram of
evidence to the truth of one tittle of it, is found by such as weigh it in the
Balance of right Reason, to be a lie, and lighter then vanity it self.

Belike then according to thy fancy, Paul when he wrote to Timothy to bring his
Books, and P^rchments, and Cloak left at Troas with Carpus, wrote that, not as
a matter conceived in his mind, or retained in his memory, but as a thing
forgotten, that he had no comprehension of aforehand? Did he not write that
and a hundred more matters, as retained in his memory: And though he wrote them
as moved by the spirit, in the wisdom of which he lived and walked, and did all
he did, as he saw service in it; yet did he not write of his Revelations and
Temptations after them, by the thorn in the flesh? 2 Cor. 12.1. etc. and of his
many perils and hazards he had gone through, and his whippings, and stonings,
and shipwracks, and other sufferings and services, 2 Cor. 11. as things
retained in his memory, though some of them fourteen years behind? And when he
wrote of the Fornication, 1 Cor. 5. and the Divisions 1 Cor. 11. that were
among the Corinthians, did he not write of them as things he had by hearsay,
and common Report? And did he not retain in his memory what was told him by
them of the House of Cloe, and thereupon wrote to them thereof, as of a matter
heard, remembered, and aforehand believed, ( For L partly believe it, quoth he)
and comprehended aforehand? What innumerable instances of the like fort of
stories written, as retained in the memories of holy VVriters, might be given
out of both the Old Testament and the New! But this little is enough, if thou
be not wilfully blind, to bring thee into a remembrance of thy babbling about
the Bible, of the writings whereof thou writest, as if thou had never read it
all, but in a dream.

And when Matthew the Publican wrote of his own being called from the Receipt of
Custom, and of his entertaining Christ in his house, Matthew. 9.9. Did he it not
on the account of his retaining that passage in his memory?

And whereas thou say they wrote all immediately from God, so as that there
was only a passive concurrence of their rational faculties in their reception,
without any such active obedience as by any Law they might be obliged to. I
say, thou renderest thy self as Ridiculous o^ Reasonlesse in this thy
Reasoning, as if thou were one, that had never read any otherwise then at
random: For had thou been as observans as thou art oscitant in thy Readings
and Writings of the Scripture, thou would have seen and remembered that
several Stories, Proverbs, Doctrines, Prophesies, and other parcels and
passages, as they stand recorded in thy Rule or Canon, were not written so
immediately from God as thou imaginest, that in the first reception, as well as
in the first Scription of some of them, there was an Active, and not only a
Passive concurrence of the Rational Faculties of the Writers, and also such an
Active obedience as by some Law they might be obliged to.

1. How immediately from God do thou deem, were the Writings of sundry of
those Genealogies in the Letter of the Jewish Law, about which there are, among
many such Ministers as thy self, such foolish questions and contentions, and
endless strivings, which Paul bids those two Ministers, viz Timothy and Titus,
not to give heed to, but avoid as unprofitable, and vain, and fables, and
things that Minister matter of question, and vain jangling, rather then godly
edifying? 1 Timothy 1.4.6. Tit. 3.9. And also of those Chronologies, and
Nomenclators, and (to us impertinent) Catalogues of Names of such as came out
of Babylon, at first with Zorobabel, and then with Ezra, and of such as had
married strange Wives, and of such as sealed the Covenant, and of the Levites
in their several Offices and Orders of singing-men, and Porters, and Priests,
that could not find their Pedigree; and of the children of Solomon's servants,
and of the builders of the wall, and many more particular nominations and
enumerations of that sort, that are in the Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah?
which whatever use they were of under the Jewish Paedagogie, make little to us
now, as to a punctual observation of them; much less so much as thou I.O. of
whose Foundation, Rule, Cannon, and Standard, they are no small part,
supposest, insomuch that on any corruption supposed therein, as there well may
be, and contradiction too, if the Books of Samuel, the Kings, and Chronicles,
be critically, or but carefu^ly considered, 1 Samuel 16.9, 10, 11. 1 Samuel ^^.12
14. compared with 1 Chronicles. 2.13, 14, 15. the certainty of all saving Doctrine
is consequently supposed to be lost: I say, how immediately are these Writings
and things written from God without any active concurrence of the rational
faculties of the Writers in the w^iting of them? May it not very well be
supposed that some of these things were written at first (if by such holy men,
as all the Jews were not, that were very zealous of the Letter of the Law, and
in writing the deeds done in their Nation) yet at least in such wise only, as
holy men may, without immediate reception of every Tittle [as thou twatlest
they did] from God, and by the active concurrence of their rational faculties,
write a story of what is done in their sight, or of what they have by hearsay,
or find in the Books of the Chronicles of things done in such or such Nations?
May it not be supposed that some of those Stories, and Genealogies, and
Chronicles, and Catalogues, and Proverbs, and Prophesies, pertaining to the Old
Testament, and some of the Stories of the New too, were written (though not
without the spirit moving the holy men to it that lived in the spirit, yet) so
as not without a retaining them in their memories, and an active concurrence of
their rational faculties, and such an active obedience, as by some Law they
might be obliged to? Yea, how frivolously foolish art thou in the uttering of
thy self? Is not the very moving of the spirit it self, in which thou ownest
they wrote, and the Law of the spirit obliging thereto?

2. And what think thou of the History of John, Mark, which some have in
that respect styled Sacrum furt^m, a kind of holy Theft; is it not possible but
that it might be some Abbreviation of Matthew's story concerning Christ, there
being little in it but what is well-nigh word for word in the other? Though
some Ancients have related it to be given forth by Peter, and by Mark only
written from his mouth, either of which if it was, then was it not so
immediately from God, as thou I.O. guessest, as to the Writing of it, the
Penman taking it either out of another Writing, or else from the mouth of
another man, that had it more immediately then he, and yet neither of them so
immediately from God, as that there was only a passive concurrence of their
Rational faculties in the reception of it; for whether it were Mark writing out
of Matthew, or from Peter's mouth, or of himself, as it seemed good to him to
set down, 'twas but a History of such things, as he was well acquainted with,
either as an eye or ear-witness thereof, or as one that had it sufficiently
attested to, for him to undertake to write it out as truth; and so not without
an active concurrence of his rational faculties in the reception of what he
wrote, as well as not without a moving thereto by the holy spirit, in which he
lived, and in the light of which he saw it might be serviceable.

And on such an account as this, rationally reckoning within himself, it might
be useful so to do, Luke the Physician wrote his two Histories of the Acts of
Christ, and of his Apostles; in which Book called the Acts, many, if not most
of the matters mentioned by him, were about Paul, whose Companion he was in
several of his Travels, excepting some passages about the beginning of it,
concerning all the Apostles; and some touches concerning Barnabas and Silas,
and some others, upon occasion of their being here and there with Paul in some
services; but as for the Apostles after whom his Book is called the Acts of the
Apostles, there is scarce the one hundredth part of what they all did, nor of
those travels and sufferings that they sustained, meddled with at all by Luke,
who took notice of little more then what he knew, as he was a fellow- traveller
with Paul.

And that his Writings were of no other nature then thus, appears plainly by
his Preface to the first of them, which ye call, The Gospel of St. Luke, where
Luke 1.1, 2, 3, 4. he writes on this wife: Forasmuch as many have taken in hand
to set forth in order a Declaration of those things, which are most surely
believed among us, even as they delivered them unto us, which from the
beginning were eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word, it seemed good to me
also, having had a perfect understanding of things from the beginning, to write
unto thee in order^ most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the
certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed. Which words, [
many have taken in hand to declare what was delivered to them by the
eyewitnesses, and it seemed good to me also to write to thee, etc.] sound
forth, That howbeit the spirit of God might move him so to do for service sake
to the truth, yet as others had done before him (of whom whether Mark were one
yea or nay it matters not much to me) so himself, as it seemed good to him,
wrote a story of certain Truths not upon the account of such a mere passive
immediate reception thereof from God by inspiration of every Tittle into him,
as he wrote, as thou do, without any conception of the things in his mind,
or retaining them in his memory, or by any means before hand comprehending
them, but rather, as it were, at second hand, as they were heard and believed,
and unde^stood by him, as true matters of fact from the mouths or writings of
such as were eye witnesses thereof, and did first deliver them, and so to the
confutation of thy vain figment, not without a concurrence of his rational
faculties in the receiving of what he wrote.

3. What think thou of those Proverbs of Solomon, whose Proverbs were 3000.
in all, not 300. of which are contained in your Canon, and his Songs a hundred
and not five of which are come to your cognizance, King. 4 3.2.5. or those
which stand in your Standard from the very first inserting of them there, stand
but at second hand at best, as they were copied out of, whether the first
manuscript, or some remote, and more uncertain Transcript, who can tell^ by the
men of Hezekiah some nine or ten Generations after him, see Prove. 25.1. were
these received by the Writers that affixed them to that ye call your Canon, so
immediately from God, as thou dreamest, without any but a passive concurrence;
as things not by any means comprehended by these men of Hezekiah before they
wrote them?

4. What think thou of such parts and parcels of thy so called Canon as are
each of them written in two several places or books of thy Bible? one of which
places and the Respective parcels whether Histories or Prophesies, or Praises
therein recited are at most but repetitions and mere transcriptions out of the
other, with some such Additions, or Ablations, or ( Alterations of more than
Titles and (...)) as is not unusually made among Transcribers, of which sort
for instance in a few, I refer thee, and all such as scrape so unskilfully as
thou do about the Scriptures being in every Title as it now stands in your
Copies immediately written from God by inspiration, and without meditation, or
any means of comprehending the things they wrote beforehand by the Writers
thereof, to consider and compare Psalm. 14. with Psalm. 53. and 2 Samuel 2.2. with
Psalm. 18. also 2 King. 18.13. c. 19. c. 20. with Isa. 36. Isa. 37. Isa. 38. Isa
39. also 2 King. 24 18. c. 25. throughout, with Ier. 39. Ier. 52. by which
places perused, howbeit every word of this is asserted by J.O. to be written as
immediately from Gods own mouth, as any of it, it is yet plain and evident that
some of it was but copied and transcribed out of other some, and such a useless
Repetition of the same over and over again, as neither need be, nor would be,
if the Bible, as consistent of neither more nor less than what is ordinarily
bound up in it, had be^n intended by either God, or the holy Penmen of the
sundry parcels thereof to be the inalterable constant Canon, and only steady
Standard for all succeeding ages of men universally to the worlds end.

5. Moreover what think thou of such Scripture Prophesies and Epistles, as
were first written, and pend not by the holy men themselves, that were moved to
give them forth by inspiration, but by such as wrote them, not mmediately from
God, but from the mouths of such only as indicted them, as the spirit moved, of
which there are not a few, but how many exactly who knows? since evident it is
that those men after whom they are denominated did not at first write all their
own Prophesies and Epistles with their own hands, witness much at least of
Ieremiahs Prophecy, that was written not by himself but Baruch his ordinary
Scribe as Jeremiah dictated to him. See Ier. 36.4.6.17, 18, 32. Baruch 6.1.
etc. Witness also Paul's Epistle to the Romans, which though indicted by him, yet
Tertius was the Penman thereof, Romans 16.22. which verse Tertius himself it
seems added as he wrote. Besides many, if not most of his Epistles were sent
not from Paul alone sigillatim, but from himself, and such other of his
fellow laborers, as were with him at such times, and places, when and from
whence they were sent, viz. some from him and Timothy, 2 Cor. 1.1. Col. 1.1.
Philip. 1.1. Philem. 1.1. Some from him and Silas and Timothy, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. 2
These. 1.1. one from him and Sosthenes, 1 Cor. 1.1. of which, which of the two
or the three was the Scribe, though we believe Paul to be (under God) the chief
Author, who knows? one from him and all the brethren that were with him at the
writing thereof, Gal. 1.1, 2. which is the only one to any whole Churches, that
we have clear evidence of that he wrote with his own hands, of which he says,
Gal. 6.11. Ye see how large a letter I have written to you with mine ownhand,
and verse 17. Henceforth let no man trouble me, which very expression of his,
verse 11. intimates that it was not very usual with him to write his letters to
the Churches with his own hand, but only signed them when others had wrote them
for him, therefore he often intimate^ his love to them under his own hand, and
no more. See 1 Cor. 16.21. Col. 4.18.1. and 3.17. The salutation of me Paul
with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle, so I write; now it
being so, were all the writings and things written received so immediately from
God, as thou imaginest, by the first Penmen with out retaining any thing in
their memories of what they had learned, or comprehending them by any means
beforehand, or without any but a mere passive concurrence of their rational
faculties in the reception thereof? what ignorance is this? Besides, whether
with Paul's own hand or any others his Epistles were written, some things
therein were therein spoken to the Churches by himself, as delivering his
judgment by permission only, and not by Commandment from God, by him not the
Lord, To the rest, quoth he, speak I, and not the Lord, 1 Cor 7.6 12.40. which
as it contradicts J.O's. talk in the parcel above cited, so also it overturns
that talk and fabulous piece of pray as to some parts of it) and shall here
stand as an answer to it, which he as ignorantly utters, page 25, 26, 27. viz.
They were carried out by the Holy Ghost to speak, deliver, write all that, and
nothing but that to a very tittle, that was so brought unto them, they only
received the words from God himself: Every aspect of the written word, i.e.
writing with J.O. is equally Divine, and as immediately from God as the voice
wherewith, or whereby he spoke to, or in the Prophets, and is therefore
accompanied with the same Authority in it self, and unto us. What has been
spoken thus of the Scripture of the Old Testament, must be also affirmed of the
New, with this addition of advantage and preheminen^^, that it received its
beginning of being spoken by the Lord himself.

6. Seeing it is so, as is abovesaid, that all was not written by the hands of
the inspired Authors themselves at the very first, but much by such Scribes
only as wrote from them as dictated to by them to whom God gave out this mind,
and so wrote, not so immediately from God as thou dreamest, but that they might
mispell or mistake in more than Titles, and (...) (most good men being but bad
Scholars and Scribes as to inch more humane earthly skill as your Schollership
lies in) how absolutely does this overturn that other utter untruths, that thou
tellest twice over to the manifesting of thine own folly more fully in uttering
twice such falsehood not so much as once observing it, viz. page 10, 11. that
the Word (which with thee still is the Scripture) is come forth unto us [mark
unto us] from God without the least mixture or interveniency of any Medium
obnoxious to fallibility, as is the wisdom, truth, integrity, knowledge and
memory of the best of all men. But if what I have showed above did not
contradict, and give check to this saying of thine about the Scriptures coming
out immediately from God unto us, who live so many ages from the last person,
who received any part of it immediately from God; thou whose great Masterpiece
of business it is throughout thy whole book to say and unsay, and contradict
thy self, and run in Rounds, overturnest and statly contradictest it thy self,
saying, page 30. that we have not the Scripture from God immediately our
selves; in which self-confutation and contradiction of page 10. by page 30.
thou can not to continue long neither, but as one delighting to dance round,
and show how well skilled thou art in tracing to and fro about the Scripture;
thou ( to go round again) returnest, and reiteratest, page 153. that falsity
uttered by thee, page 10. in this wise over again, viz. The Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament were immediately and entirely given out by God himself;
mark, as if God himself had wrote it every tittle with his own finger; whereas
how little God himself wrote I have showed above, and how such as were
immediately inspired (the mediation of whose hand writing in what they also
wrote comes between God and us) did not write it all immediately with their own
hands, but men that took what they said from them in writing by the active
improvement of their knowledge, wisdom, skill in writing, memory, and other
rational faculties; so far is the Text from coming immediately from God to the
men of those Cities and places that lived where and when it was written; but
how much farther from being immediately and entirely, without any medium
obnoxious to fallibility, from God to us, who live so many Ages off unto whom
that Text J.O. talks of, is descended perhaps at the hundredth hand, through the
hands of who knows what unskilful, careless, forgetful Scribes or Transcribers?
the very best of which J.O. at best confesses, to be but fallible, and that it
was possible they might, and also did mistake, so as that failings fell out
among them, p. 167. nevertheless on he goes thus concerning that Scripture or
writings, viz. That Gods mind is in them represented unto us without the least
interveniency of such mediums and ways as were capable of giving change or
alteration to the least (...) or syllable.

7. Whereas thou say there was only a passive concurrence of the rational
faculties of the Writers, without any such active obedience as by any Law they
might be obliged to, though I have showed thee that all the first Writers were
not inspired, but some wrote from their lips that were so, and so were, though
never so skilful, obnoxious to fallibility, yet as thou intendest it of such
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, as wrote their own Prophesies, Epistles,
Histories, Proverbs, Psalms, etc. with their own hands as they were moved by
the Spirit, its utterly untrue that thou affirmest, for the holy men of God who
either wrote their Scripture with their own hands, or dictated to such as they
required to pen it from their mouths, as themselves spoke from the mouth of
God, out of which came all that wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, that is
thereby uttered forth, were such as were not so merely pasive as thou praiest,
in the reception of what they wrote without any active concurrence of their
rational faculties, but in order to their receiving the word, and manifestation
of the mind and will of God to them which was written, had both then, and long
before also an active concurrence thereof, and such an active obedience to God
as all men are by the Law of God, i.e. the light in the conscience obliged to,
whereby they were made, and became first holy men before they were used by God
in such an holy work as preaching and wrriting out his mind to others, and
were brought into the thing or life it self they spoke and wrote of, and were
purged from lusts and defilements, and iniquities, and foolish, and unlearned
questions, and such profane and vain bablings as ye are yet exercised in at
your Universities about the Bible, as well as about other books of humane
businesses, that in comparison of that holy truth, that is in the Bible
handled, are but mere Baubles, which a man being purged from, 2 Timothy 2.16, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23. he shall be a vessel of honor sanctified and meet for the
Masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

Yea their Prophets that spoke out that holy Doctrine, and soul-saving truth
that is declared in the Scriptures (what ever some of them might be, that were
exercised in the copying out of sundry of those (to us) more unnecessary, and
unprofitable parts thereof, viz. the endless Legal, Genealogical, Chronological
Catalogues of men's names, not so needful to us to know) were (...) holy men of
God, 2 Pet. 1. ult. and such to whose souls knowledge and wisdom, and the fear
of God was pleasant, who cried after it, and lifted up their voices to God for
it, and were in such love with it as to wait on God for it, out of whose mouth
it comes, and daily at the posts of wisdoms house (which your Universities are
not yet acquainted with) and sought it as silver, and searched for it as for
hid treasure, and though to Prophecy was a gift of God, and such as have it
are so passive as to receive it from the giver, and none can receive any thing
of it, except it be given him from above, Joh. 3. and though it is in no wise
to be purchased by men's money at Schools, and Colleges, as our Accademical
Simon Magus's suppose, who to obtain and buy all the gifts, whereby they
Prophecy to men, for money, and sell them for money again when they have done,
yet was it a gift obtained in the way of such active obedience to God, as by
the said Law, or light of God in the heart, men stand obliged to, and to be
coveted, and desired, and was given in a certain way that ye are so far out of,
that ye hate it, of holy waiting on God, and learning of him alone in silence
in all subjection in order thereunto; for which work there are now as there
were of old (but those are not Oxford and Cambridge Universities as it were
Schools and Nurseries of young Prophets at Jericho and Bethel, [ alias, by
interpretation] the House of God, where Truth, and true Wisdom, and true
Religion was, and is learnt, as truly and fully, as it is falsely taught, or
rather fully and universally forgotten at our now Universities, or
Nursing-mothers of that Wisdom and Religion from beneath, which is but earthly,
sensual, or animal and deceitful: See 2 K. 2.7.15. 2 King. 6.1. 2 K. 9.1. yea
in order to Gods manifestation of himself to men in such wise as he will not to
World, that lies in wickedness, it is required that men keep his commandments,
so far as they are made known already in the light in the conscience, Ioh. 14
and separate themselves from the sensual ones that have not the spirit, and not
together with them from the truth, Prove. 18.1, 2. and that they come out of all
that defiles, and become holy; for no defiled thing falls into Wisdom; but in
all ages (this as well as any of old, though ye own none to be now in rerum
natura) entering into holy souls, she makes them friends of God, and Prophets,
Wisd. 7.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

But the reason why so few Priests are ever made true Prophets, is because for
the most part they are more profane then other people, from of old, and much
more now; insomuch that, as heretofore, I mind at present, but two of all that
numerous Tribe, Race, and Party of Priests, that the Jewish Church was filled
with, that became Prophets, viz. Jeremiah and Ezekiel, Ier. 1. 1. Ezekiel. 1.3. So
now velduo, vel nemo, of all sorts of persons, few or none of our Academical,
Levitical Race of Rabbi^s arrive to so much honor and happiness as to become
obedient to the Faith; yet so far many of them came in the primitives times,
notwithstanding I cannot find that ever any of them commenced Prophets,
Evangelists, or Apostles; much less are many to be found so highly graduated,
as to become such in the true Church or School of Christ at this day; they are
not upon the Tower, upon their Watch, toward the Light.

They hearken not with Habbakkuk to what God says in them. Hab. 2.1. They
stand not in the Lords counsel, nor receive the word from his own mouth, but as
the false Prophets of old, Ier. 23. (in which respect they were false Prophets,
that profited not at all, and such as God was against, though speaking true
words) they steal the word they speak out of the true Prophets Writings, whom
God sent, and spoke to, when he neither sent, nor ever said the same unto them,
and so run crying, Thus says the Lord, as ours do, hear the Word of the Lord,
as you shall find it in such a Text, such a Chapter, such a Verse; when they
never heard God's voice at any time themselves, nor saw his shape.

They hate and fight against Gods own counsel, the Light in the Conscience,
which would lead them to purity in their own persons; and so never come to see,
much less to show his Secret, which is only with them that fear him Psalm. 25.
whose sear, which is the beginning of Wisdom, is to depart from the evil, which
the light discovers; and so as none can bring a clean thing out of an unclean,
so none can receive much of a clean thing into an unclean.

But as Isaiah who was of unclean lips, had his lips first touched, and his
iniquity taken away, before he was sent of Gods errand, Isa. 6.

And Jeremiah was sanctified to the work of Prophecy, Ier. 1.

So there must be more Holiness of Truth found among their Holinesses, the
Pope, and all the Priests and Praters for pay thorowout all Christendom, before
they know how to prophecy themselves, or tell truly (as much as they are
found, from the Text of their Transcripts, tatling to the World of what they
know not) how and in what manner Gods Prophets prophecy.

Thou addest I.O. page 6. That in writing they were not enabled by any habitual
light, knowledge, or conviction of Truth, to declare Gods mind and will, but
only acted as they were immediately moved by him; their hand in what they
wrote, was no more at their own disposal, then the Pen in the hand of an expert
Writer. And p. 23. That no rational Apprehensions had any place in their
Writing. And p. 25. That this was the first spring of the Scripture, and
beginning of its emanation from the Counsel of God, it was brought by the Power
of the Holy Ghost into its Organs and Instruments used for the Declaration of
it; and that it was not left to their understandings, wisdoms, minds, memories,
to order, dispose, and give it out. But that they were born, acted, moved to
write all, and nothing but that, to every tittle, that was so brought to them.
And that they invented not words themselves, but the words were immediately
supplied to them; and that in writing they were but passive instruments for the
reception and representation of words; And that every Apex of the written Word,
(i.e. Writing, secundum te) was as immediately from God to the writers, as his
voice in the Prophets, p. 26, 27. And p. 7. That they were but as an Instrument
of Music, giving a sound according to the hand only of him that strikes it.

Rep. These things are false, being written by thee of all the Writings, and
first Writers of the Scripture universally, as they are without exception and
distinction; for so indistinct and confused art thou in thy delivery of thy
mind about the Bible, that though it be a Bulk of Heterogeneous Writings,
compiled together by men, taking what they could find of the several sorts of
Writings, that are therein, and trussing them all up into one Touchstone,
crouding them into a Canon, or Standard for the trial of all Spirits,
Doctrines, Truths, and by them alone: Yet thou speak so Homogeneously of it,
as if whatever can be predicated of any, may be as properly predicated of it
all; yea whatever thou say ( falsely) of the Writing, thou denominatest the
self-same of it all, and every Apex and Tittle, yea every Tittle and Iota with
thee is no less then the Word of the great God, wherein the ^ternal concernment
of souls lies. p. 168, 169. And so every part of it a Rule, and the perfect
Rule; for so 'twas with thee when there were none but Moses five Books, and
it is but so with thee now so much is added: So every Apex equally Divine, and
as immediately from God as any of it, yea and as the voice, whereby he spoke in
the Prophets, page 27.

But I say, as written by thee so universally of the Writers and mere Writing
of the Scriptures (as they are) they are (for the most part) as false, as that
foregoing; and that I have said above concerning the Writing of much of the
Scripture at first, as it stands in your Bibles, by Scribes that wrote either
out of other Copies, or from the mouths of men more immediately inspired, or
from what was commonly reported, and generally believed, and what they had
heard, as delivered to them by more immediate eye and ear witnesses, and what
they retained in their memories, and some way or other comprehended beforehand,
may stand as a sufficient Answer to this parcel also, wherein according to thy
wonted habitual darkness, ignorance, and contradiction to the Truth, thou
deniest the Pors-men and holy Prophets in their Writings to be enabled to
declare, and write what they wrote by any habitual light, knowledge, or
conviction of the Truth; As if they wrote what they neither saw, nor heard, nor
knew, nor believed to be true; but besides all sight and understanding,
discerning, mental conception, meditation, Rational Apprehension, Faith, or any
manner of Antecedent comprehension of the truths they told, as if they were all
acted, and used in the Writing of every Tittle by the Lord, just no otherwise
but as a Musical Instrument in a man's hand, or the Pen itself by an expert
Writer, which can yield no more then a mere passive concurrence, having no
principle of life within it self from whence to act any thing at all, or to
move a hairs breadth in any business, but as it is moved; or as some stark dead
Corpse, which can neither stir, nor stand, but as extrinsecally born up, and
carried forth, because deest aliquid intus: Whereas (as I have showed above)
some of them wrote not by immediate inspiration, or bringing of the things into
their minds so by the spirit; but mediately, that is, from the mouths or
writings of such as received the truths more immediately, as they were
inspired, and wrote, as they also spoke, no other, things then what by some
means or other they beforehand comprehended, and no other then what they heard,
and saw, and believed, and retained in their minds and memories, whereinto the
spirit of truth, and the truths he guided them into (which the world receives
not) were both received, conceived, and entertained; yea, and I here add, no
other then such as in the same light were more or less seen, known, understood,
and believed before any Scripture, at all was, though 'twas by the same way,
then which I know no other that the Scripture speaks of, of knowing God or
Christ, viz of internal, spiritual Revelation, Matthew. 11.27. Ioh. 6.47. 1 Cor.
2.9, 10, 11, 12. Gal. 1.16. Did Paul believe, or witness, or write any other
things when he wrote with his own hands what was immediately revealed and in
spired into him by the same holy spirit, then what by the same spirit [in which
and no other way all the things of God are known, and ever were] holy men of
God believed, owned, witnessed, wrote, and both in their Writings and Speakings
acknowledged to be the truth? see Act 24.14. 26.22, 23. 2 Cor. 1 13. 4.13. Did
he write any other things then what they to whom he wrote might, and did read
elsewhere, even in the light and spirit within themselves, and did thereby
acknowledge to be the truth? And did not he himself, before he wrote them in
the movings of the spirit, acknowledge them to be the truth himself? And did he
in the light in which he lived and saw them, acknowledge them to be the truth,
and yet was not enabled by any habitual Light, knowledge, or conviction of the
truth, to declare them in writing, as he did, but wrote as one ignorant, in the
dark, unbelieving, and unconvinced of the truths he wrote, and as senseless,
unintelligently, and passively, without any active obedience to the spirit
pressing him, or yielding any but a mere passive influence and concurrence of
his rational faculties in the worker, as a mere dead thing that is utterly
devoid of all kind of life, motion, or principle of Action within it self, and
incapable of any action at all, or motion, but as it is acted ab extra, by some
forensical force or compulsion, as a Musical, Wooden instrument, or a pen by
the hand of the writer? what a weak, crooked, crazy piece of conception of
Scripture in this of thine? of which I may truly say there was not so much
active concurrence of the rational faculties of the Scribes in their writing of
the Scripture, but there is as little in this of thine, who writest as if all
the Prophets of God that ever spoke and wrote what of his mind they received
from his own mouth by standing in his counsel, and harkening to what he said in
them, and waited on him to know and understand his will and word first, that
they might do it in the particular in their own persons, and (as moved or
commanded) in obedience to him declare it to others, were absolutely and merely
as passive as Balaams Ass was, whose mouth miraculously was opened, and his
mind endued with rational faculties (supernatural to him as he was a Beast) to
Reason out the case with his unrighteous Master, and to reprove the madness of
that Prophet; and as merely passive in their work of Prophecy, as Caiphas the
High Priest was, whose mouth was opened to speak truer than he was aware of,
and to prophecy of a thing out of his irrational faculties, that was as high
above the reach of the best rational faculties he had (being a man degenerate
from pure perfect reason and in the fall) as fallen man's best reason is above
the brute beasts of the field; for as Herod and Pontius Pilate did with wicked
hands the things that God before determined should come to pass, fulfilling the
Prophets words in slaying Christ, little thinking they served the truth as they
did in it (as the Assyrian in the like case) they meant not so, nor did their
heart think otherwise than to destroy, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. Act. 4.27, 28. Act.
3.17, 18. Act. 13.27, 28, 29. So that Priest with a wicked heart, intentionally
to counsel them to murder Christ, had his mouth prepared to Prophecy a
precious truth, which, as so, he spoke not of himself, so as one that had the
light, knowledge, or conviction of the truth, but besides himself as the Ass in
the other case, Numb. 22.28, 29, 30. Joh. 11.29. 50, 51, 52, 53. Joh. 10.14.

Whereas most evident it is that the holy men of God, who wrote any part of the
Scripture by immediate inspiration with their own hands (to let pass that which
some wrote for and from them as dictated to by their mouths) were in the
light, sight, knowledge, prae-conviction, comprehension, belief, and
acknowledgement of the truth habitually, and were thereby enabled to declare
it, and from thence did declare it accordingly, as in the wisdom of the Spirit
they saw it serviceable, and as by it they were moved so to do.

I am not ignorant that they were (...) and (as so) (...) and (...) Divinely
inspired, and (as so) infallible, and acted, born, carried by the holy Spirit
in what they spoke and wrote about which matters what a mighty marvelling, and
hideous ditty, and wonderful deal of Do does J.O. make in his muddy mind, of
which (since he is so amazed that any such matter should be so much as
pretended to in those days I may likely speak more particularly in another
place.

But what of all this? because they were (...), moved by the holy Spirit in
what they did will it therefore follow they were merely passive in their work,
without any such active obedience as was in the light required of them, and
without any exercise at all, save such as was passive, of their rational
faculties therein, without being enabled by any habitual light, etc. or use of
their own understanding, wisdom, memories, or the like in any writings of what
they so wrote? as if they actively entered no more than stocks and stones into
the services they were set on work in? surely though they were instruments and
organs into which the Word was brought by the Spirit as they waited on the
Lord, for the revelation and manifestation of it to them, yet they were living
organs and instruments not only (...) to the natural, but also to that
supernatural or spiritual life of God, the things of which they wrote and
declared, and so were as it were subordinate efficients and inferior Agents,
concurring by the use and exercise of their reason and rational faculties,
which grace and the Spirit of God perfects, heightens, and delivers from the
defects therein contracted by transgression, and does not destroy.

And howbeit I deny not still but that the Prophets that pend any Scripture
were passive, as I said before, in the reception of the mind of God manifested
to them in the light, so far as the receiver of a gift is to the giver, from
whom he can command, nor have nothing unless it be given him, and were no
otherwise active, than as beggars (who are not to be chusers) waiting at the
door of wisdom, and on God in the light within to see what he will give, and in
order to the obtaining it, yet when the light and word was given out, they were
so far active (so all are not whereupon many go without it) as waiters are,
when they receive what is given, and also far active as according to the
measure of the gift of grace, or knowledge received, when the Spirit moved them
so to do, to go forth, and minister either by preaching, or writing, or what
way they found their call to serve in, some one way, some another, and every
individual, sometimes one way, sometimer another, as Paul said, Romans 12.6, 7.
Having gifts differing according to the grace given, whether prophesis, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of faith, i.e. each his own proportion
and measure (not as you Divines, who have a common Analogy of faith, or stock
of unsavory Divinity among you, according to which ye Minister) or Ministry
let us wait on our Ministering, or he that teaches on teaching, or exhorts on
exhortation, etc. which things, whether done by voice or writing is all one,
they were not to do but as the Spirit moved or acted them, yet in both were
they not only acted by the Spirit, but subordinately active with him in those
several ministrations, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God, speaking,
ministering, whether in speech or Scripture, as the Oracles of God in all
faithfulness, which is required in stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
who though it is their Master that does all supremely by them, and acts by
them, and speaks and writes, and manages all affairs by their Ministration, as
the Spirit of the Father does in his Saints and Children, yet by his power and
the gift of his grace received [in the juncture and very period of receiving of
which they were passive] they concurred actively in the work of writing, as the
Saints do in the working out of their own salvation, when God has once wrought
in them to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13, 14. so that of
the most immediate Writers of the Scriptures from the mouth of God, it might be
said as it is of all Saints, Licetnec per se operantur, nec aequaliter
co-operantur, yet aliqualiter saltem, etiam and active concurrunt cum causa
operante, they wrought and wrote neither wholly of themselves, nor equally with
the Spirit, yet even actually concurred with him in the act of writing, so as a
pen or musical instrument does not, which is not subjectum capax, a subject
capable to act or move actively in the works of man, any more than a stone can
concur actively to the throwing of it self.

And being, though but organs or instruments, as thou say the Prophets were,
into whom the words they wrote were brought, yet since living organs or
instruments alive to God by participation of his divine nature to the things of
that life and nature, they were consequently active organs and instruments, and
subordinate Agents and efficients, and as well willingly acting, as acted
therein, in the day of Gods power, wherein his people are a willing people, as
dead organs and instruments cannot be.

For since vita est Actus corporis organici quatenus organicum, life of every
kind is no less than an Act or operative power of every thing that has it to
act or work such actions as are agreeable to its nature, the life of God in
such as by the light of Christ in whom is the life, and whose life is the light
of men, Joh. 1.2, 3. Joh. 12. are led and born thereunto, is an Act or
spiritual operative power to do and perform such actions as are suitable to
man, before he dyed by transgression, and according to the will of God
revealed, as posita anima in corpore organico (qua tali) sequitur vita, and
posita vita sequitur operatio motio etc. naturalis, so posito spiritu in anima
recipiente sequitur and vita and actio spiritualis.

So the holy men that wrote the Scripture as (...), etc. inspired and moved by
the holy Spirit which brought the truth unto them, he pressed them to write,
were not according to J.O's vain figment of them, (...) or (...), acted and
hurried like some stone thrown, or pen handled which is merely and only passive
in what is done, but acted, as all Saints are in their measures, to that of
writing his truth or any other good work when called by him to it i.e. not
without, but with such an active obedience, as by his Law or Light within they
are obliged to, not without an active concurrence of rational faculties reduced
to their primitive perfection, not without, but with ability thereto from an
habitual light, knowledge and conviction of truth, and use of their wisdoms
and understandings, memories, not without, but with an aforehand containing and
comprehending of the truths they wrote, in their minds as things they had
heard, seen, believed, acknoledged, etc. God who who is the giver of every good
gift, and the chief Author and Actor of all good works in his Saints, Isa. 26.
using every instrument according to what he has fitted it for, a Beast as a
Beast, a Man as a Man, a Saint as a Saint, a Prophet as a Prophet, and not a
Man a Saint, a Prophet, a spiritual man as a stock or stone, but being a
reasonable creature, and prepared by him naturally with such a soul such
faculties, and supernaturally and spiritually with such gifts and graces, as
whereby he is capable to act, when by him commanded, and a body suitable as a
fit instrument to move in such a work, as writing his will revealed, when it is
revealed also to be his will that he should write it, he uses him so to write
as that though himself be the principal or primum movens, not only in act^
primo as he gives the pomer, faculties, gift, graces, etc. but in actu secundo
also, he holds the hand of the Scrib^, so that he would else draw but misshapen
characters, and guides, assists, and acts in and by him, yet he lets the action
bear its denomination from its next and immediate Agent, which is not God
himself, who gives the word for the writing of what he will have written in the
penning of the Scripture (except that little, i.e. the ten words as is
abovesaid) but men as being moved by him to write or to dictate to others whom
they willed to write from their mouths, so that the immediate spring and
emanation of the Scripture was not from God, but men who were the agents in it
under him, which overturns J.O's Apish opinion of every Apex of the writing
being equally divine, and as to its original as immediately from God, and of
the same Authority in itself, and to us, i e. of being received as his word,
sub paena, etc. on pain of peril of eternal condemnation, as his voice in the
Prophets which indeed was immediately from himself, and his own witness;
whereas the letter was mostly but the immediate work of man, witnessing for God
as moved by him, as first given out, and as we now have it by so remote away of
Transcription, welnigh as far from being immediately from God to us as J.O.
imagines it is, (...).

And as it is with Saints indeed when they pray, believe preach, write, etc. as
moved by the Lord, it is not denominated ever by the Author of it all, which is
God, who speaks and works all in such, and is in such of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.
but the Saints who are said to pray, believe, preach, write, so was it in the
giving out of that Scripture or writing that was of old called the Bible, which
J.O. calls his Canon, to which no Title more must ever be counted; which was
not, nor is not so immediate from God to us as his own voice is, that is at
this day to be heard in the heart, but only mediantibus manuscriptionibus, yea
by the interveniency of mediums, and hands of Transcribers and Translators
obnoxious to fallibility, and capable to give change and alteration in more
then the least syllables and (...)'s, but at the first it was no more
immediately from God than the writings of his moved and inspired Prophets are
at this day, whom he stirs up to reprove the madness of the Priests and false
Prophets, which is as that was, but the spiritual man's testimony for God,
though specially assisted by him in it; concerning all whom from the beginning
of the world to this day, so many as have spoken or written, or done any thing
for the truth in his name, I here say, and so conclude as to that above.

Certum est no ^ velle cum volumus dicere cum dicimus, praedicare cum
praedicamus, scribere cum scribimus, facere cum facimus, sed Deus est, qui
facit ut faciamus.

J.O. Thou addest page 26. They invented not words themselves suitable to the
things they had learned, but only expressed the words they received, their
words were not their own but immediately supplied unto them from God himself,
and so they gave out the writing of uprightness, (...) words of truth.

Rep. And yet it is said, Eccles. 12.9, 10, 11, 12. as concerning the Writings
and Proverbs of Solomon the Wise, the Preacher which very place thou alludest
to, though thou quotest it not, which if thou had, there is few so unwise, but
they might see thy folly therein, for that Scripture clearly confutes thy self
who touchest at it, that in teaching the people knowledge (as he did by those
Writings and Books of Proverbs he gave forth) he took good heed, and sought
out, and set in order many Proverbs (even thousands more, besides above a
thousand Songs more then are systematiz'd into thy standing-Canon) and that he
sought to find out acceptable words, or words of delight, or rather (as thy
self expoundest it more clearly to the confounding of thy self, as if thou were
accustomed and wonted to that work and course of self-contradiction words of
will or choice, (...); all which if it be not Tantamount to this, He invented
words suitable to what he himself had framed, whereby to utter and express the
wisdom he received, to people in writing, [and yet what was written, was
upright too, and words of truth, not beside the spirit of truth] and so I.O.
consequently confuted by I.O. himself about the Scripture; (If the Scripture it
self had not confuted him) then self-confounding, which I.O. is so often found
in, shall pass for me for current confirmation; and confusion, which I.O. is a
most eminent Author of, shall go from henceforth for good order; and to dance
the rounds, as I. O. often does in his, shall be held the rightest way of sound
Doctrine, and of all Divinity Disputation: For as if he had not been satisfied
with his own gainsaying, what he uttered concerning their not inventing of
words, and non-improving of their understandings, wisdoms, minds, memories, p.
25. to order, dispute, give out what truth they wrote, in such words as they
saw best suited for the things they had learned of God, by saying to the
contrary, thus: Viz. Their mind and understanding were used in the choice of
words they did use, (...) words of will or choice. I.O. [to go round again]
gain-sayes this latter saying by which he had once gain-sayed the former,
returning to his former again, Ex. 1. S. 29. where his Latin words Englisht
are in this [ foolish] wise, viz. to express the sense they conceived of the
mind and will of God, the words in those tongues in which by the command and
ordination of God the Scripture is written, were both conceived and disposed by
the holy Spirit, and not permitted or left to the wisdom, and will, or
arbitrament of the Writers themselves. In Linguisistis quibus Scripta est,
verba disposita sunt per Spiritum sanctum neque arbitrio Scriptorum relicta.


So of this sound piece of round Doctrine of I.O. this is the sum: They that
wrote the Scripture, did not invent, choose, or seek words, nor was it left to
their minds, understandings, will, wisdoms, etc. to express the truth; yet (to
go round again) they did use words of will or choice, their mind and
understanding were used in the choice of words; yet [to go round again] to
express the will and mind of God, the words were not left to the will and
wisdom of the writers.

Let the Reader choose which of the two contradictory conclusions of I.O. he
will take as true; yet as one of them is, and both cannot be true; so true it
is that I.O. runs the rounds, and contradicts himself here, as he does in
twenty places more of his self-consuting Fardel.

I. O. Thou addest, p. 9, 10. That in their writing they were not only on a
general account to utter the truth they were made acquainted with all, and to
speak the things they had heard and seen, which was their common
Preaching-work; but also the very individual words they had received, were to
be declared. And p. 9. quoting Mat. 10.10. That the Apostles were not the
Speakers of what they delivered, as other men are, the Figment, and Imagination
of whose hearts are the Fountain of all that they speak, but the spirit of the
Father in them.

Rep. How hangs this true passage, viz. They were to utter the truth they were
acquainted withal, and write the things they had heard and seen, together by
the ears with that false passage, p. 5, 6. Where thou say, The Stories,
Laws, Doctrines, Instructions, Promises, Prophesies they gave out, were not
retained in their memories from what they had heard, nor by any means
beforehand comprehended by them, etc. What clouds of witnesses be here to the
clearing of the Spirit, by which thou writest to be a Spirit of
self-contradiction.

2. Was not their common Preaching-work, and their common Writingwork all one,
as to the choice of Words wherein they declared? Were they at liberty when they
preached, to ramble into words of their own mere will, choice, and invention,
and limited when they wrote, so that they might not express themselves in such
words as in the will and wisdom of God, in which they dwelt and lived, they
saw meet for the matter in hand? but just tied to the individual words brought
to them as immediately by inspiration, as the matter, or Word of God it self
they wrote of? Who acquainted thee with this whimsical, non-sensical notion,
that they in their work of Preaching disposed and ordered their words as in
wisdom they saw them acceptable, or serviceable; but in their work of Writing
they might dispose, order, choose, and in wisdom seek to find out acceptable
words, but had every Tittle more immediately put into them, then when they
spoke the Truth by word of mouth? Do not thou thy self say, p. 9. Mat. 10.10.
That the Apostles were not the Speakers of what they delivered, but the Spirit
in them? Whereby the truer that is tthe more clearly thou contradictest thy
self again, and intimatest no less then thus much; that the Spirit as
immediately and distinctly brought to them, gave, and put into their minds and
mouths what words they should use when they were speaking, as what words they
should use when they were Writing.

So that what ever was their common Preaching-Work, and common Writing-Work, in
both which it is true enough that they were assisted specially, and in both
equally by the holy spirit, in the wisdom, power, evidence, and demonstration
of which speaking in them, and moving them, who were obedient to him, to an
active improvement and exercise of their rational faculties, minds,
understandings, wills, memories thereunto, they both preached and wrote, 1 Cor.
2.4. 2 Cor. 3.12. and so uttered no other truth then they were mostly made
acquainted withal by the spirit within themselves, and heard and saw by the
light within, as well as by hearsay, and the Writings of one another from
without: Yet the common Preaching-work, and Writing-work of thy self and thy
fellow- Ministers, not of the Light and Spirit, but of the Letter, out of which
ye surtively fetch, filch, and steal all your stuff and furniture wherewith ye
feed people till they starve, I say, Your Preaching and Writing is of things
that ye are not acquainted with from the Spirit of the Father, nor from its
manifestings the mind of God within you, and moving you to utter them in words
of his own immediate suggesting and supplying; but a certain uttering forth in
your own wills and times, of what ye have no otherwise then by hearsay, or from
the Scriptures of those who spoke and wrote ( as moved) no more then what they
both saw, and heard, and handled of the Word of Life; a certain rude handling
what ye never felt your selves, nor your own hands ever yet handled of that
Word of Life, ye read others writing of; a heedless holding forth of what ye
hear not, but only hear of; a talkative treating on what Truth ye do not truly
taste of; an impudent intruding of your selves into a self-ended showing of
what ye have not seen, but as at second-hand ye see it showed in the Scripture,
by such as were in the true sight and substantial being of it, vainly puffed up
in your fleshly minds; in which respect ye are no true Ministers, nor true
Witnesses for God, but false Witnesses, even when ye testify the truth, which
is not yours, as well as when ye tell lies, and teach the untruths, which are
your own, as the old Truth stealers, and Word-sellers were, who though they
said, because they found it so said by such as felt it, The Lord lives, which
is the truth, yet they spoke falsely, forasmuch as they witnessed him nor risen
and alive, but murdered, stew, killed, and crucified the holy and just one
within themselves; and spoke not, as Christ and his did, what they knew, Ioh.
3.11. and testified not what they had seen, but worshipped, and worded it about
what they knew not, John 4.22. And so as a man cannot be counted a Legal witness
in foro hominum, in a civil Court of Judicature among men, that shall testify
of another's theft, murder, and scandal, at second hand, that is, not as an
immediate eye, or ear-witnesse of it, but on his reading in a Letter, or
hearsay from such as were so; so, much less in foro Dei and Ecclesiae, can any
be owned as a true Minister of the New Testament, which is not of the Letter,
but the Spirit, that Ministers and Testifies no more then what he has merely
read in, and stole out of the Letter, and not what he has seen, felt, heard
and handled of the living Word inwardly, in the spirit; and further by thy own
confession, since thou say the Apostles were not as other men are in their
speakings and writings, the figment and imaginations of whose hearts are the
fountain of all they speak, and ownest not thy self and thy fellows to be
Apostles of Christ, (for thou deemest there are none so in these days) but
other men, thou thereby ownest, (but speak for thy self and thy fellows
however, and not for all; for we know some Apostles now as of old there were)
the figment and imagination of your own hearts, to be the Fountain of all ye
speak; What need we further witness to this, since we read it uttered from thy
own mind and hand?

And lastly, since thou say the Penmen of the Scripture were so tied up to
the very individual words received by them, and put into them by the holy
Spirit, And p. 25, 26. were to deliver and write as all, so nothing but that to
every Tittle that was so brought unto them, not altering nor adding, etc. of
their own in their wisdoms and understandings; it should seem then, according
to your own Principles, that God gave out by them what was sufficient to guide
men (if outward Writing or Scripture was by him intended to be their Rule) and
if they themselves might not amplify, nor add, nor enlarge, nor comment upon
the Word of God manifested by them in the Scripture, by the exercising of their
rational faculties, but were to rest in so much as was revealed in them by the
spirit, and to others in Writing by them; What need then is there of those
infinite and endless odd Additions that the Doctors and Divines have made from
generation to generation to the Scipture, of their own voluminous inventions,
interpretations, and as divided, as devised Divinations, extravagant
Expositions, incomprehensible Commentaries, confused Contradictions, Cantings
one to another, and to the world, to the confounding of it, with many more
Humbles of their Senses, Meanings, Opinions, Thoughts about the Bible, then it
can contain, amounting in Bulk perhaps to a thousand times more then the Bible
comes to? And who gave you Text-men such a Liberty and Authority to take the
Text and talk on it in your Wisdoms, Wills, Words and Understandings, opening,
amplifying, paraphrasing, prating out the plain truth as it there lies, so
unprofitably to people in your own phrases, to your own outward profit, at your
pleasure? Did he that bounded and limited, and hedged in the Writers, saying
[according to thy sense] hitherto, thus far shall ye manifest my mind in
Writing, and no further, lend you such a boundless latitude to prate out your
own opinions, and turn you loose and unmuzled in pratum vestrum, ubi non est
sepes? Was not the mind of God in that Scripture given out by God himself full
enough, and plain enough, at least in matters necessary to salvation for the
meanest capacity to understand when it is read to them, in the words wherein it
seemed good to the holy spirit, and the holy Penmen to write it out, without
such a bottomless deal of adding, amplifying and expounding, as your excentrick
Academical Exorcists make about it? When Paul wrote to Timothy, Titus,
Philemon, and the Churches, and John to the Lady, and Gaius, and Luke his story
of what Christ and the Apostles said and did, were there need, much more
absolute necessity of a Priest to be sent for in all haste to open what they
meant to such as they sent their Letters to, in a tongue that they well
understood? And now the Scripture is translated into our own Mother Tongue in
England, such as can read, may read and understand it; and such as cannot read,
may have it read to them at their own Houses, there being one or other in every
House almost, that can read now, even very children if old folks cannot; which
being read, is tenfold more plain in such places as pertain necessarily to
salvation, to every honest, understanding, and plain-minded man that is willing
to do the will of God there written of, then the costly Comments, and manifold
hampered handlings, and more perplexize unfoldings of it, that are made by our
Schoolmen, and University Theological Professors: So that what more need then
of old when the Letter came newly forth, for a Priest to be placed in every
Parish for pay, to darken the counsel of God in the Scripture, by his words
without knowledge, under a pretense of opening it; or if it were an opening, as
it rather is a shutting of the Kingdom of Heaven against men, [as our Scribes,
Pharisees, and Hypocrites, like them of old, manage that matter, and use their
Keys of Knowledge in another kind of manner then honest Peter] What need of
hundreds a year to be paid in Parishes for the opening of one or two Texts or
Verses in a Week? Or rather [as some draw it out] the talking on some one Text
for a Month, or a quarter of a year together, against the Light and Spirit from
whence it was written? If those that wrote it, might not meddle to say a little
more, as I.O. says, in their Wisdoms, though they were as spiritually fluent
and learnt, as National Ministers are spiritually ignorant; It would be more
useful then now it is, through your miserable Mangonizations of it, by your
se^ces on open places, if your Wisdoms would leave it as it is, without making
out your misty meanings on it, to poormen for so much money.

J. O. Thou addest, That the declaration of the New Testament gave out the
mind and will of God in a way of morel's e^^y and glory without that dread and
terror which was peculiar to the Old, and to the Pedagogit thereof, in which
the coming of the word had oftentimes such a greatness and expression of the
Majesty of God upon it as filled them with dread and reverence of him, Hab.
3.16. and also greatly affected even their outward man, Dan. 8.27.

Rep. Here thou talkest again like thy self, like a man ignorant (as thou art
for all thy high conceit of thy self) of the Scriptures thou art scribbling so
for, and of the things therein declared, both before and since Christ, which
two Terms thou countest the times of the Old Testament and the New, and so
they figuratively are, howbeit as to the thing it self (which is yet far above
out of thy sight) the Gospel had children from Adam to this day under Moses his
out outward Pedagogie, and the Law, whose children are of the Bondwoman, and
not Heirs according to the promise with the children of the Free, has its
children as well since that juncture of Christ's Incarnation as before.

And as for thy inconsiderate position concerning the peculiarity of dread and
terror in receiving of the word from God by the writers of the Scripture to
the Pedagogie of the Old Testament and times before, Christ, such as greatly
affected the outward man with trembling and astonishment, for which thou citest
both Habakkuk and Daniel, as it the times since Christ knew no such matter, as
true Trembling, or any such Quaking as may affect the outward man, but what is
fained, and from Satan, and the force and power of the evil Spirit imitating in
his filthy Tripodes and (...), that Dread and Terror, which is by the Power of
God upon his people, of which said fictitious sort thou falsely and foolishly
fainest all that outward Trembling, that is found among the Qua. to be at this
day, page 8. and Ex. 1. S. 1.

I say had thou been as well read and skilled in Scripture, as by thy
scribbling pro Scripturis, thou would fain seem to be, surely thou would
have found that Paul and John both were found in as great Tremblings and
Astonishments, Dread and Terror to the great affecting of the outward man,
under the Appearances of the Lord to them in Visions and Revelations of his
mind and will to them, which they wrote, as either Daniel, Habakkuk, or the
rest of the Prophets before Christ that wrote them, insomuch that they scarce
knew sometimes where they were, whether in, or out of the body, but were as
dead with fear, Act. 9 6.26.14. 1 Cor. 2.3. 2 Cor. 12.2, 3. Rev. 1.17. But alas
J.O. is so taken up and hurried in his thoughts in a hideous talking for the
Scriptures, that he has little time to give any very great good heed to the
Scriptures themselves he so talks for.

J.O. Thou addest page 6, 7. That, as far as their own personal concernments as
Saints and believers did lie in the things they wrote, they studied the
writings and Prophesies of one another, Dan. 9.2. and made a diligent enquiry
thereby in order to the investigation of the things which the Spirit that spoke
in themselves did signify, 1 Pet. 1.10.10. without which though their Visions
were express, yet they understood them not; and that they attained a saving
useful, habitual knowledge of the truths delivered by themselves and others by
the illumination of the Holy Ghost, through the study of the Word, [ i.e.
Scripture with thee still] even as ye do, Psalm. 119 104. but as to the
receiving of the Word from God, as God Spoke in them, they obtained nothing by
study or meditation, by enquiry or reading, Am. 7.15.

Rep. Here is such a parcel of uncouth prate about the Prophets and their
Prophecy of Scriptures, and the Scriptures of their Prophesies, as favors of
nothing but that illiterateness and ignorance of the true ways of coming to
the saving knowledge, and understanding of the mind and will of God, that
abounds in Universities [the supposed Nurseries as well of spiritual learning
as any other] well nigh as much as in any places of the (so called) Christian
world besides.

What dreaming, what darkness and confusion is here? As if the Writers of the
Scriptures, because they were moved by the holy Spirit to write what they did,
therefore wrote they did not know what themselves, nor in any wise sawingly
understood every one his own piece of writing, or Scripture, page 5. whether of
Histories, or Prophesies, or Proverbs, or Psalms, or Instructions, or
Doctrines, or Laws, or Promises, or what ever true he recorded, delivered, made
known, given out, revealed by themselves, revealed to them first from God, as
to their own concernment therein, as Saints or believers, by the Revelation
thereof to them from God (which as I said above is the only way of coming to
the saving knowledge of any truth, and not that of reading it, as truth, in
another writings) without running out to study and read the writings of some
other men in order to their attaining any habitual, saving, useful intelligence
of their own; as if Isaiah, that Evangelical Prophet did not savingly
understand the Gospel Doctrines and Promises, and Instructions, and his own
Recorded History of Senacherib and Hezekiah, and other saving truths delivered
and written by himself, as they were revealed to him by the Lord, nor by the
voice, Spirit and light of God himself manifesting them within him, nor as he
received the word so revealed and manifested (in order to which receiving the
word thou assertest also they obtained nothing by study, or meditation, enquiry
or reading but only as he made diligent enquiry, study and search after the
things the Spirit signified by him in the writings and Scriptures of some other
Prophets: I wonder what other parts of Scripture of the other Prophets he
studied so, to get that saving knowledge by, since unless it were the Psalms,
the last book of which is judged to have been compiled together by the
Maccabees long after his days, excepting also the three, i.e. Hos a, Amos, and
Micah, that were co aetaneous with him, all other Prophets that are ranked
after him in your Bibles (though not in the same order of time wherein they
wrote) wrote long after him: and as if Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel, or the rest
knew not savingly what they wrote themselves no more then we do, as to
themselves, or any personal interest they had in the truths of their own
writings, but as they got an useful saving knowledges thereof out of each
others writings; in proof of which, if a man would wrest them, as thou do to
thine, by the head and shoulders, to such a purpose, he might almost as easily
evince the Pope to be head of Christ's Church, as draw any such matter, as this
thou concludest from Scripture.

That of 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. Ministers no more matter of evidence to thy
imagination in this particular, that the Prophets searched other Prophets
writings to find out each the meaning of his own, then Peter's being at Rome,
if ever he were there, does to his being the Popes Predecessor there in the
holy Chair. It Is true the Prophets are there said to enquire and search
diligently after the salvation and the grace that comes unto the Saints at the
revelation of Christ; but is there no searching and enquiring after the
salvation, and the fullness of the grace of God, but i^ the letter? is not the
most succesful searching after these matters made in the light it self, that
teaches and shows it, and brings the salvation nigh to all that wait for it
therein, which light or grace has appeared to all men, Tit. 2.11, 12. and is
t^e^e any way whereby God gives the knowledge of his own glory but the light
from himself, which the letter speaks of, wherewith God, who commands the light
to shine out of darkness, shines into the hearts of the Saints in order
thereunto? 2 Cor. 4.5, 6. And are not all things that are manifested,
manifested in the light, and is there any thing that does make manifest but the
said light and Spirit, which the letter speaks of, and which was before the
letter was? Ephesians. 5.13. and does God reveal the hidden mysteries of the Gospel
any way but by his Spirit to his Saints, which searches all things even the
deep things of God? and does any know the things of God, but the Spirit of God,
and the spiritual men, who in it, and not by the letter (which letter the world
has, yet has not the other) have mind of Christ? 1 Cor. 2.9. to the end: And
in that of Peter coted by thee, is there the least hint of the Scriptures, or
of the Prophets searching the Scriptures, or of any signification of the things
they ministered to others in their writings by the Scriptures, but only by the
Spirit?

And as for Daniel, it is true he understood by the books of Jeremiah the
cer^ain number of seventy years, how long the Captivity should last, but what
of that, number ex puris particularibus aliquid sequit^^ universale? Will thou
argue from one to all? much more will thou infer from thence that neither
Daniel, nor any other Prophets, understood their own writings, but by the
Scriptures of the other Prophets, which is the absurdity thou assertest? And as
for David's saying, Through thy Precepts I get understanding. Have thou got no
more understanding yet then to believe that the Precepts, Statutes, ^udgements,
Laws, Commandments, Testimonies, Word, Ordinances, Ways, Truth, Name one or
other of which names is either in the singular, or in the plural number used in
every individual verse (excepting two) throughout that long 119. Psalm
consisting of an 176. verses, no other thing is meant but the outward letter,
writing, or Scripture of Moses five books, very little more than which was
extant in David's days wherein the ten words which God wrote with his own hand,
and a few more Ceremonious matters were recorded by the hand of Moses? Is not
the Commandment, or Word, or Law of God (as the letter speaks) the Lamp or
Light that the letter only speaks of, Psalm. 19.7. etc. 119.105. Prove 6.23. And
if all the other Prophets that succeeded Moses studied the writing^ of Moses,
and one another in order to the knowledge of their own Prophetical writings,
without which they understood them not savingly, as thou sillily say, yet I
wonder what other Prophets writing^ Moses himself who was one of the Prophets,
not excepted by thee, searched and studied, that he might get a saving
understanding of that truth that was penned by himself, since, as thou think
at least, there were no Scriptures extant before him, for Enochs Prophesies
have no standing in your Standard. I wonder Quae colliquia cum Angelis vel
ficta velfacta, quis enthusiasmus quis afflatus caelestis, aut (reapse, vis
mali spiritus did suggest these fantasms into thy fancy, Ex. 1. Ex. S. ^8. thou
have little need to detest the Qua. as Enthusiasis that entertainest and
utterest to the world as undoubted truths such Amick Enthusiasmes as these.

Sundry other such shallow furmises and suppositions are very positively
propounded and set down by thee in thy first Chapter of thy first Treatise,
which I shall let pass here, some of which may possibly be touched on
elsewhere! But this may suffice to give a taste of that untruth, which thy two
Treatises are under-propt with, whereby from the falsenesse, faultiness,
foolishness, and unsoundness of thy groundwork and foundation, and from the
brittleness of thy Basis (so thou call'st, p. 1.28.30. this Original part of
thy Book, concerning the Divine Original, and immediate manner of the
Scriptures coming forth from God to us) the reasonable Reader may read
aforehand what a Come-down Castle the rest of thy Babylonish Building is like
to be, for howbeit I grant that the Word of God and the holy truth in its first
coming forth from God to the holy Penmen that heard his voice, and so wrote it
as moved by him, was of an immediate Divine original, in which respect it is
said no Prophecy of the Scripture is of private Interpretation, or to be
counted no more upon than a private man's wri^ing, which writes of his own head
(as thou do) the figment and imagination of whose heart, fancies and thoughts
are the fountain of all that is uttered, but as that which holy men of God were
moved to write, and the outward Scripture it self may be said to be (...) i.e.
penned by men as they were inspired by God, or the fruit and effect of no
self-afflation, but according to the motion or inflation of the holy Spirit;
yet that (...) thou make such a deal of work about, as the Original of the
Copies of the Original of the Scripture and their coming forth from God, was
not so immediately from God to those that lived when they were first given out,
much less to us now, as thou imaginest in thy vain mind, who dotest that every
Apex of that Text is equally Divine and as immediately from God to us as the
very voice of God in the Prophets was to them, without the least mixture or
interveniency of any mediums or ways obnoxious, to fallibility or capable of
giving change or alteration to the least (...) or syllable thereof, page
10.30.153. for that came from God at first (excepting the Decalogue and that
little to Belshazzar, which ye have now, but remote Copies of) not without the
interveniency, medium and way of man's handwriting, which is it were (as being
infallibly guided by the Spirit) obnoxious to no fallibility, yet as it comes
to you, who own that and no other to be your inalterable Standard, its far from
coming immediately from God, since it is not without the interveniency of the
hands of welnigh innumerable unknown Transcribers, the very first and best of
whom were so far from non-obnoxiousness to fallibility that thou thy self
say, page 167. that neither all nor any of them were (...) infallible or
divinely inspired, so that it was impossible for them to mistake, and that
religious care and diligence in their works with a due reverence of him with
whom they had to do is all thou ascribest to them, and p. 10. that the wisdom,
truth, integrity, knowledge and memory of the best of all men is obnoxious
(...) fallibility, and also that its known they did fail.

Neither, if the Question were about the Autographae or first Manuscripts that
were far more immediate then thy far fetched Apographae or modern Copies are,
(howbeit thy main business is about the magnifying thy confestedly
mistranscribed Transcripts and fallible Copies, and not the other, which being
acknowledged by thee to be lost, perished, and mouldred out of the world, nemo
post homines natos aeque ac tu delerasse censendus esset si pro scripturis
ipsis scriptis hisce argumentare statueris, thy dotage would justly be deemed
of a deeper die than any man's to argue for them, if he be a fool of al fool,
that fight^ for the non-corruptibility of what is long since corrupted) but I
say were thy vehement vindication and Apologetical appearances pro Scripturis
for the individual manuscripts of the holy men that wrote the mind of God more
immediately from his mouth, than any of thy Transcribers, that copy out things
as carefully as they can as they find them copied out before them, and were
they still extant in rerum natura, yet the immediacy even of those first
Scriptures from God to us was not so absolute without any medium at all, as
thou imaginest and intimatest from the Tex^ used by thee, and ushered, in with
such a deal of pomp and ceremony in proof thereof, p. 11. viz. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
Knowing this that no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private inter^pretation,
for the Prophecy came not of old time by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

This thou writest all over in Greek first, then in English, and then
descantest paraphrastically upon it in many pages as if thou would beat thy
belief upon men, and cudgel them into thy conceit of the Scriptures being as
immediately from God to us in every Apex, as his voice by which he spoke in the
holy men that wrote it, was in them, and that assuredly beyond all doubt or
exception, because Peter says, No Prophecy of Scripture is of private
interpretati^n, nor came by man's will, but Gods, and holymen spoke us moved by
his Spirit, yea page 23, 24. thou runst away an end it with it, as an undoubted
truth, and layest it down as it were supernaculum, (...) knowing, judging,
determining this in the first place, this is a principl^ to be owned and
acknowledged by every one that will believe any thing else. This then in our
Religion is to be owned, acknowledged, submitted unto as a principle without
further dispute, that this is so indeed as before asserted, and to give a
reason, why this to be received as a principle, it is added verse. 21. (...) the
word of Prophecy is not (...) of private acceptance, for it came not, was
brought into them not at any time by the will of men, but by the will of God:
And further it is added by the Apostle, (...), they were acted, born, carried
out to speak, deliver, write all that, and nothing but that to every Tittle
that was so brought to them by the Holy Ghost.

What a pompous piece of proof here is of the Scriptures coming from God to us,
disht out with great store of circumstance, having no substance or purport at
all in it to the purpose in hand; for however J.O. cannot discern how to
distinguish between these two Terms, viz. (...) ^^e Prophecy of the Scripture,
and the Scripture of the Prophecy, the changeable Text ^^ and unchangeable
Truth, the mere let^er, and the holy matter, yet Peter speaks not there of the
Scripture, which comes to us immediately from men writing, not in their own
wills, but at the will of God, as moved by his Spirit, but of the Prophecy
thereof, which we confess came immediately from God to the holy men of God, and
to others mediately, not without the intervenieny of their handwriting of it,
V^rbum sat sapienti, insipiensi plura plus satis.

Neither does that (...) thou make such work about elsewhere viz. p. 57. in a
case somewhat consonant with this, urging out of 2 Timothy 2.16. (...) necessarily
intimate such an absolute immediacy of the outward Text from God as thou
wotest, for as there is (...) a Writing or Scripture that is more ad intra,
than the Writing ^d extra, legible by the external eye, which thy mind and
eyes are altogether a gadding after, as if there were no other, viz. (...), a
Scripture written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in
Tables of stone, but in fleshly Tables of the heart, 2 Cor 3.2, 3. which
whether Paul to Timothy does not speak of, as that which he had known from his
youth, and was able to make him wise to salvation, and as being by the
inspiration of God, and profitable to the perfecting of them in of God to
furnish him for Doctrine, Reproof, Instruction inrighteousness, and ev^ry go^d
work, is well worth your serious enquiry, who search so shallowly into the
Scripture that ye seldom meet with the marrow and true mystery of any Text ye
talk on, so if you will needs have that (...) to intend the external Text only,
as being by inspiration of God, yet that phrase (...) or by inspiration from
God, does not denote necessarily the strictest degree of immediation, nor can
it found out so much, as if the said outward letter came from him without any
medium, but it came as it is said in the other place, 2 Pet. 1.20. according to
the will of God from men moved by him to write it, so according to the motion
of Gods Spirit, or his inflations or blowings upon the hearts of holy men, not
without the interveniency of their hands in the penning of it or the hands of
such as penned it from their mouths as they spoke the truths thereof, who
received them from the mouth of God speaking in them.

Thus though the first Manuscripts had as immediate a divine original and
emanation from God as any outward Writings in the world, yet that they had so
immediate an emanation as thou would make them have, as if every Apex
thereof is as immediate from God to you as his voice was from him to the
Prophets in whom he spoke that (excepting the little that is above excepted) is
utterly false; and as for your Transcripts, which thy talk is so transcendent
for, though they are immediate to you because they come to you as the first
Manuscripts never did, yet they came not immediately from God at all, but from
the hands of fallible men, so little guided in their writing from the
infallible Spirit, that by thy own confession, they being without that, both
might and did fail and mistake therein.

And now how little all this first Chapter has in it where with to make a
sound bottom^ or firm basis for the bearing up of so great a Babel, as thou
buildest on it, viz. Such a Divine Authority of the Scripture, as whereby it
claims and challenges the high and glorious Title of the Word of God to it
self, and every Tittle of it, under pain and peril of all men's perishing for
ever that ownit not, as such, and honor it not, as thou do, whose grand Idol
the mere outward Text is, with that Divine honor that is due to the inward,
true, eternal, incorruptible, inalterable, powerful living, life-giving Word of
God it self, which it only is but a bare, though true relation of, comes now to
be considered.

CHAP. III.
HAving laid (thy falsely supposed Divine original, and immediate emananation
from God of the letter, as the sole foundation of all that Divine Authority, as
the Word of God, thou ascribest to it; and as thy Basis, as thou say, p.
2.24.30. thou beginnest thy Building in thy second Chapter, and so onward
throughout thy book in both Treatises and Theses, laying and thwacking Title
upon Title, Land upon Land, Honor upon Honor, Exaltation, on Exaltation Crown
upon Crown, on the head of the Copies of the original, or Hebrew and Greek
Texts of the Bible, as they are at this day, come down to you from the
Generations of old thorough the hands of the sundry successive Transcribers,
extolling and magnifying it in such an exceeding high, unlimited, and boundless
way of Benediction, till, like one that being busy in beautifying with Gold
his carved Image, and blessing his more then ordinarily beloved Idol, forgets
that its but a perishing piece of Wood, or mouldring matter fashioned into that
form and fabric, wherein it appears outwardly and immediately to him, by the
handywork of mere erring man, Thou carriest thy Castle into the clouds with
aerie applauses, till by thy lofty liftings up of the letter, and thy windy,
whiffling, to and fro talkings for it, and Weathercockly commendations, and
setting up of every Pinnacle, Tittle, Point, Syllable, and (...) of it, thou
have trimmed up thy Tower of Babel, with a Top welnigh as high as Heaven, and
made no less of it even of the letter and Text of thy mere modern Greek and
Hebrew Transcripts of the Scripture then appears by thy own words.

J.O. The only and most perfect Rule of. All faith and good manners.

The truest and most unerring touchstone for the trial of all truth.

The most immovable, inalterable, certain, steadfast, and stable Standard.

The only firm and infallible foundation of all that belief and obedience that
God requires at men's hands.

A steadfast Releef against all that confusion, darkness, and uncertainty, which
the vanity, fossy, and looseness of the minds of men drawn out by the
unspeakable alterations that fall out amongst them, would certainly have run
out into, page 28.

The most effectual means of bringing men to repentance, on which all faith and
repentance is immediately to be grounded.

That which alone gives the determination of Doctrines proposed to be believed
whether they are truths of God, or cunning^y devised fables. Tr. 1. Cap. 3.
Sect. 16.

That by which we are commanded to examine and prove, Tanquam ad lydium
lapidem, all those things that are to be examined and proved.

That which pleads its reception not only in comparison with, but in opposition
unto all other ways of coming to the knowledge of his mind and will founded
thereon, p. 58.

That which is necessary in such an high degree of necessity in its daily use,
not only ad ingenerationem fidei to the begetting of faith, where it is not,
b^^ and in ea edificationem to the edification of the highest Saints in it
while they draw breath here, that there is not more need to us of food and
raiment to uphold our very natural life, than there is of the Scriptures that
we may be daily instructed in the knowledge and faith of Christ.

That which does not only most exceedingly exceed all others, but as to the
saving ends thereof, is the only and singular means that God uses in order to
the revealing the knowledge of himself. Ex. 2. S. 14. Inter media quibus ad sui
cognitionem revelandam Deus utitur sacra Scriptura non tantum longissime
omnibus aliis antecellit sed fines salutares quod attinet unicum est seu
singular.


The light, the most glorious light in the world, above the Sun, etc. p. 43.

The witness of God, the power of God to salvation, ipsa doctrina quam a Deo
docemur, yea no less than ^he very powerful, living, quickening, soulsaving
Word of God.

That which challenges to it self that glorious Title of the Word of God, as
its own proper name.

That which is so tum in esse reali and cognoscibili, i.e. so, and so known
evidently by its own light and power so to be.

That which manifests and testifies of it self from the beginning to the end of
it, p. 140. to be the Word of the living God, yea abundantly and uncontrolably
to men. p. 3

That which is often, even welnigh a thousand times mentioned, indigitated, Ex.
1. Sect. 5.32. by that name the Word of God.

That which calls for attendance and submission to it (as such) with supreme
uncontroleable Authority, p. 58.

That which is expected from us, and required of us by God himself on penalty
of his eternal displeasure if we fail in our duty, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9, 10. That we
receive it not as we do other books with a firm opinion only but with divine
and supernatural faith, omitting all such inductions as serve only to
ingenerate a persuasion that it is his Word, p. 31.32.34. etc.

And many more such transcendently glorious Epethites, and Compellations thou
denominatest the Scripture by, as that, which, as to the integrity of the Text,
is unaltered in every tittle, and also every tittle and iota of which is a part
of the Word, yea the Word of the great God, wherein the eternal concernment of
souls lies; for of the Scripture, or under that term of Scripture or of the
Word, thou restisiest all this, yea and very much more do thou found out and
sing of the Transcripts of the Greek and Hebrew Text to the same tune, which
though they are all true of the true Word of God indeed, which is properly so
called, and in the Scripture it self, which never, which no where calls it self
so, is often and only so styled, yet being by thee uttered all concerning the
Scripture, which is intended by thee, when thou praedicarest any thing of it
under that Name or Term of the Word of God, saying, the Word of God is a light,
powerful, glorious, above the Sun, etc. as well as when thou speak of it
under its own true and only proper name of Scripture, saying the Scripture is
the Rule, the foundation, etc. the Scripture is so or so, it is every whit of
it utterly false, as thou utterest it, the falsehood whereof, I shall now come
to make some Animadversions of more particularly.

And for as much as I own all those high-flown glorious denominations thou
runnest out into to be true to a Tittle, if spoken of Good word indeed, but
deny utterly the truth of any one of them, as they are spoken by thee of the
Scripture, as the most commodious way that I can take for the disproof of thy
untrue talk of the Scriptures, whereby thou ignorantly, not to say
Idolatrously attributest such glorious Titles and Epechites thereunto as are
the due and only peculiar properties of the true and living Word of God indeed,
which is Christ Jesus himself, and also for the vindication of the Word of God
from that Robbery and Spoil that is done to it by thee, who pullest it down
from the Throne, and statest the mere Texs and Letter of it in its place, and
also for the further vindication of the poor deluded, Fanatical Qua. as thou
call them in whom thou foolishly fanciest Satan assaults the Sacred truth of
the Word of God in its Authority, purity, integrity, and perf^ction, against
whose abominations (as thou say in thy Epistles) thou subjoyned thy Latin
Theses in the close of the other Treatises for the instruction of the younger
sort of students, to whom thou dedicatest thy dribling doings; and for the
clearing of the Qua. in their principles from thy shallow rash censure of them
as being therein confused opposers of the truth, I shall endeavor to comprize
the whole Truth not only about the Word of God, but also about the Scripture of
it, as to Name and Thing, most miserably mistaken by thy poor deluded self, in
this one general Argument, the minor Proposition whereof being plainly proved
to be true in each particular of it (for the major is not only undeniable, but
also undenied, or rather absolutely affirmed by thy self) the conclusion which
is perfectly contradictory to the main matter, and principal Proposi^ion
contended for throughout thy Book, viz. That the Scriptures known to be the
Word of God and that is the proper name thereof, will necessarily follow (as
true) to its full and final confutation and overturning.

The Argument is on this wise.

The Word of God is the most steadfast relief against uncertainty and confusion,
the firm foundation, the most perfect Rule of all faith and obedience that God
requires at m^ns hands, the most effectual means of bringing men to repentance,
and which immediately it is to be grounded upon, the chiefest among all ways
of coming to the knowledge of Gods mind and will, the truest Touchstone,
stable Standard, Lydius lapis, that gives determination of Doctrines, by which
all is to be examined and proved necessary to beget and increase faith, perfect
in its integrals, the most glorious spiritual light in the world, above the
Sun, the Witness of God, the very Doctrine of God, the power of God to
salvation, the powerful, living, quickening soul-saving Word of God that which
challenges that glorious title to its self as it own proper name, that which
evidenceth, manifests and testifies of it self to be the Word of God, and is so
styled welnigh a thousand times in the Scripture, to be received as such on
peril of eternal ruin, every tittle of which is the Word of God, the great
God, in which the eternal concernment of souls does lie, and such other things
as J.O. denominates the Scripture by. But the Scripture is none of all this,
therefore the Scripture is not the Word of God, much less known so to be, nor
so properly to be called.

That the Scripture is none of all that which thou testifiest above that it is,
and which no Qua. do deny the Word of God to be, is the business which now lies
before me to make good, in order whereunto I shall take the several particulars
into examination, and make some Animadversion of what thou say in proof of
those particulars in the Affirmative, affirming, I that not the Scripture, but
the light the letter came from is the only most steadfast relief against
contentious, confusions, darkness and uncertainties.

Thou say indeed the Scripture is the steadfast Relief against all that
uncertainty, darkness, confusion, etc. That the minds of men heightened by the
unspeakable alterations that are found among them, run out into.

But I say (not blaming the Scripture as the cause of it, which is holy, just,
and good, when wise men have the handling of it) that throw the doting
disputers of this world about it, who in their wrangling minds and restless
pens wrest the Writings of it to their own and the worlds ruin, the Scripture,
canonized by men as their rule of faith, is become (as the Gospel of peace is
of war to the lewd minds) the occasion, or causa sine qua non of all the
confusion, darkness, uncertainty, which by the vanity, folly, and looseness of
men's minds, drawn out a whoring after the letttr without, from the light and
spirit within, by divine dotages on it, and dim divinations out of it for
means, and the unspeakable alterations of it, and endless enmities and hatreds,
and envyings one of another about their own sottish senses, and misshapen
meanings on it, has too certainly been heightened, and is already long since
run out into. So that as Aristotle and Ramus the two received and respective
Standards for the junior Sophisters of our two Nurseries, Oxford, and
Cambridge, to fight under in their Logical scoldings; So the Scripture is made
by our senior Schoolmen in their Scholastical Theological S^nffles, a Standard
more to squabble about, and fight under, than a Standard to try and determine
Truth by (as they call it) and is nothing but an ample Armory from which they
fetched most of their furniture where with all in their mad malicious minds to
fence against each other concerning the Scriptures it self, and such plain
truths as lie open to all honest capacities therein, and lie hid from none more
than these wise and prudent Praters of it, who like the Horses and Riders,
Zach. 12.4. being of the Lord smitten with madness, blindness, and
astonishment, run on to battle as Warriors, Isa. 9. with confused noise, till
the Nations where they live lie languishing for their wicked wills sakes, with
their Garments rolled in blood.

Yea the Scripture, as canonized into an Authentic common Standard to
themselves, stands but as Truncus locorum, etc. a certain Topic or Common
place from whence to scrue Arguments to the assaulting one of another, and from
which to fetch fuel to feed the fire of their wrathful, and hellish life of
disputing out their giddy guessings to each other, so nauseously, that some
Saints have been weary of the world, and wished to be out of it upon nothing
more than a desire to be rid of the angry, direful doings and divisions of the
men called Divines; which Topic of theirs too they chop to pieces and
criticize into such crumbs and bits, the better to beat one another out of, and
about it, that as the Oxonians used to say of Ramus, In tot Ramos, Ramulos, and
Ramusculos, locorum hunc Truncum, dividit, etc. So I may say of all our admired
Erasmus's or (supposedly) learned Divines, that either hate or dote on each
others Divinity doings (of the best of whom when all is done as renouned as
they seem to themselves, I can say no better yet (such Dunces are they in the
School of Christ) than I can of Erasmus himself, of whom, as to the things of
God, were he now living, it might be said, Mus, at Erasmus eras, Mus, at
Erasmus eras)
In quot Puncta, Punctula, and Punctillula, etc. into how many points,
punctualities, and punctilioes, do they spring out in their pratings,
pratlings, and prittle prattles upon and concerning it, till as Heterogeneous
as the Scripture is, in the sense above showed, in respect of its various
matters, they make the bare writing so Homogeneous a thing, that every point,
tittle and iota of it must bear not only the true (for so it may, every point
and iota, line, and letter being Scripture, as well as a whole page) but the
very false fictitious name and nature of the whole; for thus J.O. makes the
whole Scripture no more, as well as no less than the Word of God, and no less
then so, even then the Word of God (for had he said each tittle is Scripture, I
should have excused him) does he aver every tittle and iota of the Scripture to
be page 168, 169. page 27. Every Apex of the written word i.e. writing with him
is equally divine and as immediately from God as the voice wherewith and
whereby he spoke to, or in the Prophets, and is therefore accompanied with the
same Authority (which Authority with him is that of commanding the name of God
as his word, page 34, 34, 36.) in its self, and unto us, who if he can tell me
how much sense, or prove to me that there is any sound sense, true Doctrine,
comprised, commanded or taught in one tittle or iota, much more that every
transcribed tittle and iota of it is (as he there affirms) the Word of the
great God though I yet say, as he says of what he cannot believe, credat
Apella, yet he however, Erit mihi magus Apollo.

Yet for every [not to say Tittittle] but Tittle and little (...) in it is he
so loud that he labors and looks to be heard and heeded as far off as beyond
Sea by Capellus and other Divines, against whom he tiresomely talks about
trivial matters, not contented with the Truths of Doctrine contained, without
every Apex, tittle and (...) of what ever was in the Text be assured and
secured unto him, any of which yet if happily they are lost, as all the
individual immediate first Manuscripts are wholly by his own confession, I know
no body will spare so much time, or trouble themselves to take so much pains as
to look them up for him.

Yea oh the infinity of I.O's fightings with his fellow Protestant, as well as
Popish Divines, for the foresaid flim flams and forms of outward Scripture in
that second Treatise of his, or manifold Tale of a Tub without any bottom,
save the sandy ground and fickle foundation of forgeries, fables, humane
fallible persuasions, uncertain conjectures, Page 330. But we are in a way and
business wherein all things are carried to and fro by conjectures, and p. 180.
All things here are uncertain, uncertain whether any such things were done,
uncertain who are intended by the Sopherim, Ezra, and his companions most
probably. All that I know of the various Readings of the Oriental or
Babylonian, Occidental and Palestine Jews is that they first appeared in
Bombergius his Bible under the care of F. Pratensis. I wish those that know
more would inform me better; to profess my ignorance, I know no ne that do
give account of their original, in my present haste, I cannot enquire after
them, and such ike stuff, so canis festinans caecos parit catulos.
and on his own side his own thoughts, conjecture, and apprehensions, as his
own self therein abundantly confessnes into which, but for service-sake to the
truth, and that I may show the Seers how dim-sighted they are, and the World,
what a Wood and Wilderness of mere imaginations her Leaders are wandering and
erring up and down in, it even loathes me to look into it; and but that I know
the end of it be no worse then this, as the Proverb is, That when Thieves fall
out among themselves, true men are the likelier to come by their goods again;
it would more troub^e and terrify me, then it does, to behold, as every one
may that reads there, and does not [to use J.O.'s own phrase in it, p. 275.]
dream pleasantly, while he is awake, how the Divines are divided about the
ground they stand on; like children, crying out, and tearing themselves to
pieces about their shreds, and shells, and pins and Points, and counters, and
for want of insight into better materials, and into the inside thereof, are
twatling away their time to learn in, about the gaudy outside of their
Horn-Books and Primers, and brawling about the back side of their Bibles,
treating out their thoughts in tittle-tattles to each other about Titles of
Books, and T^^^'^^ and Iota's, Hebrew Points, Punctations, Accents, Vowels,
Dipthongs, ^abbincal, unical, and other sorts of Letters, Pronounciations,
Acute, Apert, double and simple sounds, Here Is a deal of Divinity as deep as the
dunghill it self, where its more fit to stand then in divine Labors of Drs. in
Divini^y, that pretend to be the chief Laborers in the plain honest Gospel,
and servants to that simplicity that is in Jesus,
as Ai, Ay, Pay, Day, How, Now, Rout, Stout, Eat, Meat, Pull, Cut, Boy, Toy,
All, Tale, Thy, My, Thine, Thin, Go, To, Use, Us Law, Draw, Title, Tittle, and
such like tittle-tattles, and simple sounds, as So, No, [J. O.'s and T.D's.
simple sounds throughout their Books] various Lections, to Kiries, and to
Ketibs, Lexicons, Original Copies, Transcriptions, Translations, Oral
Traditions, Tomes, Talmuds, Babylonish Targums, Paraphrases, Greek, Syriack,
Arabic, Aethiopick, Complutensian Franciscus, Pratensis, and Bombergius his
Bibles, Genealogies, Chronologies, Commentaries, Alcorans, Gemaraes, Mishnaes,
Massereas, Hammasoreths, Euchiridions, Apologies, Appendices, Prolegomenaes,
Biblia Poly Glottaes, Councils, Fathers, Doctors, and modern Authors, Rabbis,
Schoolmen, Casuits, Grammarians, Turkish, Jewish, and Heatbenish Writers,
Massorites, Cabalists, and other Rabbis, and a huge heap more of such
Massie-men, and their voluminous Handy-works, wherewith our men called
Ministers are ever mudling and hampering themselves and each others minds, and
out of which, more then out of the Scriptures themselves, they so scribble,
scrabble, and scramble about, and much more then out of the Light and Spirit
the Letter sprang from, the vast Body and big bundle of their Atheo-theology is
composed; about which yet, nor yet about the Standard of their own owning, and
their forefathers authorizing, they can never accord, but are ever snarling
and concurring, as dogs, together by the ears among themselves; and though
their thoughts are so various, that there is Quot homines, tot sententiae, as
many minds as men; yet every one is crouding his own erude and self-created,
conjectural cogitations, as very Oracle on all the rest, and crying up his own
incongruous Conclusions, as cogent and clear, as the clearest demonstrations in
the world.

And howbeit it befalls me in submission to God's will, who has laid it on me
against my own, to take so much notice of that notable non-such piece of
uncertain Discourse of I.O.'s about the various Lections, and pedling
Punctations of the Hebrew Text: (in all which his clack is carried to and fro
by perplexing, contradicting conjectures As the feel thinks, so the Clock
clinketh.
in the high road of Forgeries and Fables, then which, in nothing [quoth I.O.
p. 264.] has the world been more cheated: And round about in the sphere of
rational, humane, fallible persuasions, and the sandy-heap of uncertainties,
and incertainty it self: p. 181.218.222.227.) as to make some Animadversions on
some Contradictions and odd Expressions and Absurdities, apparently thick and
threefold in it: Yet I take so much heed to my self, as not much to interest my
self or any thing of mine, into that inconclusible Controversy, and endless
Intercourse, which I see I.O. and others are there engaged in, in the looseness
of which a man may (as I. O. does) sooner loose himself, then find the Truth.
And seeing, as thou say in another case, p. 343. it is to no purpose to go
over all such observations as might be made of things that are false, foolish,
frivolous, and absurd, that are therein, if any man has (as thou say, and as
it seems to me have) a mind to be led out of the way, he may do well to attend
unto them, I shall no further then to lead men out from attending to the
Toyishness of them: Nor shall I bring my self down from that sure Rock on which
through mercy I stand, into that deep pit of doubtful disputations, into which
such as are fell from God, are fallen, so as irreconcilably to fall out about
things so little worth knowing, that they are fit for nothing but to be
forgotten; left passing by, and intermedling in a strife that directly concerns
me not, I not only take a dog by the ears, but raise also a Nest of Wasps, or
whole Hive of Hornets about my own, who are striving to sting one another with
what strength they can about stuff, which (on which side foe're the truth lies)
is no more worth such a stir and strife as they make for it, then a very
straw: And since I see all the Builders that reject the Cornerstone, are found
in broiles and brabbles, not only about their several Superstructions and
Fabrics built thereon, but also their several Foundations; and even the very
Protestant Divines (whose is the better of the two, so long as the Papists have
but Traditions) at odds within themse'ves about their own, which being but the
bare Letter, is but brittle; some with I.O. stickling, to little purpose, to
prove it firm and uncorrupted, whilst others with far more evidence to evince
it to be decrepid: I am minded to stand off from that Battle about the Points,
as to any earnest Interposition, and deeper engagement therein, then is above,
and become a looker on, and leave the Clergy, that are loud and clamorous, and
full of noiles, to claw one another with their wonted Clubs, and bang one
another with their Branglings and vain janglings about Boy-Toy, and the
Antiquity or Novelty of Hebrew Points: And seeing they are hard at work in the
Night, and wrestling in Chains of Darkness like the foolish woman, to pull
down their own house with their own hands, and to find out, and fling about,
that all may see it, the sandiness, and crack's, falsities, and fallibilittes,
and flaws that are in their own crazie Cornerstone, and faultring Foundation,
and to crush down their own Chaos they have reared thereupon, with the
curiosity of their own Criticisms, and burn up their Babels with the confused
fire of their angry quarrellings and contentions; I rejoice more to see the
Truth go on, then sorrow to see their Trash come down thereby, hoping that when
they have labored long enough in the fire of their own fury, and find they
have wearyed themselves for very vanity, and see the Earth filled from the
Lord's own teachings, without theirs, with the knowledge of his glory from one
end to another, as the Waters cover the Sea; and that when they begin to feel
their old Heavens wax hot, and be on fire over their heads, and their worldly
Elements, and Earthly Rudiments to melt away with fervent heat, and the ragged
Rocks they have carved out to themselves in their own conceits to rest upon, to
r^ad in pieces, and their Root to show it self to themselves (as it is seen by
others) to be rottenness, and their Blossom to go up as the dust, and their
boggy Foundation to shake, and the ground they go upon, to open and crack, and
cleave a sunder under their feet, and themselves to cry out [as I.O begins to
do already] (...) Show me where I shall stand: And that when they feel
themseves sinking and going down alive with the uncircumcised into the pit,
they will then learn that from themselves, which being wiser in their own eyes
then the men, that can render a reason, they would never learn from others, '
viz. That were they as truly built on the Letter of Scripture (as they deem
themselves to be, and it is most sure to some, and infallibly true they are all
beside it) yet being not on the Light, they are no better bottomed then on the
Sand; trusting also, as I said above, that when the holy Thieves that steal the
word they speak from one another, to make a trade on, and the Scribes have
done Scolding and Scuffling together about the Scriptures, then there will be a
restitution to every thing, that has been robbed thereof, of its own proper
Name, viz. Of the Rule, to the Rule, of the Foundation to the Foundation, of
the Light to the Light, of the Witness of God, to the Witness of God, of the
living Word, to the living Word of God: and of the bare Writing, Text, or
Letter, to the Letter, and no more, which in truth is no more then plainly so.

So then as positive as thou art in it I.O. that the outward Writing, the close
of the Canon of which, as to any more immediate Revelation of his Will, was
immediately given out from God to us as a continent of the whole of his mind
and will, as a merciful and steadfast relief against all confusion, darkness,
uncertainty, looseness of men's minds, etc. ( ut supra) and (as it were) a
certain Standard to hush all Controversies: Yet I who affirm the inward Light,
Word, and Spirit of God in the heart so to be, do deny that the whole
Scripture, (how immediately soever it had its being and beginning of God, and
however some little of it was, Act. 15.) was ever designed by him to such an
end as the ending of strifes and contention, or determining of all doubts and
questions, and disputings about his mind and will among men; or that it ever
proved succesful or effectual to such an end, or else ut frustra est ista
potentia quae ne unquaem reducitur in actum, sic frustra istud medium quod
nunquam obtinere potest suum finem. As that is a vain Power which never produces
its effect, so that is a vain Means (and therefore not so intended of God, who
appoints no means utterly in vain) which never can obtain its own end.

Nay verily, though miserable man for his own ends cries it up into that
supremacy, sets it up as the Ensign to the Nations, in which he would have them
put their trust, that it will end and amend all matters that are out of tune in
the world about truth, and is a steadfast relief against all that fighting
Andabatarum mors, in their dark minds, that is, among the Clergy of all kinds
and colors, Papists, Prelates, Presbyters, who all three like Ammon, Moab, and
Mount Seir, (making one head against the people of God) do yet destroy each
other, and non secus as Sampsonis vulpeculae, etc. like Sampson's
Fire-brand-tayl'd Foxes, burn up the Churches true Bread-Corn, as if such were
the plenitudo Scripturarum, the sufficiency, power, and perfect efficacy of the
Scripture, that if men will come all to a trial of Doctrines, Faiths, Spirits,
and all by that, tanquam ad Lydium lapidem Then all differences and dissentions
in Religion, of whatsoever sorts, must cease; and all the most detestable
errors, which flying the Scripture, men are divided into, must extempore vanish
upon their looking there; For so says I.O. Etenim si in sentent^ am hanc,
cujus patrocinium proviribus suscip^ mus, de plenitudine Scripturarum lubenter
dis^ cederent, utque omnis cujuseunque tandem gener^ in Religione Controversia
verbo Dei (i.e. Scriptura secundum te) sistatur consentirent, erro^ res isti
Te^errimi, quorum causa lucem Scripturae fugientes, Andabatarum more in
tenebri^ demicant, atque uti olim Ammonitae, Moabitae, and habitatores Montis
Seiris, Bellum adversus populum Dei suscipientes internecioni semutuo devovent,
ad Lumen Solis hujus manifestim ovane scerent. Ex. 3. S. 3.4.
yet (till men come to turn to the Light and Word within, which is the Power of
God the Scriptures tells of, which who erres from, and are ignorant of, as the
Scholars and Scribes are more then any, do err, not knowing the Scripture
they scribble on, any more then it) the Letter is too weak an Engine to set to
rights what is what is out of order; and a Standard, which men that lean to it,
as to that intent, find to be but a broken staff, that not only fails their
expectation of support from it, but also wounds them more, and runs into their
hands; Witness the wosul work that the Worlds Ministers make in it, for all
their Scripture, who for and about the Scripture, and their sundry silly senses
about it self, and meanings made of the holy matter that is plainly made out in
it, make more havoc of whole Nations by stirring them up to war about the
Scripture, in their wild wisdom, and wicked wills, then ever could have been in
Christendom, if the Scripture had never been among them at all: What wasting,
devastations, and calamity has been in Germany, not only betwixt Protestants
and Papists, but also by Protestants, i.e. Lutherans and Calvinists within
themselves, and wherefore, but for their divided thoughts upon some few Texts
of Scripture? And what Errors, Heresies, straglings from the Truth, which is
but one, and from the true Light the Scripture calls to? Did ever any sorts of
erring men (among whom the Clergy that commonly cried Whore first, have been
the chief) run out into error in the Christian world, who have not pretended at
least to own, and to be willing to be tried also by the Scripture? Yea the
Papists for all their infallible Chair, will, and do ever, when they plead it
against Protestants, profess pretensively to prove it by the Scripture, having
a sense for every place to serve their own turns, as the Protestant Clergy to
serve their turns have another.

And howbeit it has been thought in the Protestant part of Europe, that all
would be unity it self among them, (and so it is as to make one against the Pope
since men fell from that infinity of imagination and invention, which was, and
was capable to be eternally fed with the endless fuel, which the unerring
Breast, and boundless treasure of tradition could easily find for it, and
betook themselves more singly to the Scriptures, marching from Rome under the
conduct of the purity of the Originals, (as thou speak p. 207) of the
Scritures; yet what multiplication of divisions (for want of coming to the
light, which is but one in all, and in which alone all true unity is had and
held with God, and one another, 1 Ioh. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.) rather then any
diminution thereof, has fell out in your Reformed Churches, as ye call them,
(...) all the Scriptures being so all in all among them, so that like the
Serpent Hydraus hundred Heads, whereof when Hercules cut off one, two grew up
after it in the place, as soon as one controversy among the Reformed Clergy
was hoped to be ended, though I know none was ever truly ended, yet by all the
Synodical designs that ever were on foot in this Nation, or any other, so that
we may truly say of every Synod of Divines that has yet fate, Quis Synodus?
Nodus, Patrum Chorus, Integer, Aeger,
Conventus, Ventus, Sessio, Stramen, Amen]


Many new ones began, that like new fresh Hares starting upon tired Hounds,
that have been hot in the old sent, have run them all out of breath; or if any
evil of division in one thing has been put to an end, it has been but a
preparative to a greater breach among the Protestant Clergy, and all their
creatures, and still Finis alterius Mali gradus est Futuri: Yea, I may say of
thy Scriptures, as thou pleads for them J.O. to end all strife withal, as I
may say of our English Oaths imposed upon poor persons, to the impeaching
themselves, when they come before our crooked Courts in Case of Tithes, viz.
that the Oaths given on pretense of ending all strife, are in truth given by
the Judges to begin all strife with; For if an honest man will not swear how
many Eggs, and Pigs, and Pears, and Plumbs, etc. he has had for so many years
past, they will not permit him to plead at all, or strive in his own defense
against his Persecutor.

In like manner it is with that which thou exhibit'st to men in order to the
ending all Divisions and Disputes, viz. the mere looking [beside the Light
within] into the Letter of the Scriptures, which is so far from finishing any
strife, that it feeds vain, foolish, loose minds, such as thine that hates the
light, none else, with fuel, and furnishes their fancies with matter for many
more strifes, then they would find cause for, if they kept to the Light within
alone for their learning, or at least so as in that alone to look into the
Letter, where such as learn at the Light, may read their own.

Yea, dark minds diving into the Scripture, divine lies enough out of it to set
whole Countries on fire, as the Divines have ever done.

And as to the purity of the Originals, under the Conduct of which thou say
ye went from Rome, wishing none may return thither under pretense of their
corruption. I say, the purity of them, which thou pleadest in that height thou
do, is but pretended, and that more or less corrupted they are, to the
contradicting thy self, thy self art forced to confess, p. 167. as is showed
above, but be they as they are, or how they will be, pure or not pure to a
tittle, as thou assertest them, they are so far from relieving you in your
wearisom, wrathful strifes, that cum nemini obtrudi potest itur ad me, may your
Original Text say, when the Divines can have leisure to cease a little from
their strife about the holy matter and Doctrine of it, then rather then sit
still, and be quiet or be idle from their common Calling, which is contention,
they will role Sysiphus his stone, and be at wars, and tear one another about the
very Letter, and their Original Transcripts of it, and try that out tooth and
nail, whether they be true or no, in every Letter, Tittle, Point, and Iota, as
they were written as the first.

Yea, O curas hominum! though for truth, and wisdom, and the Scriptures sake,
which I own, and honor as holy, just, and good, and of precious use to such as
know and obey the truth, I am become such a fool with them, by answering them
according to their folly, as to make this one Ski^mish among them about the
Scripture, that I may bring some of them to the truth and light of God in them,
in which only the union is, that they may cease henceforth from their and stirs
strifes, which light til they turn to, I testify to them that their way is as
slippery places in the dark, in which they will be driven on till they fall
therein, that their feet are swift to shed blood, that wasting and misery are
in their ways, and the way to true peace they know not, yet this one thing I
must say too, and of our University Scriblers, pro Scripturis, that as there
are no men in the world more up to the ears in strife about the Scripture, and
their own Fancies on it as to matter and letter, than the Scribes are, so there
is no one thing that the Scribes are striving, scuffling and scolding at each
other more about, than about their Scriptures.

That light or word within, and not the letter is the Foundation.

First, I shall take account of what thou falsely assertest concerning the
Scriptures being a Foundation.

Thou affirmest the Scriptures to be the Foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles spoken of Ephesians. 2.20. page 33. saying of them that men may quietly
repose their souls upon them in believing and obedience, and of your selves
thus are we built, (...) etc. on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
and calling them.

Page 48. The Foundation of that world which he has set up in this world as a
Wheel (...)
within a Wheel his Church.

And page 154. The Foundation of faith, hope, and obedience.

And page 155. The Foundation of all that faith, and obedience which he
requires at our hands.

And page 316. The great and blessed Foundation of Truth.

All this I own to be very true of the Word of God of which the Scripture
speaks, but it is utterly false as uttered by thee of the Scriptures. The
falsehood of which appears plainly by this Argument.

1. Argument, That which is the great and blessed Foundation of all that truth,
faith, hope and obedience that God requires at men's hands, and of the Church
and of the Apostles and Prophets must be something, which was in being before
any of these things were, for the Foundation on which these are built must have
a being before they can be built thereupon, every Foundation being before the
building can stand upon it.

But (though the Word of God be so, yet) the Scripture is not before, but long
after that truth, faith, hope and obedience, which God requires at men's hands,
and long after the Church, and long after the Apostles and Prophets were, yea
after those Apostles and Prophets were Respectively, who were the Respective
penmen thereof.

Therefore the Scripture, the Writing, the Letter, the Greek and Hebrew Text is
not the Foundation of any of these things.

The first Proposition is so true that it were no less then disparagement to
I.O's wisdom, and to suppose him to be mentis inops to go about to prove it to
him, since as he builds Castles in the air, as easily thrown down, as erected,
upon no better Foundation, then his own fancy, thoughts, conjectures, and
imaginations, yet he cannot be so senceless as to think, that that Foundation,
be it what it will, firm or brittle, on which any thing is built, must be
before the building can stand thereon.

And as for the minor in every part thereof it is as undeniably true to any,
save such as having once turned their backs upon the Truth, are resolved to
render themselves devoid of eithet Sense or Reason in their Reasonings against
it, then to own it. For none else can deny but the Church, and the Truth,
Faith, Hope, and Obedience of it, and the Messengers, Apostles, Prophets,
Preachers of Righteousness, such as were Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Lot, and
others, were in the Truth, Faith, Hope, Obedience of the Gospel, and also built
upon Christ the Light, the Word of God, the Rock of Ages, before Moses days,
who is unversally supposed, at our Universities, to have been the first Penman
of the Scriptures.

The grand Master-place of Scripture that is used in proof hereof, that the
Scriptures are the Foundation, is Ephesians. 2.20. where it is said by Paul to the
Ephesians, Ye are built on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. Hence it is strenuously stickled
for, and as confidently, as cloudily concluded by our doting Doctors, and
dreaming Divines, that the Church of God, as to all her Faith, Hope, Obedience,
Knowledge of the Truth, is built upon the Apostles and Prophets Writings as
that which is there called the Foundaeion; whereas were they but at leisure
from that lesser and lower literature, wherein they are lost from the Lord, and
the Light and Life of God, and the Letter also, which issued forth from thence,
to look into the Light, and by it into the Letter it self, they more blindly
labor for, then truly learn by, they would soon see that the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets there spoken of, is not the Apostles and Prophets
themselves, much less uncertain transcribed Copies of those few Fragments of
their Letters, and some other honest men's true stories of what was done in
their times, good instructions, memorandums, and litteral recommendations of
wholesome Laws and Statutes, most of which as laid down in the Letter, [saving
that they remain in the truth and substance, whereof they were the types,
figures and shadows] are above 1600-years since cancelled and abolished,
Promises, Prophesies, Psalms, Proverbs, Parables, occasional Letters, Epistles,
and other Writings, which such as fell into a foolish following, and falling
down before outward Images, and from the infallible Spirit it self, that their
Scriptures were written to keep men to, found and fardelled together, and
framed in their own fancies into a Foundation of the Faith, and of all the
whole Fabric of Religion to be for ever framed and founded upon; But Christ
Jesus himself, who is there also called the chief Cornerstone, and 1 Pet. 2.4.
that living Stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious,
on whom the Saints, even all together with the Apostles and Prophets, and the
whole Household of God, as Fellow-Citizens, and lively Stones, are built up a
spiritual House, to offer spiritual sacrifices yea all into one holy Temple or
Habitation of God through the spirit: This is the true and sole Foundation of
all the matters before mentioned, Christ Jesus the Rock of Ages, on whom
whoever believes, shall not be ashamed: Christ the living Word of God, that
also quickneth, whose words are spirit and life to the hearers of his voice,
whose words, uttered in the heart, do good to those that walk uprightly; this
is the Stone that you Babel-builders refuse, which God has made the very head
stone in the Corner, Psalm. 118.22. Matt 21.42. This verbum lumen internum,
Christ the eternal, internal Word in the heart, and Light of the World, given a
Light to the Nations, and [as such] Gods salvation to the ends of the earth,
and the precious sanctuary to such as believe in his light, is that stone of
stumbling, and Rock of offense to such as thee I.O. that stumble at the Word in
their wrestlings for the Letter, being disobedient unto both, whereunto also
they are appointed, and a Gin and a Snare to the Inhabitants of that earthly
Jerusalem which is from beneath, the fleshly Church of Jews and Christians,
according to the mere Letter, which is in bondage with her children, Isa. 8.14.
28.16. 1 Pet. 2.

And that it is Christ Jesus alone, and not the Scriptures that is there called
the Foundation, is most evident, not only from the Text it self, wherein Jesus
Christ himself is instanced in, as such [for the same that is called the
Foundation, is there also called the Corner-stone] but also from other
Scriptures, whereby the truth hereof is yet more illustrated, viz. Isa. 28.18.
where speaking both in the foregoing and following Verses, of the false
Foundations, short beds, narrow coverings, and lying refuges, that the
Drunkards of Ephraim, that erred from the simple plain truth, through the Wine
of their own Wisdom, and were out of the way, and stumbled in Wisdom and
Judgment, through the strong Drink of their own devised Doctrines, so that they
could not discern nor learn the Lords Doctrine that was divined to them through
the stammering lips of such as ministered Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line,
here a little, and there a little, among them; he summons all to fix their
Faith on the one only true and firm Foundation, saying, Behold! I lay in Sion
for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure
Foundation, he that believes shall not make haste: Where it is very observable,
as it is in Ephesians. 2.20. That the self-same that is called the Cornerstone, is
also ca'led the sure Foundation.

Likewise 1 Cor 11. where it is expressly said, That other Foundation can no man
lay then that is laid, which is JESUS CHRIST. Now if no man can lay any other
Foundation of the Church, which is God's Building, then Christ, whom the
Apostle says, ver. 10. He himself laid, as a wise Master Builder, according to
the Grace of God given unto him, Then all things else besides Christ the Word
of God, the Light of the World, and that measure of Light that shines from him,
which is not divided from him, any more then that of the Sun from it, but one
with him; whatsoever men go about to lay as the Foundation of the Church, and
her Faith, Hope, and Obedience, are not truly, really, and properly so, but
imaginarily, supposively fictitiously so, and but falsely so called, merely
seigned, found out, and founded only in the Fancies of foolish, blind
Babel-builders, which Founders and their fictitious Foundations, must be
confounded: For the layers of a false Foundation (and such are all they, that
with I.O. lay the Letter, or Traditions with the Papists and Jesuits he justles
with, or any other then Christ the Light) must come to confusion, as well as the
mere Formalists and their Wood, Hey, Stubble, Trash, Imitations, empty forms,
and such like Superstitions, and all sorts of Superstructions of the Babilonish
Builders upon the true: Whereupon, as much as J.O. blesses himself in his
holding the Foundation, and feeds himself with hopes of salvation, so long as
he is found holding that, though he build Hay and Stubble upon it, and his
Works come to be consumed, saying, p. 160. It will be well for us if we be
found holding the Foundation, if we build hay and stubble upon it, though our
Work perish, we shall be saved. Yet alas, poor deluded man, J.O. thou mistakest
thy self exceedingly; it would be well for thee indeed if thou held'st the
Foundation, Christ, the Head, the Light of men, thy person might then be saved,
though thy Work of wood, hay, stubble, will assuredly perish in the fire: But
thou art far from being found holding that Foundation, then which there is no
other; and found laying another, even thy uncertain Transcripts of the Greek
and Hebrew Texts, and an outward fallible Letter, and its Points, and
Syllables, and Tittles, and Iota's, one jot or tittle of which if it fail, thou
confessest all thy Faith, and Fabric of Religion, falls to the ground;
confessing also that 'twas not impossible for the chiefest Transcribers thereof
to mistake in any thing; yea, that they did fail in their Work; so rasing thy
false, feigned, and fallible Foundation to the ground, and pulling down thy
House with thy own hands, like the foolish woman: And as for the true
Foundation, Christ the Light and Spirit, which are infallible, stable, firm,
fixed, sure and certain, as every true laid Foundation ought to be, and is,
though thy flexible Letter is not so, which is of it self an Argument of its
not being the Churches Foundation of Faith and Obedience, This true one, I say,
is by thee trampled on, and flouted at, under the Names of, Nescio quod Lumen,
quem Deum, seu (...) Deo quopiam melius, merae Tenebrae, aecitas, fines
salutares quod attines, non sufficiens ad salutem, Christus Fanaticorum
imaginarius and fictitius, qualitas nescio quae divina seu anima Mundi, omnibus
misia quae (...) sit i.e. vere nihil, Ex. 4. S. 15.17.21. Doctorem infallibilem
nihil habens commune, cum Scripturis, Ex. 3. S. 22. I know not what Light, what
God, or cornucopia, better then any God, infallible Doctor, inconsonant utterly
with the Scripture, imaginary Christ of the Qua. I know not what Divine Quality
or Soul of the World, made up of all things, that is all things, and truly
nothing.

Moreover, if none can lay other Foundation then Christ, then Paul himself by
these words, Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built on the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, cannot rationally be concluded (as he is both senselesly and
reasonlesly conceived by I.O.) to intend any other Foundation, then Christ
himself; neither can he be understood by any that have common understanding, to
intend himself and other Prophets and Apostles, or his own, and their mere
outward Writings, for then there are two, whereof they must have one Foundation
of Faith and Obedience, and we another; they Christ the Light, and we them and
their Letter; which is an absurdity utterly unbecoming men called Christ's
Ministers to imagine, seeing the Foundation ( quicquid id est) of the Church,
and her faith, hope and obedience from the beginning of the world to this day,
is but one and not many; yea, as the Faith is one, and the Baptism one, and the
Temple and building one, and the Body one, and the Spirit one, and the Lord,
and God, and Father of all saints is one, so the Foundation is but one, what
ever it is, Ephesians. 4, 5, 6.

Or else secondly, if there be but one foundation for us and them to stand
upon, and that be the Apostles and Prophets themselves, or they Writings, then
Incidit in Scyllam, etc. the Apostles and Prophets must be supposed to be built
not upon Christ, but upon themselves, and their own Writings as to their faith,
and saving knowledge of the truth, or at least on the Writings one of another,
which is an Imagination as (if not more) absolutely absurd than the former, yet
of the two, I.O. having his liberty to make his choice, ex dieabus malis, of
those two evils seems to choose the latter, saying, page 7. that as far as their
personal concernments as Saints and believers lay in the Scriptures, and in
order to their saving knowledge of the truth, they studied the Writings and
Prophesies of one another.

I conclude then against I.O. that by that clause, the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, is not intended their Writings, as if they laid their
own Scriptures for the Foundation of the Church, and her faith, hope,
obedience, but that which the Apostles themselves were built upon together with
the whole Church or household of God, which could not be, nor was their own
Writings but Christ the Light

The Letter indeed is the foundation laid by I.O. and men of his mould of old,
for his Wheel in a Wheel, as he speaks, or his false Church, whose works like
his own run round on, and are found to have in them Wheel within Wheel; but as
for the true Church of the living God, which is the Wheel, that will turn the
worlds Wheels upside down, it never did, does, nor ever will acknowledge any
fallible letter, or mere transcribed Text, or any other thing to be the true,
great and blessed foundation of Truth, Faith, Hope, or Obedience, then Christ
Jesus, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; who was before it, now is,
and ever will be, when the letter shall be no more at all.

2. Argument whatsoever the Scripture it self lays down and testifies to be
the only true Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and of the whole Church
of God, and of her Faith, Hope, and Obedience, and of all Truth, that is the
only true foundation of all these things. But the Scripture it self lays down
and testifies Christ alone the Light, the living Word, and not it self to be
the only true Foundation of the things aforesaid; therefore Christ alone the
Light, Spirit, and inward living Word, that is nigh in the heart, and not the
Scripture it self is the only true Foundation of them.

The first and affirmative part of the minor is not denied by thee [as the
major cannot be] and if thou deny the second part of the minor which is
negative, and denies the Scripture to testify of it self in any place that its
the Foundation, then assign where the Scripture calls it self the Foundation,
or else own that it does not, and so that it is not the Foundation at all, much
less the truest, or the only one, as thou often intimatest, either expressly, or
in terms equivalent, it is [ Ep. p. 25 (...) not any means of standing out of
utter uncertainty about all sacred truth if the Heb punctation be invention;
also, p. 64, 65. not a truer Foundation for for faith to repose it self upon.]

3. Argument, if the Scripture be the foundation for the Church, and all her
Faith and Repentance to be founded and grounded upon, then either there was no
Foundation for it before the Scripture, or else they who lived before the
Scripture had one Foundation for their faith, and we another, and so
consequently there has been two Foundations for the one faith, or the one
Church or body of Christ, but there was a Foundation before the Scripture, and
there are not two Foundations of faith, one to that part of the body of Christ,
and of Gods building, that was before the Scripture, and another for that part
that is built since the Scripture, therefore the Scripture is not the
Foundation.

Argument 4. The Foundation of the faith must be something that is infallible,
firm, fixed, certain, stable, sure, and inalterable, as the light Spirit and
Word within only is, and Gods Foundation, 2 Timothy 2 19. the Foundation of God
sure to a Tittle for Error minimus in principio, for major in medio maximus in
fine, the least fault or error, and deviation in the principle, or Foundation
of any building grows greater toward the middle, and is greatest at the top, as
it is seen in a very Tower if the bottom or basis stands never so little awry
as is discernable, it is discerned more in the middle and much more still as it
ascends higher.

But the Scripture, letter, Hebrew, and Greek Texts (how ever I.O. pleads their
integrity in every Apex, point, tittle and iota) yet are [as I have showed
above more at large in answer to his long Tattle about the Tittles and points
and indentity of Lections of the letter] by his own confession mistaken and
mistranscribed in small things, yea and in some matters of more moment and
importance in the best transcribed Copies of the Original Text, therefore the
Text or letter of the Scripture cannot be a fit Foundation for the Churches
faith, but the spirit and Word within is only so. Psalm. 75.3. The earth, and
all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved faith Christ, the Word of God, I bear
up the Pillars of it, and that is the reason why the earth is so shaken as it
is, and reels to and fro, that it is removed as a cottage, and all helpers and
healers avail nothing, because they reject the corner stone, Christ the Word,
for if the Foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psalm. 11.3.
Isa. 24. 18, 19.

Each of which Arguments hold good against the letters being the Rule, the
light, the witness of God, the Gospel, the power of God to salvation, the only
means or way of coming to the saving knowledge of God, Word of God, and what
ever other high Titles I. O. intitles it by, as appears in their order.

That the Light or Word within, and not the Scriptures, are the Rule or Canon.

Another thing thou assertest of the Scripture is, that it is the only Rule of
the faith and obedience of Gods Church, p. 173. that it is (...) (...), that
more sure word of Prophecy to be attended to, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. not in its
self (for so it was as sure as sure could be) but in its giving out its
evidence to us then that great miracle of miracles, greater than which the
Apostles of Christ never did behold or hear, viz. That voice which came from
the most excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, which we have greater
security from, and by (according to Peter) then they had in, and by that
miraculous voice.

That Moses and the Prophets, which who so will not hear, will not be persuaded
to repent, though one arise to them from the dead, Luke 16.31.

That Word, Law, and Testimony mentioned, Isa. 8.20. according to which who
speaks not are said to be in the dark so that there is no light in them, by
which what every one says, be it what or whom it will, Church, or person, if
it be in, and about the things of God, concerning his will or worship, or our
obedience to him is to be tried.

That which we are sent to that which is, and is asserted to be the Rule and
standard, the touchstone of all speakings whatsoever, that that must speak
alone for its self, which must try the speaking of all, but its self, yea its
own also. See Tr. 1. c. 3 pertotum.

That which is the ordinary, unmovable, perfect and siable infallible Rule of
Gods worship, and our obedience so that there is no further need we should be
instructed with any other new, daily Revelations in the knowledge of God, and
our duties.

Yea the most perfect Rule that is given us of God, whereby to attain to
eternal salvation, so that after the completing of that which is called the
Canon of the Scripure ye believe and profess no new Revelations about the
common faith of the Saints, or the worship of God are either to be expected or
admitted as well such as are made Per spiritum aut lumen internum enthusiasmum
afflatum caelastem, colloquia Angelica ficta vel facta, etc. Ex. 3. s. 20, 21.
25, 28, 29.
by the Spirit or light within, or inward speculation, or heavenly inspiration
or speech of Angels to our instruction in the knowledge of God, and our duty in
order to our obtaining eternal salvation, which all are a vain, unprofitable,
false, uncertain, hazardous, and utterly, unnecessary means which the Fanatics
fain toward the knowledge of God and his will.

Yea that by which we are commanded to try and examine and prove all
Revelations, Visi^ns, Spirits, (God's no more excepted then the Devil's)
Dreams, inward appearances, or speaking, or prophesyings, within, or from
within, whether true or false, without difference or distinction, 1 Cor. 14.21.
1 These. 5.21. 1 John 4.1. Ex. 3. S 33. The only Rule of the faith and
obedience of Gods Church. Page 173. so Ex. 4. sect. 22.

Rep. In the handling of this head concerning the Scriptures being in the
nature of the Canon, Rule, or Standard to the Church of God, I say, in the
nature, use and office of a Canon (for as to the measure or bounds of your
Canon, I have elsewhere spoken to it I shall have to do with thee I. O. and
thee T. D. also, who both are as like one another in your ignorant invectives
against the Qua. as enemies to the Scripture, for not owning it to be what your
forefathers, and your selves have also ignorantly Canonized it into the name
of viz. The standing Rule of faith and life, as if one of you had been spit out
of the others mouth.

As for thy self I.O. having Ex. 3 sect. 25, 26. professed thy faith, or rather
fancy and opinion, that the Scripture is the only most perfect Rule of the
faith, and worship of God, thou stilest thy Teeological subsequent foolish
defense thereof, a proving of it against (...) the haters of the Scriptures, as
if all they that side not with thy false, weak, supportless suppositions about
the Scriptures, were presently to be condemned as enemies to them without any
more ado.

And as for thee T.D. thou stilest it a spitting out of vemome, and bringing in
of another Gospel, to deny the Scripture to be the Rule: Thou engagest me in a
public discourse about this Question, Whether the Scriptures are the Word of
God or no? and then when I owning the Word of God to be the Word of God,
publicly denied the Scripture that is the (...), the (...), the (...) or
Writing (not mentioning the paper or ink, that is the foolish phrase of thy
own inserting, to be the Word of God, in a shameful way of Tergiversation, thou
ran'st away from the Terms of thy Question, and never came near them any
more, but leftest quite another Question in its room, viz. Whether the matter
contained in the Writings, be the Rule of faith and life (as the Reader may see
in the 25, and 26. pages of thy first Pamphlet) Sir, You cannot believe us so
simple, surely, as to affirm the Scriptures in that sense the Word of God, but
we mean the matter contained in the Writing, whether that be the Rule of faith
and life? Which matter written of, and the Writing or Scripture are two
different matters (say I still) as the Lanthorn and the Candle, or the light
contained therein, so that thy doings T.D. that day was altogether as silly a
piece of business, as if one that had challenged another to dispute it openly
with him, that the Lanthorn is the Candle or the Light being come as T.D. did,
(...), with much pompous show or fancy upon the public place of hearing before
hundreds to that purpose, should say to his Antagonist on this wise, Sir, You
cannot believe me to be so simple, surely, as to affirm the Lanthorn to be the
candle or light, but I mean the candle or light contained in the Lanthorn,
whether that be a Rule for men to walk by in a dark night or no? a Question
which was never denied by his Antagonist at all; for neither I, nor any Qua.
that I know, deny the Word of God to be the Word of God, which is contained in
the Scripture, or that the Scripture or Writing declares thereof, any more then
we deny the Candle and Light to be a Candle and a Light, which is contained in
the Lanthorn; but that the Writing it self is that Word of God written of in
it, or that the Lanthorn is the 'candle or the light,' that is in the Lanthorn,
at least that the Word of God is the proper name of the Scripture (as to his
shame, I. O. has undertaken to prove in Latin against the Qua. of whom he
says they understand him not in that tongue) this I, and the Qua. do deny
against him and thee, and all men, for our denial of which dream of our
benighted Doctors and Divinet, we have been yet damned down through the false
suggestions, and silly insinuations of their busy ear-wigs the Priests by all
Parliaments and Powers that have yet appeared at the Helm in this Nation, and
deemed unmeet to be let into the lists of that liberty of conscience allowed to
other men, and doomed out as deniers of the fundamentals of Religion. Thus T.D.
[ As the King of Spain and forty thousand men, Went up a hill, and then came
down again.] Gathered his Forces and Fellow Soldiers together, pitching his own
day of battle; betokening to obtain some eminent victory over the Qua. and as
soon as he came into the field laid down his Arms, and confessed he had no
quarrel against the Qua. as to the Question he was to dispute about, as stated
and held by them; so like some Bettle he flies aloft with a humming noise into
the air, and at last flaps suddenly down into a piece of Cowdung.

Nevertheless T.D. that thou might for very shame seem to do something for
the Scripture, even for the Book it self, and Letter of it, as well as for the
good matter therein contained, since thou wast come upon the stage on that
account, after some parley that was held a while between my self and thee about
the Latitude and Limits of your supposed Rule in which thy pitiful poor put
offs of the proofs by me urged against thee, are elsewhere discovered; thou
rouzest up thy self into a new proposal of thy Question in these Terms, p. 28.
viz. Whether the Hooks commonly called the Old and New Testament, were
appointed by God for a standing Rule of faith and life, which I denying the
Books to be, thou reply on this wise, viz Now you have spit out your venom,
which I knew you were big with, and I will say to you (as the Apostle) if any
man bring any other Gospel then what we have received, let him be accursed: To
which when I replied, I am sure the Gospel you preach will never bring men to
heaven. Thou relatest thy self replying thus, viz. Then friends you hear his
acknowledgement, and how well he deserves the curse denounced against him.

By all which passages the Read may observe these things, 1. That thou judge
the Scriptures to be not only the standing Rule of faith and life, but also to
be the Gospel. 2. That there is no other Gospel designed by God as the standing
Rules, then the Scriptures. 3. That he that owns any thing else besides the
Scriptures to be the Rule or the Gospel, and he that denies the Gospel, the
Ministers of the letter preach, which is but the Letter, and the Scripture, to
be unable to bring men to heaven [though I intended by those words, viz. the
Gospel you preach, the false Doctrine, and unholy matter ye hold forth when ye
deny the Light, and plead a necessity of sinning in this life, and hold men to
be justified and guiltless, while under the guilt of Murder and Adultery, and
damn it as a Doctrine of Devils, to affirm any perfect purging from sin in this
world, and such like, and not the Scriptures, which ye are far enough from
preaching truly the very letter of] is big with, and spits out venom against
the Scriptures, and brings another Gospel, then that ye have received, and to
be held accursed, and well deserves the curse denounced against him by the
Apostle, Gal. 1.8. And in all these matters thou art coincident with I.O. who
[in substance] asserts with thee the very same, alluding to the self-same
place, Gal. 1. in proof of the Scriptures to be the Gospel, and the only
perfect rule of faith and worship, Ex. 3. s. 26.


Rep. But alas poor, simple, silly, unlearned and ignorant men, ye may curse
them that bring another Gospel, then that ye have received indeed, who never at
all yet received the true Gospel, which the Galatians received from Paul, who
was not a Minister of the Letter, to show which is all your Gospel, but of the
spirit, and of the light which only, while the dead letter, cannot do it,
saves, and brings to heaven, and gives the Life, which Light and spirit is the
old Gospel which we bring and minister to men, while you, for your mere Letters
sake, alter and despise it; I say ye may curse in Paul's words, but Paul's Curse
will come upon you, which being causelessly denounced against us by you, cannot
come on us.

Now before I come to urge any new Arguments against the Scripture or Letters
being in the Authority of the only standing Rule, as both T.D. p. 16. of his
second Toy, and I.O. p. 18. assert it to be, concluding that there is no other
Rule or measure of judging and determining any thing about the saving Doctrine
of the Gospel but the Writing, the Scriptures I shall take some account of some
of T.D's. and I. O's. weak rushy kind of reasonings, by way of Answer to such
Arguments as are urged by us against their reasonless suppositions in that
behalf.

Beginning first with T.D's Jejune Replies to what Reasons were rendered by us
to him against his Dream, that there is no other standing Rule of faith and
life but the Scriptures, and so proceeding to an Examination of his, and I.
O's. excentrick exhibitions of the Scriptures being the only Rule thereof
interchangeably as I see occasion.

The first Argument urged against thee T.D. at the third Public Dispute (as
thy self relatest it in p. 28, 29. of thy first Pamphlet) to prove the
Scripture not the only Rule of faith and life was this.

Arg. 1. If there be another standing Rule then the Scripture is not it. But
there is another standing Rule, therefore the Scripture is not it.

The minor thou deniest, and say expressly that there is no other standing
Rule, but the Scripture, which minor my proof of which thou rendrest as weakly
as well as thou can, I proved in these very terms, viz.

If the Scripture it self sends us to another, viz. the spirit as our Rule,
then it self is not the only Rule: But it self does so; therefore it self is
not it.

The minor of this being denied by thee was proved thus,

That which the Scripture bids us walk in, by, after, or according to, that it
sends to, but the Scripture it self bids us walk in, by, a fur, or according to
the spirit, therefore the Scripture sends us to another besides it self as our
Rule, and consequently is not (it self, the only standing Rule of faith and
life; in proof of this minor, Gal. 5.16. was cited, and some other Scriptures
which thou leavest out (whether as one loath to tell too much of that truth
that makes against thee or no, I will leave to thy conscience, and not say, but
some may likely think so for all that (as namely Gal. 6.16. besides I know not
whether I instanced in any other, which I shall here take that leave which in
that confused crowd of conference thou strovest (as thou say thy self) to
out-word us by, for fear of being confuted, thou would not then grant me, to
urge by way of addition at this present, viz. Romans 8.1, 4, 5, 13. Phil. 3.15
and to open as I see occasion, in order to the service of that Truth I am now
pleading against thee.

Nevertheless it were not for the Truths sake that it may more fully appear,
there is little need to say any thing more to thee than thou thy self have set
down, in thy Reply to that Text, viz. This I say, walk in, or rather to, or
according to the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh (for it
is (...)(...), the dative case, which without the preposition's is elsewhere
Engli^ht by, or according to viz. Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.15. (...) (...), as many
as walk according to this Rule, let us walk by the same Rule) is so jejune and
wretched, and poor, and miserably blind and naked, being no other then this,
viz. that phrase does denote the priniple, not the rule of our obedience in
that place, where if by principle thou intendest the Foundation, which the word
principles is sometimes used as synonomous unto, Heb. 5.12. with Heb. 6.1.
where (...) and (...), are in effect same.
then thou quite overthrowest I.O. and helpest me against him however, but that
is no news, for beside that each of you often contradicts himself, ye are, for
all your siding to vindicate, the same Points of false Doctrine against the
Qua. so frequently sound contradicting each other, that in order to the
consutation of you both, a man may find contradiction enough either in each of
your Writings within themselves, or in the Writing of one of you unto the
other; and so it is in this case, for I.O. owns no other Principle or Foundation
of discovery of Divine Truth, then the Scriptures, for the Faith to stand on,
p. 18. But thou ownest the Spirit to be the Principle of obedience: 2. If the
phrase denotes the Principle only, and not the Rule as it does not, for it
denotes both) yet the other places mentioned do denote more expressly the Light
and Spirit, [and not the Letter] to be the Rule; which said Light and Spirit,
that is the Power of God, to say the truth, is both the Principle upon which
all true Faith is founded, and is to stand, 1 Cor 2.5. in the movings of which,
obedience is to be acted; and also the Rule according to which as it moves,
leads, guides, directs, impowers (and no otherwise) all things that are at all,
are to be both done and believed.

And no less do all those phrases however denote, viz Romans 8. 1.4.5.13. Who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit;, then a being taught, led,
guided, ruled, directed by, as well as moved, acted, and enabled from the
Spirit so or so to believe or do; for it is (...) which Praeposition though
joined with the Genitive, signifies contra, against, as Gal. 5. The flesh
lusts, (...) against the Spirit; yet with the accusative is secundum after
and according to; so that the Light and Spirit of Christ within, is not only
the Foundation upon which, the Principle from which, but also that in which the
Standard, Measure, Guide, and Rule of direction, by, after, or according to
which the Saints are to walk, believe, and do whatever they do in order to
their pleasing of God, and standing uncondemned in his sight.

And no less then so, does Phil. 3.16. import, where Paul to the Saints at
Philippi, with the Bishop and Deacons, according to their several statures and
degrees of growth in the Light and Spirit of Christ, wishes all that were
perfect (as every one is that is faithful to his own measure) to be so minded
as himself; yet leaving every one to believe, and judge by his own measure of
Light, not binding any one to his, till God himself should reveal things as he
knew them, to those that were yet otherwise minded: Nevertheless (quoth he)
whereunto we have already attained, let us walk, or steer our course by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing: Which same Rule, or same thing that he
wills all, though their measures of Light may be different, to mind and walk
by, He that shall dream it to be the Letter of the Scripture without, and not
the inward Light, Grace, and Spirit of Christ, a measure and manifestation of
which is according to the measure of the gift of Christ distributing to every
one severally, as he will, (to some more, some less, some one, some two, yet to
every one, one talent, at least) given to every man to profit withal, to
improve, trade with, and thrive by: Matthew. 25.15. Romans 12.3.6. 1 Cor. 12. 7.11.
Ephesians. 4.7, 8. compared with Psalm. 68.18. Gifts to the Rebellious also, 1 Pet.
4.10, 11. I shall deem him to be more deservedly denominated a Doter, then a
Doctor in Divinity, or a true Teacher of the things of God, and the Gospel,
seeing the so-call'd Scripture-Rule or Canon, so much counted on, as that no
other, neither inward light, nor Word, nor Revelations of the Spirit, Post
completum, ejus Canonem, as J.O. says, are at all to be admitted to the Name,
Title, Honor and Authority of a Rule to the Church, according to J.O's. and
T.D's. Principles, was not yet bounded, nor completed, nor come to its full
Coronation, Canonization, Consecration, and Consignation, by any Clerical
Convocation of Divines (as it did afterward) while Paul wrote thus to the
Philippians, there being more of his own and other holy men's Writings penned
after this, besides the Revelation of John, which J.O. on his own head, p. 18.
calls the Close of the immediate Revelation of Gods will in that way of
Writing. And whether the Philippians had seen any Scripture at all, much less
any of the Books ye call the New Testament, more then this that Paul now wrote,
when he wrote this to them, (unless it may be conjectured from Ph. 3.1. that he
himself wrote to them before, to the same purpose as now, and therefore says,
to write the same things to you, is safe for you) is questionable, and more
then J.O. and T.D. with both their heads laid together, are able to prove;
therefore the same Rule he bids them all walk by, according to their respective
measures, and the same thing he bids them mind, was not the Scripture, but the
Light and Spirit, which, having revealed something to them, would, as they
walked perfectly by the Rule thereof, reveal all things to them in due time,
that he knew, and they were ignorant of: For though the Rule appointed,
designed, and authorized by God for all men to mind as one man, and to walk by
from the beginning of the World to this day, is but one, i. e. the Light, Word,
and Spirit in the heart and conscience; yet the Degrees in which it is
dispensed are different; and every one that is found faithful in the
improvement of what is committed to him, be it little or more, is crowned with
the just account of Faithfulness, V prightnesse, and Perfection, and title to
the joy, and right to have more committed to him: Yea, as if any man walk up to
what he has already attained, to the understanding of, the same shall have
more abundance, If any will do his will [saith Christ] i.e. so far as he knows,
the same shall know of the Doctrines that are taught, whether they are of God,
or whether the Teachers thereof speak of themselve,, Joh. 7.15.16. Such shall
discern, and distinguish, and see, and grow into the Spirit of Judgment and of
a sound mind, and into a clear sight of the mind of God, who manifests himself
to such, as he does not to the world, who receive not the Spirit of Truth,
which he gives to all in some measure, to convince them of sin, righteousness
and judgment, and so to guide them out of sin, but that some resist him; but
to such as own truth, as receive him, and love and come to the Light, which
^evil ones hate, loving flesh and darkness more then it, because it reproves
their ill deeds, that their deeds may be manifested more and more, and come to
be wrought in God, he leads into all truth; while such proud Pharisaical
Praters, as Vniversity-bred Scholars, stubborn Students, and rebellious
Rabbis, Scripture-searching Scribes, that keep scribbling, and preaching, and
disputing all their days, as if they did delight to know Gods ways, enquiring
after the Ordinances of Justice in order [as they pretend] to the knowledge of
what is to be done; and yet in what they know naturally, as brute beasts, by a
habit of reading Chapter and Verse, as as a Horse that is versed in a way to
the Pasture he is used to run in, in those very things they corrupt themselves,
saying to God, when he tells them any troublesome truth, Depart from us, we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways; ^^taining the truth in unrighteousness
that is told them within by the Light of God himself in their own hearts, not
receiving the love of it that they may be saved; having pleasure in
unrighteousness, and no pleasure in the Truth; such shall have at last that
they have taken away from them, and in the just Judgment of God be blasted and
blinded, and given over to strong delusion to believe lies, that they may be
damned: Nevertheless, not as a Principle only, but as a Rule of obedience, to
such as truly love her, the Light within, the Spirit of God, the Word nigh in
the heart, and Wisdom not only with, but without the Letter, ever was, is and
will be profitable to direct, Eccl. 10 10.

And no less then this that the Spirit is the standing Rule of Faith and Life
to the Church, as well as the Principle thereof, does that Gal. 6.8.16. evince,
where the Apostle having spoken so much before in chapter 5. and the ^. verse of
this 6. of the lustings of the spirit against the flesh, or evil spirit in us
that lusts to envy, of walking according to the Spirit, living according to
the Spirit, being led by the Spirit, of sowing to the Spirit, the crop of which
is the fruit of the Spirit, the everlasting life, the new Creature, while the
Crop reaped from the fulfilling the lustings of the flesh is more and more
Works of the flesh, and corruption to death and condemnation, at least adds by
way of encouragement, that the walkers by the Spirit might not not be weary of
well doing, thus much, viz. that so many as walk according to this Rule; which
Rule is not the Scripture, as the Divines and Doctors citing that place, as J.
O. does twice over at least, viz. Ex. 3. S. 26. Ex. 4 S. 22. to that purpose,
do ignorantly divine, but the Spirit, the walking in, and after which, is so
often hinted at above, and the Light within, which, and not the Letter without,
makes manifest both the Works of the flesh, and darkness, and the Fruits of
the Spirit, and the light: For the Letter indeed does declare, that the works
of the Flesh, and the fruits of the Spirit, are manifest; but it declares also,
that that which does manifest them both, is the Light, by which also they were
manifested before the Letter was: Which Letter likewise does de jure declare
what is to be done, and not done; but only the Light, de facto, what is done,
and what is not done, of the Mind and Will of God, thereby inwardly, nigh, and
more immediately revealed and declared, as it is ad extra only, and more
mediately and afar off by the Letter: For all things that are reproved or
approved, are [as so] made manifest by the Light the Letter came from: And
whatsoever does primarily and principally make manifest good and evil, right
and wrong, crooked and straight, truth and falsehood, simplicity and deceit it
self, and darkness it self, and all false spirits, sound Doctrine and seducing,
is that Light and Spirit which comes from God, and shines more or less in all
men's hearts: This as it is the Principle, as J.O. foolishly affirms the Letter
only is, p. 18. or means of discovery; so it, and not the Writing only, as he
there blindly writes, is also the Rule, or measure of judging and determining
about the saving Doctrine of the Gospel; this is, as the Light of the outward
world is in it, the discovery of it self, and of all things else in their
proper appearances: This is certum, Rectum, Regula, quae est mensura sui and
obliqui: Hitherto are we sent; this, and not the Letter (as I.O. childishly
asserts, p. 57.) is asserted to be the Rule and Standard, the Touchstone of all
speaking whatsoever, that must speak alone for it self, and try the speaking
of all but it self, yea its own also.

By all which it is evident how the Light and Spirit is designed by God to be
the unchangeable standing-Rule of Faith and Life, and the Churches Directory in
all Divine Doctrines, to be believed and practiced, and not the Letter of the
Scripture, at least not the Letter only, which is the matter very stiffly
affirmed, and stickled for by J.O. and T.D. the latter of which stands up to
vindicate it in these terms, see T.D'. second Pamphlet, p. 16. that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, and the Rule of Faith and Life, and that there
is no other standing-Rule but the Scriptures: The former in these, If every
man's private Light, (so he floutingly calls that particular measure of that
public Light of Christ, which is one, and the same in all) be the Rule of
yiedling obedience unto God, then so many men, so many Rules; but the Divine
Canon is but only one; and that the holy Scripture is that only Rule, is
abundantly shown, quoth J.O. before Si oujusque lumen privatum sit Regula Deo
obedientiam prae standi tum tot Regulas habe^nus, quot homines ut unicus est
(...) Divinus, Gal. 6.16. Ephesians. 3.16. Isa. 8.20. Sacram Scripturam hanc Regulam
esse abundeantea demonstratum est. Ex. 4. S. 22.
In proof of which saying the Rule is but one, J.O. quotes that Gal. 6.16.
which speaks not of the Scripture at all: And Ephesians. 3.16. which speaks expressly
of the Spirit of God, as the next verse does of Christ the Word, which we
confess is the Rule, but neither the one nor the other of the Scripture, Isa.
S. 20. which speaks of the Law and Testimony, which are the Light and Spirit,
as I shall show anon: For this place is three times at least alluded to by J.O.
to the like little purpose, and not the Letter of the Scripture.

Obj. And if any say, But is not the Sripture profitable to direct, yea for
Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, able
to make wise to salvacion, to make a man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished, or
as the word is, perfected into all good works, according to 2 Timothy 3.15, 16,
17. and so to be the only Rule, Canon, Standard, Touchstone in all cases?

Rep. This place is insisted upon, or quoted three or four times by I. O. To
whom I say, howbeit there are (...) holy Scriptures, as I have said elsewhere,
that are not written with Ink and Pen, nor engraven in stones; but with the
Finger and Spirit of the living God upon the fleshly Tables of men's hearts;
which make such as Timothy was, who knew that spirit in himself, spoke of Job
32.8. and that inward Writing and inspiration of the Almighty that only gives
the understanding, which are most profitable for Doctrine, Correction, Reproof,
Instruction in Righteousness; and, without any outward Scripture, to perfect
the man of God, fit and furnish him (as no outward Scriptures can possibly do
(without these) for any, much less for every) good work, which inward
Scripture, in which holy men read the Gospel before 'twas ever written
outwardly with Ink and Pen, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles
through Faith in Christ the Light, preached the Gospel four hundred years
before your Scripture, Canon, or Rule ad extra, was ever written. Howbeit I
say, There is a Scripture ad intra, that ye read little in, testified to, and
talked of by your external Text, ye only talk for 2 Cor. 3. Yet to J. O. I
grant the outward Scripture, and that in its integrity, so far as free from
corruption by mis-transcription, and mis-translation, to be holy, just, good,
useful and profitable for all the things specified in the Text of Paul to
Timothy, when read and understood in that Light, Wisdom and Spirit that gave it
out by those holy men, which only knows the Mystery of its own mind and
meaning therein, and reveals it 'also to Babes and simple honest hearts, that
come at' fools to it, looking to the Lord alone for wisdom, out of whose mouth
comes that knowledge and understanding, whereby the Scripture is seen as to the
spirituality and substance of it when the plain things of it are hid from the
wise and prudent that furfeit with their own conceited science, and lean to
their own Animal understanding, and in that give their several senses and
sentences on it, for the natural; or as the word is, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. (...)
the Animal man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, not the hidden
wisdom of God, which none of the Princes of this world know, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8.
etc. which in a mystry, or mere Riddle to their degenerate reason, is uttered
in the very outward Scripture, neither can the animal man by his wisdom from
beneath (for all his bitter envying and strife within himself against all that
oppose him, wherein he glories and lies against the truth, the fruit of which
envy is confusion and every evil work, which wisdom is but earthly, sensual,
(...)
Animal, (...)
devillisbly deceitful, Jam. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.) know the things of God, for
they are spiritually discerned, and by the spiritual man only, that discerns
and judges all, and is falsely judged by all, though truly discerned by none
that are beneath him.

The outward Scripture I say is profitable to such as Timothy was, to men of
God to make them, who are wise in the Spirit, wiser and wiser through their
faith in the light to their own and others salvation, and to furnish such a
Minister as Timothy was, who knows when, and (being in the Spirit) how, and how
far forth to use it for every good work in his Ministry: And such as are full
of might and power first by the Spirit of the Lord upon them, as Micah was,
Mic. 3. and as Apollo was, are mighty also in the Scripture, and furnished
mightily to confound the Scripture-searching Scribes, and all gainsayers of
the Light, as they were in their times.

So that we deny not the Scriptures ad extra to be many ways useful,
profitable in their place and time, where they are to be read, as they are not,
in so much as the tenth part of the world, and where they are read in the
light, and by them, who live in that Light, that gave them forth, which are not
the hundredth part of those, that usually read and search them; but will all
this prove them to be what I.O. and T.D. contend so stiffly to have them be.
viz. in that high Authority of the Rule, nay the only most perfect standing
Rule of all true belief and holy life, before the very light and spirit of God
they had their very original supreme being from, through the hands of holy men,
as but subordinate instruments in their first purity as writings, except that
little that was pend by God himself, which we now have not? which Scriptures
yet as to the being they now have, are handed to us from no higher principle
then the transcription of mere fallible, and as I.O. says, un-inspired men?

Ab sit imaginatio, let the thoughts hereof be far from us that the Scripture
is the only Rule, for if we should grant it to be (so far as truly transcribed
in the Copies of the Original) a Rule at all, or a secondary Rule, which name
of Rule is more than it any where calls it self by, yet the prime, most perfect
Rule it is not, much less is it the only Rule to the Church or any men; and
though we are as forward as any, on a due account, to own the profitablenss of
the very letter, as it declares of the words of truth and uprightness, and the
Doctrine that is according unto godliness, and to own its great usefulness, as
to the purposes premised, and so affirm that the dead letter, so far as not
depraved from its primitive purity, does as truly answer and hold proportion
with the light, and living word, as the shadow does with the substance, the
life-less picture with the living person it represents, and as the voice, which
is Imago verbi the Image of the Word, with the Word it is the Image of, or the
Echo, which is the Image of the voice, does with the voice it answers to,
insomuch that as Quae convenient in aliquo tertio santidem, what holds measure
or weight, and keeps correspondency or proportion with a third thing, that
agrees with the standard or sealed Canon, agrees also with the standard it
self; so whose life squares truly and substantially with the letter convenes
with the light and spirit it imediately issued out from; and he that lives and
speaks perfectly and adaequately according to the Scripture, so far speaks and
lives according to, and not besides the light and spirit, which the letter
requires man to live, believe, and walk in and by, as neither does or can he
err from the letter if he had never heard, read, or seen it, who answers the
measure of the light and spirit that is lent him to live by; yet for all this,
as T.D. gives this reason for his untrue imagination why this part of the
inspired Scripture you have only is the only Rule, and not any Sermons or
private religious discourses, which have, the same common ends with the
Scriptures, no nor yet any other writings but those ye have, if we could prove
and produce (as assuredly we shall anon) any legitimate ones of Divine
inspiration, though otherwise as useful and profitable as those ye have, and
agreeing therewith, viz. because God did not give order, quoth he, for the one,
as he did, thinks he, for the other; and there is no other Scripture appointed
of God to be a Rule of faith and manners, but what is bound up in the Bible
(and where he appointed that we must take account of you by and by) for besides
such inspiration to make a Rule is necessary Gods appointment of a writing to
that end, says he, God thought that sufficient which we have, therefore we can
look upon no more with such regard at we do upon that. See T.D's first
Pamphlet, p. 26, 27.43,44. and of his second Pamphlet p. 17, 18. The
difference, quoth he, is in Gods arbitrary dispensation; so do I give this
reason of our true assertion, that howbeit the Scripture is profitable, and may
be useful and called [as by it self yet it no where is] a Rule as it agree's
with the light and spirit, where it is not adulterated by man's
mistransciptions, mistranslations, misconstructions.

Yet the Canon or most perfect and only standing Rule it is not because God did
never Authorize or appoint it so to be, but [to retort back to T.D. in his own
vain phrase] thought the measure of his light and spirit every one has from
himself sufficient to make a standard of, besides whose inspiration of the said
Scripture to make a Rule is necessary Gods appointment of a Writing to such an
end, the difference lies in God arbitrary dispensation, as well as in the
excellent pre-eminence of the Spirit and Light above the Letter, who would have
that to be the Rule, Canon, Standard, Touchstone, which was so from the
beginning of the world, two thousand years before the letter was, even to this
day, even the Spirit, then which there can be no other designed by him to, that
end, if I.O's words be true, Ex. 4. s. 22. who says Vnicus est (...) divinus,
the Divine Canon or Rule, is but one, not more, then which also there is no
other mentioned in the Scripture by that name of the Rule, but the Light and
Spirit (as I have showed above) out of those places where the Rule is spoken
of, and if there be, let I.O. or T.D. assign where, and hereupon, as he says
in the other case, so conclude I here in this, we can look upon none but the
Light and Spirit, upon no letter with such regard as the only Rule, as we do
upon that.

So then notwithstanding T.D's impertinent, unimportant, utterly untrue Reply
to this Argument, That we are to walk by is our Rule, but the Spirit is that
the Scripture says we are to walk by, Gal. 5.16. therefore the Spirit is the
Rule, which Reply runs, viz. that phrase denotes the principle not the Rule of
our obedience in that place, the Argument stands firm over the head of it; for
though it betoken the principle also, yet not only, nor exclusively of the
Rule, but rather the Rule more evidently, and much more eminently than the
other, yea that the Spirit is the principle of all true obedience is professed
positively by us, who own nothing to be truly done in way of true obedience
unto God, nor the letter, but what is done from the principle, power, motion,
assistance, and ability of the Spirit of God, or that is done without the
Spirits in-dwelling; yet in that place considered together with the rest above
cited, it is most clear that the Apostle speaks of the Spirit principally as of
the Rule by which we are to walk [and the word walk imports no less than the
act of proceeding or going on] and not the principle, original, or primum
mobile, as I may say, from which we are to begin to act and move in way of
obedience unto God.

But as unanswerable as T.D's. answer is to our Argument, yet it serves us very
well to prove him a self-contradicter, as he and I.O. also are in multitudes of
more matters besides, and in that it is as answerable as may to his wonted
self; for let but any reasonable Reader observe, as it follows p. 29. of his
first Pamphlet what T.D. says next of all to this passage of the Spirits being
the principle, that is, the original or beginning of our obedience from which
as being the primum movens and Auxilians, beforehand moving and assisting, we
are after to obey, and he shall see how he overthrows it himself in his own
most immediately ensuing speech; for howbeit he says the Spirit is the
principle of our obedience, which is as much as to say, that in which we first
walk whose assistance must be antecedent to our true walking according to the
letter, which is not denied by us, yet when we say the same with him he unsayes
his own saying again, rather then he will side with us, for whereas I said, as
his own self there relates, that the Spirit is antecedent to the letter, so
that none tan walk in the letter, till they walk in the spirit: he replies
thus, viz. The spirit is subsequent to the letter, in respect of the assistance
and ability which he gives to obedience; and whereas you affirm, quoth he, That
none can walk in the letter till they walk in the spirit, if walking in the
spirit be meant of special assistance, which is as much as to say, if by that
phrase of walking in the Spirit, you mean the Spirits being the prinriple of
our obedience, it is false, for many walk in many things according to the letter
without the spirits in dwelling* as Paul while a Pharisee, was touching the
righteousness of the Law blameless, Psa. 3.6. in which, beside the rounds he
runs in, and the contradiction to himself above, T.D. says false, for though
none walk according to the letter in truth, and as to the spiritual obedience
it calls for, without the Spirits in-being and assistance, and power; as the
Principle from which they must so walk, for howbeit Paul walked according to
the righteousness of the Law, interpreted in sensu Pharisaico, according to the
Pharisees outside glosses on it, who saw not into the marrow, mystery and
spirituality of it, and was zealous of God, as to the literal observation of
many things, yet till the Law which is the light, and spiritual came to him who
was in his carnal condition, and showed him sin in the lust, of which Christ
expounds the Law, Matthew. 5, he kept not the Tetter as to the spiritual import
and true intent and utmost meaning of the spirit and mind Christ expressed
therein to the spiritual understanding, though not to the natural, but
abstained only from outward gross acts of sin, and in his blind zeal
persecuted the Church, as ye in your wild-braind zial do at this day.

The Spirit is the principle from which we are to walk, and with ut which we
cannot walk according to the letter, yet, to go round again, many walk
according to the letter without the Spirits in-dwelling* So pervenire ad summum
nisi ex principiis nemo potest; Pervenire ad summm sine principiis aliquis
potest. This is the sum of T.Ds. Doctrine.

Besides if the Spirit be the principle only that men begin to believe and obey
from, and not the Rule according to which they go on in believing and obeying,
then it seems with thee faith is to be begun and begotten, and born by the
Spirit, but kept, preserved, and nourished up to perfection by the letter,
which is a Doctrine of deep dotage and deceit, for it is the Spirit of Christ,
and the light that is both the Creator and Preserver, the Author and finisher
of the faith, insomuch that I may truly, and do here justly cry out against you
blind, bewitching broachers, and your blind bewitched believers of it, as Paul
on the Galatians, I marvel that ye should be so sottishly departed and
degenerated from the simplicity of the primitive Gospel so plainly declared in
the very letter it self, which asserts the Light, Spirit and Word within to be
both the principle and the Rule. O ye foolish Prophets and foolish People who
has bewitched you that ye should be so reprobate as to the knowledge of the
truth? Are ye so foolish as to fancy that when men have once begun in the
Spirit, they must be preserved in their faith, and regulated and made perfect
by their fleshly attendences to the Letter? that the Vniversi^ies and Ministers
merely of it, and not of the Spirit, are so lost about, and wrangling about,
that to this day they are not agreed about the integrity of its Text? They that
ministed the spirit among men at first, and were even by the very letter they
wrote, Ministers by whom men believed in the light, did they call them so much
to the heeding or hearing of the letter themselves wrote, as to the hearing of
the Word of faith they preached and testified to both in their Writings, and by
Word of mouth? even that which before they wrote to them at all was nigh in
their heart, and in their mouth that they might do it? Tell me ye that desire
to be under the teachings of the letter only, not the light, do you not hear
the letter telling of another Rule besides it self, which it self does only
point to? does not the letter teach you the Spirit and light is both the
principle, and principal means also of discovery of right and wrong, as is
showed above? does the letter part the business of our obedience, as your party
colored discourses thereof would seem to make it do, between it self, and the
Spirit? or say any where that the Spirit is the principle, but the letter it
self the Rule of our obedience? that the spirit creates, and the letter
preserves faith, as T.D. dreamingly divines? says it not that the Spirit is
both?

And yet, O the muddin^ss (not to say madness) of our now Ministers! Another
while again even within the space of one page, behold O ye wandering wonderers,
and wondering w^nderers after these vain men, and their whisling
Butterfly-businesses that would seem wise though they are but as wild Asses
col^s, and ye shall see T.D. who affirms the spirit to be the Principle, and
that which creates faith, and the letter the Rule that prese^ves it, affirming
the letter to be both, i.e. not only the only Rule of it but the Principle of
it also, and ascribing (in these words p. 28. of his first, as also in the 17.
page of his second, God did not intend, nor give order for them, i.e. for more
writings than we have in our Bibles to be the Rule, but has assured us as much
as is sufficient to create and preserve faith in the Gospel we have) both the
first being, begetting and beginning of faith to the Scripture; as also I.O.
(who jumps with him in one, as they do together in most things) in these words,
Ex. 3. s. 39. Not only the begetting of faith, but also the building up in it
while we live here is the end of the Scripture Non tantum ingeneratio fidei
sed, et in ea dum spiritum hunc ducimus aedifitio finis est Scripturae.
.

What more is uttered by T.D. as to this head of the Scriptures being the only
rule, is in answer to this Argument was urged against him as himself relates
it, but to disadvantage p. 29.30. of his first Pamph.) at the dispute on this
wise: If the Rule of faith and life was before the Scripture was, then the
Scripture is not the Rule etc. but the Rule was before the Scripture,
therefore, etc.

To which said Answer of T.D's is no other than a giving of the whole cause in
question between us, viz. whether the Scripture, i.e. the Writing or Letter is
the Rule or no? sor quoth T.D.) Your Argument concludes nothing against us, for
we assert the matier contained in the Scripture is a standing Rule, your
Argument proves but that there was a Rule before this Writing; we grant that
God revealed himself by Visions, Dreams: Since the Gospel preached to Adam
there has not been any increase of Truths, Quoad essentiam, sed tantum quoad
explicationem ( as the Learned speak of the Articles of our faith) the manner
of conveyance is different then and now, but the matter or doctrines conveyed,
still the same.

Rep. If this conclude nothing against you for as much as ye own doctrine or
matter only contained in, and declared by the Scripture, and not the letter to
be the Rule, how conclusive you outcries are against the Qua. as that they are
denyers of the Scripture, a Fool may feel, since they own the holy doctrine and
matter in the Scripture, which is the Light, Spirit, and Word in the heart to
be the Rule as your selves do, and so to have been also before the Scripture
was, though they deny the mere Writing to be the Rule, which with your selves
is not the matter conveyed, but merely the manner of conveyance, not the
essential truth it self, but only the form of its explication, which manner of
conveyance or form of explication, your selves it seems do deny here to be the
Rule as well as we, with us asserting only the matter, truth, or doctrine
contained and conveyed in the Writing so to be.

If ye assert no more than the truth, doctrine, or matters contained in the
Scriptures to be the Rule, which matters thou thy self, T.D. p. 30, 31. of thy
first Pamph. say, is that Word of faith the Apostles preached, which was the
Word, we assert to be the Rule, that is nigh in the heart, Romans 10 and dare not
assert your selves the mere letter or Scripture so to be, I trow, wherein
differ you from the Quae. whom you quarrel with as deniers of the Scriptures?
Will you never be at quiet with the Qua. but quarrelling against them, when
they affirm the truths, wherein your selves assent to them, as much as when
they deny the untruths, wherein ye dissent from them? Will you allow them
neither to say the sound doctrines which your selves are forced to confess to,
nor to gainsay the errors and false doctrines, which ye would fain force you
false faith of upon them? ye assert no more, but that the matter or doctrine
conveyed, and truth explicated therein, which is the light, spirit, or living
Word, it self, is the Rule, as thou say here, so denying the letter,
writing, or mere Text to be it; we affirm nor more, nor less, yet ye own and
justify your selves as owners, and deny, and judge us as deniers as of of the
Scriptures: Ye challenge us to dispute it against us that the Scripture is the
Word of God, the only Rule, etc. when we meet you before hundreds to that end,
you confess with us, as Christopher Fowler did at Reading, T.D. at Sandwich,
and I.O. does in his Declartion, or Latin Divinity Disputations, Vbi verbum
Dei locis paene innumeris praedicari promulgari, multiplicari, recipi enarratur
sanctissima ista veritas, seu materia scrip^: rarum, non scriptura forma^iter
considirata tenditur Ex. 1. s. 28. In cord nostro est scriptura non formaliter
quatenus scripta sed quatenus divinam veritatemcontinet atque exhibet non
respectu literae scriptae sed veritatis divinae in ea contentae.
that you mean not the Scripture formally considered, the Letter, or Text it
self ye talk for, not the Writing, but the holy matter and doctrine contained,
held forth testified to therein the Word in the heart, of which we say its a
Light, a Rule, denying the letter only so to be; yet the same truth, when ye
tell it, is the truth, when we tell it as a lie: Ye venture upon the open stage
against us a vile persons in our Tenets about the Scriptures, when ye are there
ye verefie the very self-same truth we vindicate against you, and say with us
the Scripture or Writing which is the formality of the Scripture, quae dat esse
Rei) sormally considered is not the Word, nor the Rule nor any thing but a dead
letter, only the matter and truth of the Text testified to is the Word, Rule,
Light, etc. as we say it is only: Yet when ye go away, though from the first to
the last ye give us the cause, yet we must give you leave, or else you will
steal it, to carry, away the colors, and boast and brag, and vapor as the men
that had the victory, till, by venting your lies so fast to manifest the Qua.
folly, ye fling out your own folly to the view of all men.

T.D. But (quoth T.D. p. 30.1. Pamph. All this while you go about to delude the
simple, as if you denied only this way of writing to have always been the only
way of conveyance, and you magnify the Spirit, that with more security ye may
throw down the letter of the Scripture, and if you would speak out plainly,
that ye call the Spirit, will be found to be the dictates of your consciences
blind and corrupt as they are the Lord knows, and you are no further bound to
obey the letter of the Scripture then you are willing to obey it.

Rep. As for thy lies of the friends of truth, that light stuff like the chafe
the wind will drive away: The Lord knows, whose consciences are blind and
corrupt, yours or ours, and as to thy slighting the dictates of conscience,
which work I.O. is not behind thee in, flouting at what is dictated by the
Light of God in it, and by the light therein from it to men, as Figment,
Fannaticism, Enthusiasm, and such like dirty denominations, I need refer no
further then too I.O. whose magnifications of the dictates of conscience
otherwhiles may well serve to the contradiction and confutation of himself, and
thee too, and stop both thy mouth and his own too, who ^ayes page 42.^3, 44,45.
of the conscience, and the voice of God therein, and the instinct of good and
evil, and self-judgement God has placed, and indeleably planted therein, it
declares it self to be from God by its own light and Authority, there is no
need to convince a man by substantial witnesses, that what his conscience
speaks it speaks from God, whether it bear testimony to the righteousness of
God, or that obedience which is eternally and indispensably due to him; it
shows the work of the Law written in the heart, and discovers its Author in
whole name it speaks, and much more to the like purpose; so that he, and thou
too, may with shame enough reflect upon your ignorant vilifications of it.

As for our obedience to the Letter, we are by the Spirit so bound to that, not
so far only as we are willing, as thou belie^t us, but in a cross to our own
wills, that while we walk in the Spirit, which is our Rule, we cannot disobey
the Letter, but fulfill it, while your selves, who prate of your being bound to
obey it, walk at large after your own wills and lusts in the liberty of your
flesh and through your boundless boasting of that, ye as boundlesly break, do
dishonor both God and your selves.

As for our going about to deceive the simple, we deny all Deceivers and
Deceit, teaching no other Doctrine nor Gospel then what Paul delivered, then
which whoever it is that brings or broaches another, whether it be we, who are
hated as Devils, or you, who are honored as Angels of light from heaven by
such as dwell in the depths and darkness of hell; I say with Paul, let him be
accursed; but those are now marked and manifested plainly enough who cause the
Divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine the Saints learned of old, and
by the children of the day are avoided also; for they that are such serve not
the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies and yet by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16.17, 18.

What T.D. says in his second Pamph. as to this question of the Scriptures
being a Rule, is no new thing, but a Reference of men for an answer to G.
Whiteheads Queries (which he was shye of saying much to, seeing he had not much
to say) to his old trite, trivial Toy entitled the Qua. Folly, the very book
that G. Whitehead had Routed before; and so dry is T.D. pumped that most of his
two Butter-flyes excepting the wings it flies with i. e. His Epistle and his
Narrative, consists of Repetitions of what he had uttered in the other, that
was Routed, and new References of his Reader to that old one, notwithstanding
so much is added to to this head in p. 16. of his second Pamph. as more fully
gives us the cause we contend for against him, viz. That the Truth, Doctrine,
Matter, and not the Scripture, Text, or Letter is the Rule to men; I must
[quoth he] again refer the Reader for an answer to these Queries (meaning
G.Ws.) to Qua. Folly (in which yet none of them are answered) and I add, the
matter contained in the Scriptures is a Rule to all men [so far as it is revealed
to them] and was so before it was put into writing; and so much of it as is
written upon the hearts of Heathens is a Rule to them.

Rep. Mind Reader how T.D. yields the Question to the Qua. again in his late
last Lazy labors, which Question between the Qua and the Priests is not about
the holy Doctrine, Truth and matter (for the Qua. still own that to be as to
the substantials, before which the shadowy figurative part thereof flies away,
everlastingly the same, an inalterable, fixed, firm, inward, spiritual, Word and
Light, which neither does, not can ever perish, corrupt, or pass away) but
about the outward Scripture, Writing, Text, or Letter, which uno ore with one
voice all our Priests and people vote to be the Rule, Touchstone, Word, etc.
which we deny, which matter notwithstanding when it comes to the point of proof
before people, they dare denominate only to be the only Rule and Word, denying
those high Titles to the naked Letter as well as we; crying out with a dreadful
ditty against the Qua. in their Pulpits, as deniers of the Scriptures, the
Bible to be the Word of God, the Rule, etc. and when we enter the lifts with
them, then finding themselves unable to carry it against us, falling down
before us in confessions to us that it is the Divine truth and matter only
contained in the Scripture which is the Rule to all men so far as it, that is,
that Truth and matter is revealed to them (as it is here confessed also by T.D.
to be to the very Heathen in their hearts that have no Scripture) and was so
before it was put into writing, that is, before the Scripture was, which seeing
it is so confessed, in the same way as I argued above about the Foundation
against I.O. so may I here against T.D. and him both about the Rule, viz.

Arg. 1. The Rule must be something that is in being before the faith and life
that is to be Regulated by it. 2. Must be that the Scripture testifies to be
the Rule. 3. Something that is firm, fixed, sure, stable, inflexible,
infallible, inalterable, else all the work wrought by a Lesbian Rule, a soft
waxen measure, may be, ad infinitum, crooked, scanty, erroneous, disorderly in
all Dimensions at men's pleasure, who may [as our Priests mostly do transcribe,
translate, expound, rectify the Scripture according to their crooked conceits,
and their (Antichristian) Analogy of faith (as they use to speak) and not their
crooked conceits, and false faith according to the true Theology, that is plain
to godly honest hearted men in the S^ripture] wrest their Rule to their own
wills, self ends, interests, and where it likes not their unruly selves to be
Ruled by it, Run from it, or rather Rule over ir as they list.

But the Light and Spirit, and Truth, and living Word, and holy Doctrine, was
in being before the faith and life of any man. 2. Is testified by the Scripture
[at is above shewed] to be the Rule. 3 Is inalserable, firm, etc. and the
Scripture it self is already proved, and is yet more to be proved not to be so,
therefore the Light, Truth, etc. not the Scripture, Text etc. is the Rule.

Be sides what Ioh. Tombs and Rich. ^axter, who must here be wrapped with their
own weapon, argue falsely against the Lights being the Rule, I may truly argue
against the Letters being it.

For page 51. of their Book, entitled, The true old Light. Thus they dispute,
viz.

That which is variable and alterable cannot be a persons Rule, for its the
property of a Rule to be invariable and the same at all times. The Rules,
Measures and Weights and Dialls and Squares, and what other things are made if
they be varied they cease to be Rules, for Rules should be fixed and certain.

But there is nothing more variable then men's light in them (say they falsely)
but [say I truly] then a Letter or Writing without; That which is to day, say
they, taken for light, is to morrow judged to be darkness, and that light which
is this day in a person, may be lessened to morrow; a person may become
Fanatic and dote, who yesterday was heard with applause, therefore each
persons light cannot be his Rule, so us that at all times he should be bid to
look to it, as a safe guide, as the Qua. do.

And, say I, that which is to day Transcribed, Translated, Interpreted so, and
in such a sense by some, may be through Mis-transcription, Mis-translation,
Mis-interpretation, be wrested as a Nose of wax to morrow by others into a
clear contrary sense, by Transposition of Hebrew letters, which in shape and
sound are alike, either in way of mistake among the most careful Scribes in the
world, or at the m^er will and pleasure of Critics, who ad libitum may turn
the Text into twenty senses one after another, as seems good to them, witness
I.O. himself, who [as is elsewhere shewed] in many pages together of his Epistle
Dedicatory tells how easy it is so to do, yea to turn that one word (...) by
the different pointing of it into 8 sundry senses, some whereof are clear
contrary to; each other; yea it is but doing so, or so says he, and as many
various lections arise in the very original Text as a man pleases to make. It
being so then with the Letter, that it is so variable and flexible, and
contrariwise the Light being fixed, firm, stable without variation, as it is
(for all their lying of it) it is eternally and unchangeably the same even
yesterday, to day, and for ever, as Christ is from whom it comes, one and the
same in all; the Foundation and witness of God which stands sure, and keeps its
place in the consciences of men let them go whether they will, testifying the
same truth, as Gods witness, in all men, that it does in any m^n both de jure
and defacto also, never consenting to any evil, but condemning it all in all
men more or less.

Therefore, say I, in consutation of I O. T. D. I.To. and Rich. Baxter out of
their own Books, the Light, Word, and Spirit of God within every one may and
ought to be every man's Rule, so as that at all times he should be bid to look
to it, and follow it as a guide as the Qua. do.

But the Text, or Letter without (however owned as it is by me above, to be
useful and profitable for men of God that know how to use it) cannot be the
most perfect, stable Standard, much less the only infallible Rule and guide of
men's faith and life as the blind guides say (in words it is though (in works)
they themseves live and walk besides it as much as any.

Again, if the Scriptures be the Rule, and not the Light and Spirit, then
either there was no Rule before the Scripture, or else they who lived before
the Scripture had one Rule, we another, and so consequently there are two Rules
for the one faith of the one holy Church. But all these whimsies are most
absurd, for then the one Church has tot regulus quot novas explicationes
ejusdem veritaetis, as many Rules as particular ways of Revelation of the
truth. And T.D. said the Truth was one, and that the matter was the Rule before
the writing was, and I.O. says, Ex. 4. s. 22. Vnicus est (...) divinus, the
Divine Rule is but one, and so say I of the one general Catholic Church, or
Assembly of the first born from Abel to this day, therefore the Light, Spirit,
and not the Scripture is the Rule.

As for I.Os shallow shuffling off the Lights being the Rule, and slight
slinging at it, Testaque, lutoque, with his muddy pellet in that Section, Si
cujusque lumen privatum sit regulatum tot Regulas habemus qust homines, at
unicus est (...) divinis.
If every man's private light be the Rule of obedience, then we have as many
Rules as men, but the Divine Rule is only one and that only one, (quoth he
falsely elsewhere Intermediae quibus ad sui cognitionem Revelandam Deus utitur
sacra Scriptura non tantum longissime omnibus aliis antecellit sed fines
salutares quod attinet unicum est and singular. Ex. 2. s. 14.
is the Scripture.

Rep. His minor, as is said above, serves our turn, and as for his major, its
consequence is most false, if by the Word private light he means every ones
particular measure of light that shines from God into his conscience, for that
does not make tot Regulas etc. so many men, so many Rules; for the Light and
Spirit, which is the only Rule, is one, and the self-same thing in all,
distributed to every one (as to degrees which never vary the nature of any
thing) severally as seems good to him: And this is but a piece of his own
peevish private piece of prate, so often as he does in his Disputes, to term
the light of God we testify to, as one in all, though in different measures,
lumen privatum, the private light, for its lumen publicum and commune, that one
public light, that comes and is communicated from God, and reproves sin in all
men, and never did, nor does consent to any iniquity, but condemns it in all
men, and all men as found in sin, and were I.O. as well skilled in the
Scripture, as he is in the way of unskilful scribbling for it, and would once
learn of Paul whom he often prates on, he would have learnt ere this time with
him to style the light in all the different measures of it attained to by men,
to be but one Rule, one thing still, and not to say that if every man mind the
light in himself then so many men so many Rules, which Apostle, Phil. 3 15, 16.
says, Whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us
mind the same thing.

And as to T.Ds. saying, That so much of the matter contained in the Scripture
as is written upon the hearts of the Heatbens is a Rule to them, I very readily
grant that to be the very truth; but what will T.D. get by it, but 1. The glory
of his granting to the Qua. that other Grand Question, about which he quarrels
with them, viz* the being of a measure of the same matter, and not na^^ral, as
man is in statu corrupto, but supernatural and spiritual light of truth, which
is contained and testified in the Scripture to be in all men in the world, even
in the Heathen that have not the Scripture. 2. The fuller just censure of a
contradicter of himself, who by telling the truth herein, gainsayes that false
Doctrine which he teaches for Truth in another place.

For here he owns some of the same truth or holy Doctrine declared in the
Scripture which himself, and I.O. stickle to prove it against such as deny it
not (for the truth is so though the Text is not) that every Tittle and Apex
thereof is as equally divine, or supernatural, and entirely given by God
himself, and as immediately as the very voice wherewith he spoke to, and in the
Prophets. See I.O. p. 27.153. and properly the Word of God, 24. and the Gospel
and a supernatural and spiritual light, and such like. See I.O. p. 77. and T.D.
p. 1, 2. of 1. Pamph. and p. 23. of his 2. Pamph.) I say here T.D. owns some of
that same Matter, Light, Truth, Law or Gospel, the letter declares to be
written upon the hearts of the Heathens, that never had the letter, and to be
the Rule from God to them.

But when we affirm as the Scripture does, and T.D. too, that every man in the
world is enlightened by Christ the true light, 1 John 9. with some measure of
that Light the Letter speaks of, and has some of that holy, divine,
supernatural, spiritual truth, doctrine, and Evangelical matter, which the
whole Scripture either more obscurely, or more clearly declares, then he denies
it, asserting the Gentiles or Heathens to have none of those Judgments that
God gave to Israel; and as T.D. to the contradiction of himself; so I O:
Christus nulla sub consideratione lumen salutare omnibus and stngulis hominibus
du sit, Ex. 4. s. 17. Christ has in no kind vouchsafed saving Light to all and
every man.

One ignorant untrue Assertion more of T.D. while my eye is on it I may not
here let pass without notifying it to the Reader, and then for ought I see, I
may leave T.D. as to his talk of the Scriptures being in the nature, or office,
or authority of a Rule, and see what I.O. says as to this.

T.D. says p. 17. of his 2. Pamph. Suppose we had the signs recorded that are
not written, yet were they not our Rule, yet confesses that were they written
they might be useful being done for the very same end with those lest us. G. W.
telling him he contradicts himself in so saying, T.D. answers, he is not
sensible of any contradiction herein, but of subordination only between the
efficient and instrumental cause; That the second creation does not exclude,
though the first did, instruments or second causes, instancing Iam. 1.18. Of
his own will begat he us by the Word of truth: And Romans 10.17. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

Rep. To which say I T.D. is not so little sensible of the contradiction G.W.
charges him with, as every understanding Reader may be greatly sensible of the
flat falsehood, that is told for truth in this latter clause, wherein he asserts
the first creation did exclude second causes or instruments, though the second
does not, whereas if T.D. had not been in a Dream, he would have seen that the
first Creation is so far from excluding instruments or second causes, if that
be an instrument or second cause, which himself instances to be one in the
second Creation, viz. The Word of God; for as the Scripture says that the
Saints are begotten to God and faith by the Word of God, so it says but that
our Scriblers for the Scriptures are little skilled in it, and so study it in
their dark minds till they cannot see what, who is not blind cannot easily
overlook) Heb. 11.3. 2 Pet. 3.5.7. By faith we understand, in plurali, the
worlds were framed by the Word of God, and that by the Word of God, the heavens
and earth were of old, and the heavens and earth that now are by the same Word
are kept in store and reserved to fire against the day of Judgment and
perdition of ungodly men.

You had need be ashamed to pretend to be such appearers in public pro
Scripturis that appear so much in your testimony so flatly against them as ye
do.

Now as to J. Os. prosecution of the proof of this matter, which he so often
over and over again avouches as a truth with divine faith to be embraced on
pain and peril of eternal ruin and damnation, viz That the Scriptures are in
the Authority of, the only and perfect Rule and Canon since the completing of
which no inward Light or Spirit, or new Revelations about the faith and Divine
worship of the Saints are either to be expected or admitted, it lies more in
the negative, then the positive, or affirmative, consisting for more largely of
disproofs (such as they are) of any inward Light, Spirit, or spiritual
Revelation to be at all, then of proofs of the Letter or Scripture (yet some
pedling ones are puzzled out to such a purpose) to be altogether and alone the
Rule of faith, holy life, and divine worship.

He professes to prove the inward Spirit or Light, the Qua. plead for not to be
the Rule, and that the Scripture or Letter is so, two ways, first,
Authoritative, or by the Scripture it self. 2. Rationative, or by a Rational
way of Argumentation: But though I own the Authority and veracity of the
Scripture, so far that if I.O. could produce any place of the Bible, as he
pretends to do many, wherein the Scriptures do ascribe to themselves the Honor,
Authority and Title of the only perfect Rule either in terminis, or by any
such due deduction, as is not more duly deniable, then so much as probale to a
prudent man indeed, I should truly submit to one such testimony, being
persuaded that the Scriptures are writings of truth, where not altered, and not
adulterated by men's mistakings, and mistranscribings, yet the Scriptures being
wrested besides all sense and reason by J.O. and the Theologians he adhears to,
to that end, I deny his proofs to be either Athoratative or Rational.

The testimonies he urges the Authority of, to prove the Text to be in the
Authority of the only Rule he casts into four Classes; the first sort of which
consist of such places as express (as he says) and (...), vel per immediatam
cousequentiam perfectionem hanc Scripturis ascribunt, do expressly and verbatim,
or else by immediate consequence ascribe such a perfection as of the only Rule
to the Scriptures. The second such as expressly reject all Additions to the Text
and Word of God whatever. The third such as contain the examples of Christ and
the Apostles trying and commanding to try all things by the Scriptures. The
fourth such as commend the holy Scriptures to all Religious uses.

Of the first sort he impannels eleven in all* not being able it seems to pick
out a whole Jury to serve his turn, howbeit I acknowledge these, if they would
as freely, as he forcibly would have them, pass their verdict for him, to be
enough, being all of them good and true witnesses in another case then he calls
them for, they stand all together in Ex. 3. s. 26. viz. Joh. 2. ult. 2 Timothy 3
13, 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 19.18. Luke 1.3, 4. Luke 16.29. Act. 1.1. Romans 10, 17.
Ephesians. 2.19, 20. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 3.24 Gal. 6 16. Of the second seven, viz.
Deuteronomy. 4.2.12.32. Rev. 22 18. Gal. 1.8. Mat. 15.6. 1 Cor. 4.6. Isa. S. 20. Of
the third four, viz. Luke 16.28, 29, 30 Act 17.11.21. Act. 18.24.28. Act.
26.22. with intimation of very many more commonly cited as he says to that
purpose. Of the fourth, seven, viz. Joh. 1.7. Deuteronomy 28.58. Luke 24 27. Joh.
5.39. Romans 15.4. Phil. 3.1. 1 John 1.4. It may do well to take some notice of
them at least and hear their evidence.

I shall draw them up into the form of an Argument, and then we shall see what
expressnes in them, or immediate consequence there is from them to the
Scriptures being the only Rule.

Arg. John says Jesus did more signs then are written in his Book or History
of him, but what he wrote was that men might believe that Jesus is the Son of
God, and believing might have life through his Name. David, that the Law of God
is perfect, converting the soul, the Testimony of the Lord is sure making wise
the simple, the Statutes of the Lord pure, enlightening the eyes. Luke, that it
seemed good to him also, seeing some others had taken in hand such a work,
having had perfect understanding from the first of the things Jesus did and
taught, to write an orderly Declaration thereof to Theopilus (whether a
particular person so called, or any lover of God who can tell? for so is the
name by interpretation) that he might know the certainty of the things wherein
he [by which it seems rather to have been some eminent man] had been before in
part informed; and Christ said, Men must hear Moses and the Prophets, or else
will not be persuaded to repent, if one rise to them from the dead. Peter, that
the Saints have a more sure word of Prophecy to which they do well that they
take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place till the day dawn, and
the day star arise in their hearts. Paul to the Romans, That faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God To the Corinthians, that the minds of
the Jews were blinded, for until this day the vail remains on their hearts
untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament, which vail is taken away in
Christ. To the Galathians, that as many as walk according to this Rule, Christ,
the Light, and his Spirit.
peace shall be on them, and Gods Israel. To Timothy, that evil men and
seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, willing him
to continue in the things he had learned and been assured of knowing of whom he
had learnt them, and that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures, which
were able to make him wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ
Iesut, that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Iastruction in Righteousness, that the man of
God might be perfect thoroughly furnished to all good works. To the Ephesians,
that they were no more strangers and forrainer^, but fellow-citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, and built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone.

God forbids to add to his Word, he commands and threatens to add Plagues
to them that so do. Paul says, Let him be accu^sed who ever brings another
Gospel then that he had preached to the Galathians, though the Apostles
themselves, or an Angel from heaven. Christ asked the Pharisees, Why they made
Gods Commands void by their Traditions. Paul says, He in a figure transferred
to himself, and to Apollo the things that he had wrote to Corinth, that none of
them might think of either of them above that which he wrote of them as merely
Ministers, by whom they believed, and not be as they were very apt to be pu^t
up for one of them against the other, and glorying in man. God bids seek not to
Wizzards that peep and mutier but to himself, his Law and Testimony. The Berean
searched the Scriptures daily whether the things were so or no the Apostles
preached. Apollos was mighty in the Scriptures, and as mightily confounded the
Jews, proving thereby that Jesus was Christ. Paul said no other things then
what Moses and the Prophets said should come. John Baptist came for a witness
to bear witness of the light, that all through him might believe. God says, If
the Israelites observe not all the words of the Law written in that Book of
Deuteronomy, he would make their Plagues wonderful. Christ expounds to his
Disciples all the Scriptures in Moses and the Prophets concerning himself,
bids, Search the Scriptures as testifying of him. Paul says, Whatsoever was
written before time was for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope. He says, To write the same things to the
Church is safe. John says he writes his Epistles to the Saints that their joy
might be full.

Therefore the outward Letter of the Scripture is the only Rule of all faith,
and Divine worship, and not the Light and Spirit of Christ ye only call to, nor
any internal Revelation whatsoever, ficta vel facta.

In which of all these Scriptures the Title and Authority of the only most
perfect standing Rule of Faith, Life, and Worship, is either expressly, or by
any true, mediate, much more any immediate consequence ascribed to the
Scriptures who can find but he is that not blind?

There is but one of all the places, viz. Gal. 6.16. where that term Rule is at
all expressed, by which as I have said and showed above, is not at all intended
the Scriptures, but Christ the Light, and his Spirit; and some of them mention
expressly neither the term Scripture, nor Rule, (...), and such as have in them
terms equivalent to that of the Rule, neither express nor imply at all the
Letter of the Scripture, as that of Psalm. 19.7, 8. and that of Isa. 8.19, 20.
and that of Romans 10, 17. and that of Ephesians. 2.19, 20. where by the Law, and
Commandment, and Testimony, and Statutes of the Lord, rejoicing the heart,
converting the soul, enlightening the eyes, making wise the simple, is
expressed the Lamp and the Light, Prove. 6.23. and by the Word, in the hearing
of which Faith comes, the Word hid in the heart, nigh in the heart and mouth to
hear and do, Psalm. 119.105. Deuteronomy. 30.12.14. Romans 10.8. The Law in the heart,
Isa. 5 1.7. Psalm. 37.31. The Law in the mind, which the Law of sin and death in
the members wars against, Romans 7.23. The Law of the spirit of life which is in
Christ the life and light, whose life is the light of men, that made Paul free
from the other, Romans 8.2. Which light shines in the darkness that is in our
very Doctors hearts, but the darkness comprehends it not. The Statutes of God,
and Judgments to be put into the minds of men, according to the tenor of the
New Covenant, typified by the Old, where the Statutes were with Pen and Ink
written, and engraven on Tables of stone; and by the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. Christ the Light (as is above declared) and not the
Writing, and Letter, and Text, in which the internal truth is but ad extra
declared; and by that sure Word of Prophesie', 2 Pet. 1. not the Scripture, but
somewhat within, as I shall show more abundantly by and by; and by Moses and
the Prophets, Luke 16. Writings within, as I shall show anon: All which were,
and were the only perfect, pure, right, inalterable, standing Rule, long
before any external Text or Letter was, and have not ceased so to be by the
coming in of the outward writing, with which they are since clothed upon, nor
yet have surrendered their ancient Authority of being the only Rule by which
all speakings, and writings, and doctrines are to be tried; nor resigned up
that their Right to the Writing, that testifies to their suprrmacy, veracity,
and dignity above it self to this very day. Nor have they submitted themselves,
that were once the chief Judge and Rule for the trial of Truth, to be now
tried, ruled over, judged, sentenced, and ultimately determined,
authoritatively to be received or rejected as true or false, of God, or the
Devil, Divine or diabolical Delusion, Enthusiasme, Figment, Fanaticism, and
what nickname men lift to style them by in their learned lusts, by the
fallible Transcriptions, Translations, and Expositions of miserably mistaking
men, in which ways only and merely, some of that Scripture that was of old
written by holy men, as the spirit moved them, is transmitted downward to these
modern ages.

And as for those Texts that do make express mention of the Scriptures and
outward Writings of the Apostles, and of Moses and the Prophets, and the Old
Testament, as John 20. ult. Luke 1.3, 4. 16.29. Acts 1.1. 2 Cor. 3.24. 2 Timothy
3.14, 15, 16. do, there is not the least considerable, much less any cogent,
necessary, or immediate consequence in any of them, to conclude the outward
Letter of the Scriptures to be the only, most perfect standing Rule,
Touchstone for all Truth to be tried by, so exclusively (as I.O. states them)
Spiritus verbi Luminis cujuscunque tandem generis interni, Revelatienis, etc.
Of all inward Spirit, Light, Word, or Revelation of what sort soever; For
what is the vail's being over the Jews hearts in the reading of the Old
Testament, which Vail is done away in turning to Christ the Light, to evince
any such matter? Does it not rather evidence the very contrary? For if the Old
Testament, which is (...) the Letter written with Ink or Pen, or engraven on
stones, is as a Vail over the hearts of such as read it as the Jews do, of whom
I.O. says, page 236. They read it without the administration of the Spirit, so
that its a dead Letter, of no efficacy for the good of souls. Which* Vail is to
be, and is done away no otherwise then in Christ the Light, and by turning to
the Lord that Spirit, (as Paul says it is) then does it not rather appear that
the (...) the Letter written and engraven outwardly is not the only most
proper standing Rule; but Christ's Light, the Spirit, and the measure, and
manifestation thereof within, given to every man to profit withal? And what
though Paul to Timothy does commend the inspired Scripture, (if yet we shall
take that for the outward Writing) as profitable to make the man of God, who
only knows how to use it wisely, more and more wise, and to furnish him
perfectly to exhort, etc. and every good work, against the gainsayers? as I
have showed above that I deny not the outward Scripture so to be to such a one:
And what though Christ says in order to escaping the place of torment, Let men
hear Moses and the Prophets, if yet we shall take Moses and the Prophets for
their outward Writings? And what though John says Christ did more then he
wrote of him, (as well he might; For Matthew, Mark, and Luke wrote many things
that he did not, and others wrote other matters, that were written by none of
these) What though he does write that his writings were that the Saints might
believe that Christ was the Son of God, and believing might live through his
Name, and that their joy might be full; i.e. That increase might be to them of
Faith and Joy: see 1 John 5.13. does their being useful and profitable, and
penned for the same common end, as the Light is given for in the conscience,
conclude them by such an immediate consequence as J.O. conceives, to be
designed and appointed by God to be canonized and established into the only
Canon, into the sole standing Rule and Standard for all things of Faith,
Manners and Worship to be tried by: so that nothing can or may safely be
believed, done or practiced in obedience to God, or acceptable to him, without
particular and express recourse first had unto the Scriptures?

If this be good and immediate consequence of J.O. viz. the Scriptures and
Letter has the same common end with the Spirit and Light; and is useful and
profitable, comfortable and serviceable, as the other is, though not so much.

Therefore the Scripture or Letter, is the only most perfect, standing-Rule
universally for all truth to be tried by, the only Canon for men to come to,
whereby to be rectified in Faith, Life, Worship, and all Obedience.

Then at least must T.D. J.O's. joint Antagonist against the Qua. and the Truth
be judged a mere juggling Disputant, and shufling Sophister, if he own it as any
other then a non sequittar, [unless he will rather choose to join with me here
against J. O. in denying of this consequence, and against himself too, as to
his asserting the Scripture to be the Rule] for as much as when 'twas urged
against him in the same kind, at the Dispute (but in a way of much more
necessary consequence, then J. O's. crooked Conclusion comes in by) to the
defect of Scripture-Canon, as they call it, in its integrals, on this wise:

If there were other inspired Scriptures that are not bound up in your Bibles,
as useful and profitable, and written to the same end with those you have, then
they were as much a Rule as those ye have.

But there were, etc. in proof of which minor instance was given in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, mentioned in the first we have, 1 Cor. 5.9.11.
Where Paul says, I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to keep company with
Fornicators, etc. and now have I written to you not to keep company, etc. By
which it seems both Epistles, one of which is not in the now Bible, were
written by the same Apostle, to one and the same end.

T.D. Replies to this effect, see p. 26, 27. of his first Pamph. I deny your
Consequence. Sermons, Religious Discourses have the same common end with the
written Scriptures, yet the Letter only are our standing Rule. And p. 27. All
that was written by holy men, and preserved for our use, is not therefore our
standing Rule. And two bald Reasons is rendered in the same page, viz. Because
God intended these that are bound up in our Bibles, but not the rest, neither
such as are lost; for had he intended those so lost, Poovidence would have
watched over them as over the rest; nor such as are by his providence preserved
neither, if not in our Bibles.

And page 17. of T.D's. second Pamph. Suppose (quoth he) we had the signs
faithfully recorded, (i. e. in our Bible where they are wanting) yet were they
not our Rule because God did not give order for them? He has assured us as
much as is sufficient to create and increase Faith. And page 18. If you say (as
you seem to do) if they all were done to the same end, then being written, they
must reach the same end. I deny your consequence, [quoth he] the difference
lies in God's Arbitrary Dispensation.

Now if T.D. deny the consequence of the Qua. which is two fold clearer, and
more cogent then I.O's. when they say all Scriptures written by inspiration,
and preserved for our use to this day, are a Rule to us as much as any of them
are, whether bound up, or not bound up by Stationers in our Bibles. Then how
much more must he side with me in denying J.O's far fetched consequence, though
J.O. calls it immediate, [unlesse he will be denied justly for a daubing
deceiver) when J.O. argues thus, viz. The Scriptures are useful, profitable,
and written to the same good ends and purposes, as the Light, Spirit, and Word
of God; Therefore the Scriptures, the Letter, and not the inward Light, Spirit,
Word, or any internal Revelation at all, are the only most perfect, standing
Rule of all things, in matter of Faith, Life, Doctrine, Worship, etc.

But I have reason to suspect and fear, that Night-Birds of a Feather, however
they clash and thwart one another, and fall out among themselves in the dark,
yet will fall in, flock, and fly all together in the face of the Light, rather
then seem to side therewith against each other, and that by some
sillycome-senceless secundum quid or other, they will seem to qualify their more
then seeming confusions if they can.

Nevertheless, let them agree as they please, I may safely make bold before
all, but partial, prejudiced persons, to deny J.O's. consequence, and put my
self under T.D's Patronage in so doing, who denies the same, (save only that
its much more sound and cogent when used to him ward by the Qua. and indeed so
it fares and falls out with my two Antagonists, I.O. and T.D. that though they
join to carry on the same Cause against the Qu. improving their Wits to-patch
up what proofs they can in the points wherein they oppose them; yet their
witnesses agree so little with each other, and within themselves, that what
either of them asserts, is for the most part overturned, if not by the
individual party so asserting, as it often is, yet at least by the other of
them, one where or other, in such wise, that had some wiser man then my self
had the management of this matter and work against them, that is now under my
hands, I see so much [though minding matter more then method, I am carried to
the confutation of them into sundry other ways of partly positive, and partly
polemical Discourse intermingled among my Animadversio^s, Examinations, and
comparings of their sayings] that he need go no further then T.D. and I.O. to
fetch matter wherewith to con^ute I.O. and no further then J.O. and T.D. to
confute T.D.

I conclude then my Reply to the routing of the first Rank, and cashiering the
first Class* of J.O's. Scriptures, urged in proof of the Scriptures being the
only, most perfect, standing Rule, and it may serve for an answer to T.D.
himself too, in T.D's. words to me ( mutatis muta^dis) p. 20. 1 Pamph. To make
the business short, suppose we grant the Scripture to be divinely inspired, to
be very useful and profitable, as we do, and to be written for the ends above
specified in the Scriptures mentioned; yet will it not follow that it was
intended for the Rule to the Church, much less the only perfect Rule, or
Standard of Faith and Life, because God did not give order for ^s so to be, but
assured her, before the Scripture was at all, as much as God thought sufficient
to create and preserve faith in the Gospel she had, before she had it written
in an outward Letter, viz. the inward Light, Word, and Spirit, that was in the
beginning, from which the Letter came. And p. 43. to make a Rule [much more
then, the only s^anding Rule exclusively of all other, of all internal Light,
Word, Spirit, Revelation, as JO. and T.D. both hold the Scripture to be] is
necessary Gods appointment of a Writing to that end; to which he did (and even
in the Scripture it appears) appoint the Spirit, and inward Light and Word, as
I showed above, but never at all appointed the Scripture it self. And p. 17,
18. of T. D's. 2 d. Pam. the difference lies in God's Arbitrary dispensation,
who from of old disposed the Light, Word and Spirit alone, to be the Rule,
without, and before the Letter, as being far more excellent, and fully
sufficient without it, as to the nature and being of a Rule; but never ordered,
intended, designed, appointed, or established the Writing alone as the Rule, as
my two University Antagonists dispute, without, and c^^lusively of the other.

And as for the third and fourth Classis of J.O's Scriptures, which seeing they
are so near a kin to these of the first, therefore I shall consider them here
before those of the second they are of the same kind, so that the same general
Answer might satisfy sapienti, cui verbum sat; but seeing such stress is put
on them by J.O. to the stablishing of a wrong Standard, which i^ of so great
concernment to be stated right, or else all the Building faulters; I am free to
insist a little more particularly on them then else I need to do.

They contain (as thou say J.O.) commendations of the Scriptures, as to all
uses of Religion, both by the practices and precepts of Christ and the
Apostles, searching and expounding, proving and trying all things by them
themselves, and also commending, and commanding the searching of them, and the
trying of all things by them, in and among all others.

Rep. That all the places enumerated by thee, do contain any such matter at
all, I utterly deny; for some of those thou citest, as well as sundry of those
before spoken to, neither expressly, nor intentionally relate to the Writing or
Scripture, but only to the Word of God, and the Things, and Truth, and
Commands of God written of only in the Letter; which things in what Text
soever thou find'st them talked of, thou present'y run'st blundering on in thy
wonted blindness, which discerns no difference between the Writing and things
written, interpreting them without more ado of the Scripture, as namely, Deuteronomy.
28.58. whereby the words written in that Book, is not meant the Writings, but
the Commandmen^ therein rehearsed, the Ceremonials and Morals of which they
were to observe before that Book of Deuteronomy was penned; which is a story
of Moses his repetition by word of mouth, a little before his death, of such
things as he had from the Lord enjoined them to observe; and some of them God
also from his own mouth well-nigh forty years at least before that was penned.

Also that in Acts. 26.22. where Paul says he witness^d no other things or
truths (as to the substance and matter of them though the manner was different,
the one testifying, de Christo exhibendo, the other exhibito; one saying they
should come, the other they were come) then what the Prophets and Moses said
should come: Which things Paul could now witness were come, if he had not seen
their witness that they should: And what mention is there of the Scripture at
all in that Scripture?

Also John 1.7. where its said of John Baptist, he was not that Light, but came
to bear witness of that light which John Baptist wrote no Scripture at all that
I know of, which Light he testified to, was not the Letter or Scripture, but
the same the Qua. bear witness to even that measure of its light within,
wherewith he inlightneth every man that comes into the world; so that there is
no Scripture mentioned, or so much as meant in that Scripture. Wherever thou
see in thy Concordance the word Scripture written of in the Scripture, thou
art ready to think straightway it Concu^r'^, and has no ^m^l Concordance with
thy cause, and where thou find the Words Rule, Foundation, Law, and Prophets
of God, Light, Word, Commands, Statutes, Testimony, Prophecy, and such like,
thou as rashly and rawly imaginest the Scripture or mere outward Writing meant
and mentioned by them in what ever is predicated of them, and that it makes
something for thy b^inde business of the Scriptures being the only standing
Rule and Foundation.

But alas hoc aliquid vere nihil est, this something is plainly nothing at all
to that purpose, for as it makes not a mice toward the proof thereof (as
appears above) because the Scriptures were written for good ends, and are
prefi^^bl^ to such and such good uses, unless God had Canonized them as a Rule,
so neither does it that Christ expounded the Scriptures, and that some did
search them, and were mightily read in them (as some are at this day who are
supposed to deny them) to the confounding the Scribes that searched them daily,
and therein looked for life as their only Rule, but never came to him that they
might have life, who was the Life and Light they came from but never heard him
whom they testified of, that his voice was now to be heard, in whom God who
under the Law before his coming spoke in his servants the Prophets, speaks
under the Gospel, as by his only Son.

It Is true, Abraham, who lived long after Moses, and those Prophets, whose
Writings ye have, were born, in that Parable which illustrates a precious
truth, that as to the mystery of it lies yet hid from thee, is brought in by
Christ, as saying of the Rich man's brethren by way of prevention of their
coming into torment, They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them, if
not they will not be persuaded by a miraculous message of one to them from the
dead: but what i^ this to prove what thou here alledgest it for, and more
largely inferrest from it, p. 63, 64, 65, 66, 67. where thou preachest on that
Text a Sermon as long as little to thy purpose, improving it and that of 2 Pet.
1.19. to the utmost, to prove Moses and the Prophets Writings to be the best
and most effectual means of bringing men to repentance, on which that, and all
faith is immediately to be grounded, and to prove the Scriptures to be that
alone, which we are sent to, to be more effectual and sure then either the
greatest miracle that ever was, or immediate voice that ever God himself spoke
by from heaven, and to be the sole Rule and determiner of all Doctrines whether
they be Truths, or but cunningly devised fables, which two Texts, together with
Isa. 8.20. how little they evince any such matter, and what is meant in them by
Moses and the Prophets, and by that sure World of Prophecy, which thou and thy
fellows foolishly affirm to be the Scriptures I shall, God willing, take
occasion to examine anon. Three of thy main inartificial Arguments (as thou
truly call them, p. 50, 51, 52, 56.) or Testimonies to thy untruth, being by
the head and shoulders without either sense or reason wrested from them.

Again it is true the Bereans did search the Scriptures whether the things were
so as the Apostles spoke, who spoke nothing but summarily and substantially the
same which Moses and the Prophets did say should come; but what though they did
so of their own accord, and their searching was succesful and useful also to
the fortifying of the faith they had in the World of Truth, which they received
readily not as the word of man, but of God, not as fables, but as truth, it
coming to them as to the Thessalonians, not in word only, but in power, and the
holy Spirit, and in much assurance, 1 These. 1.5. must it needs follow therefore
that the Scriptures were their only Rule of determining the Doctrines whether
they were truths or fables, the Word of God, or the word of man, and that their
faith and owning that truth was a priori, first, originally and immediately
founded (as thou preachest all faith and repentance must be, page 58.64. on the
Scriptures; so that if they had not first searched the Scriptures, and there
found a congruity of the things with the old Writing, they neither would nor
could have believed or received the truth? thus thou and most of thy faternity,
foolishly fancy, but look again and ye will find it far otherwise, for howbeit
they searched the Scriptures, and did commendably and nobly therein, and were
commended as more noble in that then they of Thessalonica (who yet are
commended as noble, excellent, and exemplary as the other in receiving the Word
in much affliction, with joy, as Gods, and not man's word, though, it seems, not
so serious in searching the Scriptures as these, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.) and
were not a little confirmed in their faith begotten before, yet they first
received the Word with all readiness of mind as hundreds do at ths day, as
preached to them by word of mouth, from the Apostles, the witness of God being
reached, and answering to the truth of it in their hearts, in which they were
noble as Thessalonica was, yet more noble by how much they were unwearied and
uncessans in seeking to be more and more gradually, and groundedly growing in
fuller assurance of the truth, as many are at this day, who first believing and
receiving the Word with joy and readiness, do not slight (as ye suppose) but a
posteriori being in the faith Timothy more seriously and singly then your
selves see into the Scriptures, that being already brought into the things the
Scriptures write of, through patience and comfort thereof have hope, according
to that other Scripture of thy coating, Romans 15.4. as yourselves cannot have
any more then the Scribes, who stand studying and sraping with your own Animal
understandings before ye are ceme to walk in the Light and Spirit they witness
too, and came from.

But what is all this more then just nothing at all to prove the Scripture to be
the only standing Rule of Faith and Life, which is asserted of it to the
evincing it to be the Word? Nay if your eyes were in your head, ye might see of
your selves [O ye Studentall, more than truly Prudential searchers of the
Scriptures] that the Word the Apostles preached, and the Scripture, which we
confess truly testifies thereof, are two distinct things, and in no wise one
and same individual as ye would make them, if ye look no farther then the
present Text in hand; for in that he says they received THE WORD with all
readiness of mind, and searched the SCRIPTVRE whether the things were so; it
imports to any but the blind searchers of the Scripture that the word they
received was one thing and the Scripture they searched about the truth of it
was another.

Again it is true, and not to be denied, but Apollo an eloquent Jew was from
his being well versed therein before he came to own the Light, mighty in the
Scripture, and learned in the Letter so as mightily to confound the Gospel gain
saying Jews thereby, when once he came to obey it himself, though yet there was
a tradesman and his wife further grounded in the Gospel, and learned in the
light, than himself, who was beyond them in the Letter, of whom he was not
ashamed [as our Universities Literatists are at this day, to learn of women,
that know more of Gospel mysteries than they do] to stoop to be instructed in
the way of God more perfectly, but how little this proves the Scripture to be
the only standing Rule, for which end, I.O. cites it, he that is blind cannot
see, but others cannot choose, when as he that was so well skilled in the
Scripture [had that been the only Rule] that he could have instructed Aquila
and Priscilla about the Letter, with which suo sejugulaus gladio, he slew the
Letter-learned Jews, as it were with their own sword, was not so clear in his
understanding of the Truth, Way, Gospel, Spirit, Word, and Light of God [which
is indeed the only standing inalterable Rule for ever as it ever was] but that
he had need to be Regulated and Rectified therein by such as in mere Scripture
all knowledge were as inferior, as they were superior to him in spiritual
understanding.

Moreover what makes it to the proof of the Scripture to be the only standing
Rule exclusively of the Light and Spirit, that Paul says to write the same
things to the Philippians, by which its questionable whether he (...) something
to them before, which is lost, and not bound up in your Bibles, nor canonized
into your Canon) was safe for them? As much as if he had said nothing at all;
for nothing at all is that to I.O's. purpose, nor yet that of John saying,
These things I write unto you, that your joy may be full, which J O. cites to
the same end.

And true it is, Christ expounded the Scriptures to his Disciples, as he did
also his own Parables that he uttered by word of mouth amongst them and the
mixed multitude together, and opened their understandings also (as he does
theirs that walk in his light that they might understand them; but where is the
immediate cogent consequence from hence, to the conscience of any, that the
Letter or Scripture is the only most perfect standing Rule of all Faith,
Truth, holy life, Doctrine, Divine Worship, etc. as I.O. states it to be, and
T.D. also exclusively of the internal Light, Word, Spirit, etc.

And what though we should grant you, that Christ says to the Scribes, Search
the Scriptures? Well, he might, for they testify of him as the life, whom they
never came to for it, who if they had known either the Scriptures aright they
so searched in, and scribled about, or the Power of God, they could not have
erred from the knowledge of him in his Light, as they did, Matthew. 22.29. We say
the same to you Scholars, that think you study and know the Scriptures more
then any men, as Christ to them, and as I.O. to all by way of command (whereas
some cannot read it) in his Title Page, to flourish his Frontispiece and vent
his vindication, pro Scripturis, more then ought else, (...) Search the
Scriptures, for they testify of Christ the Light, the Word, that Spirit, Way,
Life, Truth we talk of, they send ye to the same Light, and inward Word in the
heart, as the Rule to walk by, as the Qua. do, and as Christ said of them, Ioh.
5.46, 47. having told them they needed no other to accuse them, then Moses in
whom they trusted; Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he
wrote of me; but if ye believe not his Writings, how should ye believe my word?
So say I of you, Ye need no other witness against you, though ye have another
(even the Light within, which ye despise) then the Letter in which ye trust;
for did you believe the Letter, ye would believe in the Light, for it writes of
the Light the Qua. call ye to, and write of; but if ye believe not the Writing
ye so write for, how shall ye believe in the light?

Howbeit when all is done, as the word (...) being both the Indicative and
Imperative Mood will as well bear it, so the Context does much more clear it,
that the Verb is rather indicative of their doting doings; then imperasive of
their duty; and is rather to be rendered, ye search, then search ye the
Scripture and contains rather matter of condemnation of them for that
profitable deal of Do they made in their busy minds about the outward
Scriptures, while in the mean time they heeded not Gods own voice, nor regarded
the inward words abiding in them, then either commendation of their great,
fruitless pains that way, or commendation of the Scripture to them to search,
or commandment of them (who were too mad already for the Scripture, as their
grand Idol, receiving it as thou faist, p. 236. with the honor and veneration
due to God, and his living word alone) to search therein. Yea verily, both that
verse and those about it, do all consist of matter of sad complaint against
them for their ever-reverencing the Scripture, and negecting to receive, or
rather refusing and rejecting the Word of Life it self to any single eye; ye
have, says Christ to them of the Father, neither hear his voice at any time,
nor seen his sheep, Joh. 47. and 38. Ye have not his word abiding in you, verse.
39. Ye search the Scriptures [ye look there often] for in them ye think (but
mistake your selves) to have eternal life, and (true enough) they are they
which testify of me, as the way to life; and (yet) ye will not come to me that
ye might have the life. On this wise does Christ rather expostulate with them,
for their ignorance and negligence of the Word, then either command or commend
any searchings of the Scriptures.

And as to the second Classis of Texts cited by the J.O. in proof of the
Scriptures, being the only standing Rule, in which Texts all additions
whatsoever to the written Word of God are expressly rejected: I answer, what
though God does reprove, condemn, threaten to plague and curse such as add to
his Word, bring any other Gospel then what Paul preached, make void his
Commands by their Traditions, enjoin men to seek not to such as peep and
mutter, but to the Lord himself, and Paul would not have the Corinthians think
of him and Apollo above what he writes of himself and him, as men only by whom
as means they believed, which is the sum of the seven Scriptures by thee
produced to that purpose? what proof at all is there in all this such a way? it
is true enough there must be no adding to the Word, Gospel, Commandment,
Testimony of God, or alterings, or varyings, or detractings therefrom in a
tittle; but is any of this intended of the outward Writing, Letter, or
Scripture which are not that Word, Gospel, Commandment, but only declare this
and other things concerning it? Is the Scripture, that only set, firm, fixed,
standing Rule that may neither be augmented nor diminished on pain of Plagues
and cursing as ye say it is? then tell me,

1. How much Scripture or Writing has been added to the five Books of Moses
since Deuteronomy. 4.2.12.32. was written, wherein it is said, Ye shall not add to
the word I command you, neither shall you diminish from it? and since that of
Prove. 30.6 was written, where it is said, Add thou not unto his Word lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar: And since, Isa. 8.20. where it is said,
To the Law, and Testimony: And since that Gal. 1.8, where it is said, Let him
be accursed that brings other then we have preached, though we or an Angel from
heaven?

2. Whether were the Prophets and Apostles, that have added so many books since
those prohibitions, justly reproveable and accursed as Liars?

3. If ye say nay they were not liars, nor to be reproved, nor accursed, then
tell me as to the measure and bounds, and close of your Canon, which ye suppose
to be the Revelation, why he that by the same Spirit moving shall in writing
reveal the same truths now, is accursed, reproved, plagued for adding to the
Word and Gospel upon the account of John's saying, Rev. 22.18. If any man shall
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in
this book, any more then John himself who added his Scripture and Revelation
after Paul's Epistle to the Galathians, or Paul who added his Scriptures after
Isaiahs, or Isaiah and the other Prophets, who added theirs after Solomon, or
Solomon that added his Writings after ^^s^s hi^ inhibition in Deuteronomy?

2. Believe it that the Scripture is not that thing, nor standing Rule, to
which no more must be added, and from which no new Scripture may be diminished
on pain of cursing and plagues, but the Word, Doctrine, Gospel, Commandment,
Law, Truth told in it, to which cursed be he that adds another, or any new
Word, Gospel, Doctrines, etc. or detracts a Tittle from that: And so John
says, If any add to these things, and take away from the words of this Book,
God shall add plagues, and take away his part out of the book of life, and
from the things written in this book, meaning that particular Writing he was
now in hand with, not if any man shall write any more Scripture with so high a
pretense as by Revelation from the Spirit, or loose, or shut out any of the
Scriptures, that are already written by inspiration, from the Canon; for if he
had meant so, then as brisk as ye are to breath out Threatenings and Plagues,
and Curses to such as pretend to write any thing by inspiration, revelation, or
motion from the holy Spirit, since the days of the complearing and closing of
your Canon (as you call it) which you count from John's writing his Revelation;
though ye are far from adding any inspired Scripture to the Bible, but only
such Scripture as is the fruit, figment, and imagination of your own hearts,
which thou confessest to be the Fountain of all that other men that are not
Apostles (as ye say ye are not do deliver p. 9. not daring to pretend to the
infallible guidance of the infallible Spirit in your Ministry, yet yee'l not
escape the taking your names out of the Book of Life, and from the good things
written in the Revelation for your fault of taking away, detracting and
diminishing from the Scriptures, for ye exclude from your Canon very much of
that inspired Scripture that was written, some of which is extant at this day
too, or has been showed before. But considering the nature and true being of
your guilt, I confess in this case of varying from the Rule (if that were the
only standing Rule) of the outward Scripture, should be found to be much more
in the Ablative, than in the Dative Case. But of this more hereafter.

These are J.Os. inartificial Arguments or Testimonies of Scripture used by him
as mediums of artificial ones that may be drawn from thence, of which
Scriptures he affirms that they are as commonly cited, so already vindicated a
nos^^i, Theologis by our Divines from exceptions of Papists, and others, that
he need not insist any more on them to name them, of which say I, as he,
Communiter citantur, nonproprie, they are commonly, but not properly cited, but
not yet vindicated from the exceptions of all.

I shall now come to consider his more Artificial Arguments drawn from some of
these, and some other Scriptures by the Cart Ropes of J.Os. Carnal Reasonings
in proof that the inward Light, Word, Spirit, and its Revelations are not at
all, but the outward Letter, Text, Writings, Scriptures are only and altogether
the standing Rule to the Church, and all men of all Truthss, Doctrines, and
things, that are to be done, believed, tried, or determined in point of Gods
worship, and our obedience.

J.O s. Arg. 1. The first is on this wise, Ex. 3. s. 28. Si Revelatio, etc. If
the Revelation of the will of God in the Scripture be so perfect, complete, and
every way absolute that there is no need of any other Revelation by the Spirit
and Light within, Enthusiasm, Heavenly breathing Colloquia Angelica ficta vel
facta.
discsurses with Angels fained, or true to instruct us in the knowledge of God,
(...) in order ^o the attaining eternal life, then its plain that all those
ways and means of knowing God and his will, which the Fanatics fain to be the
means thereof, are uncertain, dangerous, unprofitable, and in no wise necessary
thereunto, and therefore to be rejected and detested.

But its so, etc. Therefore, etc.

Rep. Oh full of all fallacy, as well as falsity, folly, and blindness, in the
things of God, of whom I may truly say ( Et si non cas^etamen cause thou art
not so little honest in it, but thou art well-nigh as much crafty to hide, what
thou can, the dishonesty of what thou hold, not only from the Qua. as thou
think in the Latin language, but also from all that would handle thee for
thy ill handiwork by thy dark discoursing in words of a double and doubtful
reference and signification, that thou may the more privily pervert the
right ways of the Lord, and prepagate thy perverse Propositions the more
securely to the prejudice of them, So that its but just and meet to re^or: thy
own Tauntings of the Qu. Ex. 3. s. 17. upon thy self, lia inepic atque ediose
in explicando animi u^i sensis garris dubie and incertae significationis
vocibits indis, ut quaenum sit ^eusis atque perfectione Scriptururum sine ulia
Revelatione p^r Spiritum and lumen internum non facile quis declarabit, ut
multo sacilius sit Argumentum tuum profligare quem monrem percipere etc.
what means else thy foisting in of that foolish phrase quae simulant fanatici,
by the inserting whereof thou may either intend thus, viz. that all ways
that are fained by the Qua. are unprofitable, unnecessary, and to be rejected
and detested, and so creep thy neck out of the collar, and shelter thy self
from that censure of falsehood thou fore-sawest would else befall the minor; for
mere fained mediums of knowing God, and his will wherever found are to be
rejected as useless, unnecessary, and no less then detestable indeed that is
true enough, who doubts it? but then withal how Serpent-like would thou
hereby subtly insinuate it into the younger sort, to whose use thou devotest
this thy piece of dotage, under that Vnive s^y vendible Title of Theological
determinations, Theses, or Apologetical exercitations, pro S^ripturis, as if
the Qua. professed means were but a fained Light and Spirit, as if thou
foughtest against naught but the Qua. fictions, and not any true internal
Light, or Spirit of God, or heavenly Revelations, or inspirations, but only
such mere imaginary, spiritual Divine motions and notions as the Qua. fain or
falsely fancy so to be. Whereas no figmentitions matters are found, formented,
or sought for by the Qua. to be the Rule, but only the true Revelations, Light,
and Spirit of God himself within the heart.

Or else thou may intend thus as thy words express [that forenamed clouding
clause being excluded] viz. That the Scriptures alone make such an absolutely
perfect Revelation of Gods will, that there is no need at all of any other
Revelation by the Spirit and Light of God within, which the Qua. affirm to be
useful and needful to instruct in the knowledge of God and his will to the
attainment of life eternal, but those are uncertain, perilous, unnecessary
means of knowing our duty, and so to be rejected and detested; in which way
understanding thy mind, there is so much the less fallacy indeed, but the more
falsely, even so much as amounts to little less then great blasohemy and so thy
minor is to be denied with a witness, ex duobus malis and absurdis hisie unum
saltem est elegondum, utrum horum mavis accipe; if the first which is fallacy
and foolery, its the least and the best, yet too bad, if the last which is
falsehood and blasphemy, its so bad that its worse then naught, yet judging by
thy undertaking to prove thy minor, which else were true and needing no proof,
thou intendest the Letter, which is the greater of the evils, I enter the lists
with thee about that, and deny utterly thy minor, which thou proceedst in proof
of by man, particular confiderations, viz. 1. Of the Author of the Scriptures,
namely, God from whom (say thou) Nothing can come that is imperfect any way,
much less in respect of that end to which he decrees any work- J.O. from a
perfect voluntary cause, nothing but what is perfect is to be expected, for
nothing could hinder God, being willing to reveal his will, from revealing it
perfectly, but either because he could not, which is not consistent with his
infinite Wisdom and Omnipotency, or because he would not, which in no wise
agrees with his goodness and grace, therefore he has given out a perfect
Revelation of his will.

Reply. This is the first medium whereby thou seem to thy self Artificially
to have proved the minor of thy first Ar^eficial Argument for the Scriptures
being such an only, absolutely perfect Rule and Revelation of God and his
Will, that there is now no need of any other way of Revelation either of him or
it; but all else, whatsoever by his Spirit and Light within, as in order to the
knowing of God, his Will, and our duty to him, and our obtaining eternal life,
beside the Scriptures, are superfluous, useless, needless, unprofitable,
fictitious, and to be rejected as such, with abhorrency and detestation. And
this minor of thy Prosyllogism, should have been thy express Conclusion in thy
last Argument; instead whereof (being likely ashamed to infer it in its proper
terms, they are so fordid, fottish, false, foolish, blind, brutish, beastly,
blasphemous, grossly detestable, and abominable) thou entailest a conclusion at
the tail of it, which is not contradicted by any but aliud a negato, quite
another thing then that which is denied, yea even the same that we and all
other men own, viz. That God has given out a perfect Revelation of his Will:
Which who doubts of? Who denies but that God gives out his will certainly,
sufficiently to all men? But whether that Revelation of his will be made to all
men by a mere Letter without, so certainly, perfectly, at this day, that in
order to knowing and doing it by every man savingly, his Light and Spirit
within is superfluous, needless, unnecessary, uncertain, and no less then
fictitious and odious to assert needful, which is the lie thou labourest to
defend; or by his Light, Word, and Spirit within, certainly and perfectly,
sufficiently to every individual, in order to his doing his own duty, without
an outward Letter or Writing (as it was before any Writing was, and is still
where no such Writing is, and no less so, where such Writing is also, which is
the truth the Qua. maintain against thee) this is the Question between thee
I.O. and the Qua. which thou rovest and ramblest from, making Premises, which
pretend to have Promises in them of proving thy absurd Opinion, and then
concluding at Random that which i^ nihil ad Rhombum, just nothing at all to thy
purpose, insomuch that as an old Cardinal that had been long absent from Rome,
going once to the Election of a Pope, and seeing such shuffling, and patching,
and and shifting, and canv^sing', and daubing doings in a business of such
moment, as the choice of the infallible Chairman for the whole Church, said no
more but Siccine eliguntur Pontifices Romani? and so took his horse and rode
away turning his back upon Rome, resolving never to see it more; So seeing how
little Logical the Theological Disputations of our University Doctors in
Divinity are, and what pinching and cutting, and curtailing, and serpentine
twining and turning things upside down, and shifting and shuffling to shut out
the plain truth, as held out to them by honest Country Qua. and to escape the
force of the two edged sword of the Spirit or Word of God from wounding their
hairy Scalp, what moping and mincing and mangonizing there is among them, who
having left off to walk by Gods right Rules cannot walk well, nor keep close to
their own wrong Rules neither, is it enough to make any well-meaning,
honest-hearted, Countrified Scholars, that have long discontinued from the
Universities, ashamed and sorry, and sick to see such sorry doings at the
Nursing Mothers, and to say Siccine disputant Academici nostrates? Do our
Modern Doctors dispute thus at the Universities? surely we will never look after
them more, nor send our Sons thither to learn Logic or train them up there to
know honestly and uprightly, and rightly how to reason, much less to make them
Ministers of the Gospel.

But to let the illegitimacy of the conclusion pass, and suppose it to have
been expressed in its own due Terms, let us see how it will follow from those
premises he infers it from that the Letter without the Light and Spirit within
( Memorandum still that he styles those (most blasphemously) uncertain,
perilous, unprofitable, and in no wise necessary means of knowing Gods will,
and our duty and of coming to life, and such as are to be rejected and detested
as fictitious and counterfeit) is the only perfect Rule of Revelation of Gods
will any more then from the self same premises, it will follow contrarily to
him that the Light and Spirit within, are the only perfect, certain, sufficient
Rule of Revealing Gods will without the Letter or Scripture without.

Surely had I.O. been Magister Avtis, his Arts-master in this his Arteficial
Argument, he would have left it out altogether, and not have urged it, as he
does to the prejudice of his cause, for it does him ten times more detriment
then advantage.

For whereas it is generally concluded among you all, and by you two I.O. and
T.D. my present Antagonists in particular as much by any See J.O. p. 42, 43,
45, 46. T.D p. 1 of his 1. Pamph.
(thoug^ yet you both vilify the the said inward Light what ye are able under
the names of natural, obscure, darks, dim, low, and to salvation insufficient
principles, and means of the Revelation of his will See J.O. p. 46. Ex. 4. s.
21. T.D. p. 1, 2.3, 4, and 30. of his 1. Pamp.
imagination, figment, Nescio quid, nihil, mere dictates of our own conscience,
blind, and corrupt) that God declares, and reveals himself, his Sovereign
Power, Authority, Righteousness, Holiness, good and evil, many sins and duties,
and several divine Attributes, and that indispensible moral obedience which he
requires of us as his creatures subject to his Law, by some Light from himself
and principles of conscience, and his own voice therein, and those motions that
are inlaid by his own hand in men's minds, and that they make a Revelation of
him as to the purposes mentioned, and show the work of his own Law written in
men's hearts, and are able to plead their own divine original, and discover
their Author from whom they are, and in whose name they speak, even Gods,
without any other witnesses, further evidence, or reasoning without the
advantage of any considerations, but what are by themselves supplied without
the least contribution, or assistance from without.

Whereas I say all this is granted by you of the inward Light we plead for to
be a ^er^ain, profitable, perfect, sufficient Rule of knowing God, and means of
revealing of his will to us, and our duty to him in order to life without a
Letter, against you who plead the Scripture and Letter only to be so without
the inner Spirit and Light (to say nothing how in effect the cause is little
less than wholly, or rather is wholly given us by T.D. and thy self too, in
those many magnifications of the Light within, as effectual without any thing
but it self [and therefore without the Scripture without] to reveal God and his
will, and sins, and duties, and good and evil, and that moral obedience due
from us to his moral Law) is not thy own Argument for the propounded perfection
of the Scriptures as the only all-sufficient Rule, ab earum Authore, Deo
scilicet, a quo nihil imperfectum u^o modo, multo minus respectu finis cui opus
quodcunque destinat procedere potest, as, yea far more cogent and conclusive to
the inward Light and Spirits being the said Only Allsufficent perfect Rule,
then to the outward letters being so?

And ^iththou set thy self so preposterously to prove the said perfection
of the only Rule, as proper and peculiar to the Letter, may I not much more
properly take thy own words, and therewith ( ad hominem) argue that the name of
the only Rule is the peculiar Right and Privilege of the inward Light and
Spirit!

As thou then say, Jam vero perfectionem dictam Scripturarum, etc. so tuo te
jugulans gladio, say I, Jam vero perfectionem, dictam lucis and Spiritus
interni probamus ab ^orum Authore, Deo scilicet, etc. the said perfection of
the only Rule, and way of Revelation of his will, and our duty, as to life, as
proper and peculiar to the inward Light and Spirit, and not the Scripture, I
prove from their Author, viz. God from whom nothing imperfect in any way can
come, much less in respect of that end, to which he has designed any work.

And if thou say, as thou do, and I deny it not in a more remote sense, God
is the Author of the Scripture, let me ask thee, is he not much more
immediately the Author of his Light and Spirit in the hearts of holy men, and
of that measure thereof that is, and strives and shines in the hearts of all
men from the greater degree of which in the Prophets and Apostles hearts all
the other Scripture (except that little, Exodus 20. and Dan. 5.25, 26, 27.) came
through their hands as subordinate Authors, then he is of the Letter which
issued from him ( non nisi mediantibus manuscripteribus) more mediately and no
otherwise at first, but by means of men writing as moved, and at this day no
more immediately then by the pens and presses of fallible men Transcribing and
Printing, Re-printing, Translating, and copying them out of they know not what
corrupted Copies, not so near as at second or third, but perhaps at the
hundredth hand from the first Penman?

And seeing God is the sole immediate Author of the Light and Spirit within,
which is not alterable, flexible, etc. at the wills of Critics, as thou
confessest the Hebrew Text is, and as he is not of the Letter, which is both
Copied, Canonized and Authorized (as ye have it) by men only as the Rule, i^ it
follow (as secundum Ye it does, not Me) ab Authore remoto from the remote
Author of it God, from whom nothing imperfect can come, that the Letter is the
only perfect Rule and Revelation of Gods will, will it not much more forcibly
follow from Gods being the only and immediate Author of the inner Light and
Spirit, that they are the Only sufficient Rule, and make a perfect Revelation
of his will to the end and purposes aforesaid?

Ob. And if thou say, True; but those ends and purposes, for which the Light
and Spirit within, the Qua. talk of, though useful otherwise, are designed of
God, and given to men, are not that they may be the Rule and guide of our way
in order unto life, but only that thereby we may the more savingly understand
the Letter, which is of God designed, decreed, and authorized to be the only
Rule, for so thou expressly say of the Spirit or Light within, Ex. 4. s. 17.
which Topsey-Turvy ^or expediencies sake, I shall here take into consideration,
that I may have no more to do with it again, where thy Latin words, Englished,
are these,

Nullius luminis interni ^juscunque tandem quam vis fit salutare, is usus aut
finis est, ut ei tanquam duci viae nostrae and Regulae attendere debeamus, fed,
etc
J.O. Of no inward light whatsoever, although it be saving, is this the use or
end, that we should attend to it as the Guide and Rule of our way, but for this
end alone is that vouchsafed of God, that by the help thereof, we may the more
savingly understand that Rule [meaning the Scripture] and the mind of God
revealed in it.

Reply. I answer, Cujus contrarium verum est, this is as quite contrary a
Cob-castle with the heels upwards, and upside downwards, as it is well possible
for a man to build, whereby thou make as thou elsewhere do in I know not
how many places more the Light and Spirit but an instrumental means to bring
men to the Letter, that by the Letter they may have Life and be saved; yea and
sometimes the servile instrument of the Letter it self, by which, as by some
certain Ministerial Attorney, the Letter Authoritatively, as the cause, does all
the mighty and powerful things that are effected toward man's salvation; as
namely, p. 81.

J. O. This light in the Scripture for which we contend.

Reply. But stay there yet a while too J.O. for the Light in the Scripture is
that the Qua. contend for against thee, who contendest for the Letter [if thou
well understandest thy self] against that Light which is declared of in the
Letter as shining in the heart; for the Light in the Scripture is one thing, of
which what thou say is true, but the Scripture, in which that light is
declared and written of is another, as the beaming majesty, brightness, and
glorious light of the Sun, that shines through it, is one thing, and the Glass
window, in and through which it shines, is another, the Light in the Lanthorn
one thing, and the Lanthorn, in which it shines, is another, which Light, that
i^ in the Letter declared, is that we plead for, and J.O. against, and this
J.O. will see, when he looks over the second time with his eyes open, what with
his eyes shut at first he overlookt: Secundae cogitationes saepe meliores.

J.O. This light in the Scripture, is nothing but the beaming of the Majesty,
Truth, Holiness, and Authority of God, by this it dives, i.e. the Letter by the
Light dives into the consciences of men into all the recesses of their hearts,
guides, teaches, directs, determines in themin the Name, Majesty and Authority
of God.

Rep. See how the Light is made the Letters Messenger; and subordinate Agent;
for By here is not such a By, as is used when the Inferior is said to act by
the Authority of the Superior, but the Superior by the subse^viency of the
Inferior.

Whereas indeed the Letter is but the instrument of the Light and Spirit,
whereby the Light and Spirit do supreamly and authoritatively, what ever they
do by it at all, and can do without it even what sometimes they do with i^,
since it is in being, and where it has a being; for the Light, tries,
searches, shines shows, reveals, judges, determines, as well without the Letter
as with it, and did dive into the heart, where the Letter never was, and direct
there before the external literal directory was all; and yet uses a^ its
pleasure, the Letter as its instrument, and as a knife to kill, which knife yet
as an instrument cannot quicken, but the Letter does not enter qua talis) into
the heart at all, and what ere it does, it does in subserviency to the Light
which is its Author, whose instrument it is to use, but not the Light its
instrument at all.

Moreover the end of the Letter is but to turn men from the darkness and power
of Satan, wherein they dwell, to the Light within them, that shines in the
darkness that is also within them, which Light is the power of God, this Act.
26. is said to be the end of Paul's Ministration, which was performed partly by
writing, and partly by word of mouth, that so by believing in the light and
living in it they might not abide in the darkness but have the light of life;
but the end of the Light and Spirit within is not to bring to the Letter, by
the Letter we may have the life, for the searchers into the Letter and lookers
thereinto for the eternal life, which is Christ, whom the Letter testifies of,
never found the life they looked for there, because they heard not Gods voice,
nor cared for his word abiding in them, nor came to Christ the Light and
Spirit, that they might have the life, for the letter kills, but the Light
and Spirit gives the life, 2 Cor. 3.

And howbeit I deny not the Scripture to be perfect praesertim respectu finis,
especially in relation to that end, as J O. says, for which it was decreed of
God, yet that that end was to be the only guide and rule of men in their way to
life I deny, asserting the Light and Spirit still as that which is designed and
ordered of God as to that end, and was so from the beginning before any Letter
without was at all: And though I own the Scripture still as useful, profitable,
effectual, sufficient, and perfectly successful, where used by the man of God
in the wisdom of God for the many excellent ends and uses formerly spoken to
from, 2 Timothy 2.15. as being written by inspiration of God, yet I still deny
that to be, thereupon, the standing Rule as the Light and Spirit is, because no
where so denominated nor designed to be by God, in all the Scripture as I have
showed suffi^iently above in answer to all the Texts whence thou mistakest it
so to be; and because Damnati lingua vocem habet, vim non habet, a Heretics
words are never heeded. I must here make use again of T.D. to defeat I.O. who
says, p. 27, 28.43. of his first Pamph. p. 17, 18. of his second. That all
that was written by holy men and preserved for our use is not therefore our
standing Rule, because God did not intend them, nor give order for them to be
so, and beside such inspiration and usefulness, to make a Rule is necessary
Gods appointment of a writing to that end which appointment the Letter never
had from God what ever it had from men) the difference lies in Gods arbi^rary
dispensation, who assured his Church what was sufficient as to her standing
Rule before the Letter was, viz. his his Light and Spirit in which regard
though we highly respect the Letter yet we can look upon it, as p. 44. first
Pamph. T.D. says of some useful things of God with reference to othersome, no
more with such regard as the only standing Rule, as we do upon the other.

And though with thee I.O. we assert and deny not, but that by the efficacy of
the Light and Spirit the Letter is more savingly understood, for the Spirit
well knows its own, yea by the Light and Spirit only is the Letter understood
and read to profit, and not by that twinkling twilight of thy fidling fancy,
for that Ignis fatuus finds little, as to the inside of the letter, but fuel
to feed thee in fierce and fiery twittle twattles about the outside sense of
it, and the truth of Transcripts and Translations, pidling points, Tittles, and
Iota's; yea who has known the mind of the Lord, or the things of the Spirit
declared in the Letter but the Spirit, and they that live after the Light
thereof, and no more after the flesh, to whom only the Spirit only does reveal
them? yet Monstrum horrendum, cui lumen ademptum, what Scriptureless,
lightless, spiritless speeches are these of J.O. who depresses all inward light
whatsoever, even that within, the living Word of God within, so much below the
mere Letter formally considered as an outward writing, and abstract from these,
as to assert them from which the Letter had all the being it has, and that
thousands of years after all these ancient Rules and Lights, that are to day,
and yesterday, and for ever the same, without the least shadow of alteration,
had been famous in the world among all the Worthies from Abel to Moses, to have
all their being from God to us ward merely for the sake of the Letter which was
but of yesterday, and as well every day as every way mutable, and that so
easily that it is done in a time in but the turning of a hand, yea by the
Transposing of Letters Heb. Points (and like See how J. O. even teaches men so
ill minded to criticize on the Scriptures, and turn them easily as a nose of
wax which way soever they are minded to make them stand in his Epistle
Dedicatory p. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. It is, quoth he, if a man have a mind to
criticize, and mend the Bible, but trying what the Word or Words he fixes on
will make by the commutation of Letters, etc. it is but saying the Scribe was
mistaken in the likeness of letters, or affinity of ^ound, etc. and then its
done, and various lections arise, and corruptions come into his originals in
more then Tittles and Iota's, one Iota or Tittle, of which yet [quoth he
blindly, speaking of the bare bones of the Letter, T. 1. c. 1. s. 13. as
written] shall never change or pass away.
as himself asserteth) as many various lections may be in its several copies,
welnigh as lines, and to represent all these, which gave the Letter the being
of a certain sub sub unto themselves, as subservient, unto it as if they were
of, and for no other use nor end in the world, but to teach men to come (not to
God himself for life) but to the Letter and to read the Book called the Bible,
which does but imminde men, that forget them, to mind the Light and Spirit. I
shall therefore only take this Tale of J.O. and, mutatis mutandis, transform it
by a transposition of the two subjects thereof, viz. the Light and Letter which
I.O. has mis used and mis-placed each into its proper place, use, and order
and so quite quit it here, Nullius literae externae cujuscunque tandem, etc. in
plain English thus, Of no external letter whatsoever although the holy
Scripture it self which J.O. calls saving is this the use and end that we
should attend to it as to the guide of our way and Rule, but to this end only
is it graciously granted of God that by means thereof we may perceive to our
salvation, that Rule, i.e. the Spirit, Light, and Word of God ad intra, and the
mind of God revealed therein. In this Translation is no truth hid that shall
not be revealed, nor covered that shall not be known: So having turned J.Os.
Babel with the bottom upwards, I shall let it stand and pass on about my
business, concluding against thee I.O. in thy own words for the Light and
Spirit to be that Rule, thou say the Letter is, from its perfection, ab
Authore.

A causa perfecta, etc. From a perfect voluntary cause nothing but what is
perfect can be expected, for nothing can hinder God, being willing to reveal
his will, from revealing it perfectly as before the Letter was, so now where
the Letter is not, among heathens, by his Light and Spirit, by which thou
confessest he reveals it very far in the words forecited, but either because he
cannot, which denies his infinite Wisdom and Omnipotency, or because he will
not, which agrees not with his goodness and grace. Remember this yemy two
Antagonists, J.O. who say, Christus sub nulla consideratione lumen salutare
omnibus and singulis indulsit, Christ under no consideration has vouch safed
saving light to all and every man, Ex. 4.5.17. how ye limit God in his goodness
and grace; and T.D. who, p 4. of thy first Pamph. say, Salvation is by God
offered to more then to whom it is intended. And J.O. Ex. 4. s. 20. The light is
sufficient to leave excuseless not to save.


Therefore God has and does give out by his Light and Spirit within a perfect
Revelation of his will, so that they consequently must be secundum te by thy
own Argument J.O. the only perfect standing Rule (for there are not two) so far
is the Letter that came from them, from being so, as thy fancy fancies it to
be, alone and exclusively of them, as uncertain, useless, needless, perilous
and detestable.

The second medium by which thou go about to prove the foresaid conclusion,
viz. That the Letter or Scriptures are the only perfect Rule and Revelation of
God, his will, and our duty that gives to know him to eternal life, and not the
Spirit and light, which as Enthusiasm, dubious, useless figment, etc. are with
thee to be detested, is, A natura librorum sacrae Scripturae, etc. from the
nature of the books of the holy Scripture, which are say thou) those of the
Old and New Testament: so (say thou) the Apostle clearly dilates of the Old
Testament (2 Cor.3.14. in the reading of the Old Testament) of the New there is
the same reason, verse 6. Now every Testament (say thou) alluding to, but not
quoting, Gal. 3.15.) though but a man's, is perfect, and being once confirmed,
no man disanulleth, or superaddeth thereunto.

Reply. Never did I discern such absolute self-overturnings proceed from a
professed Doctor, as do from J.O. thick and threefold in the very cause he
prosecutes, whose proofs of his own producing do as frequently confound him,
and as fully foil him [as to the matter he would prove thereby] as any that can
likely be produced against him by those he opposes; and yet I verily believe he
speaks the sense wellnigh of the whole University it self, in which he has in
the late clawing, cringing, corresponding, and climing times, achieved to
become a Chieftane.

And that it may appear, lets reason J.O. hereabout a little with thee, let me
ask thee, Is the Gospel, is the New Testament, Letter, Scripture, external
Text, and outward Writing, as the Old Testament is? Is it such a passing,
perishing, dark, low, obscure thing, as writing, or graving of Points, Tittles,
and Iotaes in Tables of stone (though with the singer of God himself) much more
it such a mouldring matter (for so thy self call the most Original Copies of
the external Text of the holy Scripture that ever was in the world, p. 167.164.
and therefore well may I so call thy best bare transcribed copies of it) as
Writings with ink, and stamping with Lamb-black in Roles, and Books, and
Papers, and Parchments with press hands and tools, which cannot be preserved so
long as from Ezra till now from mouldring without a Miracle? Is the Gospel, the
New Testament no more than such as thou talkest of? Is it (...), Typography
which mere men can take, and turn, and translate, and tumble to and fro, and
transcribe, and tear, and dash out, and do what they will with? Is it outward
writings of Epistles, and Recommendations, and Histories, and Letters (as that
of Paul to Philemon) about private, personal, and domestic affairs, and such
like? Is it not an Epistle of Christ in the table of the heart? though
ministered sometimes by man at the motion of his Spirit? or if a Writing, yet
not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God in fleshly Tables of the
heart, 2 Cor. 3. Is is as the Old Testament, as all mere writing ad extra only
is, whether of old or since Christ, and all outward (...) or Letter only, that
cannot quicken, nor cure, but kills such as serve, as thou yet do, in the
oldness of it? Is it not Spirit, Light, and Life? Is it not the Words of Christ
spoken by the Lord himself alone, which are Spirit and Life? in newness of
which the true children of the New Covenant, that are more then Bastards that
pretend to it, do serve, and not in the oldness of a letter, or that old way of
the old Scribes that came no nearer to Christ the Life, then the outside of the
outward Scripture, which was wrote of him? Is it any of these things? are not
these the best Instruments of the Old Testament foolish Shepherds, wherewith
for a time they were suffered to feed, who made the poor of the flock the flock
of the slaughter, taken up again since Christ, directly beside the intent of
Christ, and such as wrote the later Scriptures, by our Idol Shepherds that
leave the flock to starve, so they can be better fed themselves, who are not
behind those of old in feeding, with Gall and Wormwood, the flock of the
slaughter, in not pitying but slaying them, and yet holding themselves not
guilty? for which the sword of the Lord is now upon their arm, and upon their
right eye, so that their Arm or Power is now to be clean dried up, and their
right eye utterly darkened.

Ah poor be-wildred, be-nighted blind-guides of your blindly-guided people,
that by custom and tradition from your mouths, who take it so to be by
tradition from your Forefathers, are now naturallized into a naming the naked
dead letter by the name of the living Word of the living God, and the four
mis-transcribed and mis-translated Copies of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John's
Manuscript of what Christ did in that body wherein he was born at Bethlehem,
and dyed at Jerusalem, by the name of the Gospel, and those four bare Books,
with the rest of those few that follow fardelled together with them in what
fashion men most fancy, and bound up as the Bible sellers please, by the name
of the New Testament.

So thou talkest I.O. telling the world of the nature of the Books of the
Scripture, as ye now have it is this, they are the Old Testament and the New,
so thou intendest in thy saying, Sunt autem veteris and novi Testamenti. 1.
Citing Paul, who calls the Books of Moses the Old Testament, 2 Cor. 3.14. as
^^ll well he might, for the Old Testament was indeed (...) Letter or Writing
written with Ink and Pen or engraven outwardly on Tables of stone, and not
Spirit or writing with the Spirit of the living God in the fleshly Tables of
the heart, as the New is, which the Saints are under, who are therefore said to
serve, Rom 7.6. not in the oldness (...) of the letter, but in the newness,
(...) of the Spirit. And then secondly, asserting that Novi Testamenti ^adem
est rati^, the case is the same between the Old Testament and the New (which is
most false as to the thing in hand and 3. Citing 2 Cor. 3.6. in proof of it: By
which thou show thy folly, for thou could not have well found out a
fitter Text for its disproof, and whether thou, who citest it, for borest to
set it down yea or nay for fear its should be seen how far it contradicts what
thou citest it for, I will not say, but I am sure a man that is but minded to
miss the meaning of it may run and read how that verse subverts the business
thou bring it in for: yea verily so far is that Apostle, who truly calls the
Old Testament by the names of Book, Heb 9.19. and Letter written and engraven
in stones, and such like, from affirming with thee that the case is the same
with the new Testament, as to the name and nature thereof, that both in that
verse and in the third ve^se also he more then intimates, yea plainly expresses
that of the Old and New Testament in that particular more than any divers^ est
ra^io the case is diverse, yea so far different that he flatly opposes the one
to the other, as things that, however agreeing otherwise, viz. in their being
both glorious in some degree, though the New in a far greater degree then the
other (as a beautiful picture may agree in respect of beauty, glory,
comeliness, and complete resemblance in some degree with the substantial
person, that is it pa^t^rn of) yet dis^agree in this that the one is Letter,
Outward writing, printing, and ingraving, etc. visible and legible by the
outward eye; the other not so, but internal, invisible, spiritual, written with
the Spirit in the heart, yea Spirit it self, which while the Letter is dead and
killing, is only living, quickening, and giving life.

Yea two varying Ministration does the Apostle make them, not on^y as one is
that of death and condemnation to the children of it, of whom on pain of
perishing it requires the living of a life, which it gives no ability to, and
which the other, i e. the Spirit only gives and inables to live, the other that
of Spirit, Life, Liberty, Righteousness, Glory, but also as the one, that is,
the Old is a writing ad extra only, the other, that is, the New, a writing, a
Scripture, only ad intra (though written of by that without that he absolutely
asserts a present inconsistency since the doing away of the Old, between a man's
being a Minister now of both as once, and that posita novo tollitur vetus, the
new being now come in full force, and confirmed by the Testators death, the Old
Testament, and its Ministry is disanulled in regard of its weakness and
unprofitableness (however profitable as a Type in its time for many uses) to
bring immediately to the life, so that he who is the Minister of the one, i.e.
of the Old Testament, i.e. of the Letter, Outward writing, Text, or Scripture,
is not a Minister of the other, i.e. of the New, i.e. of the Gospel,
Righteousness, Glory, liberty life and Spirit; and Retro, he who is a true
Minister of the Gospel or New Testament [as now standing in the force and
substance it self out of the figure and shadows wherewith it was veiled of old]
is not (though he may utter things, as moved of the Spirit, that are written in
the Letter, as Christ himself and the Apostles did) a Minister of the Old, as
the Old Word-stealers, Jer. 23. were, and our Modern Text-takers, and
Scripture-sellers are. Paul takes away the one from him on whom he stablisheth
the other, denies the one, of whom he affirms the other, and opposes the New
Testament, which he styles the Spirit, to the Letter, by which name (...), he
denominates only the Old: God, says he, has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, for the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives life.

2. Here is not all, nor yet not half of that absurdity and falsehood that I.O.
in his folly flings abroad in that small parcel above, which I am yet under the
animadversion of, for whereas he says, I am vero omne Testamentum est
perfectum, every Testament is perfect, intending it both of the Old Testament,
and the New, and not only so, but of such a perfection as avails in hunc finens
ut assequamur vitam aeternam, to this very end, viz The obtaining the life
eternal it self (for so is his assertion of the Books of the Scriptures, which
he describes as to their nature, and concludes under that name of the Old, and
New Testament) his Positi^n is so woefully false, that himself is as wonderfully
foolish, who sees it not flatly contradictory to the Scripture; for howbeit the
very Old Testament, or outward letter is duly owned by us to be a Ministration
of God (from whom nothing can come, as is abovesaid, but what is perfect,
praesertim respectu finis cui opus quodcunque deflinat, in reference to that
end for which he appoints it) absolutely perfect to that end for which it is
given forth of God, which is to be an A, B, C, or elementary help, or outward
worldly Rudiment to indoctrinate younglings in their ^^nage concerning the
inward Light and Spirit, as the only way that leads to Christ the Life from
whom the Light comes, and is lent as a line or clew of thread, that followed
conducts through the valley, and shadow of death to the Life it self, in which
respect the Letter of the Law is called a Schoolmaster, Tutor, Governor,
under whose Tuition the under aged imbondaged ignorant ones may be trained up
into a true understanding of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, as by a Shadow,
Type, Figure, Festraw, or Finger that points the Primarian Professors more
distinctly to that they are to eye and aim at more then it self, and by such as
are in the faith and obedience to the light may be used too, to make them wiser
toward salvation, and more perfectly furnish^ (...) every good work, as he that
is past a novice, and is become a well-studied Scholar can and may (but must is
another matter) read in the Horn-book as well and better than when he learned
in it; yet as to its being, so omnibus numeris absoluta and perfecta, as thou
bablest, making it so perfect as to bring to the life, that is a mere
Antiscriptural fiction of thy own fancy, for though a man may by the Horn-book
learning become the more dispositively fitted to read in the Bible, and other
books of Latin or Logic. and so by degrees come at last to the capacity and
degree of a Doctor in the Vniversi^y, yet he that shall say the Horn-book is (
per saltum) perfect to this end that without need of reading or learning any
other books a person may by it alone become capable immediately of Commen^ing
Dr. in Divinity, shall by my consent be counted as ridiculous, silly and
senseless as such as side with J.O s. sayings are, who say of the Scripture or
Letter alone, exclusively of the Spirit and Light within it calls to walk in,
that by it men may have the Life, it gives the Life, it is the only most
perfect standing Rule of faith and life; yea is so perfect and absolu^^ in all
respects, that there is no need of any other Revelation by the Spirit or Light
within to instruct us in the knowledge of God, and our duty, to this end that
we may obtain eternal life, yea all these means of knewing God, and his will
are uncertain, dangerous, unprofitable, in no wise necessary, and therefore to
be rejected and detested as Fanatic figment.

For the foresaid hon^urer of the Horn-book in his Hyperbolical adoration of it
would be as contrary to common sense and reason as I.O. and T.D. in their
absolute admirations of the Scripture, and abominations of the Spirit and Light
within for its sake are both to sense and reason, and the common Testimony of
the Scripture it self also, which testifies every where concerning the Old
Testament or Letter (which I confess to be profitable, perfect, and absolutely
able to the ends and uses of Gods appointment as a Typical testimony of those
things which were to be spoken after that is weak, imperfect and unprofitable
as to that end for which I*O. asserts it per salium, to be so absolutely able,
powerful and perfect to, that is to say to salvation and eternal life; for it
faith that it is the Light and Spirit that give the life, and the liberty from
the lust and sin, to which the mother that is under the Old Testament, or
Letter of the Law is yet in bondage with her children, and that the Old
Testament, or Letter lies only in eatings and drinkings and diverse Baptisms
and carnal Ordinance, imposed only till the time of Reformation, Heb. 9 10 in
weak and beggarly rudiments or elements of the world, unto which who, having
once begun in the Spirit, are tu^ned aside to, are foolish and bewitched, and
disobedient to the Truth, and do but think in vain) to be made perfect by the
flesh, and desire again to be in bondage, and know not yet Christ formed in
them, but know him only outwardly, and after the flesh, Gal. 1.3.4.9, 19. 2
Cor. 5.16, 18. are Jews outwardly only, not truly, nor inwardly, nor
circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, which is that of the
heart in the Spirit, not of letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, but
Concis'd and conform^d according to the outward bodily exercises found in the
letter, loving the praise of men, more than the praise of God; and according to
the law of a carnal Commandment, not the inward worship of God in Spirit, nor
after the power of that endless life the light leads to.

That the law of the Letter, which had but the shadow of good things, and not
the very image of the things themselves, could never make the corners thereunto
perf^ct as pertaining to the conscience, Heb 9.9.10.11.

That the Old Testament was faulty and failing, and defective, whereupon G^d
made a new one, that could bring to life, as it could not, for if there had
been a Law which could have given life, verily righteousness should have come
by it, Gal. 3.21 for if it had been faultless or perfect, or could have made
perfect, or given life, there had been no occasion for the second, Heb. 8.7, 8.

That there is a disanulling of the Commandment going before which was
attendance to an outward letter, because of the weakness and unprofitablness
thereof, because it could make nothing perfect, but only was the ushering in of
a better Hope, even of the Light and Spirit, by which we may draw nigh to God,
who is Light, Heb. 7.16, 18, 19. and with whom no Letter lauder, that lives
beside the light, and the mystery of the Letter also, can have any fellowship
at al.

And lastly, as to thy saying that every, Testament if it be but man's is
perfect, so that when once confirmed none may disanul or add^ to it.

I answer, no perfect Testament is to be dianulled when confirmed, and in full
force, as it is only by the death of the Testator; but that shows thy assertion
to be false, who saye^ that every Testament is perfect, inasmuch as the Old
Testament or Letter was disanulled [which secundum te could not have been, if
it had been perfect, and so omnibus numeris) absolute as thou sayest] in regard
of the weakness and unprofitableness of it to bring to life; and for the the
faultiness and imperfection of the first, God himself whose Testament it was,
dedicated with the blood of Bulls, Goats, Lambs, and Calves, for the time then
being only ((...) as intended for a while only 'twas called a Ceremony) takes
it away that he might establish the second, Heb. 7.18, 19.8, 7, 8, 9. that is
perfect to the giving of the life, which is ignorantly asserted by thee of the
Letter, for the Letter, that was perfect to its own end as a shadow, was
altogether imperfect thereunto.

And that nothing is to be added to any Testament once come in full force and
virtue by the death of the Testator [ as all Testaments do then, and never till
then, for Heb. 9.16, 17. where a Testament is, there must of necessity also be
the death of the Testator for a Testament is of force after men be dead,
otherwise it is of no strength at all whilst the Testator liveth] This I freely
grant as a truth, but utterly overturns all thou contendest for which that is
the Books of the Apostles and Evangelists, which were all written after Christ
the Testators death, 'are the New Testament, which how they can possibly be if
thy own Position be true, as it is, that to a Testament, if but man's when
confirmed, as it only and always is by the Testators death [much more God's
New Testament after once confirmed by the Death of Christ the Testator as it
was before one letter of that Scripture thou call the New Testament as
written] nothing must be added thereto, let all who are not void of judgment
judge. For if the writings of the Apostles and Evangel^sts which were all added
and penned after Christ's death, the Testator of it, by whose death it came into
full force and strength, be the New Testament, an outward literal Declaration
of which New Testament, I know it is, as the Writings of Moses and the Prophets
also are, both which are but the Letter, (...) or Old Testament that in an
external way declares the New, with this difference only that the writing
before Christ declared Chrisiumexihibendum, those since Chrisium exhibitum, the
first Christ to be offered, the later Christ already offered; I say if these
later be the New Testament then either one or both of these two absurdities
must be owned, viz. that there has been, where there should have been none, a
superadding of very much to the New Testament, or rather secondly, that the
whole New Testament was it self made since it was ratified and confirmed by the
Testators death. Vtrum horum mavis accipe, own thou I.O. which thou will, or
both of these if thou will, but I Will never own that to be a man's Testament only,
much les, Christ's, but only fained so to be, that is added to, or rather wholly
made after his death whose Testament it is.

I.Os. other Mediums are all too frivolous to insist upon. The third is ab
expresso Testimonio, the express, Testimony of Psalm. 16.7, 8.

Reply. Where I have showed before that by the Law, Testimony, Commandment of
the Lord, is intended the Light we talk of, not the Letter.

The fourth, A materia Scripturarum, the matter, which says he; is all the
Council of God, and nothing but what the Prophets and Moses spoke, alluding to
Act. 20.27. and citing Act. 26.22.

Reply. In neither of which places Paul does either mention or mean any outward
Scriptures or Writings of his own, much less other men's, but the things he
ministered to the Church of Ephesus and her Elders by word of mouth, delivering
to every of them according to their Stations and Relations, how they ought to
walk, and to please God, and withholding nothing that was profitable either to
Elders or flock, Act. 20.20. and to all men small and great, the sum and
substance of things fore-spoken of old, viz. Repentance toward God, and faith
toward Jesus, verse. 21. and how there was now as to the mystery of truth, Nil
dictum quod non dictum prius, nothing said, which was not showed before in the
type and shadow.

5. A fine, from their end, which, quoth he, is 1. Faith, Joh. 20.21. These are
written that ye may believe, and Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing.

Reply. Which first Text, if intending faith in the history of things, that the
Letter may beget, men may have, and have from Rome to this place, and yet
perish, which latter Text intends a saving faith: but that comes by hearing and
hearing by the word of God, which Word, says Paul above in the same Chapter,
is not the Letter without, but a Light within nigh in the heart and mouth of
men, that they may hear and do it, even the Word of faith which they preached.

2. Wisdom to salvation, perfect, instruction to all good works, 2 Pet. 1.19.
2 Timothy 3.15. 16.

Reply. Which Scriptures I have spoken to before, and showed how little they
make to I.Os. purpose, the first speaking not of the Scripture at all. The
second, how throw says in the light first, the letter may be profitable
toward, but not, per saltum, to salvation and perfection.

3 Attainment of eternal life, 5. Joh. 39.30.31.

Reply. Which life comes, as is there said above through Christ, and believing
in his light, which is his name, whom and which the Scriptures testify of, as
appears by the two Texts he cites, talked on enough by me already in way of
answer to I.Os. Fancies and not by the Letter or Scriptures themselves, though
searched after and looked for there by the Scribes, that neither heard nor saw
the Father, nor came to the Son for life, nor could abide, that his word should
abide in them.

So that howbeit he concludes the Scripture perfect in all respects, I say in
respect to its own appointed end it is, as abiding incorrupted by men's
wresting, as at first given out by holy men, yet not in all the respects, in
which I.O. and T.D. assert it to be perfect, who makes it, as now altered and
adulter^ted, the only most perfect Standing Rule of faith and life, and way and
means of knowing his will, our duty, and of coming to eternal life, and that
exclusively of all inward light and Spirit, and other Revelation, of which (but
where is the 'proof on'^?) his says there is no need of them, but they are
fictitious, uncertain, dangerous, abominable, and the like; Whereas I trust to
make it appear there is no knowing God but by other Revelation of him then the
outward one that is made in the Scripture, even by the Revelation of himself
within men.

As for thy Enthusiasm and colloquia Angelica, vel ficta vel facta, thou may
keep that to thy self, I pretend not to the defense of discourse with Angels
fained or true, yet to thy shame I shall say thus much in vindication of truth
against thee, viz. that thou show thy self but a silly man to con^emn
Colloquia cum Angelis vel sicta vel facta, and by whole sale to throw away
without making any difference all conference with Angels, whether made indeed,
or but fained? for what were all Daniels, Mary's, Paul's, I^hns, Christ's
conferences with Angels truly made, fit for nothing but thy flours, and for
thee to make thy self sport with? Col. 2.18. which thou cotest below will not
save thee from the just censure of ignerant impudence, since that condemns a
worshipping of Angels only, as also the Angel himself condemns that, whom John
would have worshipped, Rev. 19.10 22.9. and forbids it; but conference with
Angels, not counterfeit, and ficta, but facta: which thou makes no bones of to
render detestable in thy dirty driblings, as well as fained, are of those good
things thou speak ill of, because thou know them not.

Having Grubd up by the Roots the first of J. Os. Grand Artificial Arguments
grounded inartificially upon Testimonies of Scriptures, which he calls
inartificial ones, and disproved all his petty and subordinate proofs of the
minor Proposition thereof on which the whole stress of his evidence stood; I
proceed to examination of the rest.

Arg. 2. His second is, A perfecta operatione seu effe^tu Scripturarum, from
the perfect operation and effect of the Scripture. In English thus,

If the Scripture does accomplish in its way of efficacy, which is moral, All
things that can possibly be effected by any Revelation of Gods will whatsoever
in order to our due and sincere worshipping of God, and coming at last to life
eternal, Then vain are all those foresaid principles of the knowledge of God,
viz. The Spirit and Light within, which the Fanatics falsely boast of.

But the former is true: Therefore, etc.

The minor of this Argument which I deny, has a whole Troop of Testimonies or
Texts of Scripture pressed to attend the proof thereof, which I.O. takes to be
such a Trusty Lifeguard (and most of them are so to the Qua. cause concerning
the Light, Word, and Spirit within) that there is no doing any thing in denial
thereof, that can reach to the rendering of it untrue; but unless it be some one
or two of them that mention the Letter as profitable in a way that will prove
little to his purpose, the rest will frustrate his expectation of assistance
from them, sail him and fall in with us neither expressing nor implying any such
matter as the Scripture as he supposes, but intending all the very truth we
contend for against him, viz. The efficacy, profitable, and powerful operation
of the inward light, Word and Spirit of God, which he Ironically glories over
as inania, inutilia, incerta minime necessaria, fictitia, rejicienda,
detestanda, and such like.

Those Texts are Ps. 19.8. 119.105. Romans 1.15, 16. 2 King 3.15. Iam. 1.21. 1 Timothy 4.16. Isa. 55.10, 11. I^r. 23.29. Ioh. 8.31.5 1. Ioh. 17.20. Romans 15.^.
Heb. 4.12.

Here Is a whole Jure impannelled again, of which he imagines that they will all
give their verdict his way for the Scripture, that it does efficere ea omnia
praedicte, yea alia omnia perficere, etc. effect the things aforesaid, yea and
perfect or accomplish all things necessary to Gods glory and our salvation
alone, so that inania sunt falsa, etc. All Revelation, or means of Revelation
by these things, viz. The spirit or Light within, the Qua. call to, are vain
and false, etc.

But (setting aside two of them, viz. 2 Timothy 3.15. Romans 15.4. (as I have showed
above) which though they do speak of the outward Scriptures being useful,
profitable and comfortable to the Saints, yet prove them not to be therefore
the only perfect standing Rule of faith and life for the reason rendered by T.D.
why all Scripture that is by inspiration is not so, because besi^es inspi^ation
to make a Rule is necessary Gods appointment of Writings to that end, page 43.
of his 2. Pamph. which said appointment to that end the Book called the Bible
has not, saving only that appointment of man) not so much as one of all the
rest of his Trusty Texts do either mention or mean ought of the outward
Scripture, I.O. cites and summons them all together to pass their Vote for, but
do all unanimously give their Verdict on the behalf of that holy Spirit, Word,
and Light within which the Qua. stand to vindicate as the ancient, most
perfect, useful, certain, steadfast standing Rule of faith and life, and way of
Gods revraling his will to us, and of our saving knowledge of himself, and it,
and our duty to him in particular, against that venom, I.O. and T.D. spit out
against them, with which they are big, I.O. specially, under the slanderous
disgraceful and opdrobrious compellations of uncertain, dangerous, unuseful, in
no wise necessary, counterfeit, abject, detestable: So that I might let them
all pass and take no notice of them, unless he had brought such Scriptures in
proof the Scriptures power and efficacy as make some mention thereof either
expressly or implicitly at least; yet since they make not little to I.Os. as
they make much for the Qua. cause against him, who affirm the word in the
heart, and light within, to be that which he falsely and ignorantly asserts the
Letter to be, viz. the only standing Rule and way of knowing God savingly, and
means of Revelation of himself and w^^, and our duty to us, of our obtaining
life, and that very self-evidencing effectual light, and power of God to
salvation; I am minded to insist here a little longer upon them, and perhaps
upon such other Texts as I.O. elsewhere wrests this way in proof of the
self-evidencing efficacy, light and power of the Scriptures in his English
Treatises, as well as in his Latin Theses.

The first of I.Os. Twelve Texts (Ten whereof nor talk of, nor intend, nor
mention, nor mean the Sripture at all) viz. Ps. 19. it has been talked with
already above, where I have showed that the Law of God, which is therefore said
to be a restituens animam, restoring and converting the soul, is the Light the
Letter speaks of, and not the Letter it self, which any but a blind man may
see; for what Letter was written when David wrote this? very little more then
the Books of Moses, which I.O. himself, and all men con^ess to be but the Old
Testament, which is but the letter that kills, for is that outward Letter of
the Apostles and Evangelists were the new Testament, as they call it, yet none
of that was in being till above a thousand years after David, and the Old
Testament that was in his days is now abolished, neither it nor the Letter nor
outward Statutes and Judgments of it being given to any but Jacob or Israel
after the flesh, as a type of the New Testament or Covenant that is now made
good to Israel after the Spirit; but that Text I say has been unfolded enough
before, so that though I meet with it again here, as I have done twice before
(and whether I may again or no it matters not, but sure I am that some
Scriptures thou citest four, and some five or six times over at least in thy
Book, how much more I know not in proof of the Scriptures being this and that,
which testify no one Tittle of any thing concerning the Scriptures at all, so
dry are our Doctors and Divines drawn and nearly driven to find out furniture
in the Scripture in defense of their false faith, and mere figments about the
Scripture I shall meddle no mo more with it here, nor with the second that are
sufficiently forespoken to, though they both speak something (as good as
nothing to thy cause concerning the outward Scriptures, viz Romans 15. 2 Timothy 3.
As for the other nine they all with one consent, and more that elsewhere thou
cotest, do declare the Authority, efficacy, self-evidencing light and power of
the word of God within, which both the Qua. and the Scriptures bear one and the
self-same testimony to, but predicate nothing at all of the Scriptures, which
nine together with the rest that are coincident therewith and truly cogent to
all men's consciences, as concerning the witness they give to the inward word,
the outward Letter relates of, I shall here take under consideration, in what
order is not very much material.

As to that Ioh. 8 31.5 1. in which two verses Christ to the Jews speaks of one
and the same thing, which run thus, If ye continue in my words, ye are my
Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free: If a m^n keep my saying, he shall never see death. I reply.

Reply. Christ's Word and his saying is efficacious and powerful to tree them
that continue believing in it, and deliver from death* and give life, yea that
the Words he speaks are spirit and life, according as he says of them, Ioh.
6.63. and verse. 68. the Words of eternal life (which Text page 68. thou I.O.
very falsely expoundest of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles Writings) this who
^^^^ies? Which word of his as its heeded in the heart where it is spoken and
laid up there till it dwell richly within sits men to teach and admonish others
according to Col. 3.16. which Text also thou understandest Ex. 2. s 13. and
T.D. too p. 31. of his 1. Pamph. of the Scripture or Letter without, and that
the Word that Christ speaks to every man in his own heart and conscience, whose
voice and word, and Gods word also, his sheep hear, and such as are of God,
when others do not, cannot, because they will not, Joh. 8.43.47.10.26, 27. is
that which leaves without cloak or excuse in their sins, Joh. 15 22. and that
the Word that God by Christ the Light, and Christ by his Spirit and Light in
the conscience speaks, is that which who so believes in, and hears, abides not
in darkness or error, but comes to know the truth that sets him free from the
law of sin and death, and brings to life; and who hears not, or hears and
believes not, or receives not, but rejects, shall be judged by at the last day,
according to Joh. 12.46, 47, 48, 49, 50. this I do not deny, for this is it
(and not the Letter here, as it is sometimes used as the Lights instrument,
which was never in the heart, how much less the letter chiefly, only,
authoritatively, exclusively of any other Revelation by the Sp^ri^ and Light
within, a^ thou spitte^ it out, to which Letter, yet page 87.83, 86, 87. thou
^o (...) all those powerful properties) which dive, into the hearts,
co^science^, and secret (...) of the (...) of men whether they ever saw, read,
heard, or heard of the Letter yea or nay, Judges, sentences them in themselves,
convinces, tes^ifies, conquers, kills men, converts, builds up, makes wise,
holy, obedient, ministers consolation in every condition, to whom it is due,
and (as thou say intending it of the Scripture, which is peculiar only to
the Light within the heart the Scripture speaks of) guides, teaches, directs,
determines, judges in, and upon men in the Name, Majesty, and Authority of God;
also I deny not but the Word of Christ spoken by Christ himself in the
conscience is that which is effectual to purge the conscience and cleanse the
heart that it may bring forth fruit to God, and the way accordin to Ioh. 15.3
where he says, Now ye are clean through the Word that I have spoken unto you;
and according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 5.26. who says, Christ cleanses and
sanctifies by the washing of water through the Word; and that of David, Psalm.
119 9. who says that the means by which a young man may cleanse his way is by
taking heed thereto according to Gods word, which Word of God also he says,
verse. 11. he had hid in his heart that he might not sin against God, which
inward Word of God, that is so abundantly spoken of [as I elsewhere shewed] in
that 119. Psalm. that there is not past two of three among those 176. verses of
it, in which it is not mentioned, as to i^s efficacy, excellency, usefulness,
profitableness, and power under one name or other of either Testimonies,
Statutes, Judgments, Precepts, Law, Commandments, etc. all sounding out one
and the same, is styled (for it was not an outward Writing with men's hands he
there means) verse. 72. The Law of Gods mouth, and 88. the Testimony of Gods
mouth, intimating that which came more immediately from God to him in his
heart, then the Writings of Moses could do, even out of his own mouth in him,
whom he and Habakuk 3.1. and all the Pr^ph^ts, excep^ the Word-stealers, heard
what he would say in them, Ps. 85.9. Jer. 23.16. receiving from his mouth and
stood in his counsel the Light within. That that Scripture, Joh. 8. is true of
Chri^ts words in what it speaks of them, and the rest that are suitable to it,
I deny not, but that either it, or any of them by God, or Christ's words, or
sa^ing^ intend the Scriptures without at all, much more altogether exclusively,
as thou talkest of the Word, Spirit and Light within, and the Revelation of
mind and will of God thereby immediately in the heart; this I utterly deny,
affirming that the internal Reveation of his mind to men by his own ^oice from
his own mouth in their consciences is that which is mainly, yea only, and
altogether intended in them, yea and in some, not to say all of them,
exclusively rather of the Scriptures, as which indeed are not the Word or Words
that are declared to effect those precious things, but are only outward
Writings of spiritually inspired men, who witnessed its efficacy in themselves,
that declare those precious things which the inward Word effects: And the
like I respectively affirm and deny as concerning that other Text, Jer 25.29.
of thy own alleging, where God says of his Word its a fire, and a hammer that
breaks the Rocks in pieces, denying it utterly to be meant of the Writings of
the true Prophets, out of which the false ones stole the words they preached,
and then ran and said, Thus says ^he Lord, declaring in his name when he never
spoke to them, nor sent them, when like the Scribes for all their telling
things as the Word of the Lord, as they read this or that in the Scriptures,
they had never as any time heard his voice, nor flood in his counsel, nor
received, nor marked his words as coming out of his own mouth, and affirming it
to be meant of the Word of God ministered immediately by his own voice in the
conscience, which is said to be accompanied with the like mighty effects in the
hearts of wicked, sturdy, proud, haughty minded men that are likened to
Mountains and Rocks against which the Lord comes in a way of terrible storms
and thunderings which prepare his way, 1 King. 19, 11, 12 and to lofty Cedars
of Lebanon, and strong Oaks of Bashan, Isa. 2.12. to the end, in Psalm. 29.3, 4,
5, 6. etc. where it is said, The voice of the Lord is upon the great waters, or
peoples, Rev. 1^.15. The God of glory thundereth, the voice of the Lord is
powerful, full of Majesty, breaks the Cedars, divides the flames, shakes the
wilderness, makes the ^lindes calve, discovers the Forests; and that its of
this, and not the Letter which men steal and call the Word, is evident by the
verses about it, where the Lord declares himself to be against the Prophets
that steal, and tell and sell what they read in the true Prophets writings
which they wrest according to their own dreaming thoughts into sinister senses,
and to tell lies and dreams, and divinations of their own brain for truth,
which stolen ware, though they vent the same word which they read in others
writings, not receiving and uttering as from Gods own mouth, God calls but the
vision of their own mouth, and the Chaff which is nothing to the Wheat, and not
the other, verse. 21.

Moreover as to the other of thy Texts I am yet in hand with, viz. Jam. 1.2. 1 Timothy 4.16. Heb. 4.12. Psalm. 119.105. Isa. 55.10, 11. All which thou urgest in
proof of one and the same spirit of falsehood, viz. in vindication of the
Scriptures to be powerful to salvation, to beget faith, to be living, sharp,
spirit searching, discerning thoughts, a Light and Lamp, and so cons^quently
the only perfect standing Rule of faith and life exclusively of another
Revelation by the Spirit, Word, or Light within, these are a^^ true of the Word
and Doctrine of Christ the Spirit and Light within, the Qua. call to, and the
Letter points at in all these Texts of thy traducing, but m^thinks thou
should be ashamed to expound any one of those of the Letter and Scripture
itself.

As to that of Paul to Timothy, Take heed to thy self, and to the Doctrine,
continue in them in so doing thou shall save thy self and them that hear thee.
What Is this in proof of the Scriptures being powerful to save the soul, which
is the end of thy alleging it? he bids him continue in the things he had
learned (as also 2 Timothy 3.14.) and had been assured of knowing of whom he
learnt them, which if it were from Paul as a means under God, as it rather
seems to be from Christ himself, whose Disciple he was (as he could not be but
as he laarnt of him) before he became acquainted with Paul, Act. 16.1, 2. the
promise is entailed unto his continuance in the things, and not ascribed to any
power or efficacy of the Scriptures to save, though yet we know Timothy was
well skilled in the Scriptures also, as is owned above.

And as to that of James with which thou joynest this in proof of the outward
Letters power to save, to which also, p. 83 84, 85. thou jumblest together a
number more then are in this Catalogue underhand, and which I shall take in
here, that speak of the Word with one consent to one and the same purpose (but
not to thine which is to prove the Scripture to be so) as most effectual,
powerful, and able to save souls, yea the very power of God to salvation. viz.
Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18. 1 Cor. 2.5. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Psalm. 110.2. Act. 20.31. Joh.
6.68. Gal. 2.8. Col. 1.6. and more out of the Co^^nths misco^ed, from which
Tex^s thou powerest out thy blind opinion of the Bible, and concerning the
Scripture thereof in this particular, in such wise, saying it is absolutely
called the power of God, Vis, virtus Dei, the Power of God, the Gospel, the
Power of God, and faith which is built on that Word without other helps or
advantages is said to stand in the Power of God; the Word that comes not as a
naked word, but in power and in the holy Ghost, and (...), giving all manner of
assurance, and full persuasion of it self, even by its power and efficacy: It
is termed the Rod of power or strength, denoting its Authority and Efficacy;
that which is thus the Power and Authority of God, able to make it self known
so to be: It is not only said to be, (...), Power, the power of God in it self,
but also, (...), able and powerful in respect of us, (...), the sacred Letters,
(...) which are able to make wise to salvation, they are powerful and effectual
to that purpose, it is (...), potens servare anima^ nostras, the Word that has
power in it to save; the able, powerful word that Paul commends the Ephesians
(...), it is living and effectual: By v^rtue of this power it brought forth
fruit in all the world without sword, without for the most part miracles,
without humane wisdom or Oratory without any inducements or motives, but what
were merely and solely taken from it self consi^ting in things that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor could enter into the heart of man to conceive has
e^erted this power and efficacy so the conquest of the world, causing men of
all sorts in all times and places so to fall down before its divine Authority,
as immediately to renounce all that was dear to them in the world, and to
undergo what ever was dreadful, terrible and destructive to nature in all its
dearest concernments and such like.

Reply. All this I know to be true of the Word, Light, and Spirit of God in the
hearts of men which the Letter points to, and the Apostles preached as that
which men should believe in, it is absolutely the Gospel, the power of God to
salvation, but the Letter not so, the faith that is built on that word without
other helps or advantages from the Letter stands in the Power of God, as
Abraham, Noah's, Enoch, Abels, and all the holy men did, that lived by faith in
the Word, 'twas Gods power, mighty, and effectual to save them before any
outward Letter was written, and without the help and advantage thereof, but the
outward Letter is profitable to nothing at all without the help and advantage
of the Light and Spirit within, but is a dead letter, of no efficacy for the
good of souls; and this the same J.O. who says, the Scripture without other
helps and advantages, is so absolute and perfect that we may obtain eternal
life, that there is no need of any other Revelation by the Spirit or Light
within; but those are all dangerous, uncertain, unprofitable, in no wise
necessary, fanatic figment, desestable, etc. Ex. 17. s. 28. to the wonted
contradiction, of himself in all that, and what is underhand confesses with us
in totidem verbis of that Scripture, which he calls the Word, p. 236. saying,
that without the adminis^ration of the Spirit accompanying men's possession of
it, it is a dead letter of no efficacy to the good of souls.

The word Light and Spirit of God and Christ within, nigh in the heart, but not
the Letter without is the Gospel, which Paul bare testimony to, and was sent to
turn men to by his Ministry, and was not ashamed of, saying its the power of
God to salvation, to every on that believes in it, and comes in the outward
Ministry of it by word of mouth and writing [and is witnessed so to do at this
day as of old it did) to many not in word only, but power and the holy Spirit,
giving all manner of assurance and full persuasion of it self to such as
through prejudice put it not away from them, and thereby judge themselves
unworthy of that eternal life, which it is the word of, that it is not the word
of men, but [as it is in truth] the word of God, that is both light and living,
and Spirit, and life it self, even the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
the Image of God, which is not Letter, 2 Cor. 3. thining unto them both in, and
also out of the darkness that is men's hearts, where the God of this world
blindes not the minds so that men will not believe it, to the giving them the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ.

This, and not the Letter is the Rod of power, which God promi^ed to send out
of Sion, even the Rod and sharp Sword of his mou^h and breath of his lips,
wherewith he will now smite the Nations, and slay the wicked, and reprove with
equity on the behalf of the meek of the earth, whom the proud oppress, even the
word of his mouth, which he will put into the mouths of his sucklings, and
their seed and seeds seed, out of which he ordains strength to the perfecting
his own praise against the persecutor. This, and not the weak dead letter,
Bible or Scripture thou so labourest, bablest, and scriblest for, is that Power
and Authority of God, Able [as the outward Writing is not] to make it self
known so to be; for the letter is as lifeless, helpless, powerless, as any
other Book, Writing, or dumb Idols that men adore and receive (a^ ye with the
Jews of whom thou speak p. 237. do the Bible at this day) with the honor
and veneration due to God that cannot stir from the place where its set as
neither can the Scripture from where its laid no more than the Turkish Alcoran;
ye^, as Jeremiah in his Epistle says of the weakness and vanity of all the
Idols of the heathen, whom they make powerful Gods of, Th^se Gods, quoth he,
cannot save themselves from rust and moths, though they be covered with purple,
they wipe them because of the dust of the Temple, when there is much upon them,
men put the Scepter in their hands, as if they were the Judge of the Country,
and Daggers and Axes, but they cannot deliver themselves from Thieves, nor of
themselves put to death one that offends them, as a useless vessel worth
nothing when broken so it is with their Gods, they are as the beams of their
Temples, upon their bodies and heads Str^Bats, Swallows, Birds, and Cats, they
are things in which is no breath, yet they set and sell, and buy them at a high
price, they are carried, having no feet ^o walk with, if they fall to the
ground, they cannot rise up again of themselves, the same, together with what
follows ( caeteris paribus) Baruch 6. may be said of the adored Best Copies of
the Great Bibles that lie in the great old moldy Popish Parish Mass-houses,
now called the Protestant Churches where the Bells hang, the Ministers of the
Letter not the Spirit, the elder sort of which are Priests by Ordinatio^^ See
the Book of Ordination of Priests and Deacons.
fit in their Temples and roar and cry the Word of God, the Law, the Light, the
way to life, the Gospel, the power of God to salvation, as the Jews do when
their Copy is carried about, but these Gods of those Idol Shepherds that leave
their poor flock at any time for another that has a better fleece, can do
nothing at all, cannot withstand any King or enemies, are not able to escape
either from Thieves or Robbers, nor when fire falls on the houses where they
are, to help or save themselves, or fly away, how then shall we think they
(the Books called Bibles the Scriptures) are so powerful and effectual not only
in themselves, but also in respect of us, as without any other helps or
advantages to show themselves to be the great Authority and Power of God, vis,
virtus Dei, to our salvation, as I.O. dreams? If he say he means not the Text,
but the Word it talks on, let him say so then when he writes again, and then we
will take it for granted he gives the cause in question to the Qua. whom he
quarrels with for denying the Bible, Letter, Scripture, outward Writing to be
the living, effectual, able, powerful word of God, that gives life and saves
and such like, and so we shall meddle no more with him as to that matter, but
so long as he will needs damn down the Qua. as denyers of Scriptures, and the
Word of God too, because they deny the Letter, or Text to be properly the
truth, or Word of God, it does but declare and talk on, we must thereby
understand him to intend the Letter which he talks for.

Moreover as to the Light of God and Word nigh in the heart which the Apostles
preached to turn men to, and taught them, as the Scripture also does in its
Testimony there to, to attend to as the Rule of faith and life, this is that
Word of the truth of the Gospel, which is V is, virtus Dei, the Power of God,
by the virtue of which Power it brought forth fruit in the Collossians, and in
all the World where it so came, when it came unto them in the Ministry thereof,
which was the means by which they heard of it first, and then came themselves
to hear it* and to know the grace of God in truth even that grace that brings
the salvation and appears to all men, effectually instructing (as well
without, as with the outward Letter of it) all that le^rn at it to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world, which is the Light of God in the conscience called the
goodness of God, or grace given to lead them to repentance, who despising the
riches of it, are not led by it to repent, and so treasure up wrath to
themselves, etc. Tit. 2 11, 12. Romans 2.4, 5.

This is it which brought forth fruit in the world, without Sword, Miracles,
humane wisdom, oratory, or any inducements, or motives, but what are merely
and solely taken from it self consisting in things which eye has not seen, ear
heard, nor the heart of the animal, natural man, or of any but the spiritual
man that by the Spirit which only searches and reveals them discerns the
deep things of God, can discern or conceive.

This is that that has exerted its power and efficacy to the conquest of the
world (so far as it has been cap^ivated in the high proud thoughts of it) to
the true obedience of Christ, causing men of all sorts, times, and places so to
fall down before its Divine Authority, as to renounce all that its dear,
underg^^ all that it dreadful and destructive to nature in its dearest
concernment.

As for the Letter, the Scripture, which thou speak of in a sense abstract
from all other helps and advantages, as that which without need of any other
Revelation by the spirit and light within (for these thou call'st superfluous
mediums) does plead for reception not only in comparison with, but also
opposition to all other ways of coming to the knowledge of God, his mind and
will founded thereon, and calls for attendance and submission with supreme and
uncontrollable Authority, 57 58. as that which has brought forth so much
fruit, and exerted so much power.

What power has it put forth to conquer the world into such submission to the
truth as it is in Jesus, as Christ requires, or as the Letter it self either
calls for? what fruits of righteousness has it brought forth in the world
called Christian, to the glory of God, for all its being conceived in thy brain
to be the power of God both in it self, and in respect of you? Look upon all
litteral Profess^rs that run a whoring from God the Lord, the Spirit and the
Light that shines in them, there showing moral good and evil, and spiritual
good, and spiritual wickedness also (for the fruits of the spirit, and works
of the flesh, and the lusts thereof, envy, hatred, lasciviousness, etc. are
manifest, and what ever manifests them, and all things in the conscience, is
the light within, which is the Armor against the one, and the enabler to the
other, and not the Letter wihout which only says so of the Light and see what
works most abound in the most Reformed Nations and Churches of it, that are
turned aside from the truth it self to a mere talking of the Text that talks of
it, are they not the same that are to be found among Papists that live by no
other professed Rule but tradition and Popish putasion? yea set aside that
grosser sort of superstition and thicker cloud of superfluous Ceremonies in
matter of outward observations in Religion, in which the Kingdom of God, which
stands in inward Righteousn^^s of the heart, expressing it self outwardly in
the life, comes not as to Moralities, Mercy, Judgment, Equity, Honesty,
Innocence, Love, Purity, Humility, Faith and Fear of God unfeigned, which are
the end of carnal Commandments contained in Ordinances, and bodily exercises
that else are profitable to little, which said Moralities, as little as thou
make of Moral obedience, Moral good is that which the light in all men's
hearts may avail to lead them to, p. 42, 43, 45. as if these were some pedling
trivial matters that God regards not, which yet indeed being done in the Light,
out of which God, who is Light, accepts of nothing, nor has pleasure or
delight in any of your litteral performances, are n^ less then Spiritualities
fruits of the Spirit, and of the Spirics only, and not the Letter, bringing
forth (for the Letter never yet brought forth the Spirits fruits in its
Ministers and children, who for all their searchings and lookings into, and
laboring for the letter, sow to the flesh still, as the Scribes and Pharisees
did of old, that trusted in Moses and the Prophets Writings, and of the flesh
reap corruption whilst the Ministers not of the Letter, but the Spirit the
children of the Light, sow to the Spirit, and of it, and the Light reap the
life it self, and these are the weightier matters of the Law, I say, as to the
foresaid Moral matters (saving the grosser dimnest of their devotions are not
the same that is to say, as good fruits found among poor Papists as amongst
you, and as bad among you as with them, and as unsound? yea V in tu c^rtis
Iudaeis ^ppeder^, will thou judge and disdain the concised Letter-lauding ^ew,
O thou merely Rantized Scripture-profissing-Christian, when they, who make
their boast of the ancient Ceremonies and Letter of the Law, do not more
through breaking the Law in the Morals and Spirituals of it, then ye, who boast
of the later Letter and Ceremonies thereof, through breaking the weightier
Moral and Spiritual matters of it do dishonor God? Is not your Vine a^ the
vine of Sodom to the Lord notwihstanding your solemn meetings and Sabbaths,
and Fasts and fained forms, and many things that God never required at all, as
much as theirs, who were punctualin performance of the very things that God
himself required? and are not your goodly Grapes of Injustice, Cruelty,
Whippings, imprisonings, Persecutings of tender conscences for tel^^ng truth,
for not paying Tithes, etc. and all other iniquity, dissoluteness and
propaneness that overflows in Universities, Cities, Countries, as the Grapes of
Gommorrah, as theirs were, and as clusters of Gall and Wormwood? yea shall not
the Gentile, the Hea^hen, as ye call them, the uncircumcist^n, the unchristned
people, as to the Letter, that by the remants of the pure nature (for the
cor^upt nature only breaks the Law Though T.D. told A. P. before many people
at Sandwich, that it is corrupt nature by which the Heathen do the things
contained in the Law at A.P. informed me.
) do the things contained in the Law and showed them in the Light within them,
by which they are a Law to themselves, and go accused or excused in their own
conscences before God, judge as well thee, who by the Letter and Baptism
transgressest it as the Jews who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress
the Law, and Rebel against the Light? is not as much of the true Righteousness
found among many Heathens, as among most litteral Christians, who ever name the
Name of Christ, but never depart from iniquity?

What geat efficacy and power then has the Letter alone of it self without any
other helps, advantages, or any other Revelation by the Spirit and Light within
put forth and exerted to the conquering of the world, and the bringing forth of
fruit in all the world, when as it is evident that it never yet subjected any
one, whether Minister or Professor of it to the perfect obedence of it self in
the main matters of it, as the Light and Spirit has done done the children of
it: As for our Parochial and Academical livers by the Letter ( temporally I
mean, for otherwise they live neither by the Letter, nor the Light) but beside
both, both they and their Bible-blessing Believers are far from answering the
call of their very literal Rule, which is all they own under that name and
notion: that they are not come by it into the faith that ever they shall
conform to it, or be perfected in holiness, or cleansed from sin by it either
in this world, or that to come; for whereas much of it is written in way of
warning not to sin, 2 Ioh. 2.1. and is profitable and powerful [as they say
themselves from 2 Timothy 3.16. which speaks of Timothy men of God only, and also
not exclusively of all other helps and advantages from the Spirit and Light as
I.O. but as in conjunction with faith, which is in the Light as is showed
above] to make men wise to salvation and perfect in good works, they are so far
from believing it possible in this world not to sin, and be perfected in
holiness or good works, that they deny it as little better than plain Popery to
affirm any works done, though by Christ's own power in us to be truly or
perfectly good, or any better than dung and filthy Rags witness T.D. who (as
above said, p. 13^. of his 1 Pamp.) says the Righteousness wrought in Paul
after his onversion was Christ's and yet renounced by him as dung and damn it
down ^^ Doctrine of Devils to teach men that they may be fully free from sin
here, witness T. Rumsey, whose blind judgment therein T.D. justifi^r in p.
41. of his ^. Pamph. and that its most false to say the Scripture either does,
or can obtain its end fully toward us while we are in this world, and yet that
it is of no use to us in the world to come also; so denying again what other
whiles they affirm of the power and perfection of the Scripture, the perfection
of which [say they] stands in no other thing than in sufficiency to effect its
proper end which is with them the most perfect instruction of men in the
knowledge and wor^hip of God, so that they may obtain eternal salvation, witness
I.O. whose K^unds and Contradictions to himself in that point I shall here see
down in his own words Englished, which were written by him in Latin

Ex. 3. s. 24. Deus sacrae Scriptur Author, etc. Perfe^ti^ Scrip^^r aruminn^lla
alia re consi^^ere potest quam insufficientia sua respectu finis, etc.
J.O. God the Author of the Scripture being the most perfect Agent, must
necessarily, act for some end, therefore in the Declarati^n of his will in the
Scripture, it is sure he had some propounded end; but ^her^as the end is
t^of^ld. ^. V^tima^e and ^emo^e. 2. Next and immediate, we state the ultimate,
supreme and general end to be his own glory: The immediate or next end of his
giving the Scripture^, and so of the Scriptures themselves we con^end to be our
direction in the knowledge of God, and obedience to be yielded to him, that at
length we doing his will, may obtain eternal salvation, and the enjoyment of
himself, for this is the end of the worker, and of the work. What God intends
by the Scriptures that they, to wi^, morally, and in the way of operation
proper to them d^ effect. But when a^ the perfection of every Discipline
consists in relation to its end, and that is to be held perfect which is
sufficent to its next end, but that imperfect which cannot obtain it prop^sed
end the perfection of the Scriptures can consist in no other thing then in its
sufficiency in respect to its proper end, which is the instruction of men in
the knowledge and worship of God that they may attain eternal salvation. In
this sense therefore we assert the Scripture to be the most perfect Rule of the
whole worship of God, and o^r obedience.

Reply. Whether ^^ere be not a more perfect way of our instruct^on in the
saving knowledge of God then the Scripture appears elsewhere, where I show no
saving knowledge of God comes any way but the inward Revelation of himself in
us by his Light and Spirit. Here only obse^ve I O. confusi^ns and confutation
of himself in this above, by that which follows, when the Quae. say the
Scripture is perfect to its own proper end, and its end being obtained, it
ceases: Then quoth he) Fa^si^imum est S^ripturam ^um in hoc mundo haeremus
respectis nostri ^ecum suum sinem obtinereaut obtinere posse ^on enim tantu^
ingeneratio sidei sed and in ea dis-^spiritum hunc ducimus aedificatio,
s^ni^est Scripturae, quando adducimur ad Christum in gloria cessabit
Scripturaeusus praesentistatui accommodat us, quin^tiam ipsa fides quatenuss in
verbo Dei (...) to ni^ebatur, abulibitur.
Its most false that the Scripture obtains it whole end in respect of us while
we are in the world, therefore till heaven and earth pass away, not one j^t or
tittle of the Law, i.e. Letter with him shall fail, for not only the begetting
of faith, but also the building up in it while we live here is the end of the
Scripture: So then its end which is begetting to, and building up in the faith
is not effected by it here; is it then in the world to comes (...) no neither
(quoth he in the self-same Section) the use of the Scripture sh^^^ cease then
being accomodated only to our present state and faith also, as founded on it
^^^ll be done a^ay. Ex 3. s. 39.

Here then is the round I.O. makes with a Cris-cross in the middle of it, viz.
The perfection of the Scripture which we plead and affirm, and of every thing
else, is its sufficiency and efficacy to accomplish its own proper immediate
end, and what ever does not so is imperfect; The immediate end of the Scripture
is its direction, instruction of men in the saving knowledge of God, his will,
worship, their obedience and duty to him, the ingeneration of faith and
edification up in it to salvation; This whole end of the Scripture its most
false to affirm that it accomplishes till the world to come; it must do it in
this world, or in the world to come; in this world it cannot possibly do it for
perfection in the faith in holiness and freedom from sin here is not
attainable; in the world to come it cannot possibly, for there both the
Scripture it self, and also the faith it se^f, that is founded on it, will
cease to be of any use at all, being of use only here, and shall be both done
away. Verbum sat sapients, insipienti plura plus satis.

Never did I see such Rounds and crosses and confusions, and contradictions
such self-confutations and Net-works, and Checker-work and Webs, and Snares, as
I.O. makes, and hangs hampered in himself when he has done, made and woven
among any, but our woefully benighted Divines, all whose works are done in the
dark, Isa. 29.15. in all my days before.

Is the Scripture then the Power of God to salvation, able, mighty, effectual,
available to its end, that is to save the soul, as I.O. says it is? (no quoth
I.O.) it is not, its most false to say it does, or can avail to its end in this
world, and in the world to come its of no force; so if it be the power of God
(as I.O. affirms it over and over again it is) it must be in some world that is
past away, or some new found world or other, for he himself says its neither
in this present world, nor that to come, neither now, nor hereafter, neither
here nor there: But alas, as the world it self, wherein he fancies such a thing
to be, is none knows where, but a mere Chimaera of his own coining, hatched no
where but in his own head, the Shop where and whence many more such like toys
are shapen, sold and uttered among such as having sold the truth, are willing
rather to trade in utter untruths then in nothing at all, and not receiving the
love of the truth that they might be saved, but taking pleasure in
unrighteousness more then it, are given over to strong delusion to believe lies
that they may be damned. For seriously that the Letter or Scripture is the
power of God to salvation, or that Word of God which brings forth any good
fruit to perfection among either the Seedsmen the Ministers of the Letter, that
sow nothing but their own senses and thoughts upon it, or in the stony, thorny,
common highway ground of Parish peoples hearts, in which they sow, the Letter
mingled with their own chaffy cogitations saying, Hear the word of the Lord,
when yet they confess themselves neve heard his voice. This however ye imagine,
Oh ye power less, profitless Prophets, is a mere no such matter; for that is
the Word or Seed that is sown by the Supreme Sowes the Son of Man himself in
the same Field or World of men's hearts, in which the World is, where the Devil
in the dark night while men sleep and watch not to the light, sows Tares among
the good Seed, which where it lights on honest hearts that hear and heed the
Word patiently, continuing in the keeping of it, brings forth abundantly in
some Thirty, some Sixty, some ^n Hundred fold.

Indeed the Letter, the Text or Scripture, declares, and bears witness to the
Word, which is absolutely necessary, effectual, perfect to the ends aforesaid,
which is the power of God, the light of God, the wisdom, saving truth,
immediate witness, clearest way of Revelation, soul-cleansing Law, sure
foundation, most perfect Rule, immovable steadfast Standard of Gods setting up,
but it self is nos all, nor any of this, nor does it at all any where avouch it
self to be any of it at all. The Scripture points to that, which is the Power
of God by the being of which, in and upon his people, who only own and join to
it, they are made a willing people in the day thereof, when such as turn from,
and against the light, which is the power, and labor in the weak naked Letter
labor in vain, and are left unwilling to leave their lusts and lives for
Christ, as his Maryrs or outward witnesses did in all Ages: But the Letter it
self is not Power of God, that sustained them in the suffering, and enabled
them to forgo what was dear to them, and to undergo what was dreadful and
destructive to nature in its dearest concernments. The Letter tells us that the
Saints did so, and tells us, and all Saints that we should do for Christ, but
the Power by which this is done is another matter, then a Letter ad extra, even
the inward light, Word and Spirit, that thou do despite to, even that in the
conscience, that made them endure as seeing him who is invisible, and
discovered the dark^^ss, upon the discovery of which they rather chose death
then to own it as Light and Truth, not only in ages as high as Moses, who by
faith in the Light chose affliction rather then sin, and feared not the wrath
of Pharaoh, but also from him downward as low as Mary's days, in which some
died for denying the darkn^ss of the Popes D^ctrines of Transubstantiation,
etc. which the Light in their consciences told them were too gross to be of
God, who yet by their confession could not dispute against it with University
Sottish Sophisters, Doctor Dunces out of Letter, nor so much as read a letter
therein, and also as low as these days wherein by the Power of God many are
born up to bear the Trials of the cruel Academical mockings, scoffings,
scourgings, in^lictings, stonings, bonds, imprisonments, abuses to death,
witness one of the first of the Lords two Handmaids that were sent to warn the
University of their universal abomi^ations at Oxford in the time of I.Os. Vice
chancellorship there* who perhaps may not be so learned literally, though
mystically and spiritually more in the Letter, as obtuse a^cuti ^omun^ione^,
many of those dull-beaded nimble disputers out of it are in their bald fashion
of Syllogistical form.

Neither did the Letter either of the Old Testament (which is the Letter
without, of what things soever written) or the outward Letter of the New, ever
conquer the world in which thou say it brought forth so much fruit, further
then into a mere empty fruitless form of Godliness without the power thereof,
insomuch that though as to the Primitive Christian Churches, while they kept in
the Light, which the Apostles Ministry whether by word of mouth, or Writing,
Letter, Scripture, was to turn them to walk by, and believe in For the Letter
still is to send from it self to the Light, so was Moses Letter a Schoolmaster
to direct to another for the life, Moses sent his Disciples to Christ, saying,
A Prophet shall the Lord raise to you like to me, of whom I am but a shadow,
who writes the Law of God in the fleshly tables of the heart, as ye have it
handed, ministered to you from me in outward gravings in Tables of stone, and
writings with pen and ink, etc. him shall you hear in all things whatever he
says, whoever hear^ not him, though he seem to hear me, and to be zealous of
my outward Writings, must be cut off from among his people; and he that truly
hears me, will go to him, for I write of him, John 5. John Baptist sent from
himself to Christ the Lamb of God for the taking away the sin, and to the true
light he bare witness of, that enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
confessing himself, and his Ministry must decrease before the increasings of
the other. So the Apostles Writings and Letters were not to state them as the
Standard, to call men thereto as the only Canon, but to keep men a!way looking
to the Lord the Light it self, of which use our Ministry and Writings now are,
that by the Light they may come to life, and not go from Christ the Light,
whose words are Spirit and life, who has the word of eternal life, to either
letter or any thing else, to keep them to the hearing of his own voice, as his
sheep do, to take heed to his word of Prophecy, which is the Testimony of
Jesus in the heart as to a light shining in the dark place of the heart till
the day dawn and day star arise in the heart, to which purpose was the Letter
written; and that excellent voice sent, which said to them of the beloved Son
hear him; and all the Apostles drift was to drive the Jews from Moses; Thou
teach all every where to forsake Moses saying, They must not circumcise
children, nor walk after those customs, the letter required as a shadow for a
time: And indeed their Epistles point all at that one Faith, Truth, Way, Life,
Passover, Baptism, Circumcision, Supper, Body, Lord, Spirit, Rule, whereas if
^e steer as by the Foundation, Rule, Standard, etc ^ by their Letter, which
they never intended to sta^^ ( as the Foundation, then there must be more
R^les, Faiths, Forms, Baptisms, Suppers, viz. the outward Letter and literal
observations, which mere once used and ordained as Types for a time, and the
spiritual substantial ones, to which, sending us from the wri^ings of the
carnal Ordinances they speak of, they advise and call to.
and in the Spirit in which they began, till foo^ishly being bewitched from
obeying the truth it self they turned aside to the outward Text that tells it,
and so thought to be made perfect by the flesh, and the fleshly bodily
exercises they found in the Letter, which once used were as low, weak, begge^ly
elements for a time) the power of God, and godliness was much ^elt among them,
and abode with, and upon them to the prevailing against the Powers of the
earth, and the overcomming the world it self, and Satan the Prince of it by the
blood of the Lamb, and the Word of his Testimony, not loving their lives to the
death, and much fruit of the Spirit, and of righteousness was brought forth to
the glory and praise of God.

But when Synods and Councels, doting Doctors, infatuated Ghostly-Fathers, and
such as admired their persons as they the persons of the Apostles and primitive
Disciples, began to bundle together what they could get of the W^itings of such
as were coaetaneous with Christ and the Apostles, and, without any such order
from either Christ or the Apostles, to canonize what in their conceits might be
useful to others, as they had found them, it is like, to be to themselves, into a
Rule or Canon, and stated them into a common Standard for all to have their
sole recourse to in soul-cases. and matters of Christian faith and holy life,
and so to adore the dead letters of those holy living men, and to run a whoring
after some remnants of Writings that dropped from them then, in the whole world
now called Christendom instead of an Apostolical Spouse of Christ, as
Christians were at first, presented a chaste Virgin to himself by them, there
stands up an Apostatical Strumpet that had the Letter and good words written
there, but neither the life of God, nor the Word of life therein testified to,
that (according to the nature of Error which is ever multiplying) degenerated
more and more into the dark, till at last being gone from the Word, Spirit,
Light and Life within to the outward Letter that relates of it, they ran into
the Wilderness of their own numberless senses upon it, so that they lost the
Letter also, and fell from it into Tradition, and a thousand Old Wives Fables,
and though it is good and acknowledged so to be (so far as it is) that the
Protestants have marched from Rome under the conduct of the Le^ter, yet for all
they are come back from the blind screel scrawls of the Popish Scribes for
their smoaky imaginations to a pretensive profession of, and prate pr^
Scripturis for the Scriptures, unless they march on according to the conduct of
the Scriptures till they come into the Light and Spirit, which they point to,
and by a dotage upon the Scriptures ye would run from, they are not so much, as
come yet to the Scriptures, nor to conform to that counsel of the Prophets and
Apostles given in it, but are yet erring from the Scriptures, even in and by
their very eager Scriblings for it as the only most perfect Rule, and from the
only Rule of faith, and way to Life, the Letter is as loud for (but that they
are dull of hearing as they in their naked Writings are loud for the naked
Letter it self.

And so it comes to pass that as Israel was of old who was as laborious in the
Letter, and busy about the Bible and strict for his Scripture-standard, as our
Israel So they call themselves at this day through England, Scotland and
Ireland, witness Hard^ess Wallers Proclamation, and Gener. Monks and John
Lawsons, and the Cities late congratulations together about the mercy of God
toward this their Israel in recalling the Parliment, called the Rump, which if
they do right, may prosper, but if they persist yet in their professed
Resolution to stablish the Popes pay on their Preachers, contrary to their
Oaths to extirpate Popery Root and branch, which they have sworn the Nation to
endeavor also the ex^irpation of, and to persecute such as cannot be perjured
together with them, they have not long yet to subsist without a Whirlewind from
the Lord ( as fast and safe as they seem to sit) falling with pain upon their
heads, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
for the self-same, which yet they confess too is abolished as to the Litteral
observation of it, with the Appendix of a few of Stories and Letters, and
Revelations of those holy men next to Christ's time, who by the Spirit wrote
much more then is there owned as their Standard; I say, as the old Israel
proved as to God an empty vine, Hos. 10.1 bringing forth fruit only to himself,
so is our National Gospel Israel an empty Vine, fruitful to themselves in
temporals, and ( in su^ gerere) in such spiritual also as their Religion lies
in, viz. in empty forms of fastings, prayings, pra^sings, preachings, singings
of David's Psalms with Doegs Spirit. Text, applauding Treatises, talkings for
Tithes, multiplyings of Ministers of the Old Testament not of the Spirit, but
of the Letter, that may labor soundly to the blowing out if they could tell
how) of the Qua. extolled light, magnifyings of the maintenance for such
Ministers as maintain themselves out of Augmentations by the Impropriations of
Kings, Bishops, Deans and Chapters Lands, Tenths, first fruits, and such
Levitically legal ^molumenis far better than they are able to maintain either
the true internal eternal Gospel, which they are utterly ign^rant of, or their
own external Gospel either against the Qu. who maintain the true: But utterly
as fruitles to God, as full of leaves and broad Shows, wherein they flourish;
yea as barren as the figtree that God came three years together seeking fruit
from, and finding none, for which the Word had long since gone forth
effectually from the Lord (but that intercession is yet made for it by the
dresser of the Vineyard, who digs and dungs it in hopes of somewhat, but has
yet from it as small thanks for his great pains, as the unskilful dressers (not
to say devourers) of it have great thanks for their small pains) Cut it down,
why cumbreth is the ground?

So what thou so pompously utterest I*O. on behalf of the efficacy of the
Letter in this particular as the All-sufficient, All-accomplishing power of God
in its self, and to us ward to salvation, and such like, is nothing so; nor
does any one of all Scriptures cited by thee in proof thereof evince any such
thing, they all excepting that in 2 Timothy 3. which, as it may relate to an
inward Scripture thou yet searchest not, if intended of the outward, yet not
without the Light and Spirit within, which said Light and Spirit, thou still
excludest and damnest down as detestable, and no way needful to be so much as
concurrent with the Scripture toward salvation as is showed above) intend no
other Word or Light then that which is uttered and shines within in the e^rt.

Iam. 1.21. expressly speaks of the wording rafted there which is able to save
the soul, which (...) ^innate word (for its there put, planted, and sowed as
his seed by the Lord himself) some refuse and reject to walk by, whose
condemnation it is, some receive it hear it, mix it with faith in it, believe
in it to the salvation of the soul.

In Joh. 17.20. Christ speaks of the same, and not of any outward Scripture,
for by that word ( their word, is intended the Word which they preached or held
forth or testified to by their words in their preachings and writings as that
which men were to come to hear and believe in, and do, till t^eir believing in
which, though they should or do believe Historically the outward declaration,
as the Papists do the litteral declaration at this day with their heart and
confess it with their mouths, that the Lord Jesus was raised from the dead, yet
they perish and believe not on the Name of God savingly or to salvation: Which
Word is not the Letter, nor their preachings, but that which the Letter, and
their oral preachings testified to, that it was nigh men in their hearts and
mouths that they might hear and do it even the word of faith which they
preached. Compare Ioh 17.20. with Rom 10.8, 9.

Which word that they preached, was not their Preachings or Writings, or
Scriptures, but that which in their preachings and writings they called them to
hear, which was not a word without, but the word nigh in the he^rt, between
which Words and Writings of the Preachers and Writers of the Scriptures, and
the Truth, Faith, Doctrine, Light, Gospel, Holy matter, which they preached and
wrote of, if our Divines could keep constant in distinguishing at all times, as
they do sometime, they would come out of their conlusions, wherein they are
found jumbling things on heaps without heed, into the clear understanding and
comprehendings of the truth (in their heads at least, whether it may have place
in their hearts and lives or no) that is, saving their being ashamed to own it
from Babes, and choosing rather to be ignorant then submit to be taught by them,
so often told them by the Qua.

T*D. says, Its evident the Word spoken of Romans 10.8. in the heart is the holy
matters contained in the Scriptures, the things contained there, page 30, 31.
of his 1. Pamph.

Rep. Who doubts of that? But are not the holy matters one thing, and the
outward Letters that write of those matters another? the things written of,
which the Scripture says are in the heart, one thing, and the Scriptures that
write of those things another? why then do you jumble these together as one in
your blindly busy brains, which are so bewitched that ye either cannot or will
not own that from the Qua. without crying out of them as deniers of the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, which your very selves are forced to confess
to the Truth of?

For T.D. dances between within and without in the forenamed pages, as if he
could not well tell where to be, nor what to say the Word of faith they
preached is; himself denies not from Col. 3.16. which I urged, but that it was
within the Colossians, but yet because we say its within, a light within, he
will needs say, [and so he had need, or else he could not out word us] its the
Letter without also, the Word spoken of in the heart, is meant, quoth he, of
the holy matters contained, 1. Declared of in the Scriptures, which are, say
we, the living Word, Light, Gospel, etc. and yet in the same page the Word
spoken of is without, or it is the Letter of the Scriptures, quoth he, also,
though at the beginning of the dispute upon that subject, when I told him we
denied the (...) and (...), the outward writing or Letter written on paper with
ink to be the Word of God himself, p 26.1 Pamp. he denied the same with me
saying, You cannot believe us so simple surely as to affirm the Scriptures in
that sense to be the Word of God, but we mean the matter contained in the
Writing, etc.

And p. 30. When I said the Scripture is not the Word of God, for that is
within, but the Scripture is without, ^rging, Romans 10. The word is nigh thee in
thy heart. You read not all, quoth he, it is in thy mouth too, so that it is
without as well as within.

Rep. Oh gross, what an absurdity is here, as if that which is in the mouth of
a man were not within, but without him? if T.D. should tell me of a man, that
is no Monster that his teeth and tongue are in his mouth, and I should Reply
it is a mistake, for that which is in the mouth of a man is not within, but
without him T.D. would suppose me to be some Monstrous Simpleton and a doer of
the said man no little wrong in making no less then a Monster of him, by saying
his teeth, and his tongue are all ad extra without him, when they are no
otherwise then other men's are, al orderly within his mouth; but I must take
this of his, who says the word is said to be without a man while it i^ said to
be in his mouth, for the voice of wisdom from him, or else the Qua. folly will
not be manifested to all men by it, but much more of his own then all theirs
amounts to: And so as wise as he is in his own generation byond the children of
Light, I shall think my think of this to my self, and to let it pass with no
more then this notice by the way to the Reader, 1. That as the word is in the
heart showing good and evil thoughts, there searching and separating between
the precious and the vile, which is the work of the Word and Mouth of God
there, Ier. 15.19. so it is in the mouth distinguishing between the good and
evil words there, in the particular persons in whose mouths its planted, and
put for that purpose first according to the promise, Isa. 59. ult. My word
which I have put into thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor of the
mouth of thy seeds seed for ever, from out of the mouth of which Seed of God
the righteous Race, which are mostly babes and sucklings to the wise and
Dispute^s of this world, Psalm. 8.2. Mat. 11.25. It is secondarily to go forth,
as the strength of the Lords ordaining against the enemy in the latter days,
Jer. 1.9.

2. That it is no news to me now that T.D. says in the mouth is without, which
was somewhat strange to me at first, till I was acquainted with his quaint and
coined kind of distinctions and sinister senses, and many unc^uth meanings,
that he puts upon Scripture phrases wherewith to blind people from being
begotten into true wisdom by that which he calls the Qua. Folly, for it is his
usual manner of expounding, and the ordinary meaning that he gives to these two
terms ( In) and ( Out) to say by ( within) is meant ( without) and by [
without] [ within] for as he counts the righteousness of C^rists person without
us to be in us to our justification whilst not inherent in us, but in him only.
So the righteousness wrought and fulfilled in us by his power and Spirit not to
be in us, but without in his Person only; for Romans 8.4. in us [quoth he]
imports not in out persons, but in Christ, p. 17. 1. Pamph. (...), which he
thought had been (...), Luke 17.22. by in you, in among you without, p. 5.1.
Pamph. and so I.O. will have to be expounded in that place to avoid the dint of
that Doctrine of the Qua who tell of a Kingdom and righteousness within men,
that are not in it, which he confesses is used but in one more place in all the
New Testament (as he calls the new Letter of it) viz. Matthew. 23.26. and there
its used for the inside of a Vessel, Cup, or Platter by Christ, saying to the
blind Pharisees, first cleanse the inside that the outsi^e may be clean also;
yet in Luke 17. it seems, quoth he, to be used in the same sense as (...), so
making it thus the Kingdom of God, ad vos pervenis, is come to you, and a T.D.
does] within in effect to signify without, Ex. 3.5.47. and so in the place in
hand in the mouth is without, quoth T. D. which fine newfangled way of
Respondency to an opponent urging otherwise an irresistible Truth, I should
never have learnt, had I not met with these two Sophistical Shufflers, howbeit
now I h^ve learnt their wonted way of winding away from plain truth, I shall
t^e^eby learn at least to avoid it, turn from it, and pass away, but shall
never learn how to walk in it, it is so crooked, unless I mean to leave the
good way of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness.

Now as to I.O. though often he puts a difference between the Writing and the
Doctrine, and says the Scriptura formaliter, or litera scripta is one thing,
and the materia or veritas scripta is another, yet rather then he will give the
Question to the Qua. who care not whether he does or no, which Question as is
showed above, he is not ashamed basely to beg, he will distemper and conjumble
all that together again into one Chaos or lump of confusion, which he had once
orderly set asunder, and therefore drives on in gross, without dividing between
the Scripture, Writing, Letter, or Text, and the Word, Doctrine, Light, or
Truth that's written of, and earnestly endeavoring to blend all these into one.
And though for haste jumbling and posting on he gets many a stumble by the way,
whereby he lays himself on the ground, yet up again he gets, and on he goes,
though haltingly, never heeding how he interfears, nor feels how he often hacks
and cuts one leg against the other, hoping that so long as he stands not still,
nor gives quite out, nor lies flat, he rids ground as well while he stumbles
on, as when he seems to slide away more smoothly; but his blind blundering^,
in which he thinks he posts on unseen, are noted and seen by such as are not
far behind him, who find him full of fl^ws, altering often where he himself
supposes his work is most firm; and what ever he thinks of it himself, yet to
every understanding Reader he little les^ then gives the cause in effect, not
only in other places against his will and unawares to himse^f, but also in p.
71. where is a passage that while it here presents it self to me, I must take
notice of, lest I let it pass altogether, and find not a fitter place
hereafter to observe it in

J*O. It is the Writing (quoth he it self it now supplies the room and place
of the persons, in, and by whom God originally spoke to men: as were the
persons speaking of old, so are the Writings now; it was the Word sp^ken that
was to be believed yet (as spoken by them from God, and its now the word
written that is to be believed yet (as written) by the command and appointment
of God.

Rep. all this I grant to be very true, but tending to the overturning of J.Os.
own cause, and purpose in it, which is to prove the Scripture or writing to be
the Word of God, and to the confirming of the Qua. cause, who against him deny
that assertion; for the Word spoken and written, even, as spoken and written,
by Gods appointment is that which we say is still within the hearts of men,
though witnessed to without in the Ministry of Prophets and Apostles preaching
and writing of it, as that in which they were to believe, in which believing
according to the Voices and Scriptures of holy men calling them thereto and
believed by them they thenceforth, and not before, were said to believe on the
Name of God, through which believing in it they had life: but what is this to
evince the Writing to be that Word ^hus spoken, thus written of, which was
another thing, which was as truly be^eeved in to life, before it was written
of, as after?

Oh, quoth J.O. as were the persons speaking of old, so are the Writings now.

True whence in his own words I argue back ( ad hominem) on him thus, As were
the persons speaking the Word of God old, so are the Writings now. Bu^ not the
persons preaching, no nor yet their preachings and speakings were the Wo^^ of
God they preached and spoke of, but only means, by which men were brought to
believe in the Word of God: What Is Paul, what is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye
believed? 1 Cor. 4.5.

Therefore the Writings now are not the Word of God written of, but only an
outward means by which men are brought to believe in another thing then the
^ritings for life, even in the Word of faith nigh in their own hearts which the
Prophets and Apostles preached and wrote of, that i^ order to life men should
believe in it.

I.O. And now as to that Text, Heb. 4.12. which thou citest also p. 85.
reciting the words of it; which are these, The Word of God is quick and
powerful, or, as thou there, (...), living and effectual, sharper than any
two-edged sw^rd piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart.

Rep. I cannot but stand almost astonished at thy stupidity in expounding that
Text of Scripture of the Text of Scripture, and of that term there the Word of
God) of the Book called the Bible, which the business of thy Book is mostly
about, since the efficacy and power of the Word here spoken of is far beyond
that of the Letter or Scripture it self the inefficacy and weakness of which I
have showed above (specially abstract from the Spirit and Light within, in
which way thou asserts the sufficiency of it, witness thy own words above
rehearsed) as to any such mighty matters as are here mentioned. Is the Letter
the Scripture sharper then any two-edged sword to divide asund^r soul and
spirit etc. a diver into, a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart?
what think thou by the two-edged sharp sword that goes out of his mouth,
that rides the white horse with his vesture dipped in blood, and the Armies in
heaven following (not in Lawn Sleeves, Sarcenet Scarffs, Sattanical Go^ns,
Canonical Coats, Scarlet Formalities, White Surplices, Velvet, Plush black
Gippoes, and such like Scholastic Superfluities) but in fine linen white and
clean, i.e. The righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 2.12.19, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
22. Is it the Letter, or is it the Sword of the Spirit a prime part of that
Armor of God, Armor of Light intimated, Romans 13.12. Ephesians. 6.11.17. which is
the Word of God, and the sharp soul-searching, heart-piercing, living,
life-giving Word that is here spoken of? for its the Spirit that quickneth, the
Letter kills and is dead; the Sword of the Spirit, is the Spirit or words of
Christ's mouth, which he speaks, which are Spirit and life, not Le^ser, which
Word of Christ, is the Word of God also, as Christ himself the Lord, that
Spirit is, 2 Cor. 3. which was in the beginning before Letter was, and was with
God, and was God, for the three that bear witness in heaven the Father, Word,
and Spirit are one, and all three Spirit and Light, and the Letter is none of
them all, and these without the Letter are effectual, and were so before it,
though T.D. says the Spirit was not wont to be effectual without the Letter,
p. 42. of his 1. Pamph. but the Letter and its revelation is not sufficient and
omnibus numeris absolute, etc. as J.O. darkly divines, to effect and perfect
all things as to Gods glory and our salvation of it self, so that there is no
need at all of any other witness or revelation by the Spirit and Light within.

T.D. indeed (if any, save such as are bewitched and befooled already, would be
such fools as to follow his foolish fancy) would (and what Parish Preachers do
not the like?) make men believe by his non-sensical blind ways of proving it,
as if it were so at lea^t (and that is a little more moderate, then I.Os.
boundless elevation of the Letter, which he makes little less than All in All
that the Spirit was not wont to be effectual without the Letter, in proof of
which his false Assertion ^e urges, Romans 10.17. the same Text that I.O. wrests
the same way; Faith, which is the Spirits work (quoth he in the forenamed page)
comes by hearing, hearing by the word of God; which term the Word of God
there. T.D. and I.O. and their Adjutants generally take to be the Scripture
Text, though if any measure of right reason did Rule in them they might see in
the same Chapter that the Word of faith, by which it comes, is that they
preached to be brought nigh in men's hearts and mo^ths by God himself, that
there they might both hear and do it, Deuteronomy. 30.13. but so far is his Position
from having any truth in it, as much as he stands up against R.H. who justly
withstands him in it, that if his own eyes were but half open, he could not but
see the flat falsehood of it, yea it is so palpable that before all the world I
will here lay down the very contrary as the truth, viz* The Spirit was wont to
be effectual without the Letter: And why he should lose any of his Authority,
power and efficacy by men's writings as they were moved by him, he is either
wiser then I that can tell, or else very fond in asserting what he can tell no
reason for: And that the Spirit, or Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God (whether we understand it of Christ himself that Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. that
quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. who is called the Word of God, Rev. 19.13. or
the Spirit of God and Christ, which is so called also, Ephesians. 6.17.) was wont to
be effectual without the Letter of old, before there was any Letter for him to
work by, is so clear, that twere to light a candle to see the Sun by to go
about to prove it; yea as I.O. says in a case that is clear (I mean clear
contrary to what he asserts in it) Ex. 3. s. 31. so say I in this, ad Solemn
caecuti^^ necesse est, etc. he must be so blind as not to see the Sun when it
shines upon him, that is ignorant of it, or assents not to it; since as R.H.
told him then it was so, so I tell him here over again in R.H. his words, with
the addition of the long tract of time wherein it was wont to be so; The Sword of
the Spirit is the Word of God, which was effectual [two thousand years] before
the Letter was.

And this I the rather assert against T.D. here in this place because he is so
ignorant as to tax R.H. there for usual speaking nonsense, and for
underst^nding nonsense as well or better then good sense, in that when T.D.
said, The Spirit was not wont to be effectual without the Letter. R H. repeats
him, saying thus, The Sword of the Spirit is ineffectual without the Letter
which in effect is all one [if T.Ds. eyes were well open to see clearly what
the Spirit is, and what the Letter] and then replies thus, The Sword of the
Spirit is the Word of God, which was effectual before the Letter was.

Now I demand of thee T.D. 1. where is any nonsense R.H. spoke, whose words I
here speak after him, that I may clear them from thy unjust cen^^re of
nonsense; And if R.H. understood any nonsense, as thou say he did, then
that must import that thy self with whom he was then in discourse had spoken
some, for he could not understand that nonsense from thee which thou never
speak: Out of thy own mouth then at least thou art condemned for speaking
some nonsense, if a man were minded to prosecute thee for it, for habemus
Ret^^ conficentem, we have it from thy self if it were so; but though thou
tacitly taxest thy self with nonsense, yet I shall do thee that Right this
once as to clear and exuse thee from thy own false self-accusation, for in
truth both what thou spakest, and what R.H. spoke was all good sense, as to the
intelligibleness of the phrases, unless thou account every sentence to be
nonsense that is false as to the matter propounded in it, as in a sense thou
may, there being no sense nor reason for it that any man should affirm and
tell an untruth, and then I confess thou spakest nonsense, and R.H. good sense,
Since his saying was true, and thine was false. For the Sword of the Spirit
which is the Word of God, and the Spirit it self, and not the Letter, as thou
who art somewhat low and implicit, not very loud, me thinks, nor express as if
thou durst not for shame speak out thy mind about it seem to make it, was
wont to be effectual without, and was effectual before the Letter was.

But here is indeed the very knot of the business, thou deemest R.H. to utter
nonsense, in not being so non-sensical, as, with T.D. I.O. and their Chronies
to interpret the Sword of the Spirit there called the Word of God of the
outward Letter or Scripture, that is the thing will not down with T.D. without
straining at it as a piece of nonsense to assert the Sword of the Spirit not
to be the Letter, witness T.Ds. words of R*H. T.D. As for what he says, that
the Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God, if he meant like a man in his
oppositions, he must mean Christ, who but once is called the Word of God, Rev.
19.13. And Christ cannot be intended, Ephesians. 6.17 because he is not the Sword of
the Spirit, but the Spirit his Sword rather; for by the Spirit he works in the
hearts of men, and therefore, Genesis 6.3. he says, My Spirit shall not always
strive with man, which is meant of the Holy Ghost, as will appear by comparing
it with Act. 7.51. where Stephen tells the Jews, Ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost, Christ by the common operations of his Spirit strives with men, and by
the special operations thereof pre^ails, with them.

Rep. In this parcel is more truth granted to the Qua. then T.D. himself
understands so to be, or will ever stand under the force of, when made use of
by them against himself, for he says the Spirit is Christ's Sword by which
according to G^n. 6.3. Act. 7.51. he works operates [ in] men [mark his words]
and is said to strive with them that always resist him, even ( in) themselves.

I could never yet get it granted from T.D. or any other contenders against the
truth in this point, that Christ had a Spirit of his in men, by the operations
of which he is said in those two Texts to strive with them [ n themselves] for
howbeit its the common Doctrine laid down positively by themselves unawares
many times, yet when they meet with Qua. in verbal discourses, who urge these
two self same Texts, and that in 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. By the which Spirit
Christ preached to Spirits in prison, which were disobedient in the days of
Noah, etc. And that Ioh. 16.8, 9, 10, 11. concerning the Spirits convincing the
world of sin, etc. in themselves; and that Ioh. 3.19, 20, 21. of Christ the
light coming into the world, i.e. the word which is in men's hearts, there
condemning the evil deeds, even in the dark cells of wicked men's own
consciences, which Light is sent not to condemn, but (unless men love the
darkness more then it) in order to their salvation, and that they might be
saved by believing in it, verse. 17, 18. And that Text also, Ioh. 1.9.
concerning the tru^ Light, which is Christ, enlightening every man in the world;
all which places, and many more are parallel together in this point, among all
the several sorts of shifts whereby to shuffle of the sound Doctrine of the
Qua. this is most commonly made use of viz. that the strivings and shinings of
Christ by his Light and Spirit with and unto the Sons of men [which they dare
not deny neither to be universal, and yet do own ten parts to one of the world
too to be at this day without any true outward Gospel Ministry or Traditions by
by men or Letter of Scripture; O Rotas, where is the beginning and end of these
men's Rounds?] are not by any Light or Spirit of his that is in them, for that
measure of his Light and Spirit within we call men to, they name natural,
imaginary, figment, Fanaticisme, Enthusiasme, and, ironically, that infallible
Doctor, Qualitas nescio quae divina seu anima mundi omnibus mista (...), merae
tenebrae, caecitas, nes^io quid, ni^il, nothing and much more as I.O. pleases,
but by a Letter and Ministers of the Letter without them only; he strives and
shines by his Spirit, say they, and reproves and convi^ces the world that
resist, but it was of old by the outward Ministry of Noah only a Preacher of
Righteousness, it is since by the Scripture and Ministers of it that preach
outwardly out of it (though perhaps not one of an hundred in the world ever
read it, or heard it preached on) but not by any measure of his Spirit, or
immediate workings of any Light or Spirit of his within the hearts of the whole
race of wicked ones; these things are not common to all, Neque enim spiritus
Christi [quoth I.O. Ex. 4. s. 21.] Esse potest cum sit quid omnibus sommane,
this Light the Qua. talk of cannot be Christ's spirit, since they make it a thing
common to all. And T*D. p. 2. 1 Pamph. you speak of a light that every man has
in all ages and generations. And p. 3.4. G.W. saying, Christ was given a light
to the Nations. T.D. denies that the Gentiles had been at all enlightened by
Christ, unles you mean as God, quoth he, and say I, what should we mean else?
is not Christ God, and his light the light of God, and his Spirit and Word, the
Spirit and Word of God before Christ's coming?

But in the parcel above, we have it under T.Ds. own hand, what need we say
more, or use more witness nnless, the false witnesses agreed better together
then they do within themselves, and with each other, for we can either turn
each of them to himself, or one of them over to another vvellnigh at any time
for an answer, That the Spirit is Christ's sword, and by it he works in the
hearts of men, i.e. all men, in proof of which, Genesis 6.3. Act. 7.51. are urged
by T.D. himself, which grant of his we shall take and lay up against the time
to come, that if he deny Christ henceforth to have a witness, a spirit, a light
of his in the hearts of all men we may wound him with his own weapon, and
slay him with his own sword, who yet whether the Qua. meddle more with him
yea or day, will, as to that life he now live, vv^ich is partly in wickedness
and partly in his own foolish wisdom and unrighteous righteousness, be slain
at last with that two-edged sword I am to return to talk of with himself and
I.O. who are to dye to what they now are by the dint of it before they ever
know the Lord, or that Gospel of his they both fight against, and then they
shall learn that sword of Christ's mouth, and sword of the Spirit to be the
Light and Spirit within, and not the Letter they are so loud for, which Letter
yet as an instrument or sword in our hands, who are acted against them by the
Spirit, will furnish us sufficiently to slay them as to their silly senses on
it, effectually enough in all Reason and Conscience.

And now whereas T.D. dreams that by R.H. his saying that the sword of the
Spirit is the Word of God, if he mean like a man in his oppositions he must
mean Christ himself, who cannot be intended, Ephesians. 6. since he is not the Spirits
Sword but the Spirit his; and so thinks he has it Cock-sure, that since it is
not Christ himself it must be the Letter that is there called the Sword of the
Spirit, and the Word of God, as if there were no third to be assigned as in
opposition to the Letter: for this is his Argument in form, viz. the Sword of
the Spirit, is either Christ or the Letter, not any third, but it is not Christ,
therefore it must be the Letter.

Reply. What if I tell him by the sword of the Spirit there called the Word of
God, one may mean a third, as Paul does in that place, that is neither Christ
himself, whose Sword his Spirit is, nor yet the Letter which undoubtedly is not
it, and yet mean like a man too? yea verily be means not like a spiritual man,
but smells lik a Minister of the Letter, and not of the Spirit that means it of
the Letter, and not of the Spirit it self, for Spirit it is, as the Letter is
not, and the Word of God, whether understood of the Lord himself, that Spirit,
1 Cor. 15.2, 3. which is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. or of the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18. which is also the Word of the Lord, and
two-edged sword that goes out of Christ's mouth, called elsewhere the Rod of his
Power, the Rod of his mouth, the breath of his lips, the Spirit and life, Joh.
6.63. the Spirit of his mouth, Isa. 11. and brightness of his coming, with
which he smites Nations, rebukes for the meek, consumes and destroys the
wicked man of sin within, first in his Saints, and throw them as vessels that
bear his name, without, in Myriads of whom he is now beheld coming to that
work, Jude 14. as blind as ye are, neither to behold, nor believe it.

And that the Sword of the Spirit is not the Scripture or Letter is evident,
for it is something, even a Word and Sword, that was before the Letter, which
only relates of it, and therefore the Letter is not it, unless a man will be so
unmanly as to say the Scripture or Letter was before the Letter was, which were
nonsense with a witness.

Again if the Letter be the Sword of the Spirit, and Word of God, then there
was two thousand years, wherein the^e was none of the Sword of the Spirit or
Word of God that Paul there speaks of, and a long time together, wherein
Christ and the Spirit had no Sword which is most gross, absurd and sottish to
assert, yet is not T.D. alone found in it, but I.O. also in the same [for these
two are seldom otherwise, if not contradicting, then concurring with each
other in the same folly who p. 258. says thus of the Text (unless he intend it
of the Truth it self] the Spirit of Truth, Joh. 16. and Gods word is Truth
abstract from the Text, which only tells of it, which Spirit and which Word of
Truth was before the Text, and is where his Text is not, and then I acquit him,
though by the Word of Truth he usually intends the Text and Scriptures of it)
as the T^xt stands now pointed and asserted, neither Jews nor Socinians shall
be able to relieve themselves from the Sword of Truth therein: If by therein
he means the Truth declared only, I own it the Sword, for the Word, which is
Spirit is a Sword, but if the Text or Scripture, that is no other then the
Scabbard. Besides the Letter, the Bible ye bawl for, is too blunt a business to
cut so close, and search so the quick into the secrets of the heart, thoughts,
soul, spirit of men as the two-edged Sword we are yet talking about does, and
too blind a business to be denominated, as the Word of God spoken of Ephesians. 6.
Heb. 4.12, 13. is, a discerner of the intents of the heart before which there
is no creature that is not manifest unto the eyes of which, as that which we
have mainly to do with, all things, are naked and bare: And howbeit I.O. as
aforesaid is so dark, as p. 87. to tell us of its diving into the hearts,
consciences, and secret recesses of men's minds there judging and determining
upon them, terrifying, sentencing them in themselves, etc. yet he woefully erres
to ascribe that to the Scripture or Letter, which is peculiar only to the Light
and Spirit that only searches the deep things of both God and men, and Satan;
and which reveals and manifests all things, and to which all is manifested and
revealed: And howbeit he appropriates this all along to the Scripture and
Letter, which he means all along by the Word of God, yet if he did but well
understand himself, he not far off ascribes the same to the Light, that both we
and the Scriptures speak of, which yet he will advance no higher then to term
it natural and the voice of God in nature, etc. for as p. 42, 43, 44, 45. he
tells how God by that has placed a thing called self-judgement in us in
reference to his own over us, and reveals himselfes the sons of men, and much
to the like Tune; and p. 81: says it is by the light in the Scriptures (which
is, say I, that which the Scripture testifies of that it is in the heart) by
which the Scripture dives into the ^earts, and there determines, judges in the
Majesty and Authority of God, yet the Crown still is stated on the head of the
Scripture by him, and that Light it came from in holy men, which is the same, a
small measure of which is in all men's hearts and consciences, whose external
subordinate instrument sometimes the Letter is, is made by him, but the
subordinate instrument of the Letter, by which, quoth he, the Letter (...) and
does this and that, and effects and perfects; all which yet to go round again)
contradicts his own excludings, in the other forecited places of his book, of
the Spirit and Light within from bring needful, or any way concurrent with the
Letter, but rather as fi^^icious and detestable.

So the Letter is the supreme Judge only most perfect Rule, and Ruler of all,
and transacter of all still as to man's salvation with I.O. who little heeds how
the Revelation made by the light in the conscience is of an unexpresiably
larger extent then the manifestation of things is that is, made by the Letter
that came from it, for the naked Letter, or the light by it only manifests d^
j^re the right of matters what is to be done, what not, what is good, what
evil; the Moral law shows the Moral good that is to be acted, the Moral evil
that is to be declined, or else no life but cursing, but the naked ligh^
without the Letter, that was within men's hearts, as it now is, before the
Letter was, discov^rs not on^y as the Letter does, de jure, the Moral good and
evil, as I.O. himself confesses, and Moral or Evangelical obedience and
righteousness that is the substance of that legal and ceremonies that stood in
Typical Transactions and ou^side-observations ^or a time, but also over and
above searches the heart, and shows to every man, de facto, what is, and is not
done of the will of God de jure revealed, and accordingly accuses or excuses,
justifies or condemmeth in the Majesty and Authority of God, so that its
particular sentencing of every man either to life or death, blessing or
cursing, acceptance or rej^ction stands ratified, inalterably in the Court of
Heaven; yea hereby Christ shows every one, as he did the woman of Samaria, all
that ever she did, and what they do, and are, think or speak, and answerably
either acquits or accuses, as 1 Ioh. 3. as our hearts condemn us or not by that
of God in them, so are we justified or condemned, have boldness or bash^^^ness
before the Tribunal of heaven, for whose sins the light remits are remitted,
and whose sm^^s is retains are retained, and the Ministers of the Light do by
it judge the world that lies in wickedness, and justify the righteous, and we
know their judgment is true, and their sentence sure, and shall stand in fore
D^i as it does in far^ conscien^ia.

But the Letter is too too weak an Engine to enter here, and too short a Sword
to divide so distinctly within, as the Spirit and Law of the Spirit of life
does, which is the Light, the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. Which
Titles I say still against T.D. and I.O. also are not to be all attributed,
much less (as they are by them often) appropriated to the Letter of the
Scripture, but are to be denominated only of Christ or his Spirit, either of
which a man may mean as in opposition to the Letter, T.Ds. conceits to the
contrary notwithstanding, and yet mean like a man and a Minister also; for as
Christ, whose Name is the Word of God, is that Spirit, and Sword of the Father,
who is also a Spirit, with which he will wound and Rule the wicked unruly
Nations; to the Spirit of both the Father and the Son or Word, which is one
Spirit with them (for these three are one, 1 John 5.) is that Sword that goes
out of his mou^h to the consuming of that wicked enemy, (...), that sits, as
God, in his Temple both within and without, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and both are the Armor
of God, of Righteousness, of Light, which we are bid, and and said to put on,
Romans 13.2 Cor. 6. Ephesians. 6.

And because it may seem such nonsense to T.D. to say the Sword of the Spirit
is the Spirit it self, and not another outward instrument of a Letter, which
yet we know the Spirit can use too when he pleases, though his operations are
most effectual when he is heeded in his immediate workings within the heart;
for T.D. I wot judges the phrase improper to call the Spirit it self the Sword
of the Spirit, and that that manner of speech must needs import another thing:
let me ask thee, why so T.D. must it needs import another thing then the Spirit
to say the sword of the Spirit? why must it be improper so to say? had thou
had thy eyes in thy head, and thy wits well about thee when thou busiedst thy
self about that Text, thou would have seen the Spirit and Paul by it, whom
thou will not dare to charge with speaking n^^-sense, though thou chargest R.H.
for the same, speak in the same way of the who^e celestial Panoply, as ye use
to ca^l it: Is not the brestplate of righteou^sness, shi^ld of faith,
preparation of the Gospel of peace, faith, righte^usness, and the Gospel of
peace it self in the verses next above, and the Armor of light, the light it
self, Romans 13? why then may not the Sword of the Spirit be meant of the Spirit
it self, and yet a man mean like a man, and not mean nonsense, as thou
would seem to make R.H. to do in so meaning?

And now to I.O. again about the Text Heb. 4.12. in which there remains one
clause more, which, if he did not ad solemn caecutire, shut his eyes against the
Sun, me thinks he could not possibly relate to the Letter, and that is this
Epethite of (...) quick or living, and that so uncontroleablely, as he does,
even to blind and obstinate persisting in it, for Ex. 3. s. 40. where he
infers the Qua. urging against his Letters being the only most perfect Rule on
the behalf of the Spirit* he says thus:

J Oj. Ob Scriptu^a est litera mortua spiritus vivificat, quis literae mortua
nisi ips^ fi^ mortuus adhaerere velit? the Scripture is a dead letter, its the
spirit that quickneth: who but he that's dead himself will look for life from a
dead letter? Rep. Falsissima est ista assertio, scriptura est verbam Dei quod
vivum est and efficax, neque uspiam litera esse mortua dicitur, occidit quidem,
sed ido viva est. That is a most false Assertion; the scripture is that Word of
God which is living and powerful, Heb. 4.12. Neither is the Letter any where at
all said to be dead.

Reply. Verumne? Itane? Ocyus adsit huc aliquis; is it so I.O. that the Letter
is no where called dead? what no where? nec clam? nec cum scrobe? nusquam? hic
tamen infodiam: Some honest body come hither a little, and let us dig up and
dive a little deeper into I.Os. own Divinity doings to see if we cannot find
it so called there by his own self, if that be the same I.O. [as no doubt it
is] that wrote the two English Treatises and the blind Latin Theses about
Scriptures; in his own book for the Bible, which may be cogent to him however,
in the 237. page thereof ( vici, vidi ipse libelle) I find I.O. himself saying
thus of the Letter, yea and of the Word too, and that is more I dare say then
any Qua. dare say, that they are both dead without the Spirit; as living,
perfect, in all respects efficacious to accomplish all as the Scripture was,
Ex. 3. s. 28, 29. so that there is no need of any other revelation by the
Spirit and Light within, but those all are uncertain, vain, useless,
detestable, etc. Now it is [without the Spirit] a dead letter, yea the Word is so
too with I.O. as if the Word of God and Christ, which is Spirit and life, was
sometimes dis-joyned from the Spirit: Take it in his own terms then Reader,
lest thou think I wrong him all this while, The Jews enjoyed the Letter of the
Scripture as they do at this day, yea they receive it with the honor and
veneration due to God. Their possession of it is not accompanied No more is is
yours.
with the administration of the Spirit without which, as we see in the instance
of themselves And we the same in the instance of your selves.
, the Word There we leave you, for we own Gods word to all, and always living,
but the Letter never was living, but always a dead letter, though killing, but
the Spirit only living and giving life.
is a dead letter of no efficacy for the good of souls. They have the Letter
amongst them, as sometimes they had the Ark in battle against the Philistines,
And as ye have the Letter which is but as the Ark that keeps the Testament, but
not it, to your further ruin.
for their further ruin.

Here needs no more illustration of this palpable contradiction ^h^t I.O. gives
to himself, twere to suppose men that read his book to be Idiots to show it
more to their sight then it shows it self, so with his own ( in oper^ lang^
obrepsit somnus) I shall quit it here, but not acquit it quite till he acquits
the truth he quarrels with: Only as to his occidit quidem ideo viva est, the
Letter kills [for this he cannot deny being the Letters testimony of it self,
only he concludes, as he is wont to do, the clean contrary way] therefore its
living; I 1. deny his consequence, for many things are said to kill as dead
instruments used by living Agents, as a Knife, a Dagger, a Sword, which when
they have so done as in that subordinate way of an instrument, cannot quicken,
though I own the Letter as healable and honorable an instrument as any is in
the hands of men, when they are used and moved to use it as an instrument in
the hands of God; yet as dead a thing as applied by the stealers of it in these
times, as it was in the mouths of the old Theevish Prophets, of whom God said,
They shall not profit people at all, Jer. 23.

And as to I*Os. laboring to lick himself whole of this with his litera
occidit quatenus litera legis est ab Evangelio seperata, and quatenus a spiritu
and ver^ sensu voluntatis Dei destituuntur, qui literae adhaerent, quae
judaeorum conditio fuit contra quo^ eo loci disputat Apostolus: The Letter
kills, as it is the letter of the Law, and separate from the Gospel, and as they
are destitute of the Spirit and true sense of Gods will who adhere to the
Letter, which was the Jews condition against whom the Apostle there disputes.

Rep. I say, Mutato nomine de te fabula, etc. the self-same is to be said of
your selves against whom we dispute, since your condition is the same with that
of the Jews, if once ye would savingly come to see it; for li^era legis, the
letter of the Law is but the Old Testament still, and not the Gospel, and the
New, which is spirit and life, and a life-giving Light to them that according
to the call thereof will take heed to the light for life; and while you not
taking heed to the light for life, adhere to the Letter, so as ye do when
receiving it with veneration due to God, ye fight against the light and spirit
within for the sake of it, of the Spirit and true discerning of the mind and
will of God declared in the Letter, and revealed in the light ye are ignorant
taliter, if not totaliter, and as uttely destitute, as were the Jews.

And now as to that Text which remains yet with one more to be touched on,
viz. Psalm 119.105. Thy Word is a light to my feet, and a lamp to my paths,
which thou also appliest to the Letter, as the light and lamp there spoken of,
and upon that account from that, and many more as little to thy purpose, and as
much to ours as that is, let out thy mind into a long piece of dark prate
about the Letters being the most glorious light in the world (as if it were
that in Ioh. 3*19. which is not the Letter, but the measure of the light come
from Christ into all men's consciences) almost throughout the fourth Chapter of
thy first Treatise. I must here have a little parley with thee about that, and
the other places thou producest, which are all parallel with it against thy
self, and so hasten on what I can toward an end, as one more grieved, sick and
weary in my spirit to see thy confusions, then by the power of God upon me
bearing me up under the (else unsupportable) burden of it I am in either body
or spirit with confounding them.

Those other Texts are, Job 24. They are of those that rebel against the light,
they know not the way, nor abide in the paths thereof, Psalm. 19.8, 9. The
Commandment of the Lord is pure in lightning the eyes, Psalm. 119.130. The
entrance of thy words gives light, Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a lamp, and
the law is light. Isa. 9.2. The people that walked in darkness have seen a
great light, they that dwell in the land and shadow of death upon them has the
light shined. Hos. 6.5. I have slain them with the words of my mouth, thy
judgments are the light that goes forth. Matthew. 4.16. The people that sat in
darkness saw great light, to them which sat in the Region and shadow of death
light is sprung up. Matthew. 5.14. Ye are the light of the world, Job 3.20, 21.
For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light lest
his deeds be reproved, but he that does truth comes to the light that his
deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. 2. Pet. 2.19. a light
shining in a dark place.

Reply. Sure enough the man Catalogized all these together out of his
Concordance the Series wherein he has set them learns us no less, for else he
would at least have joined Isa. 9. and Matthew. 4 together, one of which is but a
citation of the other; and it may evidently seem from his more Concordantial
than Cordial consultations both here and elsewhere, that howbeit he set not all
of them down ( hoc opus esset) yet well-nigh by all places in his Concordance
where he finds these Terms, Word, and Light, he incontinently concludes the
Scripture and Letter to be meant, and so on that account as cloudily cotes as
many of them, as he judges, as to number, may make a Jury, and so Hob-Nob, as
they say, without mattering much what they are, so they Concord all in one in
the bare naming of the words Word or Light, and mostly citing the Chapter and
verse, but seldom the Truths that are told there (as if he thought that most
men would blindly and implicitly subscribe to his sentence from such a packet
of Texts trussed together, and never be at so much pains as to search them all)
he Impannels them presently about his business, hoping they will all agree to
give Verdict for him, when as how sweet an harmony soever they have among
themselves that way, where their Verdict passes, yet they Concord all in one to
contradict him, (saving I.Os. strong confidence in them, such a joint
concurrence to the contrary have every one of these twelve Texts of his own
taking; for though he subscribe them all to that his sophistical Assertion, p.
74.75. viz. The Scripture, the Word of God Mark how I.O. crowds, as often he does
elsewhere, these two terms together in one ^lause, viz. The Scripture the Word
of God, as it were by App^si^ion, as if it were given him for granted that the
Scripture, and the Word of God, were as to name and thing one and the same,
while ^is the very Question denied by us, and to be proved by him that the
Scripture is the Word of God, and so here is a piece of petitio principii in
it, or begging of the Question; and were it an Interrogation, as it is a
Position, and asks, Is not the Scripture, the Word of God Light ^it were
fallacia plurium interrogationum, whereby the Sophister asks one question of
two things at once, which is true of one, false if affirm^d of the other, for
we deny not the Word of God to be the Word of God, nor the Word of God to be
the light, but we deny the Scripture or letter ^o be either the Word of God, or
the light.
is light, in proof that the Letter is the light against such as deny it (for
none deny the Word of God to be the light that I know of, but I*O. himself, who
jeers of the verbum insernum and lumen internum, as figmentum horrendum, Ex. 1.
s. 5. Resomnino ficta, commentum erasse excogitatum, Ex 2. s. 25. merae
senebrae, caecitas, etc. Ex. 4 s. 17.) so that where ever the Reader finds him
prosecuting the proof of it under that term of, the Word, saying, the Word is
the Light, Rule, Foundation, and such like, he must be taken as intending the
Scripture, Letter, Text) witness both Title pages Proscripturis, A vindication
of the Scriptures against the Fanatics to be the Word of God, and of the
purity and integrity of the Hebrew and Greek Texts) though I say they are all
subscribed in vindication of the Letter to be the Light, yet there is not on
them all that subscribes to I.Os. sentence or judgment on them, but they all
give their verdict another way, even for that which is Light, and the light
indeed (as we deny it not, viz. the Word, Law, Commandment, Judgments of God,
and Christ's mouth, but not at all for the external Text or Letter of the
Scripture, which issue forth ad extra from the said Word, Law, Commandment,
Judgments, that are ad intra, a great deep, and known savingly to those only
that wait on God in the light within.

But to come to some examination of his Texts, and of what testimony they give
for him, beginning however with the first, and ranking the rest as I shall see
occasion.

The Scripture is light, quoth he, those that reject it are called (...) Lights
Rebels, men r^sisting the Authority that they cannot but be convinced of.

Reply. That such as reject the Scripture are to be rejected and det^sted, I
freely grant, if by rejecting thou meanest such a rejection as is in
detestation of them, in which wise thou rejectest the spirit and light within,
and all the Revelation made thereby, when of those means of coming to the
knowledge of God, and to salvation thou say, Ex. 3 f. 28, 29. Inania sunt
ista principia cognitionis Dei, inutilia, periculosa, a Faniticir simulata,
ideoque rejicienda ae decestanda, those are vain, utterly unprofitable,
perilous ways toward the knowledge of God and salvation, Fanatic figments,
and therefore to be rejected and abhorred; and in which wise thou falsely
accusest the Qua. among others, as rejecters of the Scriptures, when thou
mis-callest them, Ex. 3. s. 26. (...), haters of the Scriptures, as if they
bore some spleen, or such spite to the Letter as ye do to the Light and Spirit,
or more than to other writings, which yet we, for holy truth and doctrines sake
declared in them, love and prize above any books, and honor one Chapter of
them as more worth than twenty of your printed Preachments upon them: I say, he
that so rejects the Letter or Scripture, as is above said, let him be rejected,
and even Anathema Maranatha for me; for otherwise there is a kind of rejecting
(which the light is not liable to) of the mere Letter or Scripture, that is not
at all to be found fault with, much less to be rejected and detested, as that
of those, who make waste paper of old printed sheets or leaves of the Bibles,
and use them as they do other Scriptures or Writings, as they please, about
refusely occasions.

But the Qua. are not to be Ranked among such Rank rejecters of it as the
first.

2. That such as spitefully reject the Scriptures are (though they are not so
called in that of Job) Rebellious against the Light also may well be owned,
howbeit upon this account only, as the Letter, truly Transcribed that came from
the Light, and the Light it came from are, though two things, yet so agreeing
together in one, as to the same testimony they both bear to the same truth,
that he cannot really and truly, whatever he may seem to do, receive, own, and
obey the one, who is found fighting, denying, rejecting, and rebelling against
the other, whereupon as obedient and reverential, respectful, even to
superstition, as I.O. would be judged to be to the Letter, which he and others
receive as the Jews do with the honor and veneration due to God, yet (saving
all these shows) they are still Rebels against the very Letter, whilst so
rebellious against the Light as to reject it with that detestation that is due
to nothing but sin it self, and the very Devil; for he that owns the Letter
aright, must own, come to, believe in, follow the Light, that shines from
Christ, and shows the good, and the evil in his own, by the fall, darkened
heart, defiled, blinded, and benighted conscience, since the Letter testistes
of, and calls men to this Light: As he cannot be said to fulfill and live
according to the Letter, that lives besides the Light it calls to, so cannot he
be said not to fulfill, or to live beside the Letter, who lives according to
the Light it came from.

But not upon this account can he be said to rebel against the Light who
rejects the Letter, because the letter and light are one and the self-same
thing, viz* the Letter the light, and the Light the letter, as I.O. dreams, for
howbeit that be his sense, yet assuredly neither is the Letter the light, nor
the Light the letter, but they are two distinct things that are no more
Synonamous, or one in name then they are in their essential properties and
proper natures, and that (however in some generals, they may be one, and so
omnia' quia entia, sunt quid unum) is in reality not at all.

And lastly, in what sense soever such as reject the Letter may be called
Lights Rebels (which is in no wise in respect of the letter and lights being
individually the same yet (as is said above) they are in no wise so called in
that of Job, and if the Light had been as much heeded by I.O. as the Letter is
looked in by him without the Light, which only leads into the true meaning of
it; yea if common reason had but ruled him, he would have seen by the word
Light the Letter is not intended; for to let pass other considerations that
might be as cogent in this case, when ever, or by whomsoever that History or
Book of Job was written, whether in his days, or after, by himself, or any
other, yet that Chapter being a part of Jobs speech to his friends, it must be
spoken in his days, whom Jerome on Genesis, Augustine, Ambrose, Philo, Plato,
and most ancient Fathers and Writers, Luther on Genesis 36. observe to have lived
long before Moses, whom ye judge the first Scripturewriter, carried Israel out
of Egypt, and so consequently before any of your Scripture or Letter, which ye
now call the Light was written; and that Job should denominate the wicked of
his days under the name of (...) Lights Rebels, rebellious against the letter
long before any letter was written (unless his own book, which yet (if in his
days) must be written after that was spoken) is such a trim piece of Teachment,
and credible conceit as I could say more to, had I to do with another man, but
to him I shall say no more but that which is his usual saying of what is at no
hand to be believed, p. 244. Credat Apella.

Thus much of the first of I.Os. Texts. Now as to the next that follow, viz.
Psalm. 19.8. Psalm. 119.105.130. Prove 6.23. I have said so much to some of them
already above as may stand as a sufficient answer to the rest, viz. that by
Word, Words, Law, Commandments, Statutes, Judgments, Testimonies, Precepts,
etc. In all those Scriptu^es is intended not the Scriptures themselves in which
these things are declared of; but the Word, Law, Commandment written in the
heart, and the Judgments ministered by the light on the evil deeds in the
conscience, decla^ed of only in the letter, which letter bears no other respect
or proportion toward that Word or Law which is the light, then the lantborn
does to the light that is contained in it, and displayes it self somewhat diaily
through it, or the Glas-window does to the Sun that shines and shows it self
throw it, yet more obscurely then when its immediately looked upon in its native
lu^^re; for there is a time wherein we see the Sun through a glass darkly and
Christ through the vail, that is to say his fle^h, and the light and things of
the Spirit in the shadow of the Scripture or letter, wherewith it is overcast,
where the Sun shines more immediately to the eye, and the vail of his flesh and
letter, and carnal Ordinance is rent, a more new and living way is consecrated
thereby into the Holy of holies it self, where more immediately, or face to
face then before, whilst in a Glass, beholding the glory of God, there is a
more perfect transformation into the image of his glory, which is fullness of
grace and truth (a glory that the world owns not, but the Saints saw in Christ,
Joh. ^ 14.) even by the Spirit of the Lord, or the Lord that Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.
ult. so I shall need to say no more to to those Texts in this place; nor yet to
that, Psalm. 43.3. which is of the same nature whereby the Light and Truth that
David, if it were his Psalm, desires God to send out, could not be intended the
Letter and Text, for so much of that as he made use of for his own condition
was sent out before, which was but little more then the five books of Moses,
perhaps Joshua, Judges, Ruth and Job; and it is but folly to fancy that he prayed
that more Letter might be given out to guide him, who had so much of the light
and spirit that by it he wrote much of the Letter himself; or if he did pray
for more letter to guide him then was, I know no more was granted him unless
what Psalms he wrote himself, which the Spirit moved him to write for the good
of others, for that of Samuel the Seer is mostly of him, and those of Nathan
and Gad, were so also. See 1 Chronicles. 29.29. And if Nathan and Gad wrote any to
be David's guide, they are none nor of yours, being not in you Bibles, and so
that light and letter he prayed for, is not the letter ye have and talk for,
nor does the Letter and Text lead any to the holy hill of God, and his
Tabernacle, but to the light and truth it came from, which is it only, and not
the letter, as ye have it, that came immediately from God, so only leads
immedlately unto him.

As to Isa. 9 2. to which though thou writing them in the rank, wherein they
stand in thy Concordance, severest them by the interposition of a text in Hosea
between them, yet I must join Mat. 4.16. since they both in the self-same terms
relate to the self-same thing and time: I marvel not a little; but that God is
now proceeding according to his promise, Isa. 2.9. to do that mavelous thing,
even that mavelous work and wonder, and turning the wisdom of the wise into
foolishness, and bringing to naught the understanding of the prudent, I should
much more marvel then I do to see a professed Doctor in Divinity residing at
the well head of learning and Religion dwell so deeply in the darkness, and in
the Region and shadow of death, as to interpret the term of ( Light) in those
two Texts of no other thing then the Letter of the Scripture.

The words are these, the People, meaning the land of Zebulun and Nepthali, by
the way of sea beyond Jordan, etc. which sat in darkness saw great light, and
to them that dwelt in the Region and shadow death light is sprung up.

Rep. The juncture of time, of which this is spoken concerning the land of
Zebulun and Nepthali, seeing great light, was when Christ himself the light of
the world came among them dwelling, at Capernaum a chief City of those two
Tribes by the Seacoast, and shone ronnd about them in his own immediate
Ministry.

The Scriptures or letter which by the word, Light, there is by our great
Text-man I.O. said to be intended, must be either those of the Old Testament,
as ye speak, or of the New; those of Old could not be meant here, for if they
had been that Light, they could not have been said to have sat till now in
darkness and shadow of death, neither could the light have been said, as it is
here to have sprung up now so newly to them, for the outward Scriptures of
Moses and the Prophets was sprung up to that people of Israel long before this
time; and those of the New, it could not possibly be^, for John the Baptist and
Christ having written nothing at all that is extant in your Bibles, though
Christ after this wrote something that is not there, and the Apostles and
Evangelists having written nothing yet, for not one o them was called till
after this, as appears by the verses following, not one jot or tittle of that
was sprung up to them as yet, therefore what ever Light it was (and what it was
is well enough known to the children of the light, though not to the children
of darkness that despise, and wonder, and perish not believing the work that
God is working in their own day) ^et this I can tell them, which is as much as
is meet for them to know till they live up to what they know already, and as
much as is needful to the case in hand that it was not the Letter of the
Scriptures.

And now I am so near that, Mat. 5.14. it is not amiss to step thither be^
before I go back to Hosea, where the words are, Ye are the light of the world,
which place I.O brings to prove the Letter to be the Light. Rep. I should
sooner by the half have urged, Genesis 1.2. God said, let there be light, and
there was light to prove the Letter to be the Light (for that has a typical
mystical reference to the true Spiritual light, that inwardly inlighte^s every
man that comes into the world, then that clause of Christ to his Disciples, Ye
are the light of the world, for that has not the least tittle of tendency to
such a thing, unless I.O. who is blind enough in blending the Writing and
letter written of into one individium will now grow so gross in his confusions
as to confound and thrust a third thing, viz. the men that wrote some of the
Scriptures, into one and the same individium with them, and so make a new kind
of Trinity in unity and unity in Trinity, which if he shall then (letting pass
that long tale of the doctrine of the Trinity in seven or eight pages together,
viz p. 132. to p. 139. in which he talks, as T.D. and most Divines do, of he
knows not whom, nor what, while he hates the light) if I say I.O. shall fain
such a new fangled Trinity, as Writers, Writings, and Word written of, and
jumble them all three into one, then it is time to tell these Trinitonians their
Bell ha^ not Mettle,
Nor the Tune of a Bell, but the Tone of a Kettle.


But I.O. has a saying I touched on above whereby perhaps he may think this
unfavoury sound is salved; it is the writing it self (quoth he p. 71.) that
now supplies the place and room of the persons in, and by whom God originally
spoke to men; as were the persons speaking of old, so are the Writings now.

Rep. Therefore say I, as the outward persons of the men, which I.O. reckons on
were not the Word of God, so neither were, nor are their Writhings the Word of
God ( Ad hominem.)

Ob. But may he say the persons of the Discip^es are here called the Light of
the world.

Rep. As vessels that bore the Name, Word, Truth, or Light of God to the world
by the figure or common metonymy, as I said above, whereby the thing containing
is called by the name of that that is contained in it or held forth by it,
which yet either as to name and thing it really and properly is not, I can
allow I.O. his denomination of the Apostles by that name of a Light in such
wise as commonly by the said figure, but not properly, the Lan^horn ( in sensu
composi^o) together with the Light shining in it is termed the Light, which
Lanthorn of it self is so far from being ( abstractively from the Revelation
made in it by the light within it) a light of it self, that its a dark body
that can neither show any thing else, nor be seen it self, without it be
manifested by something else that is truly Light.

But all this will lend I.O. as little help as none at all in his lame cause,
who has entered the lists with Qua. before the world to vindicate the Word of
God and the Light to be the proper name and nature of the Letter, to evince it
against them as to name and thing so to be, p. 30. of his Epist. and p. 73, 74.
that the Scripture both is so, and is so called [or else it properly could not]
as having the very nature and properties of light, and Ex. 1. s. 253. whose
dealing with the Qua. is de Scripturae nomine proprio, viz. titulo illo
glorioso verbo Deo, quod nomen sibi vendicat: about that proper name of the
Scripture, to wit, the glorious Title the Word of God, which name it
challenges to it self, and Ex. 3. s. 28, 29. who says that Revelation the
Scripture, that is abstractively considered of it self, and from the Light and
Spirit the Qua. say is necessary, is so omnibus numeris absoluta, perfecta, ut
nihil opus sit, etc. so every way absolute and perfect, and accomplishing all
things as a Rule or Guide, as who should say the Lanthorn is such a sure and
sufficient guide of it self in the night, that there is not any need at all of
any other light, the naked Lanthorn is a Revelation, and will do well enough
alone, so that there is no need at all of any other direction to know God to
salvation by nor of the Spirit, and light within, which is superfluous, vain,
useless and d^^estable.

I.O. is never the nearer as to his cause for all that which I can afford to
allow him as abovesaid.

Moreover if men made after Gods Image, and truly partaking of the Divine
nature, and begotten by the light and living Word of Truth from death and
darkness into a real union with it self by receiving with meekness (...), the
innate ingrafted word, ^am. 1.21. by which they become incorporated, and as it
were transubstantiated into one seed with it self. having the Image and glory
of God seen upon them, and shining in, and through them before the world men,
and before whom let your light shine, faith Christ, Mat. 5.16. Is. 60.1, 2, 3,
etc. 2 Cor. 2. ult I say, if such men may be styled the Light of the world, as
John Baptist was styled by Christ a burning and shining light, Joh. 35, 36 then
whom yet Christ had a greater witnes^; Will I.O. therefore prefer the dea^
copies of the writings of those living men, who wrote from the life, light, and
Spirit of God moving, before, or at least into an equality with the holy men,
who under God were the Authors of those writings, as they were at first, which
now are but the fallible ^andyworks of, by his own confession, but mere
fallible Transcribers? or if he will, will any wise men of God become so
foolish with him? I trow not, in as much as the workman is more glorious than
the work that issues either originally from, or but subordinately through his
own hands, the Writer more honorable than his mere writing, as Heb. 3.3, 4.
He who has builded the house, has more honor than the house; for as every
outward Writing or Letter, ye now have the use of, was written by some man, as
every such house is built by some man, but he of whom are all things, and he
that originally built all things is God indeed: Yet me thinks I sent not only
I.O. but T.D. also, who is so a k^n to him, (that in most matters here he
prosecues the same point) unless where he contradicts him) and hobbles upon the
same notions, enthroning the Scriptures or outward Letter very high above the
Church, whose children it immediately was pend by the hands of, and whose mere
outward Engine, the outward letter is, insomuch that I.O. makes it not only
dearer to God then the whole world besides, p. 171. but also p. 76. the very
Darling of God so that his Church, whose servant the Letter is, and for whose
sake written, is made by him but some subservant to hold out the honor of the
Letter that it may be the more conspicuous, rather then to let her own light,
image, grace, glory, which is that of God, Isa. 10.1, 2. shine out before man
the duty it is, quoth he, almost the whole of the Church to hold up that some,
time; and when we say the Church is a Pillar and Ground of truth from 1 Timothy
3.15. (...), which words Pillar and Ground should not be taken for the
supporter or foundation, nor inholder of truth in sensu Architectonico, which
T.D. denies, ^e not dispute. See p. 356. See p. 355. but grant him his sensum
forensem, or foreign sense of it, in which I.O. also, who says absurdly
however that these words Pillar and Ground may in good coherence of speech
refer to the words following, viz. the mystery of godliness, as well as to the
Church, will take it in, and let them have it, yet what follows that the Church
is but the Ground and Pillar to set the Letter upon, which I.O. calls the light
and truth there? and to hold forth only the outward literal publication, as
T.D. pleads, p. 18, 19. of his 2. Pamph. or the seat or place of residence for
the Scripture as upon the Exchange in London are pillars and places upon which
hang Tables and Proclamations? in no wise surely, for though the Pillars of the
Exchange are for support as well as show, and so T.Ds. Simile does not
quadrare, nor run on all four to be sure, yet, to give them the sense of a
pillar to hold up or hold out only, yet that which the Church is the Pillar to
hold up, that is hold forth, is the Truth, whether by, or without the Scripture
of it between which Truth and the book they both sometimes do distinguish,
which truth or light is the Foundation or Pillar in sensu Architectonico on
which the Church is built, and not it on the Church as the letter is, which
under God the Church, that gives no being to the truth or light, nor kindles
one beam thereof as I.O. says, but only bears witness to it, gives being to,
and so is in sensu Architonico the Pillar or Foundation of, though in sensu
forensi of the light and truth only for the Church is more honorable then the
letter, as the Builder, or that which supports the house, is more honorable
then the house that receives being under God, and preservation from it, and its
Prophets; but its less honorable then the light and truth it lives by, and
has its being from, as a Church, in respect of which light and truth it is
confessed it is not a pillar and ground in sensu Architectonico, as it is of the
letter, but in sensu forensi only, that is the seat, place or pillar from
whence it is held out and shines, or as the Church is called, Re^. 1.20. Zach.
4.2. a golden Candlestick, that serves to hold out in life and doctrine, voice
and writing, the eternal Word of grace, light, truth, and word of life conveyed
in measure to her from the two Olive trees, or anointed ones, or sons of Oil,
the living Word and Spirit, that empty themselves into the golden Candlesticks,
feeding them therewith, and from thence shining as God witnesses to the world,
which two witnesses shining and prophesying to the Church, or Candlesticks, and
through them to the world in power and much patience and sufferings, stand
before the God of the whole earth, Zach. 3. Rev. 11.

And if the Saints born of the incorruptible seed, the Word of God, which
lives and abides ever, may be styled the Seed of God; Will I.O. thence
conclude that a corruptible Letter copied out by corrupt men's hands [as the
Scripture is at this day] may be so styled also?

The Word of God took upon him the nature and seed of Abraham, but never took
upon him [however he is written of in it] the proper nature of a dead Letter,
that was written with ink and pen by men's hands.

There was no time wherein the Word and Light by which all was made, was made,
or born into the true nature of such a Letter, but there is a time of its
being, made flesh, and dwelling, as their food, in the Saints, Joh. 1.14. (...)
( natus est) (...), the Word was born flesh, and dwelt in us, Ioh. 6.51. to 64.
the bread I give is my flesh, etc. howbeit all flesh is not the same flesh,
there is a flesh of Christ, that, if eaten with a carnal mouth would, as so,
have profited nothing, verse. 63. its a Spirit that quickens, even the words he
speaks, which are Spirit and Life, not an outward flesh, much less an outward
Letter; but this is a great mystery when we speak of Christ and his Church,
that eats his flesh, and drinks his blood to cleansing from all sin, and to
life, as the eaters and drinkers of bread and wine yet do not, and are flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone; this is childrens bread, a knowledge too
wonderful for our Accademical Scribes, and Scripture-searchers for the life,
while they hate the light, who are so lost in their laudings of the letter, and
hampered in their heads about their senses of the History, and taken up with
tattle for every tittle of the Text, that they have not time to turn in to the
light whereby to see it, and so miss the mystery of the Gospel, which is
revealed only to them that live and walk therein by the light and spirit in the
heart.

As to that Hos. 6.5. he must be more then Moon-blinde that takes the word
Light there to be intended of the Letter, since the place sufficiently explains
it self in the next clause before that, and expresses it to be the words of
Gods own mouth, the same that I have said enough to above, even that Sword and
Spirit and Rod of his mouth, and breath of his lips and brightness of his own
coming, wherewith he Smites the Nations, Consumes the man of sin, Reproves for
the meek and slayes the wicked: It Is true, he says in the first clause of the
verse he hews them by his Prophets, for he comes not to do any judgments on
the wicked, which he reveals not first to his servants the Prophets, who go
forth and warn them of the the doom that from the Lord himself is drawing nigh
upon them, but it is the words of his own mouth, the light from himself that
condenms them in their own consciences for their evil deeds, by which he slayes
and executes his wrath and judgment [under which they are left inexcusable]
upon them, which judgments are as a light that goes forth, purging away the
sin, and preparing a way for the Lords coming in mercy to such as wait quietly
on him in the way of his judgments while they pass, as at the house of God
they do, whereat they begin, till her Righteousness at last go forth also as
brightness, Isa. 62.1, 2. and her glory and salvation as a lamp that burns.

As to that Ioh. ^.20, 21. One would not think it, that had not seen the Lord
hiding the plain truth of the Gospel, as it lies open in the Text, from the
wise and prudent, which he is revealing unto Babes, that one of the Renowned
Scribes, and disputers of this world, should be so confounded, as to conceive
that by light there is meant the letter, since it is as clear as the light it
self from the verses themselves, and those that go immediately before them that
that light alone, which the letter only points to, and not the letter it self
can so much as possibly be there intended.

Where Is th Scribe, where is the Disputer of this world for the Scriptures, that
he cannot see the Scriptures themselves he is so scraping for? is he not a
miserably be-moped, misled Leader that would lead men to mis-beleeve the
letter in its Testimony to the light, which letter has no higher end then to
bring men to believe in that true light of the world, which it self does but
testify of, which light is no other then that which shines immediately
(whether the glass of the letter be beheld yea or nay) from himself, who is the
Sun of Righteousness, into the world that is in men's hearts, condemning the
evil-doer and his deeds, laying open to them not [ de jure] only what the lusts
of it are, and in the (...) that they are to be avoided, even those of the
eye, flesh, pride, etc. but [ de facto] how far forth they are, or are not
avoided, and accordingly censuring them within themselves, where the Letter
cannot come in the inmost cells of the consciences of such men of the world, as
live where the Letter without was never so much as outwardly seen or heard of?
is not he of whom, and whose light all that i^ spoken, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19,
19, 20, 21. recorded by the same Evangelist, Joh. 12 35, 36, 46. etc. saying, I
am come a light into the world, that whoever believes in me may not abide in
darkness, and Ioh. 8.12. He that follows me ^^ark) me the true light, Joh.
1.9. that enlighten every man that comes in the world, shall not walk in
darkness, but have the light of life? is all this and much more in that book,
Joh. 9.5. and much more throughout the Epistles of the same holy man, who
speaks of the word that was in, and was the light from the beginning before any
letter was, and of the Son of God, and the holy unction, etc. intended, and to
be interpreted of no other then the little letter, and of no more then that
little of the letter that was written by motion of that Spirit, which is bound
up, and bounded within the brief bounds of your now hide-bound Bibles?

Pellibus exiguis Arctatur Fili usingens?
Pellibus exiguis Arctatur Spirit usingens?
O thou that art named, Mic. 2.7. The house of Jacob is the Spirit of the Lord
so straightened? are these his doings? do not his words (which are heard from his
own mouth) do good to him that walks uprightly by them now as well as in
former days?

Moreover the Letter is not come into all the world so universally de facto and
actualiter (for de jure and potentialiter it may by right and possibly enough
be so transmitted, but that were too much cost for our covetous Clergy to
bestow Bibles without coin upon poor heathenish Nations) into all the dark
corners of the earth as the light spoken of Ioh. 3. must necessarily be
supposed to do, or else it is not adequate to the case there handled; for the
Letter is actually seen and read but in a small part of the world; but the
world into all which the Word, that is the true light, is said to come both in
Col. 1.6. Joh. 1.9. and in Joh. 3. which is parallel to them, is the whole
world that lies in wickedness, and every man in it tha^ dwells in darkness, and
shadow of death, yea where ever the spiritual darkness is, and that is in all
men's hearts, where the Letter comes not among such as carry it under their
arms, there is this true light said to shine, though the darkness does not
comprehend it, Joh. 1.5.

I know the narrow pinching conceits of such as would wind the wide World here
spoken of within the short circuit of his Church, or the Elect, which they
confess [though as personally predestined to life, as all the rest are
peremptorily to damnation without any respect to foreknown faith or unbeleef to
be scarce one of a thousand, telling us a newfound world of men (in the Moon
of their own fancies) and making the Letter, which they call the Word, the
Foundation of that World, which God has set up in this World, so I.O. does, p.
48. as (...) a Wheel within a Wheel his Church, and asserting the term World,
Ioh. 3 to denote the Elect, a few in it only, as T.D. at the second days
Disptute at Sandwich, to which he had his answer much what to the Tun^ as
follows, that if by the World, the Church, or Elect only is meant, then those
six verses, viz. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. must be read, and rendered thus, viz.
For God so loved the world of the Elect. that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever in all that world of the Elect believes in him might not
perish, but have everlasting life; For God sent not his Son into the world of
the Elect to condemn the world of the Elect, but that the world of the Elect
through him might be saved; He [in this world of the Elect] that believes on
him, is not condemned, but he [in this world of the Elect] that believes not
is condemned already, because he has not believed on the only begotten Son of
God (as if some of the Elect did believe, and yet others of their very
peremptorily elected ones both to faith and life might not believe, and so be
condemned and perish) And this is the condemnation, of those elected ones that
perish, that light is come into the world of the Elect, but men, elect men,
love the darkness more then the light, because their deeds are evil. For every
Elect one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, left
his deeds should be reproved; but he, among the Elect that does truth comes
to the light that his deeds may be manifested to be wrought in God.

Much more was replied to T.Ds. dream then, then, shall be repeated in this
page, because I am here in talk with I.O. to another purpose about the Letter,
which is not a little served by the inserting of so much of it here; as
occasion is the universality of this true light, I.O. owns to be the Letter,
may be transiently touched upon again before the end; only thus I say here to
that absurdity of T.D. (who is not alone in it, it being the doctrine of most
of our Modern Protestant Divines, the odness of which, which I need not bid any
one that is well in his wits to behold, I shall leave to all men, among whom if
any will be ignorant let him be ignorant, if any be honest he will see it in
due time) that the word World, which is sometimes used to express the whole
fabric of the Universe, Matthew.16.26. and sometimes [when predicated of
persons] all men good and bad, as here, Ioh. 3.1.16, 17, 19. and sometimes for
the major part of men, which are the worst, lying in wickedness, and wondering
after the beast, or at best in but a form of Christianity, 1 Ioh 5. Rev. 13.
and sometimes for the whole Race of the wicked, abstract from the Righteous
seed, which are the fewest, Ioh. 17. yet I here summon all men in the World, to
show so much as one Text wherein is used to express a minor part of men, unless
by an Hyperbole, as Behold the World is gone out after him, or one at all
wherein its used to express the Saints, Church, or Elect in a sense abstract
from, or exclusively of the wicked, and I shall yield they have showed me more
then ever I could yet find at least, though twill be little to disprove the
universality of Christ's light in all men. Till then that that is done (not
tri^^ingly, nor seemingly for a show, but solidly, seriously, conscientiously,
cogently, irresistibly and substantially I must be excused if their mundus
electorum ex mundo electus [as they speak] which is one of the many Chris-cross
Round Os that I.O. and T.D. dance together in among other Divines in their
Divinity Doctrines, do pass for me under that most proper name that I.O.
himself gives it of a Wheel in a Wheel indeed.

But lastly, that the universality and large extent of the light, Ioh. 3.20,
21. said by I.O. to be the Letter, is such as the Letter is not adequate unto,
and therefore cannot be meant by it, let the two verses answer it themselves,
and let the first of them speak first on behalf of both. Every one that does
evil hatetht he light, neither comes to the light, left his deeds should be
reproved, but he that does truth comes to the light that his deeds may be
manifested that they are wrought in God.

Rep. 1. This light, whatever it is, is hated, avoided, and shunned by every
one that does evil, therefore it cannot be the Letter of the Scripture; in
various respects, 1 Because abstract from the Doctrine, teaching, and light of
Christ, which is in the heart and conscience, the Letter i neither hated, nor
shunned, nor feared by the evil doer nor need be, for fear his deeds should be
reproved by it, for though de jure the Light by the Letter sometimes, and
sometimes without it manifest, evil deeds [for the works of the flesh, as well
as the fruits of the Spirit are manifested, the Letter says, and that all that
is reproved is manifested by the light, not the letter it self, and what ever
does make manifest is the light, Gal. 5. Ephesians. 5.] yet that by which ( de facto)
his deeds, i.e. every man's own deeds are reproved if evil, and manifested so
himself to be good, is the light in his conscience without the Letter, which,
as well without the Letter as with it, shows moral good and evil, and without
the Letter ever shows every man's own deeds de facto to himself, and that from
God, as I.O. confesses a man needs no witness without him to assure him that
what his conscience speaks, it speaks from God, etc. p. 45. if he be in deceit
it will tell him, yea in short by this light there Christ shows, as he did the
woman of Samaria, all that ever they did, which thing the light as shining
without in the Letter only, does not, much less the Letter without it, for that
tells only what men should have done, not what de facto they have done within
themselves; so that evil ones need not much more fear coming to that alone,
then a Thief in the night need fear being discovered by a dark Lanthorn, that
hangs up without a candle in it; for the Letter alone is but as the Lanthorn,
and it is as evident that thousands of evil doers, who hate the light, and dare
not come to it, are not ash^med, nor afraid of coming near the Letter; they
cousen, cheat, are bloody, cruel, proud, and wicked, steal, lie, swear, commit
adultery, etc. yet read, hear, love to look in the Letter, buy Bibles, applaud
it, preach from it, plead for it, are proud of it, yea who more busy about the
Bible, and in a more uncessant search of, and endless scraping for more the
Scriptures then licentious luxurious, lascivious, ambitious, unrighteous,
murderous, envious, maliciou, lying, persecuting Scholars, and Bible-binders,
that hate light, which reproves their evil deeds, which those that love truth
in the inward parts love and come to; yea our professing Christians that say
they are the Jews, and are not, but do lie, and are the Synagogue of Satan, are
Jews in this p^i^t at least of searching Scripture, and looking into the Letter
for life, which testify of Christ as the life, to whom they will not come in
his own light that they may have it and of talking from the Letter of Christ
the Son of God, yet refusing to hear his voice, when he speaks to them in
their own hearts, and thereby leaves them without cloak for their sin, and
seeing and hating both Christ and his Father in the light that shows them, as
much as Christ and his children hate the Devil, and his deeds.

Finally, as the Text says, every evil doer in the world hates the light, but
there are millions of evil doers that neither love nor hate the Letter, nor
the Bible, which they never so much as saw or heard of, therefore the Letter
cannot be the light here spoken of, men cannot hate that they have no way heard
of, as neither can they love or desire it, for there is no odium toward that at
all, which is no way known at all, neither savingly, nor otherwise, as there is
ignoti null a cupido.

A word lastly to 2 Pet. 1.19. and then I have done at present with I. Os.
whole dozen of his own choosing which agree altogether as one to give their
Judgment or juridical verdit against him.

As to this Text therefore which with the 20, and 21. verse. is no less then
nine, or ten times over rehearsed one where, or others in thy book, I have had
it so often under my eye that I have hardly forbore so long from talking with
thee about it, and there is yet a place behind whereunto I thought I might
have reserved the examination of it, it being there urged with two more, in the
way thou call Inartificial, ^in proof of the Scriptures being the Word of
God, p. 65, 66. But now I shall here consider it whilst, its under my hand,
where its urged in vindication of the Letter to be the Light, which Letter if
it be the Light there spoken of, then I will yield it to be the Word of God
there spoken of also, for I shall grant its both of these if either, and if it
be not both, thou must needs grant its neither: the verse runs thus, But we
have a more sure word of Propesie or Prophetical word, (...), to which ye do
well to give heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. And the two that follow it thus,
for no Prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation, for the
Prophecy came not at any time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Spirit.

Rep. Thy often repetition of this Scripture upon every occasion imports the
great stress thou put upon it, and how great store thou set by it, as
to the proof of the Scriptures being the Word of Prophecy, and the light
shining in the dark place of men's hearts here mentioned, which Text with the
Context both which thou improvest to the uttermost will s^rve us rather to
reprove thy ignorance of Gods Word by, and to prove thy heart to be still a
dark place, then serve thee from which to prove the Scripture to be the Word
of God, or to be the light here said to shine in the dark place there spoken of
which is the heart, Exitus acta probat.

From this Text considered, together with the Context, thou confidently
concludest, assertest and insistest on five things.

1. That all the Scripture, Letter, or Writing, in the original Texts of it,
which is now bound up in your Bibles, and commonly called the Scriptures, was
written at first by holy men as they were acted in it by the immediate
inspiration of the Spirit of God, and this I shall neither deny, nor put thee
to prove, though if I should, I see where thou would falter, and be foundred
in it; but (to let that pass here) this I am sure enough of, that this place
proves no such matter, as that (as it is above laid down) neither in Terminis,
nor by Consequence, for though it says holy men of God spoke of old, i.e.
Prophesied as moved by the holy Spirit, yet it from thence follows not, that
all that ever holy men of God wrote in point of History, Chronicle, etc nor
Prophecy neither, was written by the same immmediate impulse of the Spirit on
the spirits of the Penmen of all that is there, for some was written from the
mouth of such as were inspired by the hands of others that were not the men
inspired, nor moved to give forth the burden of the word of Prophecy that was
on them, as Baruch wrote from Ieremies mouth, Tertius from Paul's, and so
others; what they spoke, and was written by, and from them was one thing, and
the Writing or Scripture of that true Word is another, which yet I own to be
of God, as far as ye can from it, or any other rationally assert the Text to
be, even in matter of Chronicle or Story, wherein men may possibly write true
Scriptures of things done in their times, and times before them from Records
and other principles, without that immediate inspiration or dictation of every
Iota or Tittle to them, as thou Tatlest somewhere, from the holy Spirit of God:
And lest thou should not take this for truth to me, who am here in contest
with thee, being prejudiced against me, hear what thy fel^ow-fighter against
the Qua. T.D. says (for I can almost at any time, as Paul did the Pharisees
and Sadduces, who when they were both upon the back of him threw a bone, that
set them together by the ears between themselves, and so save himself add his
testimony to the truth from them both, Act. 23.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.) set our
Stribes, Pharsees and Seducers at odds within themselves, and send them to
learn the truth we tell, and they will not take from us, from the testimony of
one another; which T.D. says it follows not that because Books are the Books
of Prophets, therefore they are divinely inspired, for they might as well write
from their own spirits, or upon human credit, as sometimes speak from their own
spirits, p 43. of his 1. Pamph.

2. That none of all the Scripture, Letter or Writing aforesaid, is of private
interpretation, that i^, neither to be interpreted as mere private men's
Writings written as other men's are p. 9. the figment and imagination of whose
hearts are the foundation of all they speak.

And this I as readily grant they are not to be deemed as thine, T.Ds and some
other men's are, who in your private, narrow conceptions and thoughts of things
thrust out what ye tkinke, feign, and fancy still to be truth (though nothing
so) about both the Scriptures, and many other matters, for they are true
Scriptures of holy, public spirited men, who wrote, or caused to be written
what was known and surely beleveed, Luke 1.1. at least among Saints, who were
no liars, if not all at the immediate moti^n of the Spirit, they declared the
things they had seen, heard, and witnessed within themselves to be the truth,
even when they wro^e from others in matter of Doctrine, Prophecy, or so, and
in Chronicle either immediately, or from more credible testimony then I.O. and
T.D. when they write at all adventure upon leastly hear-sayes, from very go^d
hands, when the matters are, in point of fact, many, if not most of them, very
lies.

And in this sense thou strivest (...) to be taken, which thou say some
think is put for, (...) or (...), p. 19, 20. and one Copy read^ (...), by an
evident error or mistake without ground, Where take notice of at least Iotaes
and Tittles to be altered in your perfect Copies from which, say thou, not
one Apex nor Iota can fail.
and much more ado then needs thou there make to have (...) denote the
writing of the Scriptures to be by men that were moved by the public Spirit of
God and not by man's private Spirit, nor at his will, but Gods, which I grant,
and a little more too (whether (...), signify so much or not) viz. That it
neither is to be interpreted (now it is so given forth) at the Will of man, or
by man's private spirit, or by our own co^si^^ration of its sense and meaning,
p. 21. which sense I see thou would fain exclude (...), from bearing, or
having in any tolerable sense affixed to it (and I cannot blame thee as thy
principles are, for else thou who deniest the presence and guidance of the
infallible Spirit to all men in these days must cut off thy self, and fellow
Doctors, Divines and Expositors of the Scriptures from meddling much by your own
conceptions, thoughts, understandings, and wills to interpret, open, or give
your senses and fancies on them, by which craft you have your wealth) but only
and alone by the public Spirit of God, which gave them out, and only knows,
his own mind and meaning, and reveals it to those that walk therein, and not
after the flesh, as ye do, For we (says Paul of himself, and those Ministers)
have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.

So I give thee thy sense, and more then thou would willingly have as
concerning the int^rpreting of the Scripture, which men in their private
thoughts are not to expound, nor yet to deem it as mere private men's Writings.

Howbeit none of all this comes out of this place so clearly as thou
conceivest, for it speaks not of the Letter and Writing, so much as thou in thy
private spirit interpretest it to do but of the Truth, or holy things written,
for whereas thou, who do not see that (...) is one thing, and (...) is
another, take the Prophecy of Scripture, it intends the Prophecy it self,
that was, as to the sum of it, written, but not the Writing that is of it,
which Prophecy whether written by the hands, or spoken by the mouths of holy
men of God, who live in the Spirit, was not to be interpreted as the written
or spoken Doctrines of private men, that speak and write from the conceivings
of their own narrow private spirits, the figment, and imagination of whose
hearts is the fountain of all they utter, write, or speak, but as the
undoubted, infallible, eternal truth of the living God made manifest in them,
which they wrote and spoke forth as moved by Gods public holy Spirit.

3. That the Letter, Scripture, or Writing, 'or Copies of the original Texts,
as ye have them at this day, are that Word of God, called there the Word of
Prophecy, v. 19.

4. That they are a more sure Word in their evidence to us at least, though not
in themselves, then any voice from heaven whatever, yea then Gods own, if he
should speak to us from heaven, or then that voice by which he spoke from
Heaven, which Peter, James, and John heard, when they were with Christ on the
holy Mount.

5. That the said Letter of the Scripture, is the light said there to shine in
the dark place of man's hearts, with an eminent advantage to its own discovery,
as well as unto the benefit of others.

All which three last Assertions I not only deny to follow from this Text (as I
did the two first, which yet I deny not the Truth of) but do as much deny them
all three, or any one of them to be Truth at all, as I do absolutely deny all,
or either of them to be possibly by any sound reason to be deduced or
inferred from this place; and likewise affirm that measure of the Light and
Spirit of God and Christ in the hearts and consciences of men, which we bear
testimony unto, to be the more sure word of Prophecy and Light here testified
to by Peter.

And the grounds of my denial of the one of these, viz. That the Letter is it,
and of my affirming the other, viz. that the Light is it, are clear from two or
three clauses of the Text it self, which are proper, and the very import of the
phrases, and truly and plainly agreeable to the Light or Spirit, or Word of God
within, but not a tall true or proper, or in truth agreeable to the Letter
without if predicated, thereof; for

First it is (as much as I.O. jeers at the verbum seu lumen internum) said to
be the Word and Light within, and so the Letter without is not (if it were
either the Word or the Light) therefore it cannot be the Letter ad extra,
which I O. labors for against the Light, and T.D. also who p. 45. of his 1
Pamph. cot^s this same Text, 2 Pet. 1 19. affirming the Scripture to be the
sure word of Prophecy intended here, but the Light ad intra, we stand up for
against them both; that which is said to be within, is not intended of a thing
that is without only, as the formal Letter or the Scripture is, formally
considered according to its proper name and nature (as I.O. dreams) or that
proper essential form ( quae dat effeci, per quam Scriptura est id quod est)
which gives to it that very being, whereby it is what it is; but of something
that is really within, as the Light only is, which the Litera scripta, or
Letter without declares of.

And that not the Letter or Scripture formally considered, but that Word of God
only and Divine Truth, Law, Doctrine, or Commandment, which is a Light and
Lamp is within, as Romans 10.8. witnesses it for me, so my two Antagonists, I.O.
and T.D. do both from the Testimony of that very Text testify the same with
it, and me against themselves, the one viz. T D. sying p. 30, 31. of his 1.
Pamph. it is evident that the word spoken of in the heart, Romans 10.8 is meant of
the matters contained in the Scriptures, for the Apostle says expressly that is
the Word of faith which we preach, whereby it seems by your selves the Letter
is neither the Word there said to be nigh in the heart and mouth, nor yet the
Word of faith the Apostles preached, but some other thing, that was actually,
properly, truly, and formally within the heart, even the holy Word, Law, Light,
Truth, Spirit of Truth, and Doctrine, which we together with the Scripture do
testify unto, and you (contrary both to us and the Scripture) are continually
testifying against, and the other, viz. I.O. saying, Ex. 1. s 40.

The Word in us is that Word of faith the Apostles preached, but they preached
nothing but what was written by Moses and the Prophets, Romans 16.26. yea that
that Word was a Word written the Apostle professedly testifies in that place,
Verbum illud quod in nobis est est v^rbum fidei quod Apostoli praedicarunt, Rom
10.8. Nihil autem praedicabant quod non scriptum suit per Mosen and Prophetas,
imo verbum illudscriptum esse eo loci, v 10. asserit Apostolus. 2. Scripture
est prope nos in ^re and cord nostro, no^ respectu literae scriptae, non
formaliter quatenus scripta, sed veritatis divinae s^^ quatenus continet atque
exhibet divinam veritatem.
verse. 10. 2. The Scripture is nigh us in our hearts and mouth, not in respect
of the Letter written, or the Scripture formally considered as written, but of
the divine Truth, or as it contains and holds forth the divine truth it self.

Reply. V. 11. Thou meanest sure, for there the Word, Scriptures, is named, but
what of that? and who doubts, or denies but that the Word in the heart was
written, as well as preached and testified to by writing, as well as by word of
mouth? but will thou ever be so blind I.O. as to make no difference (but when
it serves thy turn to do it (as thou think) against the truth, for then thou
make a difference. See p. 12. 13.) between the Word written, Doctrine
declared, and Declaration, Book and Truth, Scripturam and rem scriptam,
preaching, and thing preached, publication, and will of God published,
proclamation of good things, and the tidings, or good things proclaimed and
told of? Suppose a man should stand at a Market-cross, or in Cheapside, and
preach, publish or proclaim by Word of mouth, or set up a Bill or Writing that
there is special good Wheat, Bread, Flesh, or the like, laid up under the
custody of the Lieutenant of the Tower, enough for all the poor starvelings of
the rich City of London where (the more shame and woe to the rich Gluttons in it
they ly perishing about the streets) by him freely to be dispensed, who is
sealed or authorized to that end, to give to all comers according to their
wants, or in a time of distress or danger, that there is safety in the Tower
for all that are willing to run in thither within so many days, or else the
gates shall be shut; for thus the Publishers of the glad Tidings of the Gospel
of peace and salvation by Christ the Light alone, and his Spirit and Light,
which reproves sin is the heart, do declare, both by Voice and Letter, or
Writing in their times, as he himself, Isa. 45.22. Look to me, and be ye saved
all the ends of the earth, viz. That in him who is the Light is the life of men
to be had, and not in the Letter, which rather kills, He is the strong Tower
where safety alone is, Him has God sealed to be the giver of the bread of
life, and the meat that endures to eternal life to all that come to him in
that time wherein he shines in his Light. Now if people should run only to the
Crier, and hang always on the hearing of his voice, or stand reading the good
news in the writing he has set up, doting on, and delighting only to read that
day by day, because its comfortable, as it tells of good things, and never at
all according to the counsel thereof betake themselves to the Tower where they
only are, might they not stand there poring till they perish, pine, and starve,
and would they not lose time, and perhaps totally withstand it? and would ye
judge them to be well in their wits if they should run up and flock all
together to the Proclamation or bare Writing, supposing to enjoy the things
themselves, though they never look after the said Lieutenant, spinning out the
time limited in looking upon the writing, and so far dote, as our Dr does that
the coming to the Scriptures, is the only proper way of coming to Christ
himself which he counsels us to, Rev. 3. as to think that their coming to that
Paper every day is their next way to the Tower, their very only proper going to
the Lieutenant that is required? Mutati^ mutandis de te fabula, the case is
your own, O ye untaught, better fed then taught Teachers, it is yours, O ye
more letter-lauding then letter-learning Preachers, and Priest-admiring people.
Christ is come from God that men might have life, and have it abundantly, calls
all to look and come to him for it; ye like the old Scribes search the
Scriptures, and therein look for the eternal life, because they are they that
testify of it, and of him who is the life, but ye will not come to him that
ye may have the life, Ioh. 5.35. etc.

2. What need I say more, but with T.D. and I.O. to heed and believe
themselves, because they are so dull of hearing that they will neither heed nor
believe the Qua.. for they give the cause in Question between the Qua, and them
about the Scripture, or the Letters being the World of faith or light shining
in the dark place of men's hearts, which Peter says men are to take heed to,
which said dark place that is the heart and cons^ience, where (by their own
confession) so gross a thing as a formal outward Letter cannot come, but only
some more subtle thing then that is, even a spiritual light, as that is not, is
as evident in the Text as the Word and Light it speaks of is to him that is not
blind; for the dark place wherein the Word and Light here is said to thine, is
the same wherein as the Light is taken heed to the day dawns and the day star,
i.e. Christ him self arises first as that bright and morning star, Rev. 2.28.
whereby the day spring from on high visits such as sat in darkness, Luke 1.78,
79. and at last as the Sun of righteousness it self, Mal. 4.2. but that is said
expressly to be the he^rt; so far as from Ioh. 1.5. we argue, Where the
spiritual darkness is, which comprehends not the Light, within which darkness
the light shines, There the true light shines, but that is within in the
conscience of all men, therefore there the true light in some measure is
shining: As if the dark place within which the Sun shines be a room within the
house, then some light from the Sun must be within the said Room also; so we
argue Retro from hence, If the dark place where the day is to dawn, as the
lesser light therein is observed, be the heart, then the place wherein the
lesser light shines, which even therefore secundum v^s (O ye b^nighted) ones
cannot be the Letter, must be the heart also; but verum prius, etc. the first
is true, therefore the latter. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which
ye do well to give heed as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

2. The word of Prophecy, or Prophetical word is a phrase that of it self
seems to any, but blind Expositors, to intend another thing than the outward
Letter, and to found forth no less then that more inward Word or immediate
Testimony of Christ himself in the conscience elsewhere styled the Words of
Prophecy, or Word of God and Witness, or Testimony of Jesus, or Spirit of
Prophecy from which, of which, and to which the holy men that were internally
illuminated thereby, and made acquianted with Gods secrets, bare Record or
Testiminy without by Voice or Writings, Rev. 1, 2, 3.19, 10. the tr^e and
faithful words of the Lord himself inlightning such as wrote the Letter, who,
having no need so to do, the Lord and the Lamb being their light, wrote not by,
though not against, the Directory of I.Os. outward Candle, Moon, or Sun, ad
extra, i.e. the external Text of others Writings, Rev. 21.23. 22.25.6. the
Words of the Prophecy of this book, as John calls it, Rev. 22 8. i.e. the
inward Spirit of Prophecy or Testimony of Jesus, from which all Prophecy went
forth, whether by voice or writing, which the Angels and Gods servants the
Prophets had and kept. Rev. 22 9 compared with Rev. 19.10. which book I.O.
dreams ('it is like) was the outward Writing or Copy that John gave forth, the
uncertain Copies of which (to say nothing of the doubts of the old dimn sighted
Doctors, that were at odds about the outward Book called the Revelation, and
some others, even of those that are owned as Authentic, whether they are not
spurious yea or nay) only are extant at this day, little deeming that was an
inward Book, which I.O. tells us of too, if he will own his own words, p. 9.
25. which John took in at first, from which he gave out the the other, and
prophesied in the way of manual wiriting, even the inner book of Gods secrets,
which are only with such as fear him, revealed to Christ by the Father and by
Christ to John, and opened by Christ to his servants at this day who eat it and
prophecy out of it again before many Peoples, Nations, Tongues and Kings,
though sealed with 7 seals to the Scribes on the backside or outside of it, on
which backside or outward letter, they are busily poring, but they cannot read
it, neither learned nor unlearned, because it is a Book sealed, Rev. 5.3.10.2.
and 9, 10, 11, 12. Isa, 29 9, ao, 11, 11.

3. That very Epethite, which to the Word of Prophecy here spoken of is
annexed does even infallibly evidence it to be intended of that inner Word
Spirit and light in the conscience which the Qua. call too, and thou scoffest
at, and not at all of that fallible external Text which thou art so talkative
for, for its called a sure, permanent, firm, or stable Word, which is more then
can be, saving all thy blind babble about it, asserted of the best, and most
original Copies of that Letter thou contendest for that are extant in the world
in these days: and not only so but (...), a more sure or stable word then that
voice, which Peter, James, and John heard immediately from heaven out of the
Fathers own mouth concerning his beloved Son Christ the light of the world,
given as a light to the Nations shining and showing the will of God to them in
every ones own heart, and so Gods salvation to the ends of the earth, saying
unto them, Hear ye him, v. 17. comp. with Mat. 27.5. which voice coming from
the excellent glory, which was infallibly sure to them, no cunningly devised
fable they heard when they were with Christ in the holy Mount.

Now the Word, Spirit, voice and light of Christ in the conscience is properly
and truly (...), a more stable, firm and permanent Word, or standing Rule,
constant Canon, and lasting light, and so more sure to us ward then that voice
to them, not surer in respect of its evidence to the hearers of it, or the
security given by it that it was no fable nor fancy, in which sense thou most
foolshly fanciest, p. 66. that the immediate voice above said ( absit absurdum)
was not so sure, i.e. not so certainly evident to be Gods voice as the Letter
is certainly evident to be Gods Word; for in that sense, the said voice was to
them that heard it most infallibly sure or evident, so as nothing can be surer
to be God, and I.O. in saying [as he dotingly does p. 66.] that comparatively
we have greater security from, and by that written Word, meaning the Scriptures
or Writing (for that is the Word written with all along, such is his illiterate
language) then they had in and by that miraculous voice, as he calls it, and
that the Scripture is more sure in respect of its giving out of its evidence to
us, then that voice of God was, does thereby ( absit blasphemia) render the
very voice of God himself whereby he spoke in, and to the Prophets that wrote
the Scriptures to us, less sure and certain, more doubtful and questionable
whether it might not be a mistake or no, then the outward Writing or Text they
wrote, as it is transferred to our hands at this day, through the hands of such
a mighty multitude of fallible Transcribers, none at all of which no not the
first were (...) infallible or divinely inspired so that they could not in any
thing mistake by his own confession, p. 167. where I.O. confesses, and grants
also that its known that failings have been among them, from whence various
lections, of which it cannot be ascertained to men now which is right, which
wrong, are arisen, which so variously transcribed Scripture, it is shame enough
for I.O. to assert (as he does, p. 10. under that term of Word by which he
terms it, and p. 153 under its own name of Scripture) that it is come forth to
us from God without the least mixture ^r intervenience of medium obnoxious to
fallibility ( as is the wisdom, truth, integrity knowledge and memory of the
best of all men, or capable to give change or a^teration to the least Iota or
syllable; and more shame yet to say (as he does p* 27.) that every Apex of it
is equally Divine, and as immediately from God as the voice wherewith, or
whereby be spoke to, or in the Prophets, and is therefore accompanied with the
same Authority in it self, and unto us; but most shame of all (if he be not
past shame so as not to see it) in that he from this of Peter sets the
Scripture, the alterable and much altered Copies of his Letter, his flexible
Transcripts and Text, that are and may be turned and winded, (as himself
confesses, p. 22, 23, 24, 25. of his Epist. at the wills of Critics) into
^arious senses, not only in equality with, but into a state of certainty ab^ve
the very immediate voice of God, that was heard from heaven, which true v^ice
of God yet p. 66, 67. he says, to the contradicting of himself in what he
asserts as to the minority of its evidence to us then that of the Scripture,
has that (...) and (...) accompanying it, as evidences it self, and ascertains
the soul beyond all possibility of mistake, and is that which we are at last to
rest in as being discernable from, and obliging men to discern it from all
delusions, though yet, O Rotas I to go Round again, the Scripture is that with
him, that is ultimately to be rested in, and not the voice of God, which he
says may counterfeited; witness the same pages where he bems in, and hedges
up his speech concerning the infallible certainty of Gods voice beyond all
possibility of mistake, and concerning our resting ultimately in that, a part
ante, with this saying, viz. Suppose God should speak to us from heaven, as he
spoke to Moses, or as he spoke to Christ, or from some certain place, how
should we be able to know it to be the voice of God? Cannot Satan cause a
voice to be heard in the air, and so deceive us? or may not there be some way
found out whereby men might impose upon us their delusions. Pope Caelestine
thought he heard a voice from heaven when it was but the cheat of his
successor, must we not rest at last in the (...) that accompanies the true
voice of God evidencing it self, and ascertaining the soul beyond all
possibility of mistake? and a part post, with this saying, viz. If the
Question be whether the D^ctrines proposed to be believed are Truths of God or
cunningly devised fables we are sent to the Scripture it self, and that alone
to give the determination. Thus ultimately we are to rest in Gods voice; and
yet ultimately we must rest in the Scripture, which is another thing; for those
that heard and searched the Scripture, as I showed above, never at any time
heard Gods voice, though yet I believe I.O. to be so sottish to suppose the
Scripture or Writing to be it, from which yet himself sometimes distinguishes
it.

Now the Scripture, the Letter (what ever thou say of it to the contrary
I.O. specially as to the present corrupted Copies of it, which are your Canon
are not Sure, much less a Surer matter then the immediate voice of God, neither
1 In that false sense in which I.O. interprets that Term more sure, viz. more
unquestionable and undoubtedly evident to be of God; for if we grant it to be
of equal Divine certainty, as we need not, it being, as now, but the Remote
issue and product, at the hundredth hand perhaps, of Gods voice in the
Prophets, yea but Remote Transcripts of fallible men from the handywork or
manuscripts of the first Penmen, yet to say its of greater divine certainty
then Gods own voice is absurdity in the abstract: Nor yet secondly in that
genuine sense, which the Term (...) most properly bears, viz. more firm,
stable, steadfast, standing, permanent, or the like; for the Letter is
changeable, alterable, flexible, passing, perishing, corruptible at man's will,
who may mistrans^ribe, turn, tear, change, alter, burn it, etc. and so flecting
and transient; but as for that Voice, surer then which I.O. says the Scripture
is, which Scripture he calls the Light or the Word of Prophecy, and the
Prophecy of Scripture, mistaking himself, when it is but the Scripture of the
Prophecy, (...).

That Voice was as infallibly sure to its evidencing it self to them that heard
it to be of God, as any thing can be, though so permanent it was not as the
Light within is, and the Voice of God that is to be heard in the heart of those
that take heed to, and turn not away from it; for that particular Voice that
came to them from God, saying of Christ, Hear ye him; was passing and
transient, not abiding, staying and standing, as to the actual ^udibility of
it, but the Voice and Word of the Son in the heart, of whom the Father said,
Hear ye him, this is permanent, lasting, standing, stable, sure, steadfast,
always nigh in the heart of men that they may both hear and do it, and this
and not the o^tward Scripture, or (...) which I.O. scrafles for is the (...)
the (...) the (...) the more sure word or Prophecy of Scripture, i.e. that
that Scripture writes of, or the light shining in the dark place of the heart
good to be taken heed to here spoken of, even the voice of Christ speaking from
heaven, in the heart and conscience, of whom the Father says verse. 17. hear
him, whose voice his sheep hear, and who ever hears not in whatever he says
shall be cut off from among his people, whose voice which shakes the old earth
and heaven, where its heeded, its more dangerous to turn from, then it is to^
turn from Moses and the Prophets and holy men's outward Writings; for these,
whether old or latter, speak and write, though by motion from God, yet on earth
only* but he comes from heaven, and is above all, as John Baptist said of
himself and Christ, Ioh. 3.3.28, 29, 30, 31. etc. I am not the Christ, I am but
sent before him; he has the bride. I am but the Bridegrooms friend who stand
and hear him, rejoicing at his voice, he must increase, I must decrease; he
that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks of the earth, he that comes from
above is above all: See therefore says Paul, He. 12.25. That ye refuse not him
that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth,
much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from
Heaven.

Yea not the Letter, but this Voice, and light in the heart this inwardly (...)
ingrafted innate Word or Spirit imparted, implanted, indelibly in men's
consciences is as God and Christ's Vicegerent there, both revealing what he
requires of every man (as to his own particular) and taking account of him also
in the name, Majesty, and Authority of God de facto, how he answers it, which
Voice or Light of God and Christ in the conscience is called by thee, p. 42,
44, 45, 57. The innate or ingrafted light of nature, the voice of God in
nature, and common n^tions, and general presumptions of God, and his Authority
inlaid in the natures of rational creatures, and innate principles of reason
and conscience, and such like, as if they were so de naturae, and de esse
hominis, so flowing from the mere natural being of men, that they can be no
more said to be supernaturally of God, then the very natural faculties of
reason, understanding and conscience it self [of which more an on both with
thee, and T.D. also] though it be indeed that very way of supernatural
Revelation which thou say, p. 47. the Scripture is, that (as now in the
world) is handed to thee by the mere improvement of men^ natural faculties in
the way of transcribing, printing, re-printing, as also studied by the mere
improvement of your natural faculties of reading, remembering, understanding
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, English, etc. to the begetting of a mere animal or
natural knowledge whereby ye know things merely naturally, speaking evil of
what ye know not, and corrupting your selves in what ye do know naturally as
bruit Beasts, for as a Horse or Bullock can find the way to the Pasture where
he has often been, so the Priests by use, course, custom, and concordance
more than the work of the Spirit bringing all things to their remembrance, can
turn readily to Chapter and verse.

Which forsaid Voice or Light that God (as thou say truly p. 43.) has
indelibly implanted in the minds of men (for the mind, heart, and conscience
is as a dark place, as to all spiritual, moral and supernatural knowledge,
without the Law or Light of God shining in it, and showing good and evil) is
by thy own further Confession to thy own further confusion accompanied with a
moral instinct of good and evil, seconded by that self-judgement which God has
placed in us in reference to his own over us, and that by which God reveals
himself to the sons of men, and that indispensable moral obedience which he
requires of us as his creatures subject to his Law, and which is as effectual
to reveal God, as his works are, to which there is need of nothing, as thou
say, but that they be represented or objected to the consideration of
rational crtatures, and bears Testimony to the being, righteousness, power,
Omniscience, Holiness of God himself and calls for moral obedience which is
eternally and indispensably due to him, and so shows the work of the Law
written in the heart, and is that by which the Gentiles, or Nations, that have
not the Law in a letter, are a Law to themselves; and more then all this by thy
own absolute acknowledgement, whereby it is evident that it (even that thou
call the Voice of God and the Law written in the hearts of the very
Gentiles, and not the Letter of the Law written without with ink and pen) is
that ingrafted word by every one to be received with meekness, Jam. 1.21. which
is able to save the soul, and that sure word (as to it its evidencing it self
to us) or light shining in the dark place of the heart, and that more firm,
steadfast, constant, standing, permanent Word or Light, or rule of life to us,
then that infallibly sure and certain, though passing and transient Voice, that
in the audience of Peter, James and John came from God himself, that is here
spoken of: The said voice or light in the heart declares it self to be from God
by its own light and Authority, so that there is no need to convince a man by
substantial witnesses that what his conscience speaks it speaks from God what
ever testimony it bears, or what ever it calls for from us in his name, and so
speaks and declares it self (not only more constantly, as its ever with men but
as to its certainty also) that without further evidence or reasoning, without
the advantage of any considerations but what are by it self supplied, it
discovers its Author from whom it is, and in whose name is speaks, and is
inlaid by the hand of God to this end to make a Revelation of him as to the
purposes mentioned, and is able to evince its own divine original without the
least contribution of strength or assistance from without; and therefore [I
adde] without an outward Letter undoubtedly, though as undoubtedly an outward
Letter cannot do all, nor any of all this without the Light or said Voice,
Word, or Spirit of Christ within, which only does, and can evidence it unto the
conscience that the Letter, Scripture, and doctrines declared therein are of so
divine an original as they are.

Thus I have done with that Eminen^ Text, which is so much talked on so little
to their own purpose by the most eminent talkers for the Text of the Scripture,
as that thing therein recommended to us to be taken heed to, as the most sure
word of Prohesie, the light shining in the dark place of men's hearts, the
Prophecy of the Scripture, that is not of private interpretation, but spoken
forth in writing in the movings of the holy Spirit, under which terms the holy
Apostle intends not the outward Text, in which, as well as otherwhile by word
of mouth the holy men testified to it, and held it forth, but that inward Word,
Light, Spirit of Prophecy, Truth, witness and testimony of Jesus in the
conscience, which their outward voice, words, witness, and writings were but a
Testimony unto, and an external means to turn men to: upon the account of which
Text in Peter, and the 11. other aforesaid which I.O. impannels as his Jury to
judge the case in question, whether the Letter outward writing or Scripture is
the spiritual Light or Word of God yea or nay? I.O. makes such a full account
to carry it his way, and to have their unanimous universal verdict for him,
that the Letter is the Light, and consequently the most perfect Rule, and
consequently the Word of God, that in his blind hasty confidence he cannot stay
from stiling it so, till the trial about it be ended, and while the cause is
sub-judice, and he but in his prosecution of the proof thereof, but by way of
Anticipation, as it were, throughout his whole book, which is written mostly in
ordine ad probationem as an enquiry after, and examination of the matter, he
very often here and there, if not as frequently and commonly as by its own
proper names of Letter, Writing, Text, or Scripture styles and denominates it
under the foresaid names of of the Light, Rule, Foundation, Witness, Word of
God, as its nomen pr^prium, which he will never prove to be Proper to it
whilst he breathes.

And so he runs on blindly in such over ample applaudings, and most mighty
magnifications of the Scripture, that is the subject about which the Argument
is driven on, by what terms soever, whether of the Truth, the Foundation, the
power of God, the Rule, the VVitness of God, the Word of God, etc. he
expresses it by, that if he were set to extol and set forth Christ Jesus
himself in all his Dignity, Authority, Dominion, Might, Majesty and Glory
[unless it be the express names of the only beloved and begotten Son of God,
King of Kings, Lord of Lords, Mighty God, the Ever-Father, the Prince of Peace,
and perhaps some few more] I can scarcely suppose on a sudden that he could
find any other, or at least any more eminent Titles to dignifie him by, then
those by which he dignifies, not to say Deifies his adored dead Transcript,
Text, and Corpse of the Greek and Hebrew Copies of the Scriptures, which he
vermilions over with the honor and veneration (as to sundry of the most
excellent glorious Titles and properties he attributes to it) that is due
either to God or Christ, or his living Word, Light and Spirit alone: For
howbeit every such particular expression of Wonderful, Councellor, Leader, and
Commander to the people, Redeemer, Savior, Salvation, etc. that Christ is
styled by, may possibly not be used in I.Os. book to express the outer
Scriptures by, yet I believe there is but little asserted in honor of Christ,
the Spirit, the living Light and Word througout the Scripture, which is not
asserted, if not in the same, yet in Terms equivalent in honor of the
Scripture it self.

Witness all those most high flown phrases and eminent strains he flies out and
strikes up in in way of ascribing little less then all Authority, Dominion,
Exaltation, Transaction, self-evidencing efficacy, Light, Power, Dignity and
Glory, here on earth at least, unto the Scriptures, as if the Father had sealed
it, and not his Son and Spirit to be the disposer and orderer of all things
next and immediately under himself as supreme Judge, Rule, Ruler, Head and
Governor over the sons of men, and the giver and dispenser of the meat that
endures to eternal life.

CHAP. IV.
ANd now I return to take more notice of what more is urged in his Latin
Theses, as concerning the Scriptures being the only most perfect rule of faith,
life, worship* and knowledge of God as to salvation. The second Argument in
proof whereof is its perfect operation and efficacy, Ex. 3. s. 29. omnia
perficit necessaria, etc. it accomplishes all that is necessary to Gods glory,
and our salvation, in vindication of which, a whole Dozen of Scriptures are
urged, eleven of which are above answered, and one only remains to be a little
spoken to, viz. Isa. 55.10, 11.

And as to that of Isa. 55 10, 11. I grant, That the Word of God, as the Rain
and Snow comes down, and returns not without watering the earth, and causing it
to bring forth and bud, and give seed and food, so it returns not void at any
time without working that for which he sends it to any person or people, and
prospering to the accompli^^ment of what he pleases; but I am half amazed to
see that thou I.O. should be so silly as to interpret that of the
Scripture, since it so expressly speaks de verbo oris sui, of the Word of his
mouth, which is asserted immediately from himself with his own voice [so shall
my Word be that goes out of my mouth] which Word expressed by his own voice
speaking, who so upon second thoughts, and serious consideration, shall say the
Scriptures are, and properly too, as I.O. excusing his ignorance, for as much
as not for want of incogitancy, I my self sometimes so thought while I ran as
our National Ministry now does, making haste and saying he saith] before
himself had sent me [howbeit I wanted no sending of man] or had spoke to me,
or I heard his voice, I shall make bold to accuse him of arrant, Absurdity,
miserable mistake, wretched blindness, and utter un^^rthiness to be
denominated a Doctor in that thing, which our Divines call Divinity.

Nevertheless not having so well minded the matter, as upon occasion they may
do in time to come, being carried in times past by custom to take things, and
term and talk of them according to tradition, more then true discerning of them
in their proper natures, the very preachers of this Nation, as well as the poor
people that have lived on their lips, have been so habituated, by common
Metonymies, to miscall the Scriptures by names not proper to their natures that
they now stand up to depend them to be most properly denominated by those
Metonymical and improper names; so that howbeit we are never so willing to
allow them to express themselves by such figurative phrases as are frequently
found in the Scripture it self (as Act. 13.27. the voices i.e. Scriptures of
the Prophets, are said to be read in the Jews Synagogues every Sabbath) and
that satisfies them not, but the Qua. are deniers both of the Scriptures, and
of the Word of God, and spoylers of them of their proper names, if they yield
not to their as absurd as arbitrary Appellations of them, by those glorious
Titles of Gods Words, Gods Voice, as their proper names, yea in this dotish
disquierness, and peevish perverseness of his prejudiced spirit does I*O. quarrel
with the Quakers as bereavers of the Scripture of its proper name, because they
own not his improperties, in ignorantly and impudently imposing the names of
the Word of God, and the spiritual Light on the Letter as its Proper names,
which it chal^engeth to it self from its preheminent participation of the
nature and properties of the Word of God, and of Light, viz. Life, power, to
quicken and save, and to shine to the evidencing of it self.

J.O. I am now to deal against the Qua. about the proper name of the Scripture:
for this sort of men are glad that the care of this business is committed to
them by Satan that they may spoil the Scriptures of that glorious Title the
Word of God: This name does the Scripture challenge to it self. So p. 49.73,
74, 77. That the Scripture is light, we shall see that is so, or can be called
so, unless it has this nature, and properly to evidence it self, as well as to
give light to others, cannot in any tolerable corespondency of speech be
allowed: Whether spiritual, intellectual light, regarding the mind, or natural
with respect to bodily sight be firstly or properly light, I need not inquire,
both have the same properties; it is spiritual, moral, intellectual light, with
all its mediums that has the pre-eminence as to a participation of the nature
and properties of light. Now the Scripture, the Word of God, Note how I.O. all
along makes the Scripture and the Word of God so synomous, that from the
participation of the same nature and properties he judges them to be all one,
and that the names of the one, viz. the W^rld of God, and the Light, are the
very proper names of the other, i.e. of the Letter, and where he expresses
himself by these Terms the Word of God, the Light, the Power of God in his
Treatises and Theses (except in the place where he speaks of (...) and (...))
it must still be understood of the Scripture.
is Light, a Light ^hining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. with an eminent
advantage for its own discovery, etc. a glorious shining Light, an illuminating
Light, compared and preferred ab^ve the light of the Sun, Psalm. 19.5, 6* 7.
Romans 10 18. The most glorious light in the world, the most eminent reflection of
increased Light and Excellencies: the Psalmist ascribes light, power,
stability, and permanency like that of the Heavens and Sun, in commutation of
properties, to the word, i.e. Scripture with I.O. and an inexpressible
exaltation of it above them, the light of one day of this Sun [meaning the
Scripture, which he expresses by the term the Word of God] being unspeakably
more then that of seven others, as to the manifesting the glory of God, nor
does it impair this self-evidencing efficacy of the Scripture, that it is a
moral, spiritual, not a natural Light. This, and much more utters I.O.
concerning these Terms of the Word, the Light, as the proper names of the
Right belonging to the Letter.

Neither is I.O. alone in this, but some others I have met with that have
stiffly stood up to defend the Scripture or Letter to be the Light, the Word of
God, yea verbum oris, the word of his mouth, and the Voice of God and Christ
properly, and properly to be so called.

Rep. Which sayings, O the contrariety that is in them to common sense and
reason! they may as well say they hear that man's voice properly, some of whose
sayings they read in the letters of such as write what they heard him say, they
may as properly say they are to own the voice of the Scribes and Pharisees for
their Rule, as they are written down by the Apostles and Evangelists, since
Christ says, They sit in Moses chair, all that they say do, and that they do
now properly hear their voices, since what they said was recorded, as say that
they now properly hear Christ's Voice in reading some things he spoke, as they
are written by them that heard him speak them, and stablish, and canonize them,
and other men's sentences, as the only standing Rule on this account, because
God said, Hear him, and they now hear properly Moses voice, and must own his
Law, that vanished, as to the shadow of it, still to the Church a standing Rule,
because Christ said, They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them. 2 O
the contrarity of this to the Scriptures themselves, for if they be properly
the Voice of God and Christ, then ( absit blaspemiae) they make Christ charge
the Scribes improperly and falsely, that they never at any time heard Gods
voice, Joh. 5. for they heard the Scriptures read every Sabbath, neither could
he say truly what he does, exclusively of such as are not his sheep, My sheep
hear my voice, if the Scriptures were his voice properly, for the Dogs and
Swine hear, and hear the outward Scriptures read as well as his sheep, but his
sheep hear another secret still voice of his, in all things that he says unto
them in their own consciences, which the loud Brawlers for the bare Bible drown
within themselves with their non-sensical notes and noyses about their Diana's,
and si^ver shrines and Temple worship, and Church work, which voice and words
of his are heard in secret with more profit among the wise, Luke 10.17. then
the cry of the Truth selling Spirit stinting-Scripture stealers among fools,
which still voice of Christ's ye^ whoever hears not, and heeds not more then our
heady high-minded Hypocrites of these days do, may preach themselves out a
while longer, yet as the Ministers and Church of Christ, but shall ere long be
cut off from among his people; in the mean time however this is the improper
tone they tune it out in when we bid them fear God, hearken to his voice, own
that, as your only guide, his Word, his Voice, his Spirit, his Light, as the
only infallible, sure standard, the witness of God himself, the Scripture
witnesses of, and sends men to, which he that heeds follows, believes in,
obeyes, needs not be so restless by wrangling as the wrestless for, and
wresters of the Scripture are about the Witness of man, though witnessing from
and for God as moved by him, for the Witness of God himself and the Witness of
Christ himself in the conscience is greater, needs not be so loud for a Letter,
for the voices and words of men, and the Writings and Revelations of holy men,
for the inward immediate Voice, the Word, the Spirit, the Light, Revelation of
Christ himself in the heart is greater. True (say they) we must hear Christ's
voice in all things he says, abide in his Doctrine or Teaching, receive his
Witness and Testimony, walk by his Word, live by his Light alone, be guided
and ordered in all things by his Spirit, which alone reveals the mind of God
and Christ, without whose Revelation none knows the things of God and Christ;
but the Letter of the Scripture, the outward Writings of such as heard him [as
we do not] the Hebrew and Greek Text at least, and Translation^, as they keep
touch with them, these are that Word, that living, life-giving, powerful,
heart-searching, soul-saving Word, those Words of his that are Spirit and Life,
by which alone men must come to believe that Light to the feet, that Lamp to
the path, that verbum oris, that very word of his mouth, that works and
accomplishes all things to his glory, our salvation, that verbum oris that
goes forth of his own mouth, that he put, according to his promise, Isa. 59.
ult. (as if that were the Scripture; oh gross and shameful! yet over and over,
and over and over again, I.O. cites that Text to prove Gods promise to continue
the Hebrew and Greek Texts entire without loss or change of iota or title of it
to the worlds end) into the mouth of the Churches Seed, and the mouth of her
Seeds seed for ever, that must go out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, as
the only strength against the persecutor to still the enemy and avenger, that
sharp sword of his mouth, with which he will smite the wicked Nations, Rev. 19.
That Rod of his mouth, or breath of his lips, with which he slayes the wicked,
Isa. 11. That Rod of his strength and power sent out of Sion, by which he will
rule f^reuer in the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110. That word that he has
spoken which God has magnified ov^r all that is called his name, and so over
the light it self it sprang from, which is his name, Joh. 1. and the s^fe
strong Tower of the Righteous: That vis virtus Dei, power of God and word of
the Cros^.

That Doctrine or Teaching of Christ, which, continued in, saves the Preacher
and hearers, ipsa doctrina, quam a Deo docemur.

That witness of God, which who so has needs not the witness of men, for the
witness of God is greater.

That voice of God, that is more sure and certain, as to its giving out its
evidence to us, then the very immediate voice which the Apostles heard God
himself speak to them with from heaven, 2 Pet. 1.

And all this, and much more exclusively and abstractively from that within,
yea and properly too, so that the Word of God, Foundation, the Rule, Light,
Lamp, and so consequently all the rest of the Ti^les are the very proper names
of the Scriptures, no other then what are properly answerable to its nature.

For in this wife I.O. drives on the business avouching that glorious Title of
the Word of God, and the Light to be the Nomen proprium Scripturae, the proper
name of the Scripture, and that I wrong him not herein see his own stating the
Question between himself and the Qua. Ex. 2. s. 1, 2, 3. de Scripturae nomine
proprio nimirum Titulo illo glorioso Verbo Dei, and p. 73. the Scripture is a
light yet neither is, nor can be called so unless it has the nature and
property of light, p. 77. the Scripture a moral and spiritual, not a natural
Light. p. 73, 74. Light spiritual has the pre-eminence as to a participation
of the nature and properties of Light; firstly and properly Light from whence
the other, i.e natural respecting bodily sight, is by allusion so denominated;
in these places either expressly or eventually, I.O. calls the Light and Word of
God the proper names of Scripture or Letter, and so consequently en^tails all
the other glorious Titles to it as its Right, due and proper names which they
rob it of, and deny it to be what it naturally and properly and really is, who
own it not properly both to be, and be called the Word of God, but it neither
is actually testified so to be any whereby God, nor by its self (as I.O. p. 87.
most lyingly and falsely affirms it, in so much that he who owns it not as so)
does what in him lies to make God a liar. And also p. 140. where he says, If
the Scripture be what it reveals it self to be, it is then unquestionably the
Word of the living God [as p. 85. (...) the living Word of God] Truth it self,
for that it professes of it self (quoth he from the beginning to the ending,
neither can it possibly be so styled properly, or unless it be by a figure [as
it no where is neither by it self that I know of^ by which the Image is called
by the name of the Person, which it properly is but a dead Picture, and
lifeless representation of, the Lanthorn by the name of the Light, that
displayes it self more brightly when beheld without it, which Lanthorn yet
neither is the Light nor properly said so to be.

I am not ignorant of that Common Metonymy Continentis pro re contenta, or
figure whereby the thing contained is sometimes, but never properly where it
is, expressed by the name of that which c^ntains it, and as well in that
Scripture we talk of as in other Writings, Matthew. 26.43. and 1 Cor. 11.26. If
this Cup may not pass away except I drink it: As often as ye d^ink of this Cup,
meaning, properly, not the Cups, but the wine ther^in, viz. the one the bitter
red wine of the wrath of the Almighty God, the mixture whereof is powered out
into the Cup of his indignation, and of the fierceness of his Fathers fury,
which Christ drank deep of in the days of his flesh and humiliation, to the
drawing of supplications from him with strong crying and tears; the other the
wine of his blood shed for the remission of sins, which such as walk in the
light come at last to be cleansed by from no less then all sin; neither of
which Cups or sorts of wine thou have yet drunk of, or truly know what they
are, by all the skill thou yet have in the Scriptures thou so scriblest for,
but shall assuredly have thy part in the first, before thou savingly know the
second, yea whether ever thou attain to witness the saving efficacy of the
second yea, or nay.

But what is all this to the helping of I.O. in his crazy cause, whose fighting
is not all for figures, or mere figurativ^ denominations but for the formal and
true proper names of the Scripture, which is the name of the Scripture, and not
the Word of God, say we, but is, says he, that of the Word of God; had he
fought for no more then figures against the Qua. that stand for the Truth, and
said so too, though in so fighting he had been foolish, yet we could have born
with him in that frivolous piece of ^olly, and have lent him such a latitude,
as both by the Letter and Light may be allowed, to speak Metonimically and
Metaphorically of Methaphorical matters, and left him to his liberty without a
check, and let him alone in his figures to figure out things by other names
then their own, and to call them that, which yet properly they are not, to
style the Heus^ they sit in by the name of the Parliament, which it is not, to
style the Picture by the name of the Person, it is the image of, the Voice by
the name of the Word, it is but the image of, and the Scripture by that of the
Word, it is but the remote expression of, and of the voice, it is the more
immediate image or expression of, for vox est imago verbi Scriptura vocis
immediata, verbi quaedam mediata imago seu expressio; and to signify the Wine
and the Light respectively by the names of this Cup, this Glass, this Lanthorn,
and the Word, and Law by the name of a Scripture, specially if by Scripture he
mean that inward Writing of it by the Spirit of the living God in the fleshly
tables of the heart, where the Law of God is written, though that writing and
the Word written are not all one neither, and we could bate him the impropriety
of that figurative expression also, though it be far further fetched then the
other, whereby he should decypher that outward Letter by the name of the Law,
which it is but a bart Copy of, and the written Word by the name of the
Writing, which yet in truth does no more then declare of the Word and Retro,
though I know not where in all the Scripture the Srripture is so much as by A
figure denominated by that name the Word of God, if the Word be any where so
called by the name of Scripture, as I.O. says (at least fortyfold falsely)
that above fifty times in the New Testament the word Graphs or Scripture is put
absolutely for the Word of God, but if it were a hundred and fifty times so
called, it would not prove the high point in that height he takes on him to
prove it in, viz. that the Scripture is properly the Word of God, and the Word
of God its proper name, any more then the Wine is called by the name of this
Cup, this Glass, or the Light by the name of the Lanthorn and Retro the
Lanthorn by name of this Light, which is all figurative, not proper.

But this is not I.Os. case, who runs up to the very highest peg, and sings of
the Scriptures a note above the Ela, and quarrels with the Qua. as deniers of
the Scripture, unless they swerve aside with him in his silly supp^sitions, and
as well uns^holler-like as unsaint-like senseless sayings, that the outwar^
Scripture the Writing, the Letter, and every Letter and Tittle, and Iota,
though but transcribed, in it, is the Word of God, as T. 2. c 2 s. 5.6. that
tam in esse reali, as cognoscibili, Ex 1 s. 1. the Scripture both is, and does
infallibly evidence it self unto the consciences of men, that are not blind to
be assuredly the Word of God. See his first Title page, and T. 1. c. 4. s. 1.
and that men that believe not (as he implicitly believes in this) being obliged
so to believe upon the penalty of eternal damnation, at the peril of their own
eternal ruin, and such like, are left unexcusable in their damnable unbeleef,
T. 1. c s. 5. T. 1 c. 3. s 6. T. 1 c 4. s. 14. and who says, That his chief
business with the Qua. is de noveine Scripturae proprio, Ex. 1. s. 1, 2, 3.
about the proper name of the Scripture, and to stablish it under that glorious
Title the Word of God, as that proper name of it, which the chief business,
committed by Satan to the Qua. that they rejoice in, is to spoil it of: yea how
will all those figurative forms of speech list I.O. out of that Qu^gmire
wherein he sticks, and into which he has rash^y run himself by, his hasty
quarrelling with the Qua. who is far from being satisfied, if the Truth and
Doctrine of the Scriptures be confessed to be sufficiently declared in the
Scripture, unless he be infallibly assured that every Tittle and Iota, as it
was at first written, stands truly transcribed in his Copies of it, and so far
from being satisfied, if by a figure it should be granted [as it need not for
its no where called so] that the Scripture is the Word of God that he
professes, Ex. 1.34. that if that Declaration, that Writing, which declares the
mind and will of God, be not the Word of God, he knows not what is the Word of
God, if he may not call the Scriptures by that name the Word of God, is so far
Ignorant of any name else to call it by, as to call out to the Qua. to tell him
what to call it if he may not call it by that name, Si hoc non sit verbum Dei
(quoth I.O) ego nescio quid sit, aut deceant nos Fanatici quid illud dicendum
sit, etc if the declaration of the will of God, i.e. the Scripture, be not the
Word of God, I know not what it is, or let the Fanatics teach us what we may
call it; these and many more to the like Tune are the eminent Titles, which
I.O. not by a metonymy, but in truth as their proper privilege, and real
right, attributes in words at length, and not in figures to the outer
Scriptures, these are the lofty terms, wherein in throughout all his Treatises
he treats on their behalf, not with all others only, that are his Opposers in
other matters, but with the Qua. also, who own the Scripture in its own proper
name, use, and place, and own the Truth written of to be the Word much more,
then he does himself, but about the Scriptures oppose him only as to these his
childish thoughts: Such are the high, rigid, unrighteous, strickt streins he
stands upon, and stickles in, and that so stiffly, that he is minded either to
win all, or lose all, and if he be not owned as stiling of the Scripture truly
and properly, when he styles it by the names of other things, which truly and
properly it is not, he will no more own it under its own true and proper names
of writing, Letter, Scripture, but make himself altogether ignorant of these as
if he had quite forgotten, and could in no wise call to mind, that he has
any other names at all whereby it can be called, save those undue ones of his
own imposing.

Now when a man begins to swell out with his wind of Doctrine into such a
bubble as knows no bounds, its time to blow him out; and when he grows into
such a giddy, greedy, hydropical humor, as not to know what ground he stands
on, nor how to stand still, and sit down satisfied when he is well, nor well
to understand when he has enough, nor to slack his thirst with a just and
lawful allowance, its good

-- Venienti occur morbo:
Danda est elleboritali pars maxima Avaro.
As there is no reason that he should have all he desires, so its but reason
that his brain be purged from such excrements, as occasion such extraordinary
extravagancies, that if he will never be otherwise then so fantastically
Fanatical, yet he may insanire cum ratione, be moderated at least as to his
height of madness, be taken down a peg or two, and brought from his high
Garret, into a lower Story about the Scriptures, that if, he will have no nay,
but they must needs be called the Word it may be no otherwise then the Cup is
called the Wine, which (though, by a Metonymy the Wine is sometime called the
Cup yet is never, or very seldom, if at all.

For my part I am free, rather then he shall take on ad ravimusque, and cry
himself hoarse, and wrong himself (as he does) with so much wrangling, and
restless wrestling for the Letter which he more loves to talk of, then lives
the life of, and longs for, so that is not likely he will be at quiet, unless
we still him by piping to the same tune with him at least a little, to please
him so far to his profit, in order to the saving of his longing, as to allow
him a little, i.e. so much leave as by the foresaid Figure to call the Glass
window, or the Lanthorn the Light, which in truth and properly are not so; but
as that Tailor which having an inch of cloth granted him for his minds sake,
about so much as will serve for a pattern, incroaches so as to steal an ell or
enough to make a suit of, and from Top to Toe clothes himself therewith
accordingly, wou^d have no wrong to have his goodly garment torn off, or else
beaten well upon his back with his own yard; so if I.O. who begs the whole
question, be not pleased with his poor pittance, which yet is the largest
allowance that Truth it self allows us to allow him, but will be a chuser (as
Beggars must not be, and his own Carver, and carve out the Scriptures, which is
more then ( salva veritate) we can give him, or he can justly take on him to
do, into no less then a pattern, a lydium lapidem, a touch stone of all Truth, a
standard for all Spirits (even that of God, by which it, and all Spirits and
Scriptures else are to be tried; to be most truly t^ied by, a Rule, an
immovable, stable, perfect, the most perfect, the only Rule of Gods worship,
and our obedience in matters of faith and manners, as Ex. 3. s. 20, 24, 25. Ex.
1. s. 5, 6. Ex. 3. s. 32. Ex. 4. s. 17. so that since the Churches completing
of its Canon, no Revelations, internal Spirit [and consequently not that Spirit
of God] Visions, inward Light, or Word are to be expected or admitted, as any
Rule to walk by, the only guide and directory of all men's believing and living,
so that who have not that have none at all of any sufficiency to lead them to
life, though they should follow what light they have from God vouchsafed them
to the utmost. So that there is no principle (to speak in his own words, T. 1.
c. 1. s. 16.) or means of discovery of the saving Doctrine, or sacred Truth, no
other rule or measure of judging or determining any thing about or concerning
it, but only that writing from whence it is taken, the Revelation of it being
expressed only in that writing, upon supposs^ion of any corruption in which,
the saving Doctrine, Truth, or Word of God, as at first given out from God,
which say I, whatever becomes of the Scripture is ever entire, and for ever
incorruptible, and unquestionably incorrupt, 1 Pet. 1. cannot be evinced
unquestionably to continue entire and incorrupt, he must then be fed, as
himself and his fellow unlearned learned ones do feed their poor, blind,
p^r^-blinde, unlearned people, viz. with a bit and a knock, and be kept close
to so much as reason and Scripture can well spare him, be caned into a just
compass with his own Canon, and Rapt into the right measure he runs out of with
the Rule and measure of his making, and bounded within the due bounds of
equity, which, beyond all measure, he breaks beyond for the bare Bibles and
Letters sake, by that Letter and Book it self, which is called though by I.O.
the Word of God, Tr. 1. chapter 1. s. 12. yet by it se^f never so honorably at
all, but only by such like Titles, as a Declaration, Letter, Scripture, Book or
Bible.

And if he shall go on undervaluing that ancient covering of Christ the Light
of the world, and the Armor of his light, which is unchangeable, and which the
True Church, which has the Moon, and all such moveable and changeable things,
as the best outward Writings are, under her feet, stands ever clothed with,
Romans 13.12, 14. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Col. 3.8.12. Rev. 12.1. casting it away as some
old menstruous cloth, cast clout, or rotten rag, as he does while in his
imparralleld both ignorance and impudence he flerts at it, as if 'twere a mere
Puppet patcht up of shreds, as a fictitious imaginary Christ feigned in the
fancies of Fanatic fools and mad men, Nescio quod lumen, quos, Enthusiasmos
quem Deum, etc. (...), vere nihil, Ex 3. s. 11. Ex. 4. s. 15.21. Ex. 1. s. 5,
6. and rejecting that covering of the Spirit of God, which Woe be to him that is
not covered with, or is covered with any other, Isa. 30.1. to cut out the
outward Scripture, and grave out the (...) into a G^rment, into an Idol
covering to himself, stealing Words from thence, and therewith clothing
himself which will once wax old as a garment that is moth eaten, and at last
(being old, yea oldness it self though younger the Spirit, and not the ancient
newness of the Spirit, wherein the true worship and service stands) is to
vanish as an Idel, that must go to the Moles and Bats, and as the brazen
Serpent be taken down, and among other Idols of men's earthly Elements, wordly
Rudiments, and carnal Ordinances that were good in their own times and places
yet but imposed till the time of Reformation, be sent away with, Get ye hence,
Isa. 2.20.30, 22. Romans 7.6. Heb. 8.13.9, 10. Its high time to strip I.O. naked,
and discover his shame, which is seen by such as live in the light through his
covering, which is a prate of words about the Scripture, and other things which
yet he knows not, and to summon him to sit in silence before the Lord
undressing himself out of his stolen Ornaments, which till he does he shall
not know what a work of spoiling the Lord has to do unto him till it come
irresistably upon him.

And if he shall fly out so far in his whifling words as to call the Letter
[which to the Light bears the same, and no better proportion then that of the
Lanthorn to the Candlelight] the Light, as the name that is proper to it; and
fly up higher yet till according to his flashy fancy thereof he affirms it in
Print (as he does) before the world that not only the Word of God written of
in the Writing, which none denies so to be, but the Writing it self also (which
he means well-nigh in every place by that term the Word, or else he strikes
beside the Iron, and lies hammering on the Anvil, beating the Air, and meaning
another matter then that he meant when he began, and makes men believe that he
means all along, which is no more to his purpose then if he meant nothing by it
at all) is an illuminating, shining, spiritual light; and higher yet, preferred
above the light of the Sun, T. 1. c. 4. s. 8, 9. the most glorious light in the
world; and higher yet, the Sun one days light of which is unspeakably more
then that of seven others as to the manifestation of the glory of God, T. 1 c.
2. s. 15. a Sun that more eminently then any inferior fire discovers and
evidences it self by such properties as it has, viz. Light, and Heat, and
Power, T. 1 c. 3. s. 10. and c. 4. s. 16.20. and much more of such like high
strains I.O. strikes up in, till he stretches the bare Letter so far upon the
^enters as to strain it into (...), and make it even every thing that the true
Word, and Light within is, when as howbeit it has its excellency above other
Writings as an instrument, yet, as to these peculiarities and precious
prerogatives of the living Word, is vere nihil; then I must summon I.O. as warm
as he seems to himself to sit, and as much as he seems to see by the painted
flame of his fained fire, and the sparks of his own kindling, that if he know
no other way to salvation then the Scripture, and own not the light as the way,
which the Scripture speaks of; this he shall have at the Lords hand, He shall
lie down in sorrow.

Finally, [to pursue yet a little further, and prosecute our present matter
under the Metaphor of the Parliament and the House] If a man should arise and
stand up, and contend that the House the Parliament meets in is the Parliament
properly, and none shall persuade him to believe otherwise, but he will try it
out with them that allow him to call the House by a figure, or metonymy of the
thing containing for the thing contained, so as to say this House is the
Parliament; and will say the Parliament is the proper name of the House, and it
may properly challenge that to it self, and they rob it of its true and due
name, and are enemies to both the Parliament, and the House, and Traitors, that
will not so own it to be; and shall say, Die mihi, etc. tell me what it is to
be called, if not so [not heeding that himself calls it the House where the
Parliament sits] and that that is the most proper name of it: I should judge
that man utterly unfit to be chosen a Parliament Man, or, if he should be
chosen, as unmeet to meet there among the rest, as in regard of his
Clergy-ship, I.O. himself once chosen to that honor (as I hear) was thought
unmeet to meet among them. Or (to prosecute the matter rather under that
Metaphor of the Lanthorn and the Light that shines in it, with which the Letter
and the Light, the Writing and the Word does so exactly correspond and hold
proportion) if there should appear such a man as would not be contented by the
forementioned Metonymy only to call the Lanthorn the Light it self, which
makes out it self thereby, and other things also to the view of others, but
stand up to contend tooth and nayl, that the Lanthorn is the very Light in very
deed, and ought so to be denominated, as that which really is so, yea and every
inch of it from the Top to the very bottom, or else it is spoiled of its own
glorious due and proper name, and denied to be what it is, and abused and
depressed quite below it self, debased and disgraced at their peril of men's
utter r^ine for their damnable, unbeleef, though they believe, own and
acknowledge it to be a very special good, serviceable, profitable, clear,
useful and perfect Lanthorn above all other Lanthorns, as to all ends and
purposes for which it was at first made and framed, unless they see it with
such eyes as his own, and believe it with himself to be veraciter, the real
light and only rule and guide of the way, that mafests both it self and all
things else that are needful to be seen to all such as are ne^r to, and within
the sight of it; and as concerning the Light it self, which reveals both it
self and the Lanthorn, and the dark room also round about, wherein it shines
and shows it self, and other things, as well, yea more brightly when its beheld
immediately, and is abstracted from the Lanthorn, which it reveals, and in
which (to say the truth) it self is more properly veiled then revealed ( For
novum Testamentum, i e. Christi lux, spiritus, verbum fidei, est in ^etere
velatum vetus i. e. (...), litera scripta, (...) Scriptura ad extra, vel Dei
ipsius digito scripta in tabulis externis lapideis, quae fuit mera, licet vera
figura, umbra, imago Scripturae ad intra, per Dei Spiritum in internis tabulis
cordis carneis, est in novo Re^ latum, 2 Cor. 3.
for the Light or new Testament is veiled in the Old, the Old Letter revealed
in the new) will not believe there is any such thing, nor without impatience
hear the Testimony of those that testify of it unto him, and tell him that he
is mistaken, it is not the Lanthorn that enlightens the room (as he supposes)
for that is, though transparent, yet a dark body of it self, that can no more
by and of it self without somewhat else, i.e. the light to manifest) evidence
either it self, or other things, then a stool or chair, or any such opacous
body like it self, but it is another thing within it that shows it self in some
measure through it, and (as the whole room and all things therein are by it)
most evidently seen when it stands and shines in the room, and is severed from
it, and that its that Light only, and not the Lanthorn, that can properly
challenge to it self that name of Light, and that the Lanthorn under no
consideration whatsoever, whether formally considered in its own proper nature
as an instrument made into that form of of a Lanthorn, of such materials as
Wood, Horn, Tin, Glass, or the like, nor yet quatenus containing the Light in
it, Which quatenur containing the Divine Truth is the utmost that I.O. is
capable to say for the Scriptures being called by that name of the Word of God,
as that nomen proprium, that proper name, he disputes for on its behalf, and
for its being within in the heart, Ex. 1. s. 1, 2, 3 and s 28.40. which is to
say just nothing to his proper purpose, and indeed to unsay all that ever he
says both before and after, in his proofs of the Word of God to be the proper
name of the Scriptures; for if it be not, nor is to be called the Word of God
formally considered, as a VVriting, but only as contaning, and declaring of the
Truth, Lights and Word, then it is not properly, nor is to be called the Word
of God properly at all.
either i^, or can properly be said to be the Light at all, but the man will
rather vilify and utterly nullify the Light for the Lanthorns sake, so that
men become his enemies for telling him the truth about it, and his hand is up,
and at work against every man, whose hand is against his crude conceptions,
stigmatizing them in Print, as poor, erroneous, foolish, Fanatical, Knaves, Ex.
25.22. deluded Dreamers, etc. and belying the Light, as a mere ^ained, imagined
piece of business, a figment of Fanatics, fanaticisme, Enthuss ^isme, dotage,
Ex. 2. s. 32. Nelcio quid, vere nihil: And moreover if the said man will not
only positively assert, but also not blush to profess in effect, that if the
Lanthorn be not to be called the Light he knows not what to call it, and
thereupon call out to such as deny it to tell and teach him what the Lanthorn
is to be called, if it be not properly to be called the Light, saying you must
either call it the Light, aut doceat nos aliquis quid dicendum id sit; and
lastly shall not blush to put himself upon the proof thereof against, all that
shall gainsay the Lanthorn to be the Light, and that in no better then such a
piteous, either flatly false, or foul and fallacious manner as here under
follows, viz.

1. The Lanthorn does sufficiently evidence it self to be the Light; therefore
most assuredly, unquestionably, incontroleably, infallibly, the Lanthorn is the
light, by which men must see, or not at all; in which Enthememe the Antecedent
is as most assuredly, unquestionably, uncontroleably, infallibly false, as
I.Os. saying that the Letter does so evidence it self to be the Light, and
consequently the Conclusion, yet this is I.Os. way, p. 68, 69.

For thou triest it out in these Terms, which are the truest, though the more
thou keep to them, the more false thy Propositions, as to the matter
asserted in them, both are and do appear, viz. the Letter, the Scriptures, the
VVriting, with every Tittle and Iota that is therein, arguing (as aforesaid)
thus

The Scriptures do abudantly, infallibly, incontroleably, manifest themselves
to be the Word of God: Therefore we know the Scriptures assuredly to be the
Word of God, Tr. 1. c. 2. s. 5. etc. 4 s. 1 21.

Which Argument is fair, and not fallacious, yet its frame, not more fair, then
its Antecedent flatly false understood as it must be by thee (if there be at
all such thing as uniformity in thy two Enlish Treatises, and not so much
noniformity as that we may not safely judge of thy meaning in that word
Scriptures in one place, by thy own expression and explanation of it in
another) of the writing, or the written Letter, and the transcribed Tittles and
Iotaes of it, the falsity of which Antecedent, as uttered in such open terms,
being not unlikely seen by thy self to be too obvious to be seen by others,
thou fetchest it about in a way of fallacy, acting, arguing minus cast, but
magis cause from this foundation.

2. Or else thus, viz. The Light in the Lanthorn, Tr. 1. c. 4. s. 14. does
evidence it self infallib^y to him that is not blind to be the Light.

Therefore the Lanthorn is, and is assuredly known to be the Light; in which
the Antecedent is most true, but the consequence denied, as no less false and
foully fallacious, then the other is true, and as non-sensical a non sequitur as
it is to say, the Light declared of in the Letter, is known to be the Word or
Light, which is fallacia consequentis, yet this is I.Os. way of arguing,

Viz. By this Light in the Scripture for which we contend, does the Scripture
make such a proposition of it self as the Word of God, that whoever rejects it,
does it at the peril of his eternal ruin. Therefore we know, and others may
be assured that the Scripture is the Word of God.

In which Argument, Mulier formosa superne Definit in piscem.

The Antecedent is most fair and true, let him be Anathema that denies the
Light in the Scripture to be the Word of God, but the consiquence is foully
false ( fallacia consequentis) and consequently the conclusion, for it follows
not, because the light in the Scripture or Word of God declared in it is so,
that therefore the Scripture it self is the Word of God.

Or else 3. thus, viz. That which does evidence it self to be the light is the
light, but the Lanthorn, the light does evidence it self to be the Light.

Therefore we may assuredly know that the Lanthorn, the Light is the Light.
Which Argument were it urged interrogatively thus, viz. Does not the Lanthorn
the Light evidence it self to be the light? Therefore is not the Lanthorn the
Light? were fallacia plurium interrogationum, the fallacy whereby one thing is
asked of two things at once, which is true of one of them but false if affirmed
of both; but formed positively it is fallacia, either divisionis, whereby the
Sophister concludes that to be true of two things joined together as one,
which is true of but one of them, i.e. of the Light, considered figillatim, or
a part; or else petitionis principii, or a disputation exfalso supposit is from
a false supposition of that which is not, or of that to be granted which is not
granted, but remains as the main matter yet to be proved, viz. that the
Lanthorn and the Light are all one: which yet is the way of I Os. proving the
Scriptures to be the Word and Light, Tr. 1. c. 4. s. 2. the Scripture or
written Word of God, and s. 6. The Scripture, the Word of God is light,
therefore we may assuredly know that the Scripture is the W^rd of God.

Or else 4. Thus (making no express mention of the Lanthorn at all, which is
the main subject that is to be proved to be the Light) viz. if the Light does
uncontrolably evidence it self to be the Light, then we do infallibly know that
the Light is the Light, and properly so called.

But the Light does uncontroleably evidence it self to be the Light.

Therefore we infallibly know that the Light is the Light, and properly so
called, which is I.Os. manner of speech sometimes, Tr. 1. c. 4. s. 1. the Word
of God is furnished with innate Arguments for the manifestation of it self, i,
e. to be the Word of God. So s. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Where ever the Word
comes, there is a sufficiency of light in it to evidence to all the Authority
of God, i.^. That its the Word, and evidence of truth, commending it self to
the conscience of men: No want of light in the truth it self. The Word makes a
sufficient proposition of it self where it is; leave the Word to men and if it
evidence not it self to them, it is because they are blinded. So Tr 1. c. 2. s.
6. Thy Word is truth, S. 14. Over all his Name God magnifies his Word (in all
which places in an honest way of proof of the Scripture to be the Word of God,
that term of Scripture should have stood in the stead of that term the Word of
God, but then the falseness had been obvious therefore we infallibly know the
Word of God is the Word of God, and properly so called.

In which Argument a man may take his choice of fallacies, and of two call it
which he pleases, or both if he will, and do him no wrong whose it is, for as
there is a begging of the grand question in the dispute, and a taking it
aforehand for granted, which is not granted but denied, and to be proved, viz.
That the Lanthorn is the light, the Writing the Word, which is called Petitio
principii, so there is a concluding aliud a negato, another thing, which is
owned, and not contradicted, nor gainsayed, viz. that the Light is the Light;
when the thing denied, and to be proved, i.e. that the Lanthorn is the Light,
the Writing the Word, is not affirmed in the conclusion at all, which is called
ignoratio Elenchi, when that is inferred as contradictory to the thing denied,
which does in no wise contradict it.

Or else 5. thus, viz. the Lanthornquatenus it contains the Light may be the
light.

Therefore the Lanthorn may be said to be the Light. Which Argument is
fallacious, being a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simplicitor; for it follows
not in any wise (if we should yield as we need not) that as it contains the
light, the Lanthorn may be said to be the Light, that therefore it may properly
be said so to be, much less that the Light is the proper name of the Lanthorn;
which is that which is undertaken to be proved by I.O. for he from secundum
quid, argues, and says, the Letter, non respectu literae scriptae, as it is
Scripture, but quatenns, etc. as it contains the divine truth, is, the Word of
God, therefore the Letter is the Word of God simpliciter, and the Word of God
is its proper name and nature.

I say if the said man shall not only fly up thus into the height of falsehood
in his assertion of the Lanthorn to be the Light, the Letter to be the Word,
decrying that altogether which is so indeed, but also drive on his proof and
evidence thereof in such a sorry way of either downright falsity, or evident
fallacy and deceit as this is, though I should not dare to deal any otherwise
then fairly and openly with this man, if I should come to argue all the utter
untruths utttered by him about the Lanthorn back again upon (as by and by I am
to syllogize back upon I.O. his false tales about the Scripture) and though I
desire not that any man should be caught with any other then that godly guile
whereby Paul caught many out of the deceit, yet whether he that deals thus
treacherously does not deserve when he has done, ex lege Talionis, to be dealt
treacherously withal, Isa. 33.1. Let wise men judge, and according to their
judgment let such fools act and execute, which I now am none of, among whom,
Fallentem fallere non est fraus, to deceive the deceiver is no deceit.

However thus much I shall make bold to say of the man aforesaid, that it is fit
he should be told barely of his bruitishnes, and fully forewarned of both his
falsness and his folly, that he fall not into the like for the future, and if
he be indeed so blind as he makes himself, and so mean of memory as not to
remember any name, whereby the Lanthorn or Letter can be called, but that name
of the light and Word though himself calls it not the light or word only, but
by the name of lanthorn, letter, or Scripture also save that Trapezantius-like,
who in a long fit of sickness forgot his own name, I.O. forgets himself, and
heeds not that himself often calls the letter, as others do, by its only due
and proper name of letter or Scripture) it is fit he should be plainly told what
to call it, and minded of it, as I here do tell and mind I.O. who calls to the
Qua. to tell him what to call the letter, that the name of Lanthorn, by which
(though he forget that he does so) himself does call the lanthorn, and the
name of Scripture, by which he [though he^ forgets it] calls the Scripture, is
a more proper name then those of light, and the Word of God, and the most
proper names that can possibly be given to them.

And if for all this he will obstinately oppose the truth, and wilfully wa'k on
without wisdom, then nescio quid indeed, the dotage being so deeply dyed into
him, that its scare like to depart, if he be brayed in a Mortar, I know not
what more to say, but Nescioan Anticcyram ratio illidestinet omnem.
Now I.O. ne Kideas be not so merry about the mouth, for such a man there is,
and nigher to thee too then thou think he is, so nigh that thou can not
step an inch from him -- nete quaesiveris extra, he is a well known to thee as
any man in thy clothes, and thou can not be ignorant of him, if thou be not
willingly ignorant of thyself, yea verily, Thou art the man that art found in
that folly and falsehood that is aforesaid about the lanthorn and the light, as
is showed so abundantly above, that there needs little more to be said in proof
thereof. Tu Dominus, Tu vir, aut Doceas nos, quid sibi vuls santa blateratio
and mugitus, etc. what means such a bl^ating and bellowing out for the letter?
such a pleading it to be the true light, which it does but plead for? such a
striving to have it styled the light? and the mere writing and every tittle of
it to be called the Word of God? which bears in truth, caeteris paribus, but
such a reference to the true light and Word of God respectively, as the
lanthorn does to the light of the candle which is set up and held forth in it:
Quid sibi vuls detesta^io, execratio tanta, etc. what means such direful
detestation, extr^am execration, and thundering out of little less then Anathama
Maranathaes against the light within, and word within, and all that confess to
it, as I.O. himself does too, but that he forgets it, and so curses himself by
craft, Ex. 1. s. 4. as Fantastical, foolish, deluded, Enthusiastical enemies
to, denyers and reproachers of the Scripture, because they deny the letter to
be that light and Word of God, which as through a lanthorn, glass or vail, and
not so brightly, but more dimly, then when viewed with open face as shining in
the heart, are seen and show themselves through it? siccine se gerunt ministri
lucis sicut vosmet vos geritis O ministri literae? tantaene a nimis caelestibus
irae? Quid sibi vuls tanta terminorum transpositio? verborum ista tua mutatio,
mussitatio, mangonizatio, etc. supradicta? If there be not such a man, and
I.O. be not he, teach us I.O. plainly what thou meanest by that peeping and
muttering out of thy mind? by that mumbling and fumbling in such foul
fallacious ways about things, wherein if thou were not minded to mask over thy
meaning that men may not mind too much where thy lame cause halteth, nor find
where its false and falters thou might have made it ( fairer in it self, I
cannot say, for the fairer and fuller thy openings of it are, the falser and
fouler it appears, but) tenfold fairer to be seen in its falsness and foulness
then now it is: tell us what means that mess of medley, that Mangonization and
mixture thou make of both thy matter, and thy meaning? that Tohu Vabohu? that
tangled and tangling kind of talk that thy Treatises do consist of, wherein
not only like him that talks up the lanthorn into the name of the light, and
talks down the light as nothing, thou triest to turn the outside inwards, and
that which should be uppermost downwards, i.e. the light within, which is the
Truth it self out of doors, and the outward letter, which is but a Writing of
it, in its room, place, power, use, and name, but also in the proof and
prosecution of that most subsenseless subversion do in one place or other
(one place well compared with another) subvert thy self by thy own sayings and
unsayings (how much more I cannot say but) little less I dare say then twenty
times over, tumbling about like a Bull in a net, turning things to and fro,
transposing thy terms, and introducing the prime praedicate in place of its
own prime subject, one while using the term Scripture, Letter, Writing, which
(witness thy ^itle pages) is the sole subject expected by thy Reader according
to thy intimation of no less, to be proved to be the Word of God, and treated
on without varying from it under that term of Scripture, Letter, Writing;
other while in thy very Argumentation for the Truth of thy untrue affirmation,
which is that the Scripture in esse both reali and cognoscibili is the Word,
and in answer to that queston how is it known that the Scripture is the Word of
God? promiscuously putting all these terms, viz Book, Faith, Bible, Truth,
Writing, Doctrine, Letter, Light, Scripture, Word of God, Declaration, mind,
will of God, and things declared together again, as if 'twere already out of
question, which is the matter in question, that these are all one thing and
terms Synonymous, and compounding, and confounding them into one Chaos or lump
of confusion, chopping and changing, popping out, and pulling in, mounting up,
and then dropping down, as if thou were sensible of being got too high, then
hiding they head again, and there [as those that are afraid out of their close
places] moving out of thy ho'e, as a worm of the earth, and twining every way,
fair or soul to secure the main chance, and to make good thy bad cause, and
carry what thou contendest for, which yet when all is done, beside the getting
to thy self among seeing men the blot of blindness, ignorance, weakness, folly
falsehood, fallacy, and confusion, thou will, which way soever thou orderest or
disorderest thy Arguments for it, even by thy own Management of it be on the
losing hand, till at last thou have lost it altogether: for though thou make
as much of it to the utmost as another can well do, that has taken on him to
make an ill business good, yet the utmost thou make of it, if well examined,
is as little as it is naught toward the bettering of it, and very much of it at
least, but very little better then what is urged above about the Lanthorn: And
when thou have turned every stone, and have wrought a long time till thou have
tired thy self with talking to have the Letter, and every jot and Tittle of it
to be the Word of God, till thou can scarcely go one jot further, or add one
Tittle more to the countenancing of thy cause, thou even give out and lie
down, and as ( T.D. had the wit to do at first, and C.F. was forced to do at
last) in a manner give it in, and layest it down so very fairly to thy
opposers, that all thy after struggling for it again is to no purpose to prove
thee any further a friend for all thy ample appearances pro Scripturis, then
the Qu. are, with whom thou art fain to fall in one, and say as they say in thy
Ex. 1. s. 28. s. 40. and, as thy fellow fighters with us about it do all
confess, that the Scripture no otherwise^is, nor is to be called the Word of
God, then Respectu subjectae materiae, or divinae veritatis in earevelatae seu
contentae, non respectu literae scriptae, non formaliter quatenns scripta, in
respect of the matter or Divine truth therein declared and contained only, not
in respect of the Writing or written Letter, not formally, as it is Scripture;
and that in innumerit paene locis ubi verbum Dei dicitur, etc. in those [
well-nigh innumerable] places of it, where the Word of God is said to be
preached, published, multiplied, and received the holy truth, or matter of the
Scriptures is intended, but not the Scripture it self formally considered; and
when the Word is said to be nigh us in our hearts, and in our mouths, Romans
10.8. and the Word of Christ to dwell in us, it is confessed by thee that that Word
of faith is not litera Scripta, is not the Writing, but the Truth written,
which is another thing then the Scriptures; neither do the Qua. say (as thou
there belyest them in thy lame laying down of their Argument (which is of force
to stop thy mouth however as thou rendrest it weakly, much more if urged in its
full strength) that the Word within, is not Verbum Scriptum, for it is the
same word that is written, but it is not the writing, not the Scriptura, not
the litera scripta, between which, and the Verbum Scriptum thou art or wilt
seem so silly, as to make no distinction: So then if the Scripture, formaliter,
formally considered is not (as secundum te it is not) the Word of God then
however thou scruest it into that name and thing, by secundum quid, yet
simpliciter, really, truly its not so at all, nor so properly to be called, for
forma dat esse rei, and is that per quod res est id quod est; and if it have
not the form of the Word of God, then the Scripture has not the being or true
nature of the Word of God; much less is the Word of God (as thou improperly
say it is) its proper name.

CHAP. V.
NOw as to I.Os. third Argument whereby to evince the Scripture to be the only
most perfect Rule, Standard, absolutely sole sufficient way of Revelation of
Gods will, etc. and so consequently the Word of God, its on this wise, Ex. 3.
s. 30. Spiritus Dei gravissime damnat and rejicit omnia additamenta ad verbum
Scripturarum, cujuscunque tandem generis sunt, ac speciatim omnes istas vias
and modos cognitionis Dei, accum eo communionis, quos ja^titant Fanatici, etc.
viz. J.O. The Spirit of God most heavily damns and rejects all additaments to
the Word of the Scriptures, i.e. the Scriptures with him, of what sort soever,
and specially all those ways and means of knowing God and communion with him,
boasted of by the Fanatics, chiefly conference with Angels, Col. 2.18. Heb.
1.2, 4. 1 Cor. 4.6. Luke 10, 29. Revelations not only alienas, containing
different doctrines, Gal. 1.8. but alias also, 2 Pet. 1.19. other new
Revelations of the same Doctrine then those individual Revelations of it that
were made to them that wrote the Scripture, Rev. 22.18. Heb. 1.2. 1 Cor. 4.6.
Col. 2.18. And Col. 2.18. And lastly, that inward Spirit the Fanatics talk of,
or internal light common to all, 1 John 4.1. Isa. 8.20.2 Pet. 2.18.

Rep. Surely I.O. thou wast in some deep Divine dream when thou wrotest these
thy Divinity Disputations, or else thou would never have divined out such a
deal of darkness and falsehood at thou have done, or have lent such, as thou
would have to own what thou writest for light and truth, a little more of
that thou eallest light, even a little more of that Letter a of Scripture thou
pleadest for, to discry it by, or something, or whether thou deemest I will not
say that men seeing a number of Scriptures quoted by the Dozen (for so it is
here as it is in sundry places above spoken to, excepting that counting such as
are twice over recited, here is thirteen to the Dozen) of which it might be
said, nos numeri sumus, would make account of them by wholesale to be all on
thy side, and take account of them, not by weight, but number, without so much
as looking otherwise on them then to see how many they are, but not heed either
what they say, or whereof they affirm; but some odd blind business or other
is in the wind, as the reason of it I know full well; for there is not any of all
the Texts of thy own tumbling a top of one another that I meet with yet, either
in this Dozen, or those before, that has the least tendency toward such a
thing as thou intendest them to in thy mere Nomenclateral citation of them.

Thou intendest by all these to prove there is now no other way of knowing God,
of communion with him, but the Scripture, that there is now not only no other
kind of Revelation of the Gospel, save such as was made of it to the Writers
of the Scripture, but also none of that same kind of Revelation of it, as was
made to them to be expected, or on pain of damnation and cursing, pretended to
by any person by any means, whether Angels internal spirit, that inward light
the Qua. talk of, or other medium whatsoever; but only that very individual
Revelation of it, that is made in so much of the Letter as is now extant and
bound in your Bibles, is, and must be the only Standard, Rule, and measure, to
which no Scripture must be added, tho bounds of which no man for ever, nor
Angel is for ever to enlarge, so as to write any more, though of the self-same
Doctrine or Gospel [mark] on so high a pretense as from the self-same true,
inward illumination, vision, in the same true light, or immediate motion, or
inspiration of the same holy Spirit, on pain or peril of utter rejection and
execration. Do the Texts set by thee in that Section, even all of them
together, prove that general ignorant, audacious Assertion of thine? Does any
one of them respectively prove the particulars thereof, that it is particularly
alleged to? Does Gal. 1.8. because it is said, If we, or any man, or Angel
from heaven bring any other Gospel then what we have preached to you, twice
over, let him be accursed, prove him cursed that writes more Scriptures of the
same Gospel by the same Spirit? if so, was not John hereupon accursed, that
wrote more Scriptures of it after Paul was dead by a new Revelation, not the
same? and was not Paul, if he wrote any Epistle, after to Galatia cursed out of
his own mouth by saying, though we bring any other Gospel, let us be accursed,
if that were his meaning, 'that no more Scripture must be written? is every new
Revelation, and new writing, by way of Revelation of the old Gospel, a new
Gospel? or does Rev. 22.18. prove there must be no more Scripture nor
Revelation within, nor new outward Scripture and Revelation of the Gospel by
motion from the Spirit after by John, because he says, If any shall add to
the words of this Book, God will add the plagues of it to him? Said he
therein any more then what was said long before, Deuteronomy. 4.2.12. ulz. Prove. 30.6.
Add thou not to his words lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar: were
all those adders to Gods Word, or words, and reprobate, and liars (as they must
be if the Scriptures be Gods Word, and the adding of more Scripture be
additament to his Word) that added all that Scripture which was written after
Deuteronomy and the Proverbs? and if the Scripture were the Word of God, is not
taking away his name out of the Book of Life threatened to him that takes away
from the words of that Book, as well as plagues to him that adds? and so ye,
in that ye discanonize most of what was writ there by the Prophets, are
discarded from the comforts of the Scripture by the places of you own quotation?

Does Col. 2.18. twice over cited, and allowed two votes in this Section, vote
either of those particulars it is cited for? Does the Spirit there condemn
Angelorum alloquia, alias, called by thee Colloquia Angelica, s. 28. all
conference with Angels? or only that worshipping of Angels, forbid more
expressly (as I hinted to thee before) in Rev. 19.10.22.9. where I also told
thee of the lawfulness of talking with Angels, or receiving of Revelation of
the truth from Angels, unless thou will Tax such as received the Law, which was
given by the disposition of Angels; and Daniel, and Mary, and Zachary,
Cornelius, and Paul and John, that wrote the Revelation, and Christ himself,
who all were spoke to, and ministered to by Angels? were these all guilty of sin
and condemnation? Look again I.O. on the words in English, which thou Greekest
out (perhaps to the further hoodwinking of Idiots that ken not Greek, lest they
should find out thy folly, who set it for a Cipher, if rendered in plain
Latin which to give thee the reading as they stand in your Translations, run
thus, Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, or
worshipping of Angels? Is the talking of Angels to men here deeply damned by
the Spirit of God as thou dreamest? And 2. what is that Text to prove there must
be on pain of cursing no additament of more Scripture or Writing to that
Scripture that is in your Bibles? with pretense of immediate Revelation of the
same Doctrine, Truth, or Gospel there taught, from the same inward Light, and
holy Spirit, which is the second purpose; for which its cited a second time?

And again as to Heb. 1.2.4. cited Heb. 1.1, 3. (for thus thou citest that
twice to the 2. same purposes with Col. 2.) what has that in it to the
evincing the Spirits damning of either all talk with Angels, or addition of
more Scripture thereof from the Revelation, motion, or inspiration of the same
holy Spirit, to that Scripture of the Truth that is now trussed up, as the
close of the whole Council of God, that ever must be declared in writing, or
counted upon as part of your Canon, according to the Clergies Council, who
first caused that consignation of it by Book-binders within the bounds of your
Bibles? thus run the words, God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in times past the Fathers to the Prophets, has in these last days
spoken to us in his Son, who is better then the Angels, etc. Must not his eyes
be out that sees any such things hinted at here as those above, the proof of
which I.O. intends by this quotation?

Because Angels are here named inferior unto Christ, therefore Anathematized
is he that hears or heeds any thing that shall be spoken to him by an Angel,
though he reveal the same Truth, and not another, seeing that truth is already
written in the Scripture; yea cursed be he from henceforth even for ever;
there is one of I.Os. Conc^usions, who consequently concludes John accursed that
wrote the Revelation from thenceforth, even after this of Paul to the
Colossians, and the Hebrews, were written, from whence forward I.O. drives his
execration downward to this day; since the said John had his Revelation
immediately from an Angel, by whom Christ, who had it from the Father, sent and
signified it to his servant John, Rev. ^.1.

And because Christ is better then the Angels, and God in these last days
speaks in and by him, his only begotten Son, the light of the world, the great
Shepherd and Over-seer of the soul, whose own voice his Sheep hear, warning all
to hear him, to hear his voice in all things what ever he says on pain of
being cut off from among his people, therefore the Scripture must have no more
writing, though of the same truth that is there, added to it on pain of
damnation for ever: there is the the other of I.Os. Conclusions from Heb. 1. from
which Conclusion I can much more clearly conclude that a cloud of darkness is
drawn over I.Os. understanding, and that a beam is in his eye, then draw such
an untruth, as that no more Scripture since John's time was to be written by the
holy Spirits moving, and added to that, from that Text, which tells the truth
if I.O. would once heed it, viz. that the hour now is wherein God speaks to the
Sons of men, in, and by his own Son, whom he has given to be a Light and
Leader, to all people wherein the dead must hear his voice, before ever they
live to God, who since God speaks by him, and he by his own light, Spirit and
Voice in I.Os. conscience, why does not I.O. heed him then, but scoff at him
in his inward Light and Spirit the Qua. call to, as at Christum quendam
Imaginarium, infallibilem Doctorem, nescio quod lumen, scu verbum internum
nescio quem Deum seu (...), Deoforsan quopiam melius, etc. for woe unto him
that ever he was born if he repent not of it, but run from him to the Letter,
which does but testify of him, and call to him, in the reading and searching
of which if he think he hears Christ's voice, and Gods voice truly, then the
Scribes, that read the Scripture as much as he, could not be truly reproved
Ioh. 5. as not hearing it as they are by Christ: And 2. I shall think he is
not only without his sense of spiritual hearing, but, as it is showed above of
others in the like case, not so well as he ought to be in his natural wits and
understanding.

And as to that 2 Pet. 1.19. which I insisted so lately, and so largely upon
above, if there were the weight of one half grain in it toward the turning of
the scales to his purpose, I would weigh it once again, but he that shall say
these words, We have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which ye do well if ye
take heed as unto a light shining in a dark place, till the day dawn, and day
star arise in your hearts has ought in it [if the Letter of Scripture were
there meant, as I have showed it is not] to prove there must be no more
Scripture written (as from the Spirit) after that verse was written on pain of
damnation, [as I.O. does, for that's his drift in quoting it] does no more
condemn the Qua. by that Text of Peter, then he damn John himself, whose
Revelation was written [as by the Spirit] no little while after that.

As to that 1 Cor. 4.5. spoken to once before where I met with it, Ex. 3. s.
28. yet twice here cited by I.O. to the self-same purpose as before, from which
because Paul there says he would have none think of him, and Apollos above
what he wrote of himself; and him, as no more (however Idolized by the Church)
then mere Ministers by whom they believed. I.O. concludes there must be no
addition of more Scripture to his Canon.

Rep. If any man be minded to look so long till he find a pin in a pack of
wool [which he may sooner do, if lost there, then find I.Os. conclusion coming
from the Text aforesaid] let him look till he is weary for me, who will meddle
no more with that.

And the same summarily, and in short, say I of 2 Pet. 2.18. another Text of
I.Os. urging, For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean
escaped from them who live in error.

Rep. He that will spend so much time as to study on that Text till he can
duly draw either of these Doctrines from it, viz that the holy Spirit
downrightly damns, 1. All addings whatsoever of more Scripture or writing, as
from the Spirit, to that Scripture now in the Bible, which our Clergy calls
their Canon. And 2. All the ways and means of knowing God, and of communion
with him, even that internal Spirit, and light in the conscience (to use I Os.
phrase) boasted of by the Qua. as in some measure communicated to all men,
shall most assuredly have his labor for his pains.

The same may be said of 1 Ioh. 5.1. Beloved believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they he of God or no, for many false Prophets are gone out
into the world.

Rep. What damnation is thundered out here at all to the Adding of any thing, or
Revelation that is true, to the outward Writing or Scripture, where the
Scripture is neither talked on, nor intended? he talks of Spirits there, and
not Letters; much more what follows thence to the condemnation of the inward
light and spirit, the Qua. talk of, call to live, and walk, and hold communion
with God in now according to the counsel of the Scriptures, as Abel, Noah, and
all holy men of God did from the beginning before the Scripture was? Is this to
add to the Scripture, and to fall under condemnation from that Scripture, and
from that Text too, as Adders to the Scripture, to hold forth, preach, publish,
in the movings of the Spirit, and therein also to commit to writing the holy
Truths revealed in the Light and Spirit of God they obey and walk in? and to
call men by Voice, Scripture or Writing, as they are moved, to live and believe
in the Light, to walk not after flesh, but the holy Spirit of God in them which
reproves them of sin, and lusts against their flesh, as they did of old, who
wrote in the same Light and Spirit of God, that outward Scripture ye more
scrible for, then walk by, so long as ye walk not by the Light and Spirit as it
bids you? does not the Scripture call to believe and walk in the Light and
Spirit, and not in the darkness, and in the flesh? and where is that Spirit and
Light? is it not within in the heart where the flesh and darkness dwells which
lust against it? And for as much as thou say here the Spirit damns all ways
and means of knowing God, and communion with him beside the Scripture. O thou
Elymas! Will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Does not
the Scripture and Spirit of God by it rather down rightly damn all them out of
al' communion with God, let them jactitare, joy and boast never so much of
their having the Scriptures, that walk not in the said Light the Qua. testify
to, which thy self only, contrarily both to the Scriptures and sound reason,
and Gods Spirit also, damnest down as Diabolical to the Pit of hell who yet
sometimes again confessest it to be of God and Gods voice in nature, by which
he reveals his mind to men, and that infallibly without the least contribution
of strength, or assistance from without, and therefore surely without a Letter
ad exera, p 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.) yea and rejectest with abhorrency and
detestation, Ex. 3. s. 28? Does not the Spirit by the Scripture condemn them
for Liars (and such are all the formal Professors of the Letter that have got
the good words to talk on for hire, and make a trade of, whose portion is the
Lake, while they are not under the power of the Light, but hate it, and the
holders of it out) that pretend to communion with God out of the Light? and
own's it any other way or means of fellowship with God, but the light, saying,
1 Job. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, if we say
we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness we lie, and do not the truth;
but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light we have fellowship together,
and the blood of his Son cleanses us from all sin? do not thou then instead
of light walk in obscurity, instead of brightness in darkness it self? do
thou not grope for the wall yet like the blind, as if thou had no eyes and
stumble at noonday as in the night? is not a mist upon thee already from the
hand of the Lord, so that thou see not the Sun, as it was on the false
Prophet Act. 13.6.10, 11, 12. that sought to turn away the Deputy from the
faith, and from believing in the Doctrine of the Lord, which yet he could not
do by all his mischievous subtilty, and to pervert the right ways of the Lord?

And now thou have brought me upon that Text, 1 Job. 4.1. it is true, he bids
the Saints not believe every Spirit, but try the Spirits, for many false
Spirits and Prophets were then abroad, and as Christ said, Matthew. 24. there
should in the last time come false Prophets, false Christ's, Antichrists, even
so (witness John here, and also 1 Job. 2.18.) they did come, and were even then
already in the world, and have multiplied since then into a number numberless,
and spawned themselves over the face of the whole Europian earth, and more, so
that all Cities, Countries, Universities, (so called) Parishes through
Christendom are even overflowed therewith (the more shame for them that cannot
see Wood for Trees, and how Christ is now coming to consume the Antichristian
locusts of all sorts where they swarm, with the Spirit of his mouth, and
brightness of his coming in Myriads of his Saints, Iud. 14. but rather dream
they are now newly rising out of the bottomless pit, so I.O. Ex. 3. s. 19.
Locust as hasce cum primum ex fumo put^iprodierunt etc. speaking of the Qua.
says I.O.
and so mistake the true Prophets to be them, who rather are armed with the
Light, and standing up in the might and power of the Lord against them) But let
me ask thee I.O. what were they to try the Spirits and the Prophets by? was it
the Letter or the Light, the Scripture or the Spirit of God it self? which of
these two is the Rule or touchstone of trial? which is the Judge that must give
the resolution, in whose sentence there must ultimately be a resting and
undoubted discerning what Spirit or Prophet is of God, and speaks truth, and
what is false, and comes with cunningly devised fables? I know thou say p.
67, 68. the Scripture and that alone we are sent to in this case to give the
determination; but (saving thy single say so) there is no evidence of any such
matter either in this Text, or any other, it is not denied by me, but the
Scriptures may be searched, and that that which is of God contradicts not them;
So the Bere^^^ did, who are commended for receiving the Word first as it was
spoken (...) readiness of mind, and recorded as searching the Scriptures also,
but that on the account of which they believed the doctrine before they looked
into the Letter, was the Light in their own hearts, whereby then very
conscience could witness it to be the truth, it answering to that of God in
them, as face to face in a glass, and not the Letter without, for being looked
on without the Light and Spirit of God it came from that gives to see into the
mystery of it (to say nothing here how the Light and Spirit within, only gives
to know the Letter to be more of God then the Jewish Talmud, or the Turkish
Alcoran, the Scripture answering to the eternal, unchangeable, infallible
light of God in the conscience then those Fables do) the Letter would have
further blinded them from all belief of the truth, as it did the old Scribes,
and does the new that search it in the darkness of their own understandings,
more then the Bereans did, the Letter being but such a History, Record, and
Writing of certain outward things transacted in a ceremonial or temporary
figure and Type of some spiritual, inward, substantial, invisible, and eternal
truth, as looked upon by them that are not in some measure in that Truth it self
it in a figure calls to, and is the Type of, benights the dark minds, and
prejudices them more against the truth then if they had no outward Letter at
all, as the Pillar of fire to Israel that were on the inside thereof was a
cloud and darkness to the Egyptians that were on the backside, which is the
reason why all sorts of porers on the outside of the Letter, and backside of
the Bible, and Professors, as well in separated Assemblies as Parochial, of the
Letter in the carnal Commandments thereof are further hardened in hatred
against the Qua. the children of light, who are let and lead by the Spirit and
light of him, who only opens the seals to his Disciples, into the inside of
it, and into the power of the endless life, yea more then very heathens that
never heard of any Letter at all; for to such as read the Letter any other way
but in the Light and Spirit that gave it forth by holy men, as Animal men do,
and therefore discern it not, it seems to contradict the things of the Spirit,
whereupon the Apostles were counted blasphemers of the Truth because they
called men into it out of the Types, and taught men to forsake Moses Testament
that stood in outward, viz. Heb. 9.10. eatings, drinkings of flesh, bread and
wine, and diverse Baptisms, carnal Ordinances, outward, or in the flesh, etc.
which all had their institution, and were in being before Christ crucified, who
d^ jure put an end to all these by the Sacrifice of himself, though de facto
used after by permission for a time in regard of peoples weakness at first to
bear the total leaving them off; for indeed to the lookers for the Kingdom and
coming of Christ in outward observations, he that seeks to bring them off from
these, which decrease, to Christ who increases, that they may witness him
formed, and his image brought forth in them, seems to such (as Paul did to the
foolish bewitched ones of the Galatians that hung in the Letter, and stuck short
of the Spirit, thinking to be made perfect by the Letter, and fleshly
performances) to be a very enemy both to them and truth, and then most when he
tells them most of the truth. I say then, it is the Spirit and Light and not the
Letter by which Doctrines, Spirits, Prophets true or false are to be tried,
neither is the Spirit of God which was before it, so to stoop to the Letter as
to stand at the Bar before the Letter that is infer^^^ (...) it, and came from
it, but both the Letter and all false Spirits, and their speakings, and it
self, and its own also to be tried, judged, and determined by the Spirit of
God, which judges all, and is not to be judged by any, which, as the Light,
discovers, discerns, and comprehends the darkness but is not discovered,
discerned, nor comprehended by it: nor is this absurd as it may seem to some
blind ones, to say the speakings, writings, doctrines, things of Gods Spirit,
as well as all false Spirits and the things thereof are to be tried by the
Spirit of God it self, for as the Sun, outward, is that which shows both it
self, and all things, and is not showed by any thing but it self, and rectum is
ever mensura sui and obliqui, that which is infallibly right is the Rule and
measure of manifestation of it self, and of all the wrong, and not, retro, any
wrong, dark, crooked, doubtful, or fallible thing the Rule of that, so the
Spirit and Light of God, by, and from which, and that but remotely too through
men's hands, the Letter had at first, and now through fallible men's hands has
all its being, is the Rule of trial for it self, and of the Letter, and of all
false Spirits, Prophets, Doctrines, etc. yea it self, and all things are made
manifest by the Light, whether approveable or reprovable, works of flesh, or
fruits of the Spirit, as the Letter says of it, Gal. 5. Ephesians. 5. yea what ever
does make manifest (as the Letter never does, or can without the Light, and the
Light does often, and did thousands of years without the Letter, and before it
was) it is the Light: And if any other should, yet of all men I.O. cannot
charge this on me as an Idem per Idem, to say by the Spirit of God and the
Light alone, we must Try the true Light and Spirit, and the false Spirits and
pretenses to the names of Light also, for I say no more in it then the truth of
the true light and spirit, which himself says most falsely of the Letter when
p. 51. he asserts it to be the Rule and Standard, the Touchstone of all
speakings whatsoever, that that must speak alone for itself, which must try the
speaking of all, but it self, yea its own also.

I.Os. 6. Argument to prove the Scripture, and nothing else, the only most
perfect Rule and Standard is this, viz. Ea omnia quae examinari and probari
debent, etc. All those things which ought to be examined and tried, yea which
we are commanded to try, tanquam ad lydium lapidem, as 'twere by some
infallible Touchstone by the Scripture, whether they are true and agreeable to
divine verity, or not, with free liberty, yea abs^lute necessity of rejecting
them if not consentaneous to Scriptures, those neither apart, nor jointly
considered, can be the Rules or Directories of Gods worship, our faith and
obedience, nor are upon their own account at all to be credited.

But all Revelations, Visions, Spirits, Dreams, Enthusiasms, we are commanded
so to try, examine, and prove; Therefore those are no Rules that are of
themselves to be credited.

Rep. That Argument, (the minor of which is most false, and supposes that
infallible Spirit of God, to be now subjected as some underling to a fallible
Letter now transcribed by weak men) is founded on this Text, 1 Job. 4.1. and
two more only, beside those above spoken to, viz. 1 Cor. 14.21. and 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. The first of which I know nor why I.O. cites it, it proving nothing to
his purpose, because Paul there quotes a Text out of the Law or Letter, saying,
In the Law its written with men of other tongues, and lips will I speak to this
people, i.e. to the Drunkards of Ephraim, yet they will not hear, which first
part has not a tittle for him, but the latter part of it, much more against
him then he is ware of, being not wise enough well to weigh it: And the second
Text with the two verses before, viz. Quench not the Spirit, despise not
Prophesyings, prove all things, rather against him, that the Spirit, which is
there mentioned, and not the Letter at all, is that by which all things are to
be proved. What is said above to that Text in John shall (as well it may stand
as answer to the said sixth Argument, with this only addition, that if we must
go to the Scripture for the trial of all spirits, even Gods as well as others,
then lets go no further at first however, then that in hand, which tells us,
that the true Church, who is written to in that verse, wherein (nor in any
about it) there is not the least hint about the Letter, had a secret taken
whereby to know the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error, vers^ 6. which
the world, and its Priests and people have not, verse. 2^ Every Spirit (quoth
he) that confesses Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh is of God and every
Spirit that confesses not this, is not of God; and this is the Spirit of
Antichrist, whereof ye have heard it should come, and even now is i^ already in
the world. Riddle me I. O. if it be within thy reach, and from thence tell me
which are the true, which the false Spirits, which Christ's and Gods, which
Antichrists, they that confess Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, as the
^uardo, or they that deny the Savior, the Anointed to be come in the flesh, as
from the Pope to the least outside, or nominal Christian, and mere literal
beleiver and professor, among the most reformed Protestants (save they who
believe and live in the internal light and Spirit with one accord all do.

Looking at, talking of, bel^eving the History of, expecting justification,
sanctification, righteousness, salvation, all from Christ only as he was made a
man of outwa^d flesh and blood without them.

And if I. O. say in vindication of himself in this, that that is the
confession of Jesus Christ to be come in flesh, which every spirit that makes
is of God, to believe the story of the Incarnation, Life, Suffering, Death,
Resurrection, etc, (that is all truly related in the Letter without, as 'twas
done in a figure of what was to be further, and more spiritually and mystically
transacted in his true body the Church whereof he is the head) with a confident
application of him, and of the benefit of all the righteousness he did in that
person by every man to himself, as by way of computation and imputation, before
he has it indeed imparted or conveyed into himself (for this is T.Ds. and the
whole brood of the back side believers, and the Bastard Christians says and
confession of Christ to be come in the fle^h on the account of which they hope
they are of God, and shall be saved, though they are far from witnessing or
confessing the same Christ, who is the Wisdom, Righteousness, Light, Power,
Salvation, and Image of God to be begotten, conceived, formed, born, brought
serth, incarnated, risen from the dead, living, and dwelling within themselves,
where he has lain slain as an innocent Lamb from the foundation of the world
in their hearts, which therefore is to perish with the lust thereof, which
inward witness of the Words incarnation and dwelling in themselves they that
were of God of old had Job. 1.14. (The Word was made flesh, and dwells in us,
and we saw his glory) and all now have who are of God, and have not the vain
hope of the hypocrite only, which is as the giving up the Ghost when God comes
to take a^^y his soul, Job but that hope, 1 Job. 3.3. which is an Anchor to the
soul, s^re, and steadfast, entering into that within the vail Heb 6.18, 19, 20.
which is Christ himself in us the hope of glory, Col 1.27. known by them to be
in all them who are not Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13 (...) and still in that
transgression and in that condemnation, which has past already upon them, and
is not now to them that are in Christ, walking no more after the flesh, but
after the Spirit, Romans 8.1.)

I say if I.O. judge with T.D. and others that that faith and confession ad
extra only, is the faith and confession of Christ's Incarnation, Resurrection,
etc. which proves them to be of God who have it, and them to be Antichristian
spirits who have it not: Let him tell me whether there be any Antichrists in
Christendom yea or nay; I have hitherto taken it that our Divines say the
Antichrists properly are no where else, and that there are many more
Antichrists then true Christians (natura, non nomine) in the world called
Christian; but seriously I know not where to find them, if I.Os. trial,
judgment and discerning of Spirits by the very Scriptures themselves be not
very dark and undiscerning and confused, nor what Spirits or Prophets
throughout all Christendom are not of God, since Papists and Protestants of
all sorts, Prelatical, Presbyterian, Independent, Baptists, Seekers, Kanters,
and all other that I know of, as well as Qua. [who only of all the rest,
witness that true, inward, saving, good confession of the Lord Jesus with the
mouth, and believing in the heart, that God raised him from the dead [as
feeling him living there within themse^ves] to which the promise of salvation
is made, Romans 10.9. and which every Spirit that witnessesh, is of God, 1 John
4.2.] do together with the Qua. who own and deny not that (as there be some
that falsely lay of them) all confess, and really believe the truth of the
outward History of Christ's coming in the flesh of that person that was born at
Bethlem, that lived and dyed and rose again at Jerusalem, according to the true
Relation of the outward Scriptures, and do also apply him and all his by that
faith they have in the story of that person, and in the person at a distance
from them, though never feeling the power of his Light Righteousness, and holy
life within themselves: but I wot whether I.O. will own all these Spirits,
Prophets and Professors to be cordial believers, or all such confessors of that
outward Incarnation and Resurrection of Christ from the dead to be all of God
or not, and in a present state of salvation thereupon, and not one of the
outwardly believing, Christ-confessing Spirits, Prophets, Priests and
Professors abovesaid (whereof the most are very profane, false, deceitful
Liars, Swearers, Couzeners, Cheaters, Drunkards, Riotous, Glutt^ns, Belly-gods,
Want^ns, Whoremongers, Idolaters Covetous, Proud persecutors of Christ, every
way abominable, and unchristian in their lives, few or none of which believe so
much as that they must necessarily, or can possibly be purged perfectly from
their sins till they dy^) to be at all Antichristian. If he say nay, these all
shall not be saved, then the said outward faith in, and confession of Christ,
as without them, is not saving: If he say yea, then first where is his
personal election? 2 What need any personal sanctification of us as to our
salvation? what was personally in that man only that dyed and rose at Jerusalem
is enough for us so that none needs reside in us, let us eat and drink when we
dye we shall be saved and live for ever.

Moreover what has been said above may stand as a sufficient answer over the
head of I Os. fourth Agument, which (as most of them are one with another, in
many matters in proof of which he cites over and over, again the same Texts, so
that one cannot well make a full end with one Argument without some transition
into another) is very much coincident with this. The sum of which fourth is
this, viz.

If it be often commanded by God that we attend diligently to the Scriptures,
left we be turned aside from the truth and right knowledge of himself by
seducing spirits, vain Revelations, false teachers, etc. then the Scripture is
the most perfect Rule, etc. but the first true, therefore the other, Ex. 3.f.31.

The Texts that prove the minor of this Argument, quoth he, are so clear and
plain that ad solemn caecutiat necesse est, etc. he must needs be blind toward
the Sun it self, who Assents not to them in some of which also [quoth he] the
certitude of the sacred Word [that is the Scripture still with I.O.] is
preferred before the certitude (as to the Churches use) even of true
Revelations and miraculous.

Rep Yet two of them, viz 2 Timothy 3.13, 14, 15, 16. and 2 Pet. 1.19. many times
a piece over repeated and supposed to supply almost every turn of I.O. how they
serve not his turn at all is abundantly above discovered, whereupon I here quit
them.

Another is so much misquoted, viz. 2 Ioh. 11.5, 6, 10. that, as plain and
clear as the Sun as it is, he must be better skilled then I that knows where to
find it at all.

Two more there are that make as much to I.Os. purpose, as any two well-nigh
can do, that speak contrary to it, and those are Ioh. 5.47. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. The
words of the first, which with those of 46. verse. are Christ's to the Scribes,
are these, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of
me, but if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words. Christ
by true Revelations of it from the Father to him truly revealed the Fathers
will to the Scribes which they received not from him but hated him for, Ioh.
8.40. 12.49, 50.14.31. saying of Christ, We are none of his, we are Moses
Disciples, we know God spoke to Moses, as for this fellow we know not whence he
is, Joh. 5:45, 46, 47. Christ tells them in effect that for all their prate and
pretense to Moses as their Tutor, he rather was their Accuser in whom they
trusted, since they in truth believed not Moses, for [ a minori ad majus] did
you indeed believe Moses, ye would much more believe me, quoth he, for he wrote
of me, he sent, directed, and pointed you to me, for so he did, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
saying of Christ, A Prophet will God raise to you, etc. him shall ye hear in
all he says, who hears him not shall be cut off from his people, Act. 3.22,
23.7.47. But if you believe not his writings, wherein ye are bid to hear me, as
the greater of the two, as the Son in the house, where he was but the servant,
then ye cannot believe my words. The sum in short is this, he that heeds
Moses writings, must hear me, for Moses bids them do so, he that believes what
I say, does what Moses says; he that believes either, believes both, he that
believes not both, believes neither.

But what of that? what follows hence? this, quoth I O. for that is the very
end he infers this Text for, and the very conclusion he infers from it; viz.
that Moses writings of Christ are more sure, and of greater certainty, as to
the Churches use, then Christ's own words from his own mouth, or then Christ's
Revelations of Gods minds to men, as revealed to him from the mouth of God,
from the very bosom of the Father: Siccine? Itane? is it so I O. indeed? what
the ou^^ard, remotely transcribed Copies of the writings of the Old servant,
that put a vail over his face too, and spoke so darkly in types and figures,
and shows, and shadows, that 'twas hard to behold steadfastly to what end he
spoke, more plain, and steadfast, and sure, and certain then the immediate
Voice, Words, Revelations of the Son himself, whom Moses called to hear, as
coming and speaking more distinctly out of the very bosom of the Father? O the
dotage of our University Doctors, the dimness of our Divines! who profess to
dive daily and deeply into the Scriptures, that make the dark Writings, and
dead Letter and servant more clear and worthy, and useful to the Church, then
the express Voice and Words of the Son, which are Spirit, and life it self. I
shall set but one Scripture to face this fancy of I.O. and so leave, and let it
stand to the shame of it self, and its Father, Heb. 3. verse. 1. to the 8. See
and read it.

Thus of the first: The words of the second are these, Be not soon shaken in
mind, nor troubled neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us,
as that the day of the Lord is at hand.

Rep. The business I.O. cites this in proof of is [for this, and that next
before are of those that are subscribed to that purpose] that the certainty of
the Scripture is preferred before the certainty of true Revelations and
Miracles; but which way so much can be drawn, unless it be as I.O. draws
iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with Cart Ropes, from that
Text is more then I can tell.

Paul, Silas and Timothy had told them it seems of the coming of the day of
God, both by Spirit, Word and Letter, they whose great hope lay in the coming
of that day, like such as look and long for what they love, and are apt to
think and hope it to be, as they would have it, did hope it to be nearer hand
then it was, and fearing left, finding it further off then they thought, they
might be troubled, and shaken in mind, and failing in their faith of it, he
gives them to understand the worst of it, that the best might the better help
it self, that they should not mistake them in their Doctrine about that day, as
if they had said it was immediately to shine out upon them, and so waver in
their minds, flag in their faith, and be troubled with doubts, as if it would
never come to them, because not so soon as they wished it might, for there was a
long night to interpose it self first, he wills them withal to remember v. 5.
that he told them no less in the Spirit by Word of his mouth (as now he does
over again by Letter or Writing) when was present with them, howbeit, as that's
never long that comes at last, so that day would come at last to their
salvation, and destruction of the man of sin (who caused the night) with the
brightness of it: Here Is the short and the long of the business of that verse,
and those about it, from which I, who can see the Sun, can see no such Doctrine
follow, as I.O. dreamingly draws from it, nor one dram of Reason, nor the least
grain of Assent to his Asas^inated Assertion, that the Scripture is of more
certitude as to the Churches use, then any true Revelations.

Other Arguments I.O. urges why the Light and Spirit cannot be the Rule, etc.
Therefore the Scripture must be it. J.O. That to which we are never, no where
sent of God that we might learn the knowledge of himself, and his will, and
take direction in our duty, that cannot be the Rule, Canon, Principle or
directory of our Faith, Ex. 3. s. 32. Illud ad quod nunquam, nusqnam a De^
mitti^ur, ut inde, seu ex ^o discamus sui cognitionem and voluntatis suae, vel
ut inde directionem in officio nostro sumamus, illud non porest essefit^ei
cognisionir, doctrinae aus obedientiae nostra Regula, Canon, Princip^^m, (...);
s^ita ^^qui (...), Directorium. At ver^ ad lumen internum seu spiritum internum
privatum, etc. nunquam, nu^quam a D^^ ablegamur, ergo, etc. Proferant Fanatici
velunum sacrae Scripturae locum, etc. Si antem de su^ santum loquantur mendaces
sunt, etc.
Learning, Knowledge and obedience.

But we are never, no wheresent of God to any inward Light, or internal Private
spirit, etc. Therefore, etc.

Les the Fanatics produce but one place of Scripture, wherein we, or any are
sent to their Rules or directions of faith and obedience, and we will not say
but they have cause to triumph in earnest, but if they speak of their own, they
are Liars, they bear witness to themselves, and their witness is not true.

Reply. As for thy word, Private Spirit, we deny all leading by any Private
Light and Spirit: It is the Common Light and Public Spirit of God, which is
one and the same in all, though not in the same measure, and not any thing of
our own that we testify to, and profess to follow, as our guide: It is the
gift of Gods grace in us, that appears to all, bringing salvation, which
teaches all, that are led by it, and learn at it, to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and live godly, righteously, and soberly here, that we intend;
nor do we so much as pretend to any other inwardlight, but that of God in the
conscience, which, though thou foolishly style it Natural, yet thy self be
^rest such an ample testimony to sometimes, that we need use no other then thy
own words, to prove it to be infallibly of God, and from him an infallible
guide: and that we are sent of God to this inward Light, Word, or Spirit, in
answer to thy challenge to produce one Scripture, I say what need we produce
one? Thy own pen, if thou wilt believe it, points out almost i^numerable places,
yea all in which the Word of God is said to be preached, published, multiplied,
received, where the Word nigh in the heart is meant, and the outward Scripture,
that is the declaration of it, considered formaliter or (as written) not at all
intended: yet for fear thou should not believe thy own pen when such. Truths
drop from it as make against thee (and indeed it has let fall so many
untruths, pro and cons, and fellaries from it, that it little deserves to be
believed by thy self, but rather suspected when it writes the truth) I am free
here to produce some out of many more that might be produced, wherein men are
sent in the Scripture, if that be of God, by whom thou s^yest they nunquam,
nusquam, never, no where are so sent to the rules and directions we call to,
which are not any man's own private spirit, or fained light, or Enthusiasms or
dreams, as thou dreamest, and to the abusing of us to the world out of thy own
narrow private light-loathing spirit divinest they are, but the Word, Light,
and Spirit of God which is within, viz. Jam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the
ingrafted Word able to save souls, (...), insitum v^rbum. That the Word is a
light thou do not deny, and that its within, sure thou will not, who say,
Ex. 1 s. 40 thus, That Word within is the Word of faith the Apostles preached,
and that we are here called to it thou can not. So Gal. 5.16, 17. Walk in the
Spirit, etc. of which Spirit he says it lusts against the flesh, which
lusting must be where the flesh that private, earthly, evil spirit, that man in
the fall is possessed with lusts against it to envy and all evil; but that is
within, and the Scripture says so, not only in Iam. 4.5. but in some other
place whence he a leadgeth it, whose words are, Think ye that the Scripture
faith in vain the Spirit that dwells (in) us lusts to envy* So 1 John 2.24,
27. Let that abide in) you, etc. If that ye have heard from the beginning
remain (in) you, etc. and what is that but the anointing the Spirit of God
within? which though ^.O. may call a whimsy and delusion, a lie, and such like,
yet is Truth, and is n^ Lie, yea it is nothing but that which is in the lie,
which calls it a lie, and that which is already deceived, and has naught but
deceit it self to be deceived of, that cries out Deceit and Delusion of the
Truth.

To which I might add all such places as call to the Light and mention the
Light, as that which though evil ones hate, yet such as d^ truth come to, and
Christ both warned men himself to walk by, and believe in, and sent Paul and
John, and therest of hi^ Ministers to turn men to Joh. 1.5, 8, 9 3.12.9.3.12.
35, 36 46. Act. 13.47, 26.18. Isa. 42.6.49.6 1 John 1.^, 6,^ 2 Cor. 4.6. 2 Pet.
1.19. Romans 1.19.
and John the Baptist pointed at, and witnessed to, which Light was not the
Letter, in which they wrote of this Light (as thou silli^est supposest) for
they were not A^inisters of that, 2 Cor. 3. But the Light of Christ, and Christ
the Light of the world who enlightened every man before the Letter was, and
that is within, in the mind and conscience, where the darkness is, for the
darkness is within, and not without, and therefore the Light must be much more
within, which shines within the darkness, though not comprehended by it; for
that Light which shines in the dark place till the day dawn, and the day star
arise there, which is the heart, must be also in the heart, and that Light
which shines within the darkness, which is within men, must needs be much more
within them; as the candle that shines within a dark Lanthern that is seated
within a Room, must need be within the Room, as much, if not more inwardly then
the Lanth^rn is.

Another Argument against the Light and Spirits being the Rule, and so
consequently that the Scripture only is it, is the uncertainty of all sorts of
Enthusiasms.

J O. That which is every way uncertain, yea most uncertain, deceitful,
whether, we consider the principle of the Revelation, or the things revealed,
that we ought not to attend to, as a Rule or guide in the way of life, and the
worship of God, but that is the nature of all Enthusiasmes. Ex. 3. s. 34.
Enthusiasmorum omne genus incertitudo, etc. Quod om^i modo atque respectu est
incertum imo incertissimum, Fallax five, etc.
Therefore, etc.

Reply. Is thy Text then such a certain Rule with thee, which thy self
confessest to be so uncertain, that Critics may alter it as they please; and
about which thou confessest ye are in such a heap of uncertainties?

2. We talk not of Enthusiasms as the Rule, but of the Light within, and
Spirit of God in the conscience and Word in the heart, manifesting good and
evil, lusting against the flesh, which the Letter calls a Light to the feet a
lamp to the paths, and this as is above showed from 2 Pet. 1.13. is a sure word
of Prophes^^; yea this is most certain, unchangeable, eternally the same,
incorruptible living and abiding ever, what ever become of the dead Letter,
that is so liable to be altered, corrupted, nullified, that there need no other
Argument in the world be used to prove it not to be the Word of God, (unless
God have an uncertain and corruptible Word which i^ blasphemous and contrary to
the Scripture to imagine) then the utter uncertainty and corruptibility of it,
insomuch that we may safely Syllogize thy own Argument against the inward
lights being a Rule from its uncertainty back again upon thee against the
Letters being a Rule ab e^us omne genus incertitudine from its uncertainty and
corruptibility thus, viz Quod omni modo est incertum incertissimum
corruptibile, etc.

That which is every way uncertain, most uncertain liable to be altered,
falsified corrupted to be mis-transcribed, mis-translated, mis-interpreted,
wrested this way and that, to moulder away to perish, be torn to pieces burned,
and many ways brought to nothing, is not the Word of God, nor the only Rule,
etc.

But the Letter or Scripture is so as abovesaid, witness the written Role of
Ieremiahs Prophecy which Zedekiah cut with a penknife, and consumed in the
fire, and thy own confessed mouldring away of the very first manuscripts,
therefore, etc.

Another Argumen of I.O. against the Light and Spirits being the only Rule is
this.

J.O. Its of no small moment that leaning to these principles, following th^se
guides, rejecting the Rule of the Word written, the Fanatics are daily driven
to pernicious manners, abominable Idolatries, Murders, Whoredoms, Blasphemies,
and in all Nations to unhappy ends.

Rep. Whether there be more abominable Idolatries, Murders, Whoredoms,
Blasphemies and pernicious manners among Qua. or other men called Christians,
and Christian Ministers, that suck at the breasts of the Universities or
nursing Mothers is sufficiently showed above, as for unhappy ends, it is true, by
bloody persecution many Fanatics, as thou call the Qua. have come to
untimely deaths, the more shame for New England, where two of them have been
hanged for coming into their coasts, and Old England also, where for all the
pretenses to Reformation, many have perished in prisons, and by blows and
bruises for their testimony to the truth; the more shame for Oxford it self
too, where one of the first that came thither dyed of the bruises and abuses
there received from the Scholars; but if by unhappy ends thou mean such as
befall men, as his Judgments, from the hand of God immediately in some eminent
notable way seizing on them, and cutting them off; these are untimely ends that
many not for following, but forsaking and fighting against the Light the Qua.
testify to, have brought on themselves in these latter years in these Nations,
besides many sharp sufferings in their lives time, in which thy self I.O. have
had a just share for flinging at the Qua. as Fanatics, who art now flouted at
as a Fanatic thy self; Beware therefore, and be warned in thy lifetime, le^^
thy latter end be as some of theirs: How scores (at least) of persons have been
taken away for their hands being heavy on the Qua. by the hand of God heavy on
themselves, is to be seen in a book of E.B. styled a Word of Reproof, where he
mentions about fifty sad examples of Gods vengeance on the Qua enemies, where
Dean Owen is also marked out for no great good but his excessive pride, to
which I refer thee: And to this very day the Righteous God every morning brings
his Righteous Judgments to light, but the unjust knows no shame.

Another Argument whereby I.O. would prove the Scripture to be the Word of God
is on this wise.

I. O. It will easily appear to any one that never so slightly reads it that
the holy Scripture is by the holy Spirit very often indigitated by that name.
Ex 1. s. 31. Sacram Scripturam saepius ^o nomine a sancto Spiritu
indigitaricuivi^eam vel leviter inspicienti facile apparebit.
So p. 117. in every place it avers it self to be the Word of God. So p 140. If
the Scripture be what it reveals and declares it sef to be, it is then
unquestionably the Word of the living God, for that is prosesseth of it self
from the beginning to the ending.

Reply. 1. In proof of thy Minor thou producest Mar. 7.13. which is nothing at
all to such a purpose, for its the Commandments written, which were Gods
commands before they were written, and we confes^ to be the Word of God,
whether they be written, or not, that are there spoken of under that Term Word
of God, and not the Writing or Scripture of the Commandments.

2. Exer. 1. s. 28 Thou overturnest thy self clear as to thy minor saying thus,
Ex. 1. s. 28. Locis paene innumeris, etc. ubiverbum Dei praedicari promulgari
recipienarratur non Scriptura formaliter considerata intenditur. Miilles fere
mentio fa^^^ ve^^i D^i^^que prae^^^ationis, promulgationis, ac receptionis
ejusdem, neque iism hocis Scriptura^^ intendi^agnoscere (...).
Where the Word of God is said to be preached, published, multiplied, received
in innumerable places almost) the Scripture formally considered is not meant
nor intended: Which is so (though I know thou contradictest this again blaming
the Qua. because they allow not the Scripture to be meant in those innumerable
places of Scripture where the Word of God is said to be preached, published
and received, Ex. (...) then how can thou say, the Spirit in the Scripture
calls the Scripture from one end of it to the other, calls the Scripture the
Word of God, and that the Scripture every where calls it self so?

Another Argument whereby thou would evince the Scripture to be the Word of
life, and so the Rule, is a certain absolute necessity, vel ad esse, to the
spiritual being of the Saints that thou fanciest to be in the Scripture,
saying, Ex. 3. s. 39. Non p^usopu^est vict^^ and vesti^^u^ vitam hae^^animatem
traducamus, quam Scrip^utis (...) eju^ cognitio^^ (Dei s^ili^et) atque side in
dies ^^udiamur. We have not more need of food (...) to the natural life, then
of the Scriptures to the knowledge of God and ^^^th, and that its evident that
the Qua. have with Less danger and loss assayed to fast forty days, then they
can lead a spiritual life free from deadly sins without the Word of God.

Rep. Without the Word of God I grant it, but the Word still is in the heart,
and is not the Scripture formally, or Lie^^er without, which thou (with shame
enough due if thou take it to thy self) say men cannot live spiritually
without, nor free from sin without: As if there were no holy spiritual men that
did no iniquity as the world does, or that were free from deadly sins before
the Letter was: What Letter had Abel, Enoch, Noah, righteous and upright men,
that walked with God in crooked generations, to live by? and if they lived
without the Letter to God, is it as impossible to do so now, as to live bodily
without food? that which is necessary ad esse, and not been esse only, must be
necessary for them as well as us, and so the Word of God is, which was before
the Letter, and which they then had who had not the Scripture, yea both
outwardly and inwardly men live by the Word that proceeds out of Gods mouth,
else outward bread does not keep men alive bodily, Matthew. 6. yea every creature
that man lives by must be sanctified by that, else its a curse, 1 Timothy 4. And
for the Qua. fasting forty days without hazard: There Is a miracle told by I.O.
himself concerning the Qua. if that may convince such as look for miracles, yet
will not men believe.

2. More Texts there are used and quoted often over and over again in proof of
many particulars respectively about the Text or Scripture, not one of which
either of them truly serves one jot toward the proving of, as namely that it is
the Word of God, and that so assuredly that who receive (...) not (as so) are
inexcusable in damnable unbeleef, that that is asserted to be The Rule and
Standard, The Touchstone of all speakings whatsoever, That which pleads its
reception not only in comparison with, but in opposition to all other ways of
coming to the knowledge of Gods minds and will, the best and most effectual
means of bringing men to Repentance, That which all faith and repentance is
immediately to be grounded upon, That by which God gives us greater security
against all pre^ences and pleas of unbeleef to the excluding of them, and to
the enforcing of belief, as a sure foundation for faith to repose it self upon,
and more moving then any evident miracle, That true voice of God which
assertains the soul beyond all possibility of mistake, That which not only it
self to be discerned from al delusions, but determines al Doctrines also
proposed to be believed whether they be truths of God, or cunningly devised
fables, more then the most signal miracles imaginable, more then that greatest
of Miracles, even Christ's Resurrection, and other man's rising with him from the
dead, more then any voice from heaven it self, not only then one counterfeited
by men or Satan in the air, but then any True voice of God himself speaking to
us from heaven, as he spoke to Mose^, or as he spoke to Christ; yea as safely
to be rested in, as such, a^ any voice coming from heaven with such divine
power as to evidence it self (...) be of God, and to be rested in, as such; yea
giving greater certainty and security then that voice which came to them in the
holy Mouns; That Moses and the Prophets which who hears not wi^ not be
persuaded to repent though one arise to them from the dead; That which as to
its certitude is preferred before the certitude of even true and miraculous
Revelations: That beside which (after the completing its Canon) no new
Revelations about the same faith and worship are to be expected or admitted, no
more (...) it (as from the Spirit) to be added, which is to stand alone as the
only most perfe^^ Rule, inalterable Standard, for the trial of all Doctrines,
Visions, Revelation, Spirits, [Gods own not excepted] to which we must stand,
come, and are sent alone to stick steadfast, and earnestly attend to without
hearing or heeding Angel or Spirit, without listening to any new blowings or
inspirations of the Spirit, which is now imited to the Letter (though it was
once at liberty, and had the license as well since the Letter was written, as
before, to blow where it listed, Ioh. 3.) without looking at any light within
without walking in any way, or using any other means of knowing God, of having
or holding fellowship or communion with him [which was wont, to be only in the
light, 1 Ioh. 1.] but that of the Scriptures, on pain of rejection and heavy
damnation from God own Spirit in the Scripture: In a word, That Law and
Testimony which alone is to be consulted with in all doubtful cases, to which
God calls from our seeking and attending, Pythonibus aut Aryolis, qui pipiunt
and qui mussitant, to Wizards and familiar spirits that peep, and that mutter,
yea that very word there spoken of Isa. 8. which whoever speaks not according
to these is no light to him.

I say the two Texts abovesaid are not only frequently cited and recited in
evidence of these various and sundry particulars, but also judged by J.O. to be
such sure grounds, Hercules pillars, firm props and principles, as are not only
satisfactory to men's consciences, but sufficient to stand that way he draws
them against all men's objections, so that relying thereon men have a sure
bottom and foundation for their receiving all the other Scriptures, so
assuredly as the Word of God, and consequently all that that it abovesaid, that
who, even from thence, even from these Text own them not in that manner (as
such) are left inexcusable in their damm^ble (...), p. 56.

That therefore the utter in ^onsequence of J.Os. deductions from them, which
are mere non sequi^^^s may the more plainly appear, I shall (letting fall J.Os.
other trifling Arguments, and sidling Replies to what the Qua. urge on behalf
of the light) of inartificial Arguments, as himself calls them, draw them into
the form of artificial ones, and express the manner of his illegal inferences
from them, which is in such wi^e as here under follows.

We are by that Text in Isa. 8.19, 20. sent to the Law and to the Testimony, to
try what ev^y Churches or persons speak about the things of God, his will,
worship, or our obedience to him, who if they speak not according to that Word,
there is no light in them.

Therefore it is evident that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and
consequently all that, that is abovesaid.

The second, viz. Christ, Luke 16.31. bids men attend, not looking for
Miracles, to Moses and the Prophets, the written Word, as the best and most
effectual means to bring to repentance, and which all faith and repentance is
immediately grounded upon.

Therefore the Scriptures are evidently the Word of God, etc.

Rep. In which two Arguments thou reasonest in Print well nigh as ridiculously,
as he works in Paint, who does Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam.
For the head of the corner is strait, sound and sure, the body of the building
upon it corrupt and crooked, weak and rotten.

That we are sent to the Law and Testimony, to that Word there talked of and
intended, and to Moses and the Prophets, and that that Law, Testimony and Word,
that Moses and the Prophets spoke of in those two Texts is that Word that is
the true touchstone of all truth, a greater ground for faith and repentance to
be founded on then that of Miracles, and a more sure, stable, firm, fixed,
steadfast, or standing Word, then the voice which came from heaven, all this I
do not in the least deny, but that the bare outward Writing which thou falsely
call the Written word, and the external (...), as at first written, much
more the present transcribed Copies of that Letter, much more yet every Letter,
Tittle and Iota of it, which thou keep such a tatling for to be no less then
the Word of the living God is that Law, Testimony, Moses and the Prophets, or
written Word (as thou call it) intended in those two Texts or that by these
terms in those two places is meant the said outward Scriptures, and lastly,
most of all that it follows by any good consequence from those two places by
such sound deduction, as will stand against all objections, and gives such
assurance thereof, that he is a damnable unbeleever that be^eeves not from
thence, that the said Letter and Letters are infallibly known to be the Word
of God and the rest above said, which are the things by thee inferred from
them; all this I both do and dare deny.

For the Law that in Isaiah is spoken of, is not the literal Copy, nor outward
legible Letter that thou pleadest for, and divinest it is, but another Law,
which I see by thee thou art not yet very much ver'st in, nor used to read,
even that in the heart, not the (...), or Letter of a Law of carnal
Commandments, not the formal Letter, or literal form of a writing without, but
an inwardly written spiritual Law or Light within, which is the power of the
endless life, that Law in men's minds, which is warred against by that Law of
sin and death that dwells in their members; The Law in the Spirit lusting
against that, and lusted against by that flesh, or evil spirit that is also in
men lusting unto envy, and all evil, the Law of the Spirit of life which is by
Christ Jesus, that is powerful to that, which the Letter, or Copy thereof,
which is (figuratively) called the Law, is weak to, cannot do, viz. to deliver
such as take heed thereunto from that Law of sin aforesaid that leads men
captive unto death: The Commandment that is a Lamp, and not a dark Lanthorn,
p. 6.23. the Law that is the Light it self that leads to the life it self (for
so that of the Spirit does) and not the dead Letter, that is used
instrumentally as a knife to kill, but in any wise cannot quicken.

And that Testimony or Witness is that Testimony of Jesus, which they have and
hear that keep the Commandments of God, even the Light in the conscience as
aforesaid: This Testimony of Jesus, who is the true and faithful Witness of
God, of whom also God himself testifies and bears witness, is Jesus his own
Witness or testimony for God, born by his own voice and writing, by his own
Spirit and light immediately in the heart, who there testifyeth what he has
seen and heard of the Father, though few such a thou art receive not his
Testimony, whose light, voice, spirit, speakings, and counsel from heaven in
their own hearts, who so turns away from, and hears not in all things is none
of his sheep, but shall be condemned and cut off from among his people; and not
the testimony or witness of men in outward Writings or Letters testifying
(though as moved by him) what they have seen and heard from him, not that
Scripture thou so w^itest for, and call the witness of God, for that of God
is far greater: the Testimony of Jesus is a Letter indeed, a Writing, and an
Epistle and Prophecy, yet not the outward Writings, Letter, and Copies of the
Epistles, and Prophesies of Peter, Paul, and the holy men of old, wherein is
written and transcribed their Witness or Testimony for Jesus, which they were
moved by his holy Spirit to give out, and hold forth whether by word of mouth
or writing; but the Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the
heart: yea the testimony of Jesus is no less than the Spirit of Prophecy it
self, Rev. 19.10. and not the writing thou so writest for, in which men do but
write it, and write of it, as is showed above.

This verbum and lumen internum, the Word and Light within, is that which those
that reject it are, in that place of Job 24.13. hinted at by thee, called (...)
Lights, Rebels, men resisting the Authority which they cannot but be convinced
of, and not the present letter or letters of the Scripture (as thou dotest p.
74. before the writing of one letter or tittle of which outward letter this
inward light was, though he that lives not by the light, lives not by the
letter neither, which came from it and (excepting where men have sold it with
the dirt of their mis-transcriptions and mis-translations agrees with it: I
wonder how much of that Scripture thou so super-eminently adorest, and would
have the pre-eminence in prating for it, was written when that in Job was
w^i^ing, against which men could be said to Rebel; tell me if thou can, and
in so doing thou perhaps m^yest tell thy self that that was a light within, and
not a letter without, which they then were said to rebel against, which letter
without [as much as thou seem to wonder at the Qua. for holding the light
within in authority equal to it] they are not ashamed to set the light above,
and to say that it is non ejusdem Authoritatis cum Scriptura, sea majoris
Authoritatis quam Scriptura, Aiunt lumen hoc esse eejusdem Authoritatis cum
Verbo Dei scripto, i.e. (secundum te) cum scriptura I.O. Ex. 4.15.
not in as much but in more Authority then the Scripture, neither will all thy
Scripture-admiring scrape add so many cubits to the statute of it, as among
any but such stocks as stick at nothing, but without streining swallow all down
for truth that thou tellst them is so, to state it in any equality with the
light it came from.

And that the Word we are sent to in Isa. 8. is the living Word, and not the
dead letter, nor men's dead senses thereon, interpreting it according to their
own private familiar spirits, muttering out their own meanings, and imposing on
people their own cloudy cogitations thereon, as Cogent Canons, is evident, for
he calls them off from the dead, to the living, when they say unto you Seek to
them that have familiar spirits and Wizards that peep and mutter, should not A
people seek to their God? for the living to the dead? to the Law, to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because the morning
light is not to him, (...) so its more truly rendered then thus, there is no
lightin them, which mis-translation many [not knowing the Hebrew, and many
knowing it not heeding] make no little ado against the lights being in all men,
and to as little purpose, for its no light to him, and not no light in him, and
we know a light may be in a room under a bushel, and so not shine out unto it.

And that by Moses and the Prophets to which Christ directs as the most
effectual means of bringing men to repentance, and that all faith and
repentance is immediately to be grounded on, is not meant their mere outward
writing, it evident; for all men that need repentance have not that, yea if the
Scripture it se^f, and that alone be that men are sent to, by which the
Doctrines to believed must be tried whether they be truths of God or fables,
and upon which all faith and repentance must be grounded; what must become of
those twenties to one in the world, to whom God never vouchsafed so much as a
sight of those their Writings? if thy Divination from hence I.O. be as true as
it is sure enough to some its but a dream, one of these things must be true as
concerning such, viz. either I. They need no faith nor repentance (as they do)
or 2. They must be accepted with God, and saved without either faith or
repentance (as they cannot) or 3. Both believe and repent without any ground at
all for the doing of either, and so build a castle in the air without any
foundation or bottom, which how impossible it is, or how well it would stand,
if it were possible so to build it, an Idiot may imagine; or 4 perish and be
damned for ever by, and from the living God for not doing that which they had
never any ground at all given them from God, whereupon to do it, and so ( absit
blasphemia) be cursed for ever for not acting what they were never put into any
capacity to act and ( absit tibi Domine, ne tale quippiam facias, exercendo
Pharonis tyrannidem, absit tibi, an non Iudex totiusterrae exerceresjus?) be
sorely beaten for not making as great a tale of brick without any straw at all,
as would have been expected from them if they had had straw enough and be
punished for not effecting impossibilities. But thy faith about that Scripture
being but the festisious fruit of thy own fancy, and thy Divination from it but
the divinity of a divine that dreameth, we need not in the dark iun upon any of
these ragged Rocks having a more sure way, then any of these, in the light made
so plain before us, that unless we choose so to do (as some do) we cannot split
our selves upon them; for as all men (having sinned) need faith and repentance;
so they have a more effectual means of bringing them to repentance, and a more
immediate ground to build their faith and repentance on then the naked outward
Writings of Moses and the Prophets, which thou here make the ground of all
faith and repentance (not mentioning the Apostles, as if thou had forgot
them, whose writings thou make a joint piece of the foundation in other
places, p. 33, 34.) or then the mere outward writings of the Apostles either
together with them, and that ground is no other but the self-same, which the
writings of all these bear one joint Testimony unto, viz. the measure of Gods
grace in every ones heart that teaches to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
such as will learn of it, and io live soberly, justly, and godly in this
present world, appearing to all men to that end, bringing salvation along with
it to such as submit to be taught by it, 2 Tit. 1.17.14. called the riches of
Gods goodness, Romans 2. which such as thou art despise to their own ruin, not
knowing its given to lead to repentance; the Law, Light, Doctrine, Truth,
Spirit, Word, Writing, and Testimony of God himself in the heart and
conscience, given out of his own mouth, written with his own finger therein,
not consenting to any, but condemning all evil, and calling to repentance and
all other good, reaching men even thi^ good lesson, Quod sibine vis fieri
alteri ne feceris and e contra, Whatsoever ye would that others should do unto
you, the same do you unto them, and this is that Law and the Prophets, that
Moses and the Prophets, which Christ ever sends to, Matthew. 5.12. And they that
heed, believe in, and walk according to this, whereby they are a Law to
themselves (though heathen) shall come to the life of God it leads to sooner
then the Letterlanding Jew or Christian that boasts of the Letter, yet through
breaking it in the Morals of it dishonours God. Yea such are the true believers
unto life as believe in that inward-light, and they unbeleevers, who believe
the history of the Letter and despise this; and thus it often falls out, that
even Ethnici non credendo credunt, when Christiani credendo non credunt; and he
that will not hear this Moses and the Prophets that i so nigh him, that is
within him, will never be profited or persuaded by any man's Writings, nor any
preachings that are further off him, and without him, though one do arise to
him from the dead. And this, even this very thing, viz. your vilifying,
undervaluing, hating, resisting, smoothering, turning from, not coming to that
light of Christ in your consciences, but closing your eyes against it, stopping
your ears at the voice of Christ who from heaven speaks to you by it, hardening
your hearts, striving (like the old stiff-necked, and [in heart and ears]
uncircumcised Jew against the strivings of the Spirit of God in you by it,
which by it convinces the whole world both of sin, and of righteousness, and
of judgment; your receiving the grace of God in vain, even the light that will
not let you run to ruin, without check, reproof, and control, which is that
mercy that shows his long-suffering to men-ward, and that he is not willing any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance, and be saved in the
acknowledgement of the truth, and your turning it into wantonness; also your
despising the riches of this grace of God (the Light) in your taunting terms of
(I know not what imagined Christ or figment of the Qua. I know not what Word or
Light within, an infallible Doctor, I know not what God, or (...) Cornu-copia,
horn of plentiful salvation better then any God, Every thing, Nothing) and the
riches also of his long suffering and forbearnce toward you in your deep
defiance and derisory Deifiance of his light and grace, not knowing that this
goodness of God, who gives you and others this, is that grand ground that true
Moses and the Prophets, and not thy differently transcribed Copies of their
outward writings, which are long since worn out, and worm eaten, and could not
by thy own confession continue to this day uncorrupted, and from mouldring
without a miracle, that should least you to repentance, and is the most
effectual means of bringing men thereunto, and the firmest foundation and
practice for all faith [but such as yours which is false and fallible] to
fasten it self upon: I say this very thing, and sin of yours in setting so
light by the Light of God, is the great, if not the sole reason why faith and
repentance, that are so much preached, are so little practiced, so abundantly
called for in a form and found of words, yet little or nothing but infidelity,
impenitency, and iniquity, diminished into the name of infirmity to be found
abounding as well among the most professing, as among the most profane
Preachers and their respective peoples, who all continue in the same sins that
both the Scriptures, and themselves too, cry out against ad Ravim usque and
sudorem, to very heat and hoarsness; Sacerdotibus pluteum caedentibus,
sedentibus in plureis fudantibus, laboring, and laying on till ye Preachers
sweat in your Pulpits, and people in their Pews against pride, and
fantasticalness in apparel, against foolish talking and jesting, and idle words
in your speeches, against unsavory laughter and merry tales, and such like
frothiness in your communications, against vain thoughts, lust, luxury,
rioting, drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, voluptuosness, covetousness,
greediness of gain, couzening, chearing, defrauding, overreaething in
bargaining, buying and selling, against all unrighteous dealing, headiness,
high-mindedness, fierceness, frowa^dness, anger, passion, impatience,
discontent, backbiting, whispering, slandering, hatred, malice, contention,
suing at law, strife, envying quarrelling, railing, reviling, self-avenging,
against preaching for hire, divining for money, against biting and crying
peace, and preparing war against such as put not into your mouths, against
spoiling of men's goods, persecuting and imprisoning their persons for their
conscience sakes, cum multis aliis, quae nunc, etc. and yet more or less from
the least to the greatest Prophets, Priests, Princes, Preachers, Prayers,
Professors, People of all forms living still for all this (because unturned to
that light which would show every one of you his shameful, sinful self) without
much condemnation for, or repentance from these evils some in one of them,
some in another; all in some one or other, and every one in his own that likes
him best, and believing it will be spared, and be excused th^ugh it live in
him, or he in it, even till he dies, so that the best of the Parish are yet
but as the Beasts that perish, being all lovers of pleasures more then lovers
of God, having all this while a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof, for which therefore having [as eye witnesses] born, and in this
Nation, well nigh finished their Testimony against you that ye may remember ye
were warned in time, and be excuseless and speechless when God himself comes as
a swise witness against you for your adulteries against him, and comes nigh
unto you, even in your own consciences unto judgment) Christ own Disciples,
Gods own hidden ones, who suffer from you for it, are now utter'y and eternally
turning from you.

And as there is no thriving in any thing but an empty outside profession of
Truth without the possession of it, and no profiting appears in ought, but the
prophanenes, aforesaid among the vain Truth-hating Teachers, and vain Talkers
of these times, i.e. the Doctors, and their Disciples, whose Religion runs all
up into straw, and brings forth no fruit to perfection, because they are all
out of that light, which is in them, preaching and hearing one another preach
the good words they have stolen out of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles
Writings, but not heeding the Law, and the Prophets, and the light of the
Gospel within them, God himself also according to what he said of old,
blasting their Ministry, so that they cannot profit people at all, and cursing
all their blessings, though they seldom send their hearers away without their
Blessed are all they that hear the Word of God and keep it.

So also there is nothing but what is worth nothing comes forth (as most
effectual a means as I.O. faith the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets are to
bring men to Repentance) by the hearing of Moses, and the Prophets Writings
read (one Chapter yet of which dead Letter of those living men, I grant is
worth two of our dead Divines dead divinings) for-as of old, Act. 13.27. Act.
15.21. so now among Jews and Christians, there are those that read these every
first day; but what is the issue of all the reading of their outward Writings?
As all that comes up on the plowings and fowings of these Seeds-men, when they
preach, is like that corn on the house top, whereof the Mower fills not his
arms, nor he that binds sheaves his bosom; so all that comes out upon the
Threshings and Treadings of these Oxen, whose mouths must not be muzled from
feeding where they please, if they do but read, much more if they be at so much
pains as to expound the Scriptures, is but an itching ear to know, more then
do; yea a bare husk, an empty hull, an ear without grain, a whole Church full
of chaff, which every wind of Doctrine drives up and down and whisles to and
fro, which when winnowed, and fified in time of temptation falls all back to
the ground, to the earth from whence it came, which he whose fan is in his
hand, when he has gathered his Wheat into his Garner, will thoroughly p^rge his
floor of, blow upon by his Spirit, and burn up with unquenchable fire

Thus Moses is read, and the Prophets read, and their Writings heard, which [if
I.O. does not divine a lye] are the best and most effectual means of bringing
men to Repentance; but where is the Repentance hoped for? Are not the people
ever in their sins? Is not that a vain power, and mere fained efficacy, Quae
nunquam reduditur in actum? Is not that a most ineffectual most effectual means
of Repentance which never effects the end, i.e. the Repentance it is the means
of? Yet where is there one among all these painted Penitents that so truly and
fully repents from his sins, as not to ive in, and believe he must live in some
dead works to his dying day? or repents so far as to reach so much as hope that
he shall live without sin till he dies? in which yet [ to go round again] it is
believed by the hearer, because taught by his Teacher, that if he dye without
Repentance, he shall find no place after death for repentance, though he seek
it carefully with tears, and that there is no Purgatory in the world to come:
So here is plowing in hope, and threshing in hope, performing in hope, and
praying in hope, preaching in hope and hearing in hope, treading in hope, and
reading in hope (not so much of godliness sometimes too as of earthly gain) but
what is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained? It is no better then
the giving up of the Ghost when God takes away his soul Job 27.18. And what is
the reason of all this vain hope, and ^on-proficiency, and impenitency under
this best means [as I.O. calls it i.e. Moses and the Prophets Writings? Is it
for want of having the Copies of their Writings among them? No, ^here's
Transcriptions of the Original of the Hebrew and Greek Texts of sorts enough,
so many that they vary very much from each other, and cannot stand together in
some greater matters, much less [as I O. talks] in every Tittle and Iota in
unity among themselves: Is it for want of rendering of these Writings of Moses
and the Prophets out of the Hebrew Copies into their own Mother Tongue? No, the
Transcripions are not so many and various, but the Translations are as many
more, and more various, not only in respect of that variety of the Languages,
into which, but also that more vast variety that is found in the Translations
of them into but one, even our own English-tongue, whereinto they stand
translated, so that he that is not in 'ove with such Translations as cross his
carnal Interest, and serve not his will and earthly turn, may have his choice
of any or many others that like him better: Is it for want of a competent
number or quantity of Bibles printed to serve the numberless number of people
named Christians in this Nation? No, not so neither, almost every one that can
read, and has money enough to buy one (without which the Word of God, nor any
other of his gifts are to be purchased, if the Simon Magusses may have their
wills, who buy the Patent for the selling thereof, and yet sell but their own
thoughts and words instead and under the name thereof) will buy a Bible, what
ever it cost, to carry with him to his Church; and some will have two or three,
and most houses some, and against the old Word is worn out, at the Sellers
Shops there is enough of the Word of God to be bought for money if the mere
Letter were it and a number of new Bibles for all comers: Is it for want of
hearing them read? No! they are read too much, and heard read too often, unless
they were more spiritually understood, and more carefully and practically
observed: Is it for want of Interpreters, and Interpretations, Expositors and
Expositions, Divines, and their Divinations what may be the mind of God in
this, and that place of it, and what the drift and scope of the Penmen in such
and such sayings, and their sense in such and such a sentence, and the meaning
of such a Parable or Proverbial speech and the like? Is it for want of men to
give out their own judgments, opinions, and thoughts of things, and manifest
their mere minds about the matters therein contained? No, there is no need of
this, it can do no good, for if it could, O the Ocean of Opinionists, Thinkers,
and Thrusters out of their own thoughts of things, Doctors, Divines, Critics,
Scepticks, Schoolmen, Casuists, Commentators, and such like Diviners, Dreamers,
and deep Diverse after the marrow of that Divinity in the Scriptures, that lies
deeper yet then their shallow Head-pieces can ever reach too, who never yet got
within the bones, nor entered farther then into the outside of the sealed Book,
and the Letter, or mere literal sense of the Law and Testimony that is bound up
from all, but Christ's Disciples, yet they whiffle it to and fro, and weary the
world out with the winds of their opinions, which, as they are as many more as
the different Translations are, and more then the 32 winds or points upon the
compass by 32 times twice told, so they blow and strive against each other upon
the face of the earth to the disquieting thereof, as the Sea is disquieted,
with their boisterous buslings, filling it with the froth of their own wisdom
which is foolishness with God, foaming out their own folltes and fained senses
upon the Scriptures, so fast and so flatly contrary one to another, that as the
most must needs be false so it is enough to confound and amaze men's minds [they
are so many] to meddle to find which is true among their meanings, and to set
a man out of his own senses to set himself [so several are they] to seek out
their several senses on the Scriptures, many bumbling Volumes, larger then the
Bible it self being written, or some one Text of Sripture. Is it for want of
power or efficacy in the Letter? Yea that is one reason, for howbeit I.O.
says, It is absolutely called the power of God, and effectual to salvation;
yet to his own confutation, I.O says; the Letter is dead and ( without the
Spirit) of no efficacy for the good of souls: But another, and that not the
least is because they live in Rebellion against the light, which while they
turn not to, though Moses is read and the Prophets also, and all the Letter or
Old Testament, yet the Vail remains over Moses and the Prophets faces, and
(as over the Jews) over the heart of these Christians also, which Vail is done
away only in Christ, and in turning to his Light, and the Spirit within; their
minds are blinded being off from the Light, so that they know neither Christ,
nor Moses, nor the Voices of the Prophets that are so often read, which through
ignorance they fulfill [as the Jews did] in condemning Christ, and putting him
to open shame in his Light, Doctrine, and Disciples. Nevertheless if their
heart shall yet turn to the Lord, that Spirit, and to his Light, which is
within, that vail shall be taken away, and they shall see with open face, and
behold the glory of God, and be changed into his Image, and be led indeed to
that true Repentance, that is never to be repented of; but if they continue in
their unbeleef in the Light, and their hearturn not to the Lord, in and by the
Light, in the time and space that is given them for that Repentance, yet at
least the face of the covering, that is now cast over all people, and the vail
that is yet spread over all Nations, shall be so far removed and destroyed at
last, that there shall be repentance enough to no purpose, when it is too late,
when the Gulf is once fixed and Abraham is seen by these rich worldlings, and
Bellygods afar or, and Lazarus in his bosom, when every eye that look's for
him shall see him, who now comes in the Clouds, and they also that have
pierced him, and all Kindreds of the earth, that are no kin to him, shall wail
because of him. Even so

AMEN
The Fourth Apologeticall, and Expostulatory Exercitation.
CHAP. I.
NOw to proceed in way of answer to I.O's. Arguments for the Scriptures, and
Letter, and Book, and Bible, and Texts, and outward Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, as the only Rule, in alterable Standard, now completed Canon,
Touchstone of all Truth, to which, since its close, and consignation after John
had written, no new Revelations Writings, or Scriptures of the old Truth, as
from the old Spirit of it, are to be added, no immediate manifestations,
inspirations, motions, missions from God, as of old, to be expected, or, if
pretended, to be admitted or owned, but to be damned down, as Delusion,
Fanaticism, Enthusiasm, Quakerism, Diabolism, vain, uncertain, unprofitable,
fancy, figment, detestable, meraae tenebrae and caecitas, fines salutares quod
attinet, as to salvation mere darkness, and blindness it self and what not
that's naught? Seeing it is so, as abovesaid, that all these false Prophets and
Divines can prevail no further then to tangle, and hamper, and hinder men, and
to hide the truth, by that hideous heap of unharmoneous Heterogeneous,
Heterodox, more then Orthodox volumes of Divinity, and to smoother, darken,
confound and drive men away from the naked truth, and draw them off from the
Scriptures themselves, that are plain and clear to honest and plainhearted
men, by their Smoke, and Clouds, and Circumferences, and by that boundless,
bottomless, incomprehensible, chafly Chaos of their contradictory and confused
Commentaryes with which the world is now burdened, even beyond what it can well
bear and contain; since I say there is none to guide these poor erring, lost,
perishing, and as yet more deformed, then reformed Nations, into the life of
God, and power of godliness, from which they are alienated, because of the
blindness of their hearts among all the Sons, whom they have brought forth,
Isa. 51.18. Neither any that can take them by the hand and lead them in the
true way of eternal life, of all the Sons, whom they have brought up at their
Universities, who sit together with them under the shadow of death,
notwithstanding all their Tumbling ore of so many Tames about the Scripture, is
it then for want of true Prophets, or (...) men divinely inspired, and sent of
God to call people to Repentance, and to turn them to that light of God within,
that leads to Repentance, by voice and writing to them, as them elves have had
the true way thereof manifested in them by the light, as themselves, being
taught of God, have learned and practiced it, and are moved of the holy Spirit
to preach and press the practice of it upon others, according to the scope of
the Scriptures? No! For there are many in England at this very day, speaking,
reproving, writing, and prophecy^ng from the same light, and by the same
Spirit, that the Scriptures came forth from, and as themselves have received
and heard from the voice and mouth of God, and seen, felt, and handled of the
word of life, as the Prophets, Amos 7. and the Messengers, and Ministers, of
God and Christ of old Act. 26.16, 17, 18. 1 Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. The Spirit
of the Lord, is not more straightened in these days from blowing where it lists,
then it was in the days of old; howbeit, because it lists not much (as it
never did) to blow upon or inspire the learned Scribes, Hypocritical Pharisees,
chief Priests, aspiring Rabbis, Divinity Doctors, Proud Diotrepheses,
pre-eminence loving Praters, hireling Preachers. Fawning prudentiall Parasites,
Political Polliticians and such like, but mostly upon a meaner sort of men as
to outward account, these wise men are most hardly brought to believe it to be
so; and so as said the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, Rabbis, and Doctors of old
of Moses and the Prophets, we own them, know them and their Scriptures (which
yet they knew not, nor the power of God) We are their Disciples, we will stick to
their writings, that's our complete Canon, our stable Standard, our immutable
measure, to which nothing must be added, and of Christ, and his in the days of
his flesh, we know God spoke to Moses, as for this fellow and his fellows, we
know not whence he is, and whence they are, they are of the Devil, have a
Devil and are mad, Why hear ye them? they speak blasphemous words against
Moses, and the Law, and this place, the holy Temple, and turn away much people
saying God is not worshipped in Temples made with hands, but within only in
Spirit and Truth, talking as if they would teach us, as if they heard Gods
voice, and not we, who search the Scriptures, and expound the Law, and have the
Key of knowledge, have been trained up in the Scriptures, in reading the holy
letters, but these we take notice of them that they are ignorant unlearned men,
yet they say we are unstable and unlearned and wrest Scriptures to own
destruction, but whence has this man letters having never learnt at
Universities as we have done? away with them and their Scripture, no more holy
Scripture now, the Canon is completed, the Standard sealed, no immediate
motion now, no such mission as the Prophets had now, no speaking by divine
inspiration now, no Divine authority in any man's writings now, though they
write not others but the same Divine truths as of old, no extraordinary
infallible ^uidance of men by the infallible Spirit of God now, and suchlike:
Thus they said then, and thus our wise Ignorants at Athens say now of the same
Spirit that then spoke in Paul pressing others now to write, or speak to them
of their wo^sh^pping an unknown God, seeing their Universities given wholly to
Idolatry, and thus I.O. one of the sore men against the truth, What will these
Bablets say, and in a manner so they say all: But slay friend Gods arm is not
shortened; neither is the mouth of God more made up now then formerly from
making out and manifesting his own mind immediately from himself in the minds
and consciences of men and women, so as that men may without manifest
imprudence (not to say impudence) imagine so ignorantly as in effect I.O. does
that God spoke his last to the Sons of men, and all that ever he meant from his
own mouth to make known of his will to any man, when John had, at the command
of Christ, written that precious Revelatio, ^which God, gave unto Christ, to
show to his servants, who was pleased to signify it unto them by the hand of
his servant John, and when once in after ages a Syned of some honest men (who
we know not) upon some some mistakes and sailings (which we^ I.O. confesses Tr.
2. c, 2. S. 4.5. They were liable to) establish so much as they could get
together (which was but little, it is like of that much that was written) of the
transcribed Copies of the holy men's Histories and Apostles Epistles, and
letters to particular Churches and private persons, and canonized, it together
with the writings of Moses, and the Prophets, into such a standing Rule of
faith and manners for all ages to come, that whatever should from thenceforth
be found (as not a little was, even of the Apostles own, and some of Christ's
own writings) and whatever should be written after that with pretense (as much
has been since then, not in pretense only, but in truth) of motion from the
same holy spirit, should be shut out for ever from standing in their Canon,
since it came not in at that time to their hands, and be ever of so low esteem
as not to be owned among the rest, under so much as the name of holy Scriptures
with them, but as to all ends, uses, and purposes, for which all holy Scripture
is written, be utterly raced out of the Record, canceled, made void, and of
none effect, while those few they Authorized, because of their Stamp of the
only Standard upon them, must be had in as high, if not an higher Esteem,
Honor, and Authority then the Light it self, from which directing holy men in
the writing thereof, they had all the being they have at all, as holy
Scriptures.

Let not I.O. in any wise say so, for there are yet (though himself is none of
them) 7000 of the people of Christ in England that bow not the knee to Baal,
many of whom, as they are under the new Testament i.e. the Spirit, and not
under the old i.e. the letter, where thou yet art, have (even both men and
women) the promises Joel 2.28, 29. Act. 2.17, 18. Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4. Gal.
3.14.
thereof made good unto them concerning the gift of the holy Spirit of the
Lord, and power to prophecy, which of old also, the true had Mic. 2. and of
judgment, and of might to declare unto the rebellious house of Jacob and Israel
(even the Heads and Princes thereof, if they abhor judgment and pervert all
equity, and the Priests and Prophets thereof that Preach for hire and Divine
for money and build Sion with blood and Jerusalem with iniquity, and yet lean
on the Lord, and say is not the Lord among us? none evil shall come upon us)
their sins and their transgression: And (to use thy own words I.O. p. 331.332.
to thy self, who are much in the dark, as thou utterest them to such as are
further in the dark behind thy self) much more to the same purpose will same of
them be found to say when men of (outward) wisdom and learning who are (as
they think) able to instruct them, shall condescend personally so to do.

Yea, of myself I will not speak, who by the grace of God am what I am, and if
the least measure of that grace be imparted to me among other of his servants,
that I should Preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, it
is to one, that, for ought I know, is of all the rest least worthy, or rather
most unworthy of it: but I am bold to say so much, and no more then what will
stand as truth against thine or any others gain sayings, that there are some,
who do not more profess themselves to be, then they are indeed inspired by the
holy Spirit, whose messages and ministrations, whether by voice or writing, are
so immediate from the mouth of the Lord, that your not receiving, nor
submitting to them on that account, but rejecting and denial thereof with such
rigor as ye do, does justify your predecessors in all ages, who rejected and
slew those that spoke to them in the name of the Lord, and speaks out in plain
terms, your imagination to be this, that you may with safety to your selves
reject them whom God sends; yea (to go on yet for a while much what in thy own
words, Tr. 1. C. 3. S. 9, 10.11. 12) There are some (whether they work miracles
yea or nay, as thou confessest most of the Prophets did not, that's nothing to
thee) who pretend not to this inspiration falsely, but both can and do to
youward insist upon this, that being (...), divinely inspired, their doctrine
is to be recieved by you as from God, and in their so doing it will be found in
due time to be your sin, even unbelief and rebellion against God not to submit
to what they speak in his name, as that of his word they receive from his
mouth: and this is not only pleaded and insisted on by some, but also (whether
their Testimony be received or not received by you preachers and the people
whom you deceive) it declares the foundation of its acceptance to be this (viz)
its Divine Inspiration by the Spirit of God from whom it is, whence also it is
(though not so thought by you) (...)

A message or word well worthy of all acceptance much more of much better
entertainment then you afford it, who Mock, Scoff at, Whip, Scourg, Imprison,
Revile, and evil Entreat the messengers thereof, and the earthen Vessels, in
which God sends it as a Treasure to you, 2 Cor. 4.7. that the Excellency of the
Power may be of God, and not of man.

So that it being rejected by you, and this untoward Generation, which by their
blind leaders are guided in such crooked ways, and caused to err to their own
destruction, Isa. 9.13.14.15.16. you shall know its not only with a refusal of
its witness, and a high detestation of its pretense to be of God, but also
with a high detestation of God himself, from whom its not so much pretended to
come, as twill once be found by you to come in Truth; and what excuse, ground
or plea, for such your refusal and detestation, you have against the time of
Gods pleading with you for his people, Joel 2.2. etc. in the valley of
Iehoshapat, or of the Lords Judgment, whether he is now bringing you down, the
hour for which decision is nearer upon you, then you professing Persecutors,
who yet awake not, are aware of, it is good for you now you have time, and not
afterward to consider, least to you cost you find the Truth of Qui non ante
cover post delebit.
the burden of Dumab, draws on and begins to lie hard upon his back, yet I know
the seed of Esau, the fightlesse Seers, who see with their eyes shut, supposing
themselves secure, being at repose yet on their high Mount Seir, and so look
askew upon the light and its children, and scornfully call to them out of Seir,
watchman what of the night, etc. but for all this, that morning hastes, which
is their night, therefore, if ye will now enquire, enquire ye, return and come
to the light, else woe and alas for ever, the Bare Book will not boot you, the
Letter without the Light, ye look awry at, will little help you, the Scripture
without the Spirit ye despise so cannot save you: But Si non ante diem libruin
cum lumine poseas, vigil tor quebere.

There be some them, and those not a few in those days, declining the word of
God, while you, who have your dreams tell your dreams, faithfully as they have
it, who, as they have received that mercy of the Ministry, saint not, but
having renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not handling the Word of God
deceitfully, by manifestation of the Truth commend themselves to every man's
conscience in the sight of God. 2 Cor. 4.12. who are not, as the many false
Prophets are, hucksterizing, selling their own imitations of the true Prophets
words, Counterfeit Wares for money, and the back and bellies The Grand Senior,
and Oldest Master of Arts in most Universities and Countries.
sake, the master of their art of Preaching, instead of that which is current,
nor Shuffling off in the dark their words, for Gods Word, their own thoughts,
conceits, and conjectures for God Council, nor, as I.O. does, calling light
darkness, and good evil, nor putting darkness for light, and evil for good,
as the light, and Treacherous Prophets and hirelings do, who will once have
their hire, spoil and pay from God, such as they look not for, as well as that
they look for, at the law, from men, when they have made an end of spoiling,
nor as our Carnal Spiritualty do, holding forth their hollow, Husky, holy
Collations, and light Chaff for weighty wheat, but as in sincerity, as sent of
God to turn men to it, holding forth the Light of God, and, as in the sight of
God, speaking the true Word, and Gospel of God in Christ Jesus, which Gospel,
if it be hid, is bid but to them that are lost, whose eyes the God of this
world blinds, least the Light of the Gospel of Christ, should shine out in
them, whose sin it is to refuse it, and duty it is to receive it, as that Word
and Gospel of God, which is sufficiently manifested so to be, and easy enought
by any but blinded blind ones to be discerned from that of yours, who defy the
true light, and deify the naked letter, which is pretended so to be, yea as
easy by such as are indeed desirous to see, as true ones are (but not by such
as fleeing the light, close their eyes, and seeing will not see least they see
themselves to dwell in deceit, and by the light within, which manifests what is
within be reproved for it, John 3.20.21) as the wheat is to be discerned from
the Chaff, which may infallibly by being what it is be discerned from it: for
the word has such proper ties of weight, light, heat, power, profit, as
whereby infallibly to discover, and distinguish it self from the Letter it
self, much more from your light, dark, frozen, frail, and fruitles, fabric of
Theology, Who (as Calidi, not to say Callidi, as you are in your Re Frigida) by
all your great pains, and great pains, and your great pay have hitherto sown
little but the wind of your own words among the people, that love to have it
so, for which and from which both you and they shall find neither corn nor
meal, but at last reap the whirlwind, even the grievous whirlwind of the Lord
that is gone forth in fury, and is to fall ere long with pain upon the head of
the wicked. When it is come to pass ye shall consider it perfectly, Hos. 8.7.
Ierem. 23.18, 19, 20, 21, etc. Ier. 30.34.

Therefore it would be your wisdom to consider it now, whether the (...) or
inspired ones of this age (which are not yourselves, as your selves confess,
who nor do, nor dare, nor can, as the case is with you, Pretend to such
intimate or Immediate acquaintance with the Father, Son, and Spirit (which
Trinity, notwithstanding, ye cannot but be tatling of, till you bewray your
ignorance) as to say that ye either feed or receive, or feed your flocks (of
Goats) with what Word ye receive by inspiratiration from Gods own mouth) are
not, yea rather to know assuredly that they are those called Quakers, whose
persons, together with their prophesyings, and preachings, ye reject and deride
with detestation and envy, by the names of Euthusiasts and Enthusiasines.

It is true (as thou say) (...) There were false Prophets, that spoke in the
name of the Lord when he sent them not; and may be now, and have been, and are,
witness not only the many millions of those Locusts, that stand now separated
into three swarms, as was foreseen and foretold in the vision of the three
unclean spirits, like Frogs, that have gone out to the deluding of Princes and
people, even the great City, Woman or Whore, that has reigned over the earth,
and sat on the many waters, peoples, multitudes, nations and tongues, with
whom both Kings and inhabiters of the earth (being drunk and intoxicated with
the wines of her wisdom) have committed fornication, and run a whoring from the
wisdom of God, divided and dividing the people that profess the name of Christ
(without his nature) respectively into three PPParts, Rev. 16.14.19. Rev. 2.20,
21, 22, 23. Rev. 17.1.2.15.18. (viz.) 1. Pope and his carnal crew of
Cardinals, Mount Seniors, Priests, Jesuits, Monks, Friars of all sorts, and all
the other sorts of his spiritual men and women, which are enough to weary one
to read, much more to reckon them all up in writing. 2. Arch-Prelates,
Prelates, Deanes, under which name I.O. was lately the only man in England,
till removed, that stood denominated, whose Popish Traditionall Title was Dean
of Christ-church in Oxford, an Officer that Christ never instituted in any
Church that he constituted; Deans and Chapters, and all that hang on that
Hirarchy, in the fall of whose Spiritual Courts Tithes went down too, as to
the way of Recovery of them by any law, from any that are not free to pay them,
if our wise Statesmen, who sat at the Stern, once had been made willing in
their time, to see what they saw, before their fun was setting. 3. Presbyters,
Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and all manner of spiritual persons, and their
Officials, Clerks, Sextons, etc. depending still, together with some that were
once Independents, as none of Christ's, but national messengers for national
stipends: Which said three swarms of Locusts, who love the dark smoke, they
came out of more than the light, which dispels it, have covered over the whole
European ^^^th (and more too) in all corners of it, and have what they could,
withheld the wind of Gods spirit from blowing upon the earth, that themselves
might eat up the good things thereof, and none of Christ's spiritual ones appear
to hinder them, Rev. 7.19.3. But also, even among those that truly pretend to
it, such as pretend falsely to the foresaid inspiration; yet do not thou dream,
that because among these, by Gods permission, as a snare rained down on, Ps.
11.6. and a stumbling block laid in the way of the wicked, that are
disobedient, Ier. 6.21. 1 Pet. 2.8. there arise some false Prophets, therefore
God himself has no Time ones; for if he has, as so sure as thou have clothes
on thy back, he has many more than thou art yet aware of, thou will get little
by that fond conceit, fith (as thy self truly say) Those whom God (...) send
are to be received on the same (...), on which the other are to be refuse i.e.
n pain of Damnation.

Neither deceive thy self so far I.O. any more as to make and imagine it such
an unwonted, wonderful, impossible matter (as in a manner thou do) that even
in these days men and women too, should, as of old they were, be moved, and
inspired, both to speak and write by the holy Spirit; howbeit it is true there
are times of Gods going away and returning to his place withdrawing and hiding
himself, and his face in a little wrath, for their forsakings of him, from his
own seed, as it has fell out for ages, and generations together, even 1260.
years at least, wherein all the inward Temple, worship and worshippers therein,
lay wast and trodden down by the Gentiles, or Nations, that have had it given
them so to do, and to glory in that name of Christians without any true
Christianity, and in literal forms and observations of external Ordinances,
according to the letter, which they have not kept to neither, but abominably
corrupted themselves in the use thereof, and made void by their own tradition,
without either of those two witnesses the Word and Spirit, which have been much
more then the letter, abused and depressed into so low a condition, as to speak
low out of the ground, and whisper out of the dust, and bear their Testimony
fiting in Sackcloth, regarded and attended to but by a few, to which yet God is
now giving power again to open their mouths, and to devour their enemies, and
to burn up all that hurt them, and to smite the earth, and the dwellers in it,
that rejoice and make merry over them, with all Plagues, as often as they will,
Isa. 29.4, 43, 4, 8. 54, 7, 8. Isa. 8.17. 66. 5. Hos. 5.15, 16. Hos. 6.1, 2, 3.
Zach. 8.2, 3, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Rev. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. etc. Isa.
44.3.35.7. Ioh. 7.38. Ioh. 4.14.
yet thereis a time of his returning to his own again, and of being found of
them that seek him, and of his appearing to all those that love, and wait for
his appearing to their joy though the shame of their adversaries, and of
bringing forth the blind that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears, and of
opening the eye of the blind, and unstopping the ear of the deaf, and causing
the waters to break out in the Wilderness and streams in the desert, of
pouring of floods upon the dry ground and making the thirsty Land springs of
water: and of speaking himself not so sparingly as before, and of pouring out
his Spirit on his Sons and daughters, Servants and handmaids, that they shall
prophecy, and of revealing himself in Visions, and of the heavens dropping
down their dew, and of preparing himself as the morning to meet such as follow
on to know him, that they may live in his sight.

Though therefore I.O. as little believes this as one of the Lords of King
Ioram did Elishas Prophecy of so great plenty in Samaria, after the woeful
famine that came by the Syrians siege, when an Asses head was sold for 41. and
the fourth part of a kab of Doves dung for 55. and may come to see it with his
eyes, but not eat thereof, because he says, as that Lord, if the Lord make
windows in heaven can this be, 2 Kings 7.1, 2, 17, 18, 19, 20. yet such plenty
of the Spirit of God shall be given out to them that believe in the light, that
out of their bellies shall flow rivers of living water, and the spirit shall be
a well of water springing up into eternal life, and there shall be a measure
of fine flower for a shekell, and two measures of barley for a shekell, and
preaching and prophesying by the Spirits motions, and writing by his
inspirations, shall be as good cheap, as a measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny, Rev. 6.6, and abundance of oil and wine,
yea new wine, that is now in the cluster, which must no more be spoiled, nor
hurt, nor destroyed by neither the great, nor: the little Foxes, but we will be
to them that hurt, or hinder the tender grapes thereof, for a blessing
assuredly is in it, Cant. 2.15. Isa. 65.8. Rev. 6.6. then shall the Asses heads
be prized no more so high, nor the Doves dung be sold so dear, nor the chaff
that has been sold for wheat be so costly as it has been, nor any outward
Excellencies, which are but excrement with the spirit and the spouse, who prize
the Doves innocence above all that, nor fleshly wisdom, which is foolishness
with God, be any more accounted on.

And though this seem such a mervailous matter I.O. in thy eyes, and utterly
beyond that diminitive belief, and that little faith thou have, which if we may
believe thy self, is for ought thou know, just none at T.I.C. 5. S. 12, 13.
For speaking there of the Testimony that the Spirit bears in the Scripture, of
the Scripture, that it is the Word of God, which in all the Scripture is not to
be found, for neither the spirit in the Scripture, nor out of it neither, or in
the hearts of any, does testify that false thing, that the bare letter or
Scripture is Gods Word, nor does the Scripture say any such thing of its single
self, but whatever spirit says the Letter is the Word of God in any heart, is
the lying spirit and not the spirit of God.


And what Testimony soever the spirit of God beaves of the Scripture, or of the
Word of God, or of the Gospel, or of any anything else to us, so as on pain of
Gods d spleasure to bind us to the belief thereof, it bears it in the hearts
of men also, as well as in the Scripture (though thou say falsely, that all it
now testifies it testifies in the Scripture, and by that only to the heart,
and not in the heart immediately by it self) or else it requires not the belief
of it) thou concludest thus (viz.) And if this be not a ^^^teme and foundation
of faith (and sure enough it is not so, if the spirit speak not the same
within, that it does without in the Letter) then I publicly profess, that,
for ought I know, I have no faith at all: He, that does not know that he has
any faith, may thereby know assuredly that he has not any. all, yet must it
therefore be such a mervailous thing in the eyes of God, and of his people, who
are not so incredulous of the Scripture as thou art, that God should speak with
his own mouth to his own people, and vouchsase them so much mercy as to hear
the joyful sound of his his own voice, and reveal his mind and will to them
by his own spirit? indeed sometimes he is pleased to speak in one to another,
as he did much in the Prophets to the Fathers, in Paul to the Churches, 2
Corin. 13.3. in one Prophet in his Church, or two or three to all the rest, as
he was pleased to move and inspire them by his spirit, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25, 29,
30, 31. and reveal any thing to them, and by his Spirit press them in their
spirits, and give them utterance to utter it to others; yet, if any spoke as
they ought, they were to speak as the Oracles of God, and to minister, not
only as of the ability that God gave, and not man bought at University, but
also as of that, which came to them as the Word of God, uttered by his own
voice in their hearts from his mouth out of the holy Oracle of God, 1 Pet.
4.11. and when he so speaks his voice is known and owned by his own, who own
not the voice of strangers, when their tongues run before their wits, and out
of their time, to tell and talk in words of the self-fame truth, which, but by
bare hearesay they know not, and at this day he speaks out in his servants to
people, and to you Scribes that search the Scriptures, who call on you to hear
what he says in you, though as your forefathers, John the fifth, you have not
at any time in your selves heard his voice (which if it were the Letter, you
have often heard that read) nor yet heeded such as spoke to you from him, in
whom he speaks: But does all this exclude God from speaking, when and what he
pleases, to any or every man immediately within his heart? Was there ever any
age wherein he debarred himself from this, unless in the case of aforesaid,
wherein he was pleased to hold his peace, because men would not hear him, but
stopped the ear like the deaf adder to what he said, because, being evil doers,
they did not like it? In which case, terras Astraea reliquit, is there not a
time, wherein his very Adversaries, that will not hear his voice in order to
their own peace, shall hear it whether they will or no to their own terror?
will not he that fits in heaven (as far off as you think that is) utter his own
voice as the roaring of a lion, so loud within their consciences, that they
shall hear him speak to them in his wrath, vex them in his sore displeasure,
who have vexed his spirit? And do not the people of God (though you do not)
hear what God the Lord himself will speak? And will he not Psalm. 85.8, speak
peace to his people, and to his Saints? And are not such as have ears to hear
bid to hear what the Spirit says, not in the Scripture only (for that
properly is not a voice, though figuratively it may be called so, no more than
my Letter to a friend, in which he may read my mind, is truly and properly my
voice, and our controversy with I. O. is much about proper names) but in the
heart, where to them that hear, he speaks the same that by his motion is
written in the Scripture? And do not Christ's people hear his voice? who, though
they may read the Letter too, yet in that act can no more properly be said to
hear his voice, than he properly to hear his Masters voice, that is an hundred
mile off, while he is but reading something or other that was written, not by
his Master neither, but by some other by his approbation, or appointment? And
are we not commanded to hear the welbeloved son of God? And is it not dangerous
to turn away the ear from him that speaks still from heaven, more then to turn
away from Moses or the Prophets in whom he spoke, and who spoke, but from or by
him here on earth? And is not Christ (the^ Light of the world) that great
Prophet, who preaches himself the Gospel in every Creature, whose voice
whoever hears not in all things whatever he says must be cut off from his
people Col. 1.23. Acts 3 32, 33.
? And is there not much more in the Scripture itself, which sends men not to
itself so much, as to the hearing of God, Christ, and the Spirit, declared to
the same purpose? Why then should it be thought an incredible thing with thee
I. O. or any else, that God should speak to men and manifest himself, and what
is to be known of him, and of his mind to their salvation (if they heed it) to
them now in their own hearts and consciences? Does not God himself speak are,
yea twice, though man perceives it not, Job 33.14. Romans 1.19^ or that Christ
should manifest himself in a more special manner and measure then to the
world, who observe not when he speaks, nor ^what he commands, to his servants
that love him and keep his commands, or that he should come into them, Rev.
3.20. sup, abide, and be familiar with them, and (not by the Scripture so much,
for the world has that declaration, that know him not, but) by his Spirit of
truth, which the world receives not, but resists, though it strives in them,
and not without only by the ministration of holy men conviaceth them, and
preaches to them, as in Noah's days, not by Noah only, but in their
consciences, should dwell in them, and, not in writings and proverbs only,
show them plainly of the Father? John 14.17. to 26. John 16.25. Or that any of
his people that give ear to what he says, and ^tar him, should have his
secrets revealed in them, which God did then to his own people reveal to them
within by his own Spirit in them, which knew and made them know all things that
were hid from mere (...) men (though never so wise) even the deep things of
God? or that any man now, that lives not in the flesh (as ye do) but in the
Spirit, should say he is moved to speak, or prophecy, or reprove, or warn, or
council, or exhort and teach, or is inspired to write by the holy Spirit? or
that any who learns at the mouth of God (as ye do not) out of which comes
knowledge and understanding, and not any way else, and ministers, as he is
moved, of what he has learnt there, should say he ministers no more then what
he has heard immediately from God himself? or that any that have the spirit of
God for their guide (as ye have not, who walk not after the Spirit, but after
the Flesh in your conversations, and after your own conjectures about a Letter
liable to be changed or corrupted in your Congregations) should say they are
guided by an infallible Spirit? Is the Spirit of God, the light of Christ
fallible, as the Letter is? Are they not infallible, certain, unchangeable,
incorruptible, so that such as are led thereby cannot err, nor be deceived? Do
they lead into any iniquity, or uncertainty those that walk after them? Is it
not they that leave the paths these lead in, and walk after the flesh, and live
by their own thoughts and opinions of the Letter, that is to be altered with
ease at Critics wills (whom thou I.O. teach too to alter it) in their
Religions, who run into by ways (for such the flesh leads to) and into a wood
of uncertainties, which the ba^e Letter (as it is now) leads them into that
look to it only, and besides the light that gave it forth? And are any the
Sons of God, save such as led by the Spirit of God? And does not that Spirit of
God witness to the spirits of such within them, that they are his children? Yet
what a mavelous monstrous business, what a mighty dirty, what a deal of Do
do thou I.O. make in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Sect. of the 3. chapter of Tr. 1.
about this (...) or inspiration of God? also elsewhere about the motion of the
holy Spirit, T.I.C.I. S. 21.22. and elsewhere ( viz.) T. 2. C. 2. S. 4, 5. T.
1. C. 5. S. 1. about both Infallibility and Divine Inspiration, and the
infallible spirit, and the guidance and infallible direction of the spirit.

Repl. Thou writest of these things as if they were (as indeed they are) not
only far off from thee, but also far above out of thy sight, and not only so,
but (measuring all by thy self, and others corn by thy own narrow bushel, and,
as thou falsely say of the Qua. Ep. p. 29. Measuring other men by thy own
ignorance, and what thou know not thy self, thinking its bid from others
also) thou removest them far away from all others also for many ages together,
and from this very age wherein thy fallible erring self have yet thy being, as
if because thy motions and inspirations and spiritualities are fallible and
carnal, and thy own spirit hypocritical and imaginary, there were now none of
that kind of spiritualnesse nor infallible inspiration, either in writings, or
speakings, or walkings, or actings, any such direction and guidance of that
true holy spirit of God, as was of old; as if because thy self, and they that
are after thy likeness, neither hear at any time the voice of God, nor see his
shape, nor have any such familiarity with his Spirit, as you have with that in
you, which lusts another way, nor such as his Ministers and Prophets had in
former ages, therefore none in these days witness any nearer communion and
communication therewith then your selves do, or at least none such as his
messengers of old did, but all were left to gripe for the wall with you, add
for the door like the blind Sodomites (your figure) that ran in wrath upon
Righteous Lot, as if they had no eyes; as if the Spirit of the Lord were
streitned from its immediate illumination of any, because it is so to you that
strive against it; And there were no such men (because ye are not those men) as
perfectly learn (without book) what lessons by word of mouth God teaches out
of the sealed Book of ^his own councels to them that are willing to be taught
by him, as all his children are, Isa. 54. 14. Ioh. 6.45. Ier. 31.33, 34.
concerning the knowledge of himself and of his will.

As if there were none at all now, nor ever to be any more while the world
stands (because your selves are not so) any such, as were heretofor (...) (...)
men of God inspired by the Spirit of God, infallibly guided, moved, acted, or
led in their preachings, writings, doings, by the infallible guidance and
direction of that holy Spirit. As if to be thus were to be more then mer, and
so indeed it is, then such men as you, who being in the fall, and out of that
Wisdom and Image, wherein ye were created, must (for all that wisdom, ye are
since then entered far into) know your selves to be but the beasts that perish,
Ps. 49.20. Eccl. 3.18. but not a jot more then to be men indeed. What mean
thou else by those and the like phrases in the places above p^^^ted at? wherein
with limitation and restrictively to the Primitive times, and exclusively of
all after ages thou writest thus of these things ( viz.) They were born, acted,
carried out by the Holy Ghost Why do thou not write it Holy Sprit? but then
perhaps it would not sound so well to thy turn, for many Idiotish people are
ready to think, as if the Holy Ghost were some more extraordinary matter, than
the Spirit ( if thou do not thy self, whereupon perhaps thou so often writest
in this phrase the Holy Ghost) Ghost is that terrible word which the Ghostly
Fathers have used to fright poor simple people with in their Liturgies,
Talkings, Treatises and Translations, it sounding somewhat more hideously then
the word Spirit, or else I know no reason why they render not the Greek word by
that English word Spirit in one place as well as another, for its (...), all
along in your Original Copies, as well where they did translate it Ghost and
wind, as they do in one place, John 3.8. as well as where they translate it
Spirit; but though it were an uncouth sound to say Ghost in most places where
the word Spirit stands; as it were strange to say, The Ghost of God witnesses
to our Ghosts, etc. the Ghost lusts against the Flesh, and the Flesh against
the Ghost, etc. Such as are led of the Ghost of God, are his Sons, etc. The
Ghost helps our infirmities, etc Et sic de caeteris) yet where the Epethite
Holy is joined to it, it is more dreadful, and enought to frighten
Priest-befool'dpeople, and some of our Ghostly men too, to say Holy Ghost and
so mostly where Holy is with it, it so stands in your Translations.
to speak, deliver, and write all that, and nothing but that to every tittle,
that was brought to them, etc. Suppose a man were (...) divinely inspired, and
should so profess himself in the name of the Lord, as did the Prophets of old,
Amos 7. supposing I say he were so indeed, etc.

Repl. As if thou did suppose, that if any man in these days should profess
himself to be sent of God, as Amos was, he must undoubtedly be a Deluder: As if
because ye witness no stronger motions from people to people, place to place,
in your ministrations, then the assurance of some bigger benefice, better
booty, or sweeter subsistence (which is the primum mobile in most national
men's minds, in their movings and removings to and fro) and no more immediate
mission from God then what is mediante Magistratu, etc. by the Magistrates and
Patrones of the place, or at the best the bare benevolence or good will of the
people (whose ill will if ye have, ye will obtrude your selves upthem too, if
the living like you, and you can but procure the patent) it must needs be
supposed and taken for granted thereupon, that such a sending as that Amos had,
is but falsely pretended to.

So speaking of the Hebrew points, They were, say thou, completed by the
men of the great Synagogue, Ezra and his Companions guided therein by the
infallible direction of the Spirit of God. So speaking of the first transcribed
Copies of the Scriptures of the New Testament, thou say, There were Copies
quickly given out to faithful men, whilst the infallible Spirit yet continued
his guidance in an extraordinary manner: and of the first Transcribers thou
say in the next Section, that they were not all or any of them infallible and
Divinely inspired.

Repl. Now I say not that either all or any of these Transcribers were
infallibly or Divinely inspired, nor can thou say they were not; for neither
thee nor I know who they were, and they might or might not for ought either of
us know, for the infallible spirit continued his guidance no doubt to such as
took him, and not a fallibly transcribed Letter to be their guide, both then
and long after that, and also does now in that manner which thou call
extraordinary (though it was but his ordinary guidance) to such as give up to
him, and to any but such as thee, who being not guided by him, thy self
conceivest it some strange and extraordinary business for any now adays to
profess themselves so to be, but with I.O. the extraordinary guidance of the
Spirit of God is his immediate and infallible guidance, his ordinary is his
mediate fallible guidance: Oh prime Doctrine for a Doctor! surely if the Spirit
of God have any fallible guidance at all, and thou be led at all by him, he
vouchsafed thee but his cheaper, ordinary, remote, and far off, and fallible
guidance in this piece; but its his infallible guidance and direction, which
thou call extraordinary, he now guides by, for the Spirit has by indirect
and false directions, nor fallible guidances that I know of.

I say I meddle not to affirm one thing or other of all these Transcribers,
what they were it makes no matter, and is neither here nor there to me, whether
they were infallibly guided or divinely inspired, yea, or nay; but this I would
fain know, what thou meanest by some of thy expressions, and wherefore thou
talkest as thou do, and what reason thou have so reasonlesly to restrain and
streighten the spirit of the Lord, which to do is none of the Lords doings,
Mic. 26.7, 8, 9, 100, 11. and to pound him up into such a small point and
pittance of time as the primitive ages (as ye call it) of the Gospel, and to
lock him up into that little narrow nick, so that he must either then speak all
he has to say to the world, and his own people in it, or else for ever after
hold his peace, and must inspire all he means to inspire, and lead and guide
all he means to lead and guide by his own immediate, extraordinary and
infallible direction then, or not at all; there being now another ordinary
fallible Ruler, Rule, Guide, Leader and Commander of the people (viz.) some of
the Stories, Letters, and Epistles, that were written lately by his motion and
direction to be by fallible men transcribed, and ere long by a Synod of who
knows whom? to be authorized, as the only and most perfect Rule, Directory,
infallible Canon, chief Leader and Commander, that must be wholly substituted
in his room, and take his place, to which himself (if ever he speak more) must,
as well as all false spirits, submit himself to be tried, and be accountable,
so that if he offer to lead, guide, move, inspire any to write, and speak, or
prophecy, extraordinarily, immediately, infallibly, or any otherwise then
ordinarily and fallibly, or immediately, or infallibly speak to any from
thenceforth, so as to send them (who were mad indeed, as the world counts them,
if they should go unsent on such rugged service, which false Prophets,
Ministers of the Letter, and of men's making, who love their ease, and to sleep
in a whole skin, will be sure to keep far enough from) to reprove, as
immediately from himself, and to warn the wicked world when it lies in
wickedness, or call men to repentance, or do as he has done by Gods permission
in that age, or if he send any of his messengers, as he did Paul and others, to
exhort, teach, reason, dispute, in Towns, Cities, Universities, Streets,
Markets, or to enter, never so peaceably, into the Synagogues and Temples to
talk and make disturbance among the Priests and their people there, after once
the Old Testament Jewish Church is down, and the Old Testament Christian Church
in many outward things after its likeness is so well founded and established
in its stead, that the Priests and Ministers thereof are warm, and begin to fit
at ease in their functions of Tithes, outward benefits and blessings, earthly
honors, Divine and Ghostly Titles of Rabbi, Doctor, Lord Arch-B^shop,
Archdeacon, Reverent Clergy, Orthodox Divine and a mint more of such like
Clericall Calleries, and spiritual Renowneries, Parochial, Provincial,
Diocesian D^gnities, Arch-Advancements, and Advantages, then both the said
Spirit of God and all his Emissaries, Messengers and Messages, then and from
henceforth shall be both rejected and condemned under their several respective
names of Sch^sme, Schismatic, Schismatics, Heretical, Heresy, Heretics,
lying Spirit, Delusion, Deluders, Fanaticall, Fanaticisme, Fanatics,
Enthusiasticall, Enthusiasme, Enthusiasts, Dreams, Dreamers, Fictions,
Figments, Quakers, and whatever other ignominious terms any ungodly Scoffers
can invent, and shall please themselves to reproach them by* and moreover the
said Messengers shall be had and held as Disturbers of the public peace, and
be proceeded against as Rogues, Vagrants, Vagabonds, that (as the first
Apostles had not for the Gospels sake, though else they had* and were as
sufficient in the outward as other men, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.) have no
certain dwelling place, and be (as they often are in the same cause) sent away
with a pass) banished, whipped, stoned, set in the stocks, imprisoned, Boca^doed,
and what way the Magistrates shall please, at the suggestion or direction of
the Ministers, or the Mayo^s by the advice of the Vicechancelours (who are
supreme directive, though the other corrective, as the Constable is over the
B^sholder, which at his appointment is to correct the Beggars) be defamed,
shamefully abused, and entreated, and made a spectacle to the World, and to
Angels, and to Men.

Now I. O. what meanest thou? or what ground have thou thus to forbid the
Spirit of the living God? Has God prohibited him? has he any where limited
himself from speaking immediately, infallib^y to the Council, Guidance,
Comfort, Assistance of his people (in these latter days especially) without
book, any more than in former ages, before the letter was, and in the first
age, wherein the Gospel began to flourish, if men had not sneapt it, and the
glorious light thereof to shine out as the Sun in its brightness, but that the
Devil and his Imps besmoak'd the Sun and Air, whom in his just judgment God
suffered so to do, because men began to dote one upon another, and to set up
Idols and Images in their minds of good writings (that were written for another
end by the Spirits motion) Histories, Letters, Epistles, and instead of the Law
of the Spirit of Life and Light, which is by Christ Jesus, to magnify the
outward Letter and make it Honorable; which is but men's wi^nesse for God, and
to run a whoring after it from Gods own Witness, even his Light and Spirit in
the Conscience? Must the Spirit be bound now by thee to read his mind to men
in a book of men's writing at first by his own Guidance, and of fallible men's
mistanscribing from the hands one of another through so many ages, or else he
must be silent, and not manifest his mind at all? He must read his old Sermons,
it seems, but he must not preach new ones, he may read in the Letter what he
did reveal, but must come forth in no new Revelations now of the old thing,
nor preach immediately in men's minds any more, as he had done from the
beginning of the world to that time, and inspired immediately whom he pleased:
Is not this to muzle him up, as the Bishops were wont to do the Parish
Curates, lest too much Truth should come forth; and as they do where the Pope
has most to do at this day, so that they may read (not too much Scripture
neither, for therein I confess the case is a little altered for the better in
England) but old moldy. Mass books, and Forms of Service in Latin of their
own setting out, in which there is here a little and there a little sprinkling
of some Scriptures, mostly out of the Psalms, which they most corrupt, and make
certain Sing songs out of, or if there be any Homilies read, its a mighty
matter, but as those the Friars make are worth little, and some of them worse
then naught, so, as bad as they be, there is few Sermons to be heard throughout
the Popedom: and as they allow men to read Writings of their own setting out,
but not preach nor speak in any other order, method, manner, or form of words,
then as they find there, so thou will allow the Spirit to speak to men in and
by that letter he caused once to be written; he may read his mind in men's
hearts by that, or have it read by men's mouths one to another if he will, but
no preaching now by himself within or by his immediate inspiration by men
without, nor writing neither; but it must come to the touchstone of what he
bade Paul, Peter, or others to write, before which, whosoever shall presume to say
it is of God, or from God immediately at all, though it do agree never so much
with that (as all that is of God and from him does, and cursed be he that
speaks contrary to what was of old written, rightly understood) or shall say
it is Truth before our time-serving Tryers have tried it by that, who understand
it not themselves, much less are fit to try Doctrines by it, let him be dealt
with according to the foresaid provision against Delusion, made of old in the
night time while men slept, in that behalf.

But is God, and Christ, and the Spirit, so sparing toward his people, and so
niggardly in dispensing Truth, in revealing his Righteousness (which he is now
bringing near) and in showing his Salvation which now is not to tarry to them
that long for it, and have long looked for it according to his promise, as those
narrow headed, niggardly hearted Nothings and Novices are, whose work is all
along (as dumb as they are from opening their mouths otherwise) to bark and
bite them back again, that having left off to linger any longer at their lips,
and as well to feed from their mouths, as to feed or put into them, make more
have then they would have them from the depths of Hell and Darkness toward
Heaven, Gods high and holy Hill? Nay verily, he says to his servants, Open thy
mouth wide and I will fill it, and stands ready to make good that blessing he
has pronounced to such as hunger and thirst after righteousness (viz.) that
they shall be (from himself, who only reveals it) no less then filled with
it: Thus liberal the Lord and his Spirit is.

Yet these are the doings of the Churl, whose instruments are evil, and of the
vile person, who ye^ would fain be looked upon as liberal too, as he has been
by such as saw him not in darker times, nor discerned how he fed himself, and
not the flock, and minded his own matters, even to make meat for his own belly
of them, more then to make meat enough for the sheep in that dark and cloudy
day, Ezekiel. 24.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. But the hour comes, and now is, wherein a
Man, even a shepherd, whom he knows not, shall reign in righteousness, and be
as Rivers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a
wea^y land, wherein the deaf shall hear the words of the book, which are sealed
from the backside Admirer, the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity,
and out of darkness, the eyes of such as seeing will see shall be no more so
dim as they have been, and the ears of such as hear must hearken unto him;
the heart also of the rash or hasty, that without heed have run they know not
whether, shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers be ready
to speak plainly, they also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding,
and they that murmured shall learn Doctrine.

Then the vile person shall no more be called liberal, nor the Churl said to
be bountiful, for the vile person will work villainy, and his heart will work
iniquity to practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, to make
empty the soul of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail,
the instruments also of the Churl are evil, he devises wicked devices to
destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy steaketh right things:
but the liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he
stand: In that day the burden of the insolent Antichristian Assyrian, that has
so straightly besieged the people of God, that dwell in Sion, and cut off from
them (so far as God would suffer him)* he stay and the staft, the whole stay of
bread, and the whole stay of water, shall remove from off Sions shoulders, and
his yoke from off her neck, yea that yoke shall be destroyed because of the
anointing, Isa. 10.27. for the spirit shall be poured out upon them that wait
for it from on high, and the liberal soul shall be made fa^, and he that
waters shall be watered also himself, and the wilderness shall be a
fruitful field, in which judgment and righteousness shall remain, and the
works of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness
quietness and assurance for ever, and they shall be blessed that sow beside
all waters, and the soul of the diligent shall thrive and be fat, but the soul
of the vile person and niggard, and of the sluggard shall desire, but have
nothing, yea, their Vintage shall fail, and their gathering shall not come,
and their fruitful field shall be turned into a forest, they shall be stripped
and made bare, and sit with sackcloth on their loins, and lament for the tears,
for the pleasant fields, and the fruitful vine, and their palaces shall be
forsaken, their tents and towers shall be for d^ns, and that which now is the
pasture of wild asses, Job 11.12. Isa. 29.18, 24. shall be no more enjoyed by
them for ever, Isa. 32.

Wherefore then ^ayest thou I. O. with Restriction of the Spirits guidance to
those first generations thus (viz.) While the infallible spirit continued his
extraordinary guidance; and thus (viz.) guided therein by the infallible
direction of the spirit of God, and, by way of exclusion of after-ages, and
more expressly of this age, thus (viz.) They were born, acted, carried out by
the Holy Ghost, to speak, deliver and write, etc. and suppose a man were
(...), (1.) inspired of God, and should profess himself so, and were so indeed
as the Prophes of old, Am. 7. Let me expostulate the case with thee a little
about these expressions, whereby thou seem to shut all the past primitive
times from any participation of the movings and actings of the Spirit, as those
that have neither part nor portion in that matter of his infallible guidance
and direction.

First then, not denying what Christ himself foretold, John ^4.28, 30. John
16.16. (viz.) That he would go away for a while, and his Disciples should not
see him, and the Prince of this world which has nothing in him should come,
and interpose himself to the great interception of that primitive Communion the
Saints then had with him and his Spirit, so that he would not have very much
talk with them thereafter: let me ask thee this much, Did he say he would leave
them for ever, and never have any talk or words with them more, then what they
should find of his written in the Scriptures, of such as should write some few
things, and a little of that much which they knew of his mind? Did he say he
should not speak at all, not so much as by his Spirt? Nay rather, did he not
say, that so soon as his fleshly pretense was withdrawn, he would send the holy
Spirit himself the comforter to supply the room of that personal and bodily
appearance, wherein he then stood among them, which they were so in love with,
and so loath to part with, that they were ready well-nigh to dote so upon it,
as to let sorrow fill their hearts to think they should be utterly without his
tuition, as sheep without a shepherd, if that should vanish and be removed? In
the departure and absence of which, notwithstanding he told them it would be
never the worse, but much the better, and more expedient for them? For if I go
away (says he) the Comforter cannot come, but if I go I will send him unto
you: which Comforter was himself in Spirit; the presence of which in the heart
gives nearer acquaintance and fellowship with Christ and the Father, then his
abode among them, and their sight of him in the flesh could possibly do: The
self same that in the flesh was an Advocate or Intercessour to God for his
people in the Spirit, is their Advocate or Intercessour to Godward in them:
Compare John 16. with 1 John 2.1. where, though translated Comforter in one
place, and Advocate in another, yet the Greek word is the same (i.e.) (...) in
both.
for the sight of him in the flesh the world may have, and had, which is to
little effect if the other be wanting; but his presence in the Spirit is that
which is of Power and Efficacy, though yet in two different ways (viz.) of
bare conviction or condemnation to the one, and refreshment and consolation to
the other, both to the World and to the Saints, though there be no sight of him
as in the flesh any more by either: I will send the Holy spirit the comforter
to you (says he) and he shall convince or reprove the world also: Does Christ
therefore say he will leave them comfortless (i.e.) Orphans, John 14.17, 18.
deprived utterly of his presence, because he said he ( i.e.) in flesh would go
away? Nay (says he) I will come to you (i.e.) in Spirit, So Romans 8. The Spirit
helps our infirmities, and prays for us, and makes intercession.
the Spirit of truth which dwells in you, and shall be in you, and though the
world sees me no more when I am gone, because though the Spirit of Truth be
sent into them, and is nigh to men, even striving, preaching, reproving in
them, yet they recieve him not, neither see him, nor know him; yet ye see me,
and because I live, ye shall live also: and does he not say that this spirit of
truth should lead and guide them into all truth, and bring all things to their
remembrance whatever he spak^, while he was seen in the flesh? Which the letter
does not, for there were many more things that Jesus spoke and did, that are
not written there, so many, that if they should be written every one, it might
be supposed the world could not contain what should be written, John. 14.26,
13, 21, 25. And howbeit he intimates a more sparing Communion in Spirit with
his D^sciples and Church, which would be permitted to come to pass by the
coming in of the Prince of this world, wherein there should not be so much talk
as there should be before, and would be again after that gloomy day was once
over, wherein the manifestations of him (though as infallible in that small
measure, wherein they should be made, for gradus non variant naturam rei, yet)
as to the measure, would not be so great as at other times; of which going
away, and withdrawing even in the spirit also he seems to speak, when he
says, A little while and ye shall not see me: in which Eclipse the chidren of
the night must have a revelling night of rejoicing over the Word, and Spirit,
and Saints sitting in sackcloth, and an hour of laughter and merriment at the
power of (...) its prevailing, John 16. to 22. yet does he say that Eclipse
should be ^o^a^l? Was there not some few in every age, in whom the Spirit bare
a testimony, and by whom to the blind world also of little truth? And did he
not say the Spirit should be in them, and abide with them ( i.e.) in the same
manner of infallibility in manifestation of whatever he makes known, though not
in the same measure of manifestation of the truth, even for ever? John 14.16.
And did he not say that the Spirit of truth should testify of him when he
came, and so consequently his testimony must be with his Disciples and Church
for ever? John 15.26. Which testimony is not that of the letter which men wrote
at his motion (as thou falsely supposest) for that is man's mediate testimony,
and not immediately the Spirits, any more then the testimony that men bear by
word of mouth, as they are moved; of which in the very next verse (i. e.) John
15.27. Christ calls their testimony, and not the Spirits, and ye also shall
bear witness (says he) putting a difference between his Disciples testimony
by the Spirit, and that of the Spirit by it self; for that of the Spirit is the
Word it self that is testified to by inspired men, whether in writing or
speaking, and not the writing or the speaking it self. The Word (I say) put by
the Spirit into men's minds, and into their mouths, which Word is promised to
abide with his for ever: and so says I. O. many times over in his Book,
repeating that Scripture, and putting almost the whole stresse of his ill cause
upon it, and bringing it in the folly and blindness of his mind to prove the
letter by the promise of God himself, of necessity to remain inviolated,
inalterable and uncorrupted for ever, whereas the Spirit speaks it not of the
letter at all, but of the Word, which should be put into his peoples mouth,
Isa. 59.21. The Word which I put into thy mouth shall not depart from thy
mouth, nor the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth, and for ever, which
strengthens what I have now in hand to prove (i.e.) the continuance of the
Spirits immediate movings of God; people under the Gospel more or less, even
for ever: And does not Christ also say, Mat. 28.20. to his Disciples, and in
them to his Church, which is a successive body, and not simultaneous, nor
appearing wholly in this world, at, nor altogether at one time, Lo I am with
you always, even to the end of the world; and if there have been a time of
more darkness then ordinary, even to his own, by reason of Christ's absence,
and the Devils presence in the world, yet more or less to his own, which are
those that own him and heed his voice, he has ever appeared; but however, as
his promise was to be with his more or less to the end, so at the end his
promise is to be by his Spirit more with them then ever; I will (says he)
speaking of his return after the mournful time of his absence who is the
Bridegroom from the Bride) see you again, and your heart shall rejoice as a
woman when her hour of travel is over, having no more remembrance of her
sorrow, because a man child is borne unto her and into the world, and your joy
shall no man take away, so that in these days we may expect more then ever was
enjoyed before, the glory of the second Temple being to be greater then that of
the first, which was trodden down, and more pourings out of the Spirit then the
primitive ages had, these being the days wherein refreshment is to break forth
from the face of the Father, wherein he will send, Act. 3.19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
to his Church, Jesus his Son, who has withdrawn and retired, and been retained
in the heavens till these times (who so reads this let him understand) which
are the times of the restitution of all things that ever have been out of
order, and of his people, since they ran astray from God, which have been
spoken of by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began.

Why then say thou, while the infallible spirit continued his guidance, as
if after he should come he was to go suddenly quite away again, of whom Christ,
while present in flesh, says he was after his passing hence to come and to
continue in and with his people, Mat. 28. throughout all ages, in all which
ages he had people and a seed, as in Eliahs time, Romans 9.27, 29. and a remnant,
though small and unseen, Romans 11.4. left trodden under foot by the outward
Israel, that held the outward Court, which were as the sand of the Sea for
multitude, even to the end, John 14.25, 26.

What did the promise of Christ fail to his own because of the worlds unbelief?
and did he leave them to be guided by the Prince of this world that was to
come, and by his blind guides to guide and govern the world, and have his
kingdom in it a while? and was his own seed, which never consents to any
iniquity, but condemns it, given up by God, because the seed of evil doers was
to be guided by the spirit of the God of this world, that totally blinded some
from looking at the light, and by the man of Sin and Son of Perdition, to be
strongly deluded to damnation by the mystery of his iniquity, who was Permitted
indeed to withhold, and hinder, and let not a little, till he should be taken
away? but after That wicked should be revealed in his time, was not the Lord to
be revealed again in his time, which is the principal, and most proper and
seasonable opportunity for Christ to appear in his Spirit, and show himself
in, 1 Timothy 16.15. (...) in its proper times: And was he not to conjure the
other lying spirit with the spirit of his mouth, which is not the letter, that
declares of the Word, but the living Word it self, which opens the Letter, also
the sword of his mouth put then into the mouth of his seed as aforesaid, yea
into the mouths of very Babes, to the stilling of the enemy and avenger, and to
destroy it with the brightness of his coming?

What Spirit was to take the guidance of his people, if his own infallible
spirit were not to continue with them for ever? or would he deprive them of the
presence of his infallible spirit in their hearts, and place it without in the
fallible Letter, so that if ever they would see or speak with his spirit, they
must look for him, and hear what he testifies there only (so I. O. talks, T.
1. c. 5.) and must go forth and talk with him there only ( i.e.) without, but
not within, he being gone forth from his dwelling in the hearts of his people,
now to dwell in the Letter only, and minded there and no where else to be
spoken with.

And why say thou while the infallible spirit of God continued his guidance
in an extraordinary manner; And again, T. 2. C. 5. S. 1. the infallible
direction of the spirit of God? Has God any other then that infallible spirit?
and if he meant to direct his people at all by his spirit in the dismal times
that were to come, must it it not be by that infallible spirit continuing his
infallible (which thou call extraordinary) guidance and direction, or else
by none at all? Or has God two spirits to direct his own by at sundry times,
one extraordinary and infallible, the other fallible and ordinary? and has
that nfallible spirit of his two kinds of guidances and directions, one
extraordinary and infallible, the other fallible and ordinary, which
extraordinary and infallible spirit and his extraordinary and fallible guidance
was to continue with them but a while, it being for high, and holy, and
extraordinary days and times, the ordinary and fallible for more ordinary and
lower days and times, as that the presence of which may as well serve the turn
then, and his people must be contented with it? so making them like the Popish
Priests and people of the world, which have, as at Rome and elsewhere, ordinary
Ornaments, Lessons, Anthems, Songs and Services, that must serve for every
ordinary day, and extraordinary shows, and sing-songs, and ornaments, and
number of candles, and fine candlesticks, plush canopyes, and copes,
Altar-clothes, white Surplices, Pictures, Pompes, and pipings, as on some great
Saints holyday, or festival times, or general proecessions; or as our poor
still bepoped people have here, one fine suit for Sundays and holidayes, and a
cheaper and less costly one for working days.

Or when this (...), or divine guidance and inspiration is pleaded by thee as
peculia^ to those first times, I inquire of thee whether there be any middle
way, T. 1. C. 3. S. 8. but either that the Saints in aftertimes (if guided by
the guidance of the spirit of God at all, and that thou dare not deny, though
thou own his guidance by the letter only) be guided by it, as an infallible
spirit, giving them that infallible guidance which thou call extraordinary,
or as a fallible spirit, allowing them not so much as the Saints of old, but
affording them only some kind of ordinary or fallible guidance and direction?
for it remains (according to thy principles) that it must be one of these, or
else there is some middle way, some midling spirit of God, and some middle sort
of direction of that spirit, that is neither fallible nor infa^lible, but
between both, partly fa^lible, partly infallible; some participie, that i^
neither one nor the other, but taking part of both fallibility and
infallibility: And howbeit this is such a mess of mixture as may well make
awise man (and excuse him in it too) believe him to be no wiser then he should
be, and to have Hand plus cereb^i, quam cimex sanguinis, that makes it, yet I
know not why thou may not as well make God to have two spirits, and his
spirit two guidances (viz.) one infallible, one fallible, or one absolutely
infallible, and another neither fallible nor infallible, as thou make God to
have two Words (viz.) on that infallible living Word, which the fallible dead
Letter declares of, the other that fallible dead Letter, which declares of that
infallible living Word; for each of these thou make the Word God; yea, O the
depths of the Doctors and Divines of our times! thou art not only so exceeding
expert in cutting and cobling, dividing, and botching, and piecing, and
patching for thy own turn, as, when thou will, to turn two into one and one
into two, but also so well versed and exactly taught in the point of
Trinitizing, as to turn that one Word of God at first into two, and at last,
secundum quid, into three; for whether we examine what thou say of either
the Letter, or the Word it self, this testimony thy book bears to them both;
1. as to the Word, thou say in one place (truly) it is Living, T. 1. C. 4. S.
19. in another place thou say ( horresco referens) more then I dare say for
the world, whatever I say of the Letter, that the Word is dead, T. 2. C. 5.
(but falsely figured our with the figure of 4.) S. 12.2. as to the Letter, thou
say in one place ( viz.) Ex 3. S. 4. It is living, and no where said to be
dead, Neque uspiam litera esse mortua dicitur; occidit quidem, sed ideo viva
est.
yet in the forcited falsely figured chapter, S. 12. thou thy self (as no
where, as the Letter is said so to be) say thy own self that the Letter is
dead: Thus Gods one Word is cut out by thee into two (viz.) the Letter and that
Word, it witnesses of, and then each of these are cut out into three, for,
which ever of these two be that true Word of God; or if thou taking these
conjunctively, wilt have them one, at least thy opinion, as expressed in those
places put together, is tantamount to no less then this, ( viz.) that God has
1. a living Word, 2. a dead Word, 3. a Word that is both dead and living.

And why say thou of the Prophets and Apostles, they were borne, acted,
carried out by the Holy Ghost, to speak, deliver, write, etc. and suppose a
man were (...) inspired by the Spirit indeed: As if it were a matter now not to
be expected in this age, as if it were no less then a wonder (but so the
Saints and Prophets were in every generation to thy generation, therefore I
wonder not that thou fo wonderest at it, that any should now profess so to be,
though sapiens miratur nihil, and the things of God are no where wondered at or
evil spoken of, but where ignorance of them is) to see such a man as can truly
say he is moved of the Lord, and inspired with his spirit, whereas when was it
otherwise in any age wherein God had Saints? And who is otherwise that is not
in name only but a Saint or a Christian indeed and truth? Was ever any
otherwise, or less then (...), inspired of God, that was born, acted, carried
out by the Spirit? and was any otherwise or less then so, that is moved,
guided, led by that Spirit, to act, speak, write, etc. and ought any now, any
more then formerly, or do any now, that are truly Saints, act, write, speak,
think any thing more then formerly out of the Spirit, ^or in the Flesh, that is
of any savor, or has any acceptance in the sight of God? Is that accepted of
God, that is done, written, spoken, thought, ministered out of the Spirit, or in
the Flesh, not in and by the motions of the Spirit, but in and by the motions
of the Flesh, and in the wisdom and will of the Flesh? Is not all that Cains
sacrifice, that is offered in that nature of his, or while men are yet but in
the Flesh, not in the Spirit, which Sacrifice is (as all wicked men's are, while
their ear is turned from the Law in the Spirit, i.e. the light, and Spirit of
God within) abomination unto God? And are not all I. O's. prayers, preachings,
writings, who dare not pretend to have, live in, be moved, or guided by the
infallible Spirit of God in ought that he does, acted and done in the Flesh,
and the oldnesse of the Letter? and is any thing that's done in the fleshly
mind, thoughts, imaginations, wisdom, worth a Rush, when the very wisdom of
the flesh is enmity against God? and ^all the enmity is to be slain, and not
any of it accepted, or to be reconciled for ever? Do not all the Israel of God
(that are Israel, not after the Flesh, or the Letter, but after the Spirit, the
Jews and the Circumcision, not outwardly in the Flesh and Letter, but inwardly
in the Heart and Spirit) Do not all these mind the same thing, that one and
the self-same spirit, and as far, and in such a measure, as every one has
attained it, walk by the same rule thereof, Phil. 3. Galat. 6? Walk they not in
the same spirit? walk they not in the same steps, which that Spirit of God in
them treads out for them? Have they not that Spirit of Christ? And if any man
have it not for his Guide, Leader, Governor in all he does, as well as his
Comforter, is he Christ's? He that has it not dwelling in him, infallibly
directing, divinely inspiring him, is he Christ's? Do not all that are in Christ
Jesus, to whom there is no condemnation, all save such as go condemned in
themselves, to whom there is nothing but condemnation from God, walk, not after
the flesh, but after the spirit? Do they not live in the Spirit, walk in the
Spirit, pray in the Spirit, sing in the Spirit, serve in the Spirit, and not in
the Letter, minister every one as of the ability God gives from the Spirit,
not barely from the Letter? And so though they may use the very words that are
Letter, and be well read in the Letter, and quote the Letter (as Christ did,
and the Prophets, and Apostles did the outward writings one of another) and by
the Spirit be guided to utter the same words verbatim. See Isa. 2. Mic. 4. and
be mightier in the Letter then those that are Ministers of no more then the
Letter, yet are Ministers not of the Letter, but the Spirit. Are they (as well
as the Spirit is in them) not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit? Are not all that
are not in the night, and in the darkness, and the children thereof, but the
children of the day, and of the light, (which is the Lords day) in in the
Spirit, Rev. 1.10. Do they not by the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body?
Are they after the flesh? Come they not by walking in the Spirit, not to
fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, but to crucify the flesh with the affections
and lusts thereof? Does not the Spirit of God in them I ust against the flesh?
Does not the law of the spirit of Life, which is by Christ Jesus, deliver them
that follow it from the law of Sin and Death, that they were once captivated
by? Does not the Spirit quicken and give them life? Does it not help their
infirmities, pray in them with sighs and greanes, and because they know not how
to ask any thing as they ought, does it not make intercession for them
according to God? Are they not born of the Spirit, and after the Spirit? Does
not the Spirit of God bear witness to their spirit, that are his children,
that they are so? Does it not reveal the great things of God, and by that
revelation make them know the things that are freely given them of God? Is it
not the unction from the holy one whereby they know all the things, the
Anointing, which was the Canon or Rule of the Saints from the beginning, before
any Letter was, which is truth, and is no lie, which if they quench not, grieve
not, let it not, but let it abide and remain in them, will teach them
infallibly of all things, so that they shall not need that any man teach them,
and which they abiding in the Doctrine or teaching of do not err (as the
wicked world thinks they do) but continue in the Son and in the Father? Are
they not led by it from under the Law, and out of the Letter up into the life,
which the Letter speaks of, but it self only gives? out of the works of the
flesh, which in and by the light are manifest, into the fruits that it self
brings forth? Does it not bring all things to the remembrance of such as are
led by it, as all the Sons of God are, that ever Christ spoke? Does it not
guide all such into all truth, and only into truth, and not into any falsehood,
delusion, or deceit? Does it not take of Christ's and show it unto them?

Does God do all this first or last, more or less for all his people, and does
none of all this amount to so much as the motion of the Spirit, or divine
inspiration? Are there no spiritual men now in the world? and is not every
spiritual man a Prophet, or more then a Prophet? for though all in the Church
are not Prophets on such a score, and in so high a rank as thou reckonest on (
i.e.) such as have witnessed a sending forth abroad on some service to others,
the service of some lying yet nearer home, and in present reference only to
themselves, some like the Sons of the Prophets at Jericho and Bethel, 2 Kings
2.2 Kings 6. being yet under the Schoolmaster that leads to Christ, in their
nonage, going, as it were, to school (not at Athens, nor yet at Oxford, nor
Cambridge, where the Schools are not like that of theirs, neither is the
waiting in order to the Ministry like that of the Sons of the Prophets at
Jericho, but rather like that of those, to whom it was said, tarry at Jericho
till your beards be grown; which injunction many of our Junior Academicall
Students do not keep neither, for howbeit, Barba non facit Philosoph^m nec
cucullus Monachum, much less do either of these make Ministrum Christi, yet
several of them, if a good Living can be had before, do not abide so long, as
till they be Masters of either beard or hood, but are ready to run out with the
shells on their heads, and to hasten into their humane work of Prophecy before
that time) But at Bethel (i.e.) the house of the Lord, waiting at the gates of
wisdom it self, and watching daily at the posts of her house, taking council
at the mouth of God, out of which only comes knowledge and understanding,
learning of him in silence with all subjection to his will, as in the light it
is manifest concerning themselves first in the particular, purging their own
persons first from youthful and noysom lusts, that they may go forth, if the
Lord please to send them, and say go, as Vessels of honor sanctified and
fitted for the Masters use, and prepared to every good work, tarrying at
Jerusalem till they he endued with power from on high, till of carnal Babes in
Christ, as they are at first, walking as other men, having a remainder of
strife and such divisions as are seen in children, they may proceed, Men indeed
skillful in the work of righteousness, having their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil, and commence Masters, not of Arts, but over their
own hearts, and spiritual, or Prophets: which are intimated to be all one by
the Apostle in the same Epistle, wherein he says, some are yet but babes, and
in a measure carnal, and all are not yet spiritual, nor Prophets, 1 Corinthians.
3.1, 2,3. 1 Corinthians. 12.29. 1 Cor. 4.37. yet all to covet the gift of Prophecy,
as the best of Spiritual Gifts, yet inferior in excellency to that way of
love.

Though then I say all be not Prophets, yet all spiritual ones are prophets, or
more then Prophets; and there are some spiritual in these days: Are not all
that are filled with the Spirit Prophets, and (...) inspired by the Spirit,
Mic. 2.8. Acts 6. Acts 7. as Micah, Stephen, and the seven were? And are not
all Christians bidden to be filled with the Spirit? and to let the word of
Christ dwell richly in them, teaching, etc. Ephesians 5. Colossians 3.16?

And what such difference is there between being led by the Spirit, and guided
by the Spirit? And is not he that is guided by it, guided infallibly, and every
one that is led by it, led infallibly? And does not every one that walks after
it walk surely and infallibly, and he that is enlightened by it enlightened
infallibly? And he that speaks, sees, writes, acts by it (as all Saints should
do, though fallible in themselves) do all this infallibly? And is not he that
is moved by it, whether he obey its motions yea or no, moved infallibly into
that which is assuredly the Truth and no Lie? yet I.O. jeers at all pretense to
any infallible guidance by the Spirit of God in these days, as fancy,
delusion, far aricisme, etc, and at the Spirit of God it self, which the Qua:
own, as their truest teacher Ironically under that term of the infallible
Doctor: and T.D. makes it matter of heinous crime in the Qua: to talk of
Infallibility in Christ's Ministry now, saying p. 58. Pamp. thus, And as to the
Question of the Infallibility of their Ministry, Three Iurates of Sandwich will
testify that they did affirm their Ministry to be infallible: as if it were
matter of amazement to him, that men should mention such a matter as infallible
guidance of Christ's Ministry, by his own infallible Spirit in these days: As
if he gave it for granted to us (who take him at his word, for it is a truth)
that their own Ministry is but fallible, their guidance therein by no more then
their own fallible Spirits, and may be utterly destitute of the Spirit of God,
which is infallible, (for no fallible Spirit has God that I know of.) No
marvel therefore to me that T.D. so readily grants (as himself says he does)
p. 35. of his 1. Pamph. That none of his people can set to their seal, that his
Ministry has brought them to a perfect man, etc. For I know not how it should
if it be a fallible one, as he confesses it is, while he denies any Ministry now
to be infallible, and affirms perfection itself too, but so far as to be made
free from sin, to be not only unattainable in this life, but also to be no
less then a doctrine of Devils for any to preach it. See p. 47.1 Pamph.

But whereas he says p. 35. The Ministry was not intended for that end, i.e.
to bring to a perfect man, or to perfect men in this life, where they deny
perfection attainable.

Rep. I reply, that is false, and expressly contradictory to Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
where its said, the Gospel Ministry (which obtains its end in this life, or
else is not perfect according to I.O. and ceases in that to come) is given for
that end, viz. for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ: How long? till we all come in the unity
of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

And as for T.Ds. asserting the infallibility of the Spirit to be an Idiom, a
property of the Spirit, as incommunicable to the Saints that partake of the
spirit, as Omnisciency, which agreed not to Christ as man, or Omnipotency is p.
32.33. 1 Pamph.

Rep. I say that is mere flim-flam, as to the point in hand, for we assert the
Saints and Ministers of Christ no farther infallible, then they follow the
leading of the spirit, which is infallible, out of which they are not in their
Ministry, and so far as following that, which is given to be all men's guide,
men and Ministers (whom we confess to be all fallible in themselves, as
abstract from that, and not only liable to err, but erring actually as they
leave off to be led by that, and lean to their own understandings) are all (so
far I say) infallible, and infallibly guided; for as God has no fallible
spirit, so his infallible spirit has no fallible guidance, nor leads any
fallibly at all, but all infallibly, who are led by it into all truth, so as in
all those things it teaches, and are needful for them to know, to make them,
otherwise fallible and ignorant thereof in themselves, not only infallible, but
(as to all thoe things I say) Omniscient, as himself is Omniscient in all
things absolutely without exception.

Neither are Omnisciency and Omnipotency themselves, as to all those things
that are to be known and done by such, so altogether incommunicable to
spiritual men as our Academical Animals imagine they are; for though God,
Christ, and the Spirit only know and can do all things absolutely, yet, through
God, Christ, and the Spirit, teaching, leading, guiding, revealing, enabling,
all things, i.e. all things that are truly good, fit, suitable, comfortable,
profitable for such, are both infallibly to be known, and possible to be done
by the Ministers of God in their respective services and seasons; whereupon the
Wisdom of God has spoken thus of the Spirit, as in reference to the Saints
that learn of him, receive and are led by him, he shall lead you into all
truth, bring all things to your remembrance, whatever I have said, ye have an
Unction little children, and ye know all things, and not only of the Spirit it
self, that it searches all things, even the deep things of God; but of the
spiritual man also, to whom the Spirit reveals them, that he discerns all
things, when the animal man nor does nor can perceive the things of the Spirit;
and that the spiritual men had the mind of Christ, Ioh. 14.26. Ioh. 16.13. 1
Ioh. 2.20.27. 1 Cor. 2.9.15.16. and not only so, but says Paul, who had no
sufficiency of himself to any thing, I can do all things thorough Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 3.13. ^anta ischus and Col. 1.11. of the Saints. enpase
dunamei dunamumensi strengthened with all might, i.e. Omnipotency.

Whereas therefore T.D. prates, as his fellow preachers do of the other
incommunicables, of these things, I say it is Parret-like, of he knows not what
himself; for as in such wise and measure as Saints are partakers of his
holiness, purity, perfection, mercy, etc. they are holy as he is holy, pure as
he is pure, merciful as he is merciful, perfect as he is perfect, though not so
absolutely and infinitely pure, holy, meriful, and perfect, as he is, so, so
far, and in such a measure, as they are led by his spirit, and endued with his
power from on high, they are, and in the Scripture are said to be, not only
infallibly assured of things, which is Tantamount to infallible, Luke 1.1, 2,
3, 4. Act. 1.3. and to have plerophorian full assurance; but also Omniscient,
Omnipotent, panta anakcinontes, eidontes, iscuontes, etc.

And whereas T. D. says, p. 33. the Apostles themselves did not partake of
that Divine property of infallibility, giving also this reasonless reason for
it; viz. for then they would have been infallible at all times, and in all
things, which they were not; as appears by the instance of Peter, Gal. 2.11.

Rep. In this as he contradicts the Scripture; so I. O. himself serves us so
far as to contradict him to our hands, for howbeit he denies any participation
of infallibility to us, or any Ministers in these days, and also to the very
immediate Transcribers of the Scriptures, saying, p. 167. we say, not they were
all or any of them Anamartetoi, infallible, yet he denies it not to the first
Writers, p. 60. And as for his proof, that if they were infallible at all, then
they would have been so at all times, and in all things. That is as pedling a
proof, as he would count it, if I should go to prove that David was not at al
partaker of the property of holiness, because he was not holy, but wicked at
that time, and in that thing wherein he was desil'd in the matter of Vriah,
which T. D. would judge as silly an argument, as I judge T. Ds. assertion
silly, who says that David was not i ^ a condemned but in a justified estate;
alias, accounted just in the sight of God at that time, when he was under the
guilt of adultery and murder, which a wise man need not be taught to see the
folly and fowlness of.

Thus then I. O. and T. D. do unminister themselves at least, by denying any to
be Theopneustoi, infallibly guided by the infallible spirit in these days,
both of whom I may truly bespeak thus: Say ye that Gods inspired ones are all
gone?
Then ye of Gods inspired ones are none.


And who that is wise will mind I. O. much in what he says about things of God,
who cannot pretend so far as to say he is, but rather yields to the contrary,
viz. that he is not moved, acted, carried forth, nor guided in what he does
speak, write, minister, by the infallible direction of the infallible Spirit of
God, but by the fallible guidance of his own and other men's fallible spirits,
opinions, conjectures, thoughts, etc? Who but- f^ols will take such a fallible
guide as I. O. is fain to confess he is, while he denies any guided by the
infallible guidance of Gods Spirit in this age? Yea, does he not utterly
unminister himself and all his fellows, while he supposes none now to be
Theopneustoi, moved and inspired by the spirit in their ministerial functions,
nor to speak as the Spirit only gives utterance, and as they receive the word
immediately out of the mouth of God, and while he can say no farther of himself
and them, but only that they minister out of that furtive furniture, which in
their fleshly minds they filch from the Letter, which, out of which, and from
their fallible expositions of which, they minister, and of which they are
Ministers, and not of the Spirit, as the Apostles and Prophets were, which
gives the life? And is not he an ill bird that bewrayes his own nest, an ill
son that discovers his own, and his fellows, and his forefathers nakednesses
so far, as to print it out as obvious to all, that the infallible guidance of
the infallible Spirit is not continued with them, nor to be found in these
days directing any otherwise then without, by an outward letter, which is
fallible and liable to be falsified at fallible men's pleasure and fancy, and to
deny all inward pure Revelation, and immediate inspiration as Enthusiasm, and
to say that there is no means of doing and determining any thing about the
matters of God, or Doctrine of Christ now, but the letter or writing, T. 1. C.
1. S. 16. and yet in the self-same Section, to the contradicting of himself, to
say, that that Doctrine, and these things of God and Christ, are things of pure
divine revelation, the knowledge whereof depends upon no such fallible thing,
as all outward writing is now, by his own confession, but wholly, solely on
their Revelation from God?

And what difference is there I.O. between such a one as is pheromenos upon tou
pneumatos, and one ag^menos, or to whom the Spirit of the Lord is odegos, or
egoumenos? are not all these so near kin, that he who is agomenos, is
pheromenos? Is not he who is led, guided, acted by the Spirit, moved and
carried forth by the Spirit? And are not all Saints led by it? Compare the
Scriptures where all these are used promiscuously, as one in the Originals, and
in the Translations also.
And what difference between one that speaks as moved by the Spirit, or as the
Spirit gives utterance, and one that has it given him by the Spirit what to
speak, so that he need not premeditate what to say? And have not all the Saints
and Disciples of Christ a share and part in that promise of having it given
them what to speak at the same hour when they are called before Rulers and
Governors for Christ's sake, Mat. 10.18, 19, 20. and what between one that is
divinely inspired to speak, and one in whom the Spirit of the Father speaks?
Is it not intended of all Gods children and Christ's Disciples, in the case
aforesaid, as well as of some, when its said, It is not you that speak, but the
Spirit of the Father, which speaks in you? And is it not said of all that
Prophecy in the Church of God, as all are to covet to do, and are in
capability to come to do, and may do one by one, as they grow in the Spirit,
and have any thing revealed to them as they sit before the Lord, in which ca^e
they are to give way to each other, that the unbelievers and unlearned ones in
the mysteries and language of the Spirit (and such are ye that surseiting with
your inferior literature, out of the Light and Spirit in which holy men wrote
it, ly looking in the letter of the Scriptures, which ye know not, as the old
Scribes did not. Mat. 22.29. but wrest to your own ruin ( O insipidi
sapientes, obtus* Acuti Academici, quae supra vos nihit ad vos) in the account
of Christ, Paul and Peter, as unlearned as Christ himself was with some, and as
very Babbler as Paul was at Athens, as unlearned as Peter was counted by the
chief Priests and Scribes when he and John stood before them, Acts 4.13. 2 Pet.
3.16.) being convinced and judged of them all, and having the secrets of their
hearts manifested, shall be forced to their own shame to fall down, and report
at last that God is in them of a truth? 1 Cor. 14.23, 24, 25. And what
difference is there, that can help thy cause, between pneumaticos and
Theopneustos, a spiritual man, and one by the Spirit inspired, or a Prophet?
Does not the difference that is serve us against thee, whilst its no other then
thus, that of the two, the spiritual man is the greater? for if every Prophet
is not a spiritual man, yet all spiritual men are Prophets, or more then
Prophets: And that there are spiritual men in these days, thou will prove thy
self to be (what thou art) but a mere animal, and fleshly man in denying; for
as there are millions, even many more then a good many spiritual men, in Title,
so assuredly (as few as they are) there are a good many so in truth, and so
many as are so, are more then Prophets or inspired ones, that are but barely
moved to speak or act by the Spirit; for all holy men of God spoke and wrote of
old, and speak and write now, as they are acted or moved of the holy Spirit;
but all that speak as the Spirit of God may move, act, and give them utterance,
are not holy men of God, for Prophecy is but a gift that wicked men (though
seldom) yet sometimes may have, who never come into that more excellent and
spiritual way, which is to last when all Prophecy is ceased, of living in
love, and other fruits of the Spirit, witness Balaam the Prophet, that loved
the wages of unrighteousness, and taught Balaak King of Moab to cast a
stumbling block before Israel, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to
commit fornication, whose way you follow, who neither live the life, nor will
(unless ye repent for all your hopes so to do) die the death of the righteous,
and that you will see when you fall into his Trance with your eyes open, as you
will at last, so as to see him, even that Star of Jacob, as he did afar off,
not nigh, but with a gulf betwixt, and Lazarus in his bosom; though you are
yet in a T^ance of your own, with your eyes shut, and not come so far into the
bare sight of Truth as Balaam was, who for all his wickedness was moved of the
Lord, and overpowred by the Word of God, put into his mouth, to speak many
precious Truths, and full sore against his will, which would have been at work
another way for hire, and have cursed and divined against them for money, to
bless Israel altogether, Numb. 24. Witness also Caiphas the High Priest, who
gave the Jews wicked counsel against Jesus, and yet prophesied that Jesus
should dye for that Nation, and gather into one all the children of God that
were scattered abroad, which not knowing well the true meaning of his own
words, he spoke not of himself (as ye do of your selves, not understanding well
what you say, uttering in words many eminent truths out of the Prophets, and of
the Prophets, which not knowing the Prophets voices, ye fulfill to your own
ruin) but by way of Prophecy, as the Spirit made use of his mouth to utter
it, John 11.47. 51, 52.

And was not Saul also among the Prophets? so that evil men may be moved and
inspired by the Spirit, and obey also so as to Prophecy, as they are moved,
led, or acted by the Spirit, who never obey the Spirits motions of them to
better and greater matters, that spiritual men obey him in; yea fleshly selfish
men may be moved and made of the Lord (which is more then ye yet are) Prophets
of True things; but what holy and spiritual man is not a Prophet, or not
inspired, or not truly moved of the Lord, or (however fallible in himself, as
other men) is not anamartetos, or infallible, as led by the Spirit? wherefore
then make thou this matter Theopneustian, or divine inspiration, or moving of
the Spirit such a singular thing, as peculiar only to the days of old: nay
verily though all men are not so far inspired and moved of the Spirit as to be
made Prophets, yet if by the Term Theopneustia, thou mean bare inspiration and
motion of the Spirit, and speak of that thing it self, and not of such or such
a degree or measure of it, can thou tell me the man or woman upon earth,
(letting only Infants and mere Fanatics aside) who are not, or have not, at
some time or other, been moved by and with good motions to better things then
they follow, inspired by the Holy Spirit? Who is there (^aving him who walks no
more after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and so is not excepted from, but
more highly accepted into this Theopneusty, or inspiration) in all the world,
of either Heathens by name, or mere nominall Christians, that are as real
Heathens as the other, who cannot truly say Video meliora pr^b^que, deterior a
sequor? And what is that in them, who have no outward Scripture, that makes
them say, and gives them to see that they behold and approve of better things
while they practice worse? Is it not the same light and Spirit within, by which
Christ went and preached to the spirits in prison, when once the long suffering
of God waited, while the Ark was preparing? Is it not the spirit of Truth that
guides the followers of it into all truth, and strives with men, though the
stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart, and cares always resist and strive
against it, and lusts in them against the lustings of their flesh to filth and
envy, etc? Is it not that which convinces and reproves the world of sin,
because they believe not in Christ, and of righteousness and judgment, so
that they know righteousness, and the righteousness and truth of the
judgment of God, that who do such things as they do are worthy of death;
though yet they enter not into the narrow path of righteousness and life, nor
repent to the acknowledgement of the Truth? And though the earth, by reason of
the transgression, till God create the Heaven and Earth again anew, as he did
in the beginning, be without form and void, and darkness be upon the face of
the deep; yet in order to its coming into order again by the new Creation, Does
not the Spirit of God move upon the face of the waters, where the Whore
sits, peoples, multitudes, tongues and nations? And does not God say, Let
there be light, and there is light shining in the da^kness^, though the
darkness comprehends it not? And does he not separate these clearly in men's
consciences, the inner world, from each other, calling the light day, and the
darkness night? And do not many of you men called Ministers, use to teach your
unconverted people to take the advantage of the Spirits moving upon their
hearts, and not to quench them, but to step in while it moves, least, like
those that lay diseased at the Pool of Bethesda, waiting for the moving of the
waters by the Angel, that came down (which in the Antitype is not the letter,
but the Spirit) not waiting for the movings, or neglecting to observe and obey,
and close with the Spirits motions, before the motions of sin in the flesh step
in and cool and quench them, they lie unhealed, and be left unsaved for ever,
and at last no more moved by the Lord and his Spirit, because he often would
have led, drawn, guided, and gathered them unto himself, but only that they
would not? Will you neither believe the Qua. nor your selves neither, that
there are times and opportunities wherein evil men of the world, who never are
led into higher things by the Spirit, because they refuse to follow it where it
strives, are moved, theopneusto, breathed and blown upon, and inspi^ed with
good motions from the Spirit, and hear the sound of it, as of the wind, though
not heeding it, never come to be born nor begotten by it unto God, nor to know
either whence it comes, or whether it goes, or the hidden life of those that
are not so full of Ta^tle about Regeneration, as ye are, who are born no higher
then of flesh and blood, and the will of man to your fancied faith, but born
from above of the Spirit, and of God in very deed?

Does God then more or less move all men by his Spirit, and does he not move
his own people in these days by his Spirit? Does he inspire evil ones
sometimes so far (though we find few or none of that Gang now so far in sight
as they were, unless they see and say they do not) as to make Prophets of
Balaams, Saul's, and Caiphasses? and will he now have none in his own Church of
the Seed of David himself? And does he do greater things for them, and draw
them up into his own image, a state that must stand when all Prophecy shall
have an end, and will he not do that lesser and lower thing for them by his
Spirit, i.e. to use several of them as his Prophets? and if he have Prophets
whom he divinely inspires, will he do any thing of moment in these last most
extraordinary times, and not reveal his secrets to his servants the Prophets?
And will he reveal his mind to his Prophets, as he did to Amos and others, and
will not they go forth and prophecy? When the Lord has spoken, who can but
prophecy? When he gives the word himself (as he does in these days into the
mouths of Babes) how great must be the company of those that publish it? yet
such as I.O. who of the two are better acquainted with the Liberal Arts, then
the Liberal Hearts, would shut these days, to which the promise of Prophecy,
Inspiration, Revelation, Vision, Infallible manifestation (as to the measure of
it) is mostly made, from sharing at all in these things with the Primitive
times, which had but the earnest, first fruits, sprinklings and droppings of
that, which in fullness was to fall down, and be poured forth in these last
Generations; and because these Seers see not, and these Prophets prophecy not
themselves (the Sun being set upon them, and they being benighted in that massy
Chaos of their own self-devis'd divinity, that they cannot divine where they
are, nor infallibly what they have to do) they say to the Lords own Seers, see
not, and to his Prophets, Prophecy not, unless you will prophecy smooth
things and deceits, as we do, and cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from
before us; and because they cannot let their word be as the word of all the
Prophets, who with one voice flattered Ahab to his own ruin, but must speak
what God bids them, which is never good, but evil, of an evil Generation,
therefore they hate them, care not for enquiring of them, but represent them to
Princes and People, as odi^us as they are able, as Fanatics and fools, so that
as 'twas of old, so it is now, the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad,
and become hatred in their houses of God, and as haughty Haman did, who looked
for more cap and congee then honest Mordecai could honestly give him, incensing
the powers of the earth against them, Esth. 3.18. As a certain people scattered
abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of the Realm, whose
Laws are (as Gods are from mere man's) diverse from all people who keep not the
Laws (which yet they keep better in case of Tithes, and some other things by
far, then the Nations own Lawyers, Priests, and People) so that it cannot be
for the Kings profit to suffer them (though they are, for all they carry
neither sword, nor spear, the very Chariots of England, and the horsemen
thereof) and therefore as modestly as he, desiring, if it may please the Powers
that the heads of them may hang high enough for examples sake, and the rest of
the Race some way or other be destroyed, and if not, banished (at least) for all
their womanish complainings thereof, punished and imprisoned, which they by
their tumultuousness pull voluntarily on themselves, as such whose lies,
deceits, wickednesses, hypocrisy, are testimony enough of their non-perfection
to us, quoth I. O. who rakes in what reports the rude multitude raises on them,
Ex. 3. S. 39. Nobis Testimonio sunt illorum mendacia, frauds scelera,
hypocrisis Fanaticos non esse perfectos; iis vero -- punitiones and
incarcerationes, quas akatastasia sua sibi ultro accersunt, de quibus
muliebriter quiritantur, esse debeant.
and prints them out, and makes such ill use to himself of the ill doings of
some that fall from the light (whose miscarriages are less owned by them that
stand in it, then by any) as to saddle the wrong horse, and among many others,
as unreasonable as himself in that, for the sakes of such as turn from it, to
speak, write, and act no little evil against the Truth it self: And whether I.
O. who keeps such a scraping of their Divine Inspiration, in honor of the old
Prophets, who are long since in their Sepulchers and Tombs, which the old
Scribes garnisht, and of the Apostles, Paul, Peter, etc. to whom the latter
Scribes, together with their pictures upon them, have devoted high pillars at
Rome, and beautiful Temples and Colleges, etc. called after their names
throughout Christendom, who were (as all persecutors still are) the Seed and
Children of such as flew them, and thinks if he had been in the days of those
his Fathers, he would not have been a partaker with them in their blood (who
yet is now helping to fill up the measure of the Chief Priests, who were ever
the chief persecutors of Gods People, that wrath may come upon them at last
unto the uttermost) would not indeed have done the same things to them, had he
been coataneous with them, that he has done to their Seed and Successors, in
faith, life, light, doctrine, motion, mission, and conversation, in these
days; I for my own part know so well, that I need none to tell me; but as for
I. O's part, who yet knows neither himself nor others, nor the Ancient, nor the
modern Prophets and Apostles, nor the false in these days from the true, nor
any thing yet as he ought to know it: I wish him singly to consult with that of
God in his Conscience, to which I appeal, which will give him to know it as
truly as I do.

So then its not for want of Prophets, that our great Professors are so
unprofiting, nor of men divinely inspired to call them to repentance, and (if
need be) to expound the Scripture unto them according to the true mind of
Christ expressed therein, which these Theopneustoi only have, and not the most
excellent and expert of their Expositors, who have it not by pure Revelation
from the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10.15, 16. for there are true Prophets abroad, that
are truly moved in what they speak and write, by the Spirit of the Lord, though
I. O. says they are not, as well as false, who are not moved of the Spirit
when they say they are: there are pneumaticoi and agioi Theou anthropoi upon tou
agiou pneumatos pheromenci spiritual and holy men of God carried out by the
holy Spirit, as of old, as Amos and other Prophets were, who are able to
manifest more of the mind of God, and open the old Scripture, and give out more
of the true meaning thereof, by writing and preaching in an hour, being in the
Light and Wisdom of that Spirit of God, which gave it forth, then is opened
truly by the worldly-wise and spiritually-dim-sighted-Divines, in all those
vast Volumes, that they vent out of their own infinite inventions, and in all
the Sermons, that such Simonists from the supposed spiritual gifts they have
got with their own money, and give out again by way of sale to the people for
their money, throughout the year; yea, there is more truth told, and more of the
riches of Christ, and of the hidden mysteries of the Gospel, that have (as of
old) been kept secret again since the days of Apostasy from the Apostolical
ministration, brought to light in this iuncture, and much more will be, in the
day that is yet but dawning, Multa ferent Anni verientes commoda secum.
by some one Sheep of Christ, that went astray after the hollow voice of
selfish Shepherds, who served and fed themselves, under a seeming show of
serving and feeding the Flock, but is now returned to hear the Voice of the
great Shepherd, and Over-seer of Souls, then by ninety and nine of
tho^eforesaid hireling Shepherds, that never yet went astray from themselves,
or the serving of themselves, since they began to be other men's Masters, and
their own servants to this day; there are, I say, sundry such spiritually
inspired ones, not a few of which are moved and sent of the Lord, as his
Messengers and Scribes, both by writing and word of mouth, to warn a wicked
seed of Serpents, and Generation of Vipers, to repent, and bring forth fruits
worthy of amendment of life, and to flee from the wrath that is now near to
come upon them, as on children of disobedience to the Light of God in their own
consciences, who lay the Lords Axe to every stout Oak of Bashan, and tall Cedar
of Lebanon, and every tree that is lofty and lifted up, to the root of every
fruitless fig tree that has long cumbred the ground, since the Lord has
spared it in hopes of fruit, and is yet covered with no other covering, then
Adam and Eve made to themselves when they had sinned, even the broad fig leaves
of fair forms, good words, sacred shows, ample appearances, Cains Sacrifices,
Esau's tears, fleshly Isreal's formal fastings, proud Pharisees misfigured faces,
hypocrites holinesses, painted pretenses, as little possession as much
profession, as little walking in, as much talking of Truth, Bible beautifying,
letter landing, Anti-Scriptural Scripture defending discourses, without that
Life of Holiness, Power of Godliness, and fruits of Righteousness it calls for:
There are several, who with Habakknk, Chapter 2.1. are got upon their watch Tower,
harkening to what God says in them, who have found nothing to answer when the
Lord has risen up to visit them, and when they have been reproved by him, Job
31. but have sat speechle sand ashamed in silence before him, bearing his
indignation, because they have sinned against him, and have had their filth
purged away by the Spirit of Judgment and burning, and felt woe within
themselves, as men undone, of unclean lips, and dwelling among people of
unclean lips, at the sight of the King the Lord of Hosts, whose iniquity has
been taken away, and their sin purged, by the touching of their lips with a
live coal from the Altar, to whom as they have waited for it, the Vision has
come at the time appointed, and has not tarried, who having tasted of the cup
of trembling within themselves, Hab. 3. and known the terror of the Lord (as
all the Prophets and true Apostles did before they were sent of the Lords
Errand to persuade others, 2 Cor. 5.) and having seen the Son of man coming in
his Kingdom in righteousness to judge the world, and all the people with
equity, have since been sent among such as hate them, that reprove in the
gates, and make men offenders for a word from the Lord, to sound an Alarm, to
cry aloud and not spare, but lift up their voice as a Trumpet, telling the
people that seem to delight in approaching to God, and seek him daily, asking
of him the Ordinances of Justice, and not for saking the outward Ordinance of
their God, but are frequent in fasting and afflicting their Souls, and hanging
down their heads like a bull-rush for a day, and calling out, Lord give us
light, for we are in the dark, direct us in thy truth, lead and guide us in
right paths, and such like, as if they did delight to know Gods ways, as a
Nation that did righteousness, telling such, I say, that they may fast long
enough, and yet God take no knowledge of it, and find no pleasure in their
fasts, so long as in and after their fasts they find their own pleasure, and
live in strife and debate, and sue Christ's sheep at the Law for Tithes, and not
only tear off the Fleece from their backs, but flea their very skins and flesh
from their bones, and smite with the fist of wickedness, and that this is not
at all to fast to the Lord, nor the way to have their voice to be heard on
high, while their hands are full of blood, and their singers defiled with
blood, and their lips speak lies, and their tongues mutter perverseness,
proudly, contemptuously, and disdainfully against the righteous, and they hatch
Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders web, and make such Laws as entangle the
innocent, which venomous creatures can crawl over and escape out of: That the
Fast which God has chosen is to loose the bands of wickedness, to let the
oppressed Israel, or just Seed of God go Free from the house of Bondage, into
which that spirit of Pharaoh has brought them, and to undo the heavy burden,
and break every yoke within and without, etc. which doing, their light shall
break forth as the morning, and their health shall spring forth speedily, and
they shall call, and the Lord will answer, and say, Here am I when they cry,
and he will guide them himself continually by his light from himself in their
own hearts, and their light shall rise out of obscurity, and their darkness be
as the noonday; otherwise, if they leave the plain paths of uprightness to
walk in the ways of darkness, and come not to the light that shines in their
consciences, sciences, and the Law of God which is not far off, but nigh in
their hearts, that they may know and do it, but hate and abhor it, and
persecute the Ministers and children of it, and make to themselves crooked
paths, whatsoever walks therein shall not know peace; yea, Judgment shall be
far from them; and Justice never overtake them, and they shall wait for light,
but behold obscurity, and for brightness, but shall walk in darkness, and groap
for the wall like the blind, as if they had no eyes, and stumble at noonday as
in the night, and be in desolate places as dead men, and roar like Bears, and
mourn sore like Drues, and look for Salvation, but none shall come, because
their transgressions are multiplied before the Lord, and their own sins
testify against them, and their transgressions are still with them, and as for
their iniquities by the light within they know them, transgressing and lying
against the Lord, and departing away from God, while they pretend to draw nigh
unto him, speaking still oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from
their heart words of falsehood, turning Judgment away backward, and causing
Justice to stand afar off, causing truth to fail in their streets, and shutting
out of Equity that it cannot enter, making a prey of him that departs from
iniquity, and mocking the Lord, and making him believe (as far as they can with
their flattering words, and sained turnings unto him) that they love his truth,
his light, and his life, yet in truth saying in their hearts to God, depart
from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: There are such who blow the
Trumpet, as of old the Prophets did to the same tune, and the like to this that
is above, whose Trumpet gives as certain a sound as theirs did also, and not
such an uncertain fallible one as that of the Priests: And these Theopneustoi,
or divinely inspired persons, in their writings, speakings, call for
attendance, reception, and submission, not with that Supreme Authority (I
confess) which I. O. as falsely as foolishly both supposes and saves, T. 1. C:
3. S. 8. Ancient divinely inspired Scripture calls for, which is, quoth he, not
only in comparison with, but also in opposition unto all other ways of coming
to the knowledge of God, his Mind and W^ll, etc. For by his leave, or besides
it either, the Light and infallible Spirit it came forth from, may not only
well compare with its fallible and falsified self, as people now have it
transcribed, translated, twisted and twined which way any unrighteous writers,
either of it, or on it, any men-pleasing Praters, Tythe-taking Talkers, or
time-serving Turn-coats are pleased to take it, and turn it, and wrest it to
their own present ends and future ruin; but al^o may well, and do challenge
attendance to themselves with far more supreme and uncontrollable authority
then it can, yea, as the s^^e and only means of coming to the knowledge of
God, his Mind and Will, whom and which all the Scribes and Scripture-searchers
in the world nor have, nor can know, without the light and Spirit, any more
then the old ones did, Ioh. 5. Matthew. 22. Or then anyone can see the outward
Sun by any light, but that which shines from itself, Matthew. 11.27. 1 Cor. 2.10,
11, 16. And so in opposition to all outward Scripture it self, as that which
may define God, and declare of him and of his mind and will, and yet gives not
the knowledge of either, the knowledge of whose things (if we believe I. O. T.
1. c. 1. s. 16;) depends wholly and solely on his own pure divine revelation
thereof by himself; which revelation is so far expressed indeed in the Scripture;
as that there it is written of, but is expressly made only in the heart, where
it pleases the Son to reveal the Father, and the Father to reveal the Son in
men, ( Gal. 1.15, 16. Ephesians. 1. Col. 1.23.) I say then not with that Supreme
Authority, which is peculiar only to the Light, Spirit, and Word within,
(though ignorantly attributed, yea and appropriated too by I, O. to the outward
writing) yet with the same uncontrollable Authority as the letter does, they
call for attendance even from their Theopneustia, or divine inspiration, which
To Theion, or Power of God that accompanies them in their ministration is
enough to convict I. O. and all the Wolves of these times, that bark and howl
against the Light, and mis-judg^ the many messages that come to them from the
Lord, as rejecters of such as God sends and justifiers of them who flew such of
old as spoke to them in the name of the Lord.

Nevertheless as I. O. says too truly, T. 1. c. 3. s. 9. It always so fell
out, that scarce any Prophet, that spoke in the name of God, had any
approbation from the Church, in whose days be spoke: so it falls out now to
the true Prophets, among all the false Churches of these latter days, from
whom they find less Approbation, and the same Reprobation, as the former did
from those evil Generations wherein they spoke, Ier. 47.3. Matthew. 5.12. 21.33.
to 38. 23.29. Luke 17.25, 26, 27, 28. John 9.29. Acts 7.52. 24.5. And this
comes to pass by reason of the same innumerable prejudices that attend these
their givings out of truth, either in speech or writing, as did the other,
whose writings are not freed (as I. O. fancies) from the prejudices that at
first attended them; but attended with more then at the first writing thereof,
thorough the infinite alterations, mis-transcriptions, mis-translations,
mis-constructions, and mistakes of all sorts they have since been liable to, by
the fallibility, and infinite variety of Scribes, thorough whose hands they
have passed: Which said innumerable prejudices that now attend the modern
Prophets, as did the first, arise from the same Root with those that attended
them in their respective Ages. (viz.) 1. Partly the supposed interests of them
that write and speak by way of Prophecy, or immediate motion. 2. Partly the
personal inf^^mities, homely appearances, stemmering lips, uneloquent, rude,
crude, indigested, unsound, non-sensicall sound of words (as they seem to
(unintelligently understanding) I. O. Ep. ad lectorem Ex. 3. s. 17.) and forms
of speech, which the Babes vf Christ seem to him to babble in, when they drop
their doctrine as the dew, at the Command of God, to the Drunkards of Ephraim,
not all as once, but as it were gutta^im, Precept upon precept, line upon line,
here a little and there a little, Ezekiel. 21.2. Amos 7.16. Isai. 28.9, 10, 11,
13.2. Partly the mean outside of most of these inwardly glorious sons and
daughters of the King, Psalm. 45.13. whose clothing, ad extra, is not (as their
own within, and the worlds without, and its Ministers often is) of wrought
gold, nor yet is it so much of Plush Jippoes and Hose behang'd before, and at
knees with Rings or Ribbons, and Aprons of Points, and costly (if not golden)
Buttons, and such like Garments gay and gorgeous attire; neither is it so much
of that fine linen their (Bishop-like) Boot-t^ps and double Cuffs are cut out
of, as of that, which is the Righteousness of the Saints: by reason of which
these as internally golden, as externally earthen vessels, that bear Gods Name,
and bring his heavenly Treasure, are ill treated, turned out, and trampled on
by both themselves and the people of those gilded high super-celestial,
earthly minded, empty Carks, that ever sound the loudest among their shallow
waters, which make such a noise, together with them, that the still small
voice, wherein God is, can come at no audience, 1 King. 19.12, 13. Ecclus.
9.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. These not bearing such a broad bulk as the other, nor
bringing so much of that all sorts of external excellency and ornament as the
other do, which commends their persons (though never the more to God, nor good
men, yet) to men that have not Christ's mind, but being many of them (as Christ
was) of low, outward birth and education, and, till he was sent to preach, a
Carpenter by occupation, Mark 6.3. Amos's, that by the Priests good will should
never come so near the Kings Chapels, and Princes Courts, as of late some have
been admitted to do, by such Rulers as will never repent of the admittance of
them into their presence, if they repent from what ways soever the light
within them manifests to be evil, as they are advised to do by such of the
Lights Children as the Lord at any time sends unto them, Amos 7.10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Aquila's and Priscilla's Phebe's, Prophecyers by the Spirit of both
Sexer, Sons and Daughters, Servants and Handmaids; as to the lower sort of
literature unlearned James's, Peter's, John's, few of the Priesthoods function,
as Jeremy and Ezekiel once were (for as many Priests as were obedient to the
faith at first, I find few or none of them that came forth to be Prophets) and
few Lawyers, or Learned ones of any sort, unless in some handicraft
employments, one able Paul well skilled in the Law, brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, an indifferent honest Doctor at the Law, very dark and doubting, yet
more moderate then his fellows, Acts 5.34, 38, 39. 22.3. which Paul was a kind
of Pursievant to the chief Priests, till he became a Preacher of what he
ignorantly persecuted before, Acts 9.1, 2, etc. and then turned Tentmaker for
his living, Acts 38.3. Likewise Zenas another Lawyer; at least a Disciple: And
Luke an honest Physician that wrote some of the Acts of Christ, and of some of
the Apostles (of Paul especially, whom he traveled much with) one Ap^^^os
eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. Col. 4.14. Tit. 2.12. One
Matthew an Officer in the Custome-hense, and the rest, for the most part, of the
inferior sort, as they are at this day, few or no Rulers of the Pharisees;
some rich, wise, m^ghty, noble, not many, the rest mostly Tradesm^n, some such
as I. O. speaks of in a place forecited, Ba^bers, Porters, perhaps some
Alehouse-keepers (why not? the Calling being as honest in it self as that of
Ga^us the Churches Host, or any other Inne-keeper, though often much abused, as
what Trade is not when evil men manage it?) Carpenters, Shoemakers, Though the
Cobbler and his Last often troubles them more then all the rest, and makes the
Doctors cry out, Ne suitor ultracrepidam, let the Tailor keep to his shop-board
(say they) and the Shoemaker to his last. So D. Featly D. D. and some others.
Tailors, Tentmakers, Tributegarberers, but no Tithmongers that I yet know of,
Shopkeepers (as Lydia an honest Purple-seller that lived at Philippi, and kept
shop or market at Thia^y^a) Shepherds, Heardsmen, Husbandmen, Farmers,
Fishermen, out of all or most of which sorts Christ makes some Fishers of men
in these days, while the Popish Parish Priests, and other flaunting unclean
spirited spiritual men, fishall their days and get nothing but unclean
croking Frogs like themselves, Rev. 16.13, 14. Howbeit it is but few that
receive the true Faith, because such as broach it bring little or nothing with
it of that outward pomp that people look for at the Kingd^mes coming: And so
Sinihil attuleris ibis Homere F^ras.


4. Partly both Priest^ and Peoples i^c^gitancy, ^scitancy and non observation
of it, that the Kingdom comes, not with so much outward observa^ion and
sumptu^us shows as they seek after, and as the Kingdoms of this world come
with, but with all its glory (which the Saints see in Christ and the Spouse,
when the world does nor, Psalm. 45.13. John 1.) lies more inward then men are
ware of (viz.) in righteousness, peace with God, and joy in the holy Spirit, a
little thing, a grain of Mustard Seed at first, though to be at last the
greatest among the Herbs; and so they d^spise the day of small things, though
it tend to the greatest good and truest glory.

They consider not (no not when they read the very writing which is their own
Rule (as the Jews did not when Moses was read, the vail being over his face and
their hearts) what the Scripture itself says, but in their l^ftiness and
lordly minds, which fly up above the Light, overlook the lowly mind of Christ
in the very Scriptures they to themselves seem to be so much skilled in, they
heed it not, when in it God declares, that out of the mouth of Babes he will
perfect his own p^ais^, Psalm. 8.2. Matthew. 21.16. that it is not by such a fierce
people as are for five and faggot (as Papists are) and carnal weapons, Prisons
and other punishments (as I. O. is) to defend Truth by; nor by a people of a
deeper speech then can well be understood by plain honest hearts (as the
Scribes and Disputers of this world) but by stammering lips, and another tongue
then that they think of, in which all are Riddles and Parables to them, he will
speak to people, and especially to such as hearing will not hear, and seeing
will not see, when things are plain, that hearing they may not hear, yea, that
such may go and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken, Isai.
28.9. to 14. Isai. 33.18, 19. 1 Cor. 14.21. and that it is that foolishness of
preaching (as it is called by such as perish) that God is pleased to save such
by as will b^lieve; that he will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
naught the understanding of the prudent; and turn wise men backward, and make
their knowledge foolish, and frustrate the tokens of the Liars, and lead
Councillors away spoiled, and make the Judges fools, and remove away the
speech of the trusty, and take away the understanding of the aged, and take
away the heart of the chief of the earth, and cause them to wander in a
wilderness where there is no way, and make them greap without light, and
stagger like a drunken man, and befool the Princes of Zoan, and ca^^^ the
counsel of the wise Counselors of Pharaoh to become brutish, and dec^ive the
Princes of Noph that have seduced and been the stay of the Tribes thereof, and
mingle a perverse spirit among them, and cause the Sun to be covered with a
cloud, and the bright lights of heaven to be dark over Egypt, at the putting
of it out, and at the breaking of its yoke, and set darkness upon her Land, and
search out the hidden things of Esau, and take away understanding from his
Mount, and discover deep things of darkness, and bring out to light the shadow
of death, Job 12. Isa. 19. Isa. 29. Isa. 44. Ezekiel. 30.18. 22.7. 8. Obad. 6.
etc. And that he will do all this to a people that have provoked him to anger
with their vanities, by a foolish Nation, and weary them out by such as are no
people in their eyes, Deuteronomy. 32.21. And choose the foolish, and b^se, and weak
things, that Are no^, ^o confound and bring to nothing the things that Are, 1
Cor. 1.20, 27.28. That the great Mountain of Babel shall become a Plain before
Zerubbabel, i, e. Such as are from Babel, as the Word is, and this not by might
nor power of man, but by my Spirit, says the Lord, Zach. 4.6.7. That the
excellency of the work may be of him, and not of man, and that he will do great
things for his own Land of Canaan, whereat they shall rejoice and be glad, Joel
2.21. yet by such instruments as foolish Shepherds, such silly tools as shall
make subtle Sanballets, and tale-bearing Tobyasses, and the rest of the
scoffers of the same seed of Ammon flout ^t them at first as feeble, and say,
What will these feeble folk do? will they revive the stones out of the rubbish,
and build and fortify in a day? Behold, if a Fox go upon their wall, will he
not break it down? Nehem. 4.1.2.3.4. etc. Nehem. 6.6.7.16. etc. and despise the
day of God, as a day of small things, Zach. 4.10. and yet be amazed, terrified,
cast down in themselves, and made to confess it to be of God at the last; and
that he will begin to save, not so much by the heads, as by the tail of the
people, and g^^upwards (not that Prophet that teaches lies, which is the tail
that would be the head, and is to be totally cut off, Isa. 9. but) the lower.
and most despised fort of people, to whom he will show his Salvation, and by
them to the Ancient and the Honorable, and instruct Apollos by Aquila and
Priscila in the way of God more perfectly, and make the Daughters of Philip to
Prophecy, when scarce a Prophetess to be found among the Princesses of the
earth, and Phabe, and other Sisters, Ministers in his Church, and Laborers
with Paul, and fellow-helpers to the Gospel, Romans 16.1. 1 Phil. 4.3. when he
leaves Corvos Prophetas and Prophetissas picas, many unsavory gaping
Preachers, and proud women pratlers of Christ and Faith, etc. ever teaching and
learning, but never coming to the knowledge of the Truth; and that he will
save^ the Tents of Juda first, the plain plow-men and keepers in their own
Tents, and Country cottages, that the glory of the cieled houses of David, and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Kings, Governors, great ones, fine rich
Citizens, mighty Merchants, mincing Ladies, Renowned University Scholars,
Scribes, Pastors, and such like, may no more magnify themselves against Judah,
but stoop to take Truth from stammering lips, or be lest ignorant thereof
forever; and this is one of Gods works and strange Acts, which he is working in
these days, whereat the wise despisers wonder, yet perish, because in no wise
believing it, though it be declared unto them, Zach. 12.7. 1 Hab. 1.5. Act.
13.40.41 Isa. 28.21.22.

5. The mighty multitude of false Prophets, of all shapes, seducing and gain
saying the truth, which are at least four hundred and fifty of one sort, and
four hundred of another, to one of the Lords Elijabs, 1 Kings 18. ver. 19. For
as thou say I. O. T. 1. C. 3. S. 10. in the latter days of that Jewish
Church, that poople were most emi^nently perplexed with false Prophets, both as
to their number and subtilty; so, and much more is it now in these latter days
of the (outside) Christian Churches, that hold the outer Court, yet tread down
the holy City, and of the old World also, wherein the old Serpent called the
Devil and Satan, seeing himself cast out of heaven, where he held war as long
as he could with Michael and his Angels, and is now to have no more place
there, is come down to the Inhabiters of the earth, unto which he is cast in
great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time, and so bestirs himself more
then ever before, and like a mad. Bull that has received a fatal blow in the
forehead, runs bellowing about, and tears and rends what he is able, and foams
against the Man-child, the holy Seed of God, and Sheep of Christ, at his going
forth, and being by permission more strongly then ever re-entred into the
herd^of Swine, drives them down headlong so violently, that there is no saving
of them, to their own everlasting Perdition; to which purpose he musters up all
manner of his Ministers, that from him (as to their Ministerial capacities,
both live, and move, and have their being) Gog and Magags Ministry, and all the
Magicians behind, all these together running on with open mouth to devour the
Israel of God and i^compass the Camp of the Saints, and the beloved City, till
fire come down from God out of heaven and devour them, Isa. 31. yea, of a
truth it it so now, as was foretold 2 Esdras 13. Chap. thoroughout, that it
should be in the latter days, when the most High begins to visit and deliver
his Saints, and come in them, to the astonishment of many, and as a thief and a
snare upon all that dwell upon the earth (viz.) that though all the false
Prophets, and their several peoples, should be Aurium tenus, up to the ears in
strife, one sort of Seers undertaking to fight against another one City, one
Realm, one sort of their misguided people against another, one Troop of these
mad Riders, and their blind horses, Zach. 4. against another, in their
uncertain fallible minds, opinions, conjectures, thoughts, Andabatarum more,
Errorum causa Scripturam (quia lucem Scripture) fugientes Andabatarum more in
tenebris d^micant, at^; utiolim Hammouitae, Moabitae, and habita^ores montis
Sei^is bellum adv. sus, pepulum Dei suscipientes intern^cioni se mutuo
d^voven^; and ad lumen solis hujus (viz.) lucis in cord and conscientia cui
testatur Scriptura confestim evan^scent, I. O. Ex. 3. S. 3.
justling together in the dark, at the Revelation of the Son of God, and his
espoused Sion, and at the hearing of his uncouth voice, they every one in their
own land leave the battle they have one against another, and as of old, the
Ammonites, M^^ites, and they of Mount Seir, waging war against that typical
people of God, the outward fleshly Israel; so these that hate and ban one
another, even to the very death, make one head together against that spiritual
Israel, that is of a clean heart; and all the false Prophets, both an^i^^ and
upstart, and all the subtle f^xes (natura, non nomine) join both little and
great, old and young together, to spoil the Vine that has clusters of tender
grapes, and if it were possible to root it out, and (under a pretense of
preserving the Church, the true seed of Jacob and Israel) to preserve it from
taking root, and blossoming, and budding, and filling the face of the earth
with fruit, as it must do at the last, Isa. 27.6. and like Sampsons Foxes, tail
to tail, they draw diverse ways; lo^here, says one, lothere, says another;
some sounding it out for their Fathers traditions; some summoning to the
Scriptures, and the g^wdy glosses they put upon it (who yet, if they could once
come to see it, live by tradition, and teach G^ds fear afters man's Precepts, as
well as the rest) all to their own fanci^s, dreams, opinions, and imaginations
of one kind or other, and all these firebrarnds fencing to one end, and as
friendly (as Herod and Pilate, at odds against each other, yet at one against
Christ) attempting to dis-inthrone the light of Christ in the Con^cience, from
its due Authority, and from sitting on the Throne in its proper place.

Non iisdem rationibus ducti sedilli pro traditinitus, by pro Scripture
tra^scrip^ionibus, translationibus, interpretationilus ac imaginationibus suis,
tonquam pro aris f^cisque contendentes; atque ita ^on secus ac Sampsonis
vulpecular, obversis candis ignitas faces in segetes Ecclesiae ferentes, cuncti
amicissime e loco suo sacram lucem, sanctum spiritum de qui^us Scriptura
loquitur detu^bare aggrediuntur, Ex. 3. S. 4.
Some resisting the Truth by flat opposition; so all the many sorts of those
gilded cups the Parish Priests do, that yet hold forth all or any R^mish
Relics or measure of that old Whores trash; which wooden Tops are always
turning round with the times, as that lash ( viz. the loss of living if they
so do not) is made use of and exercised toward them, whose movings to and
again, back and forth, from Henry's Religion to Edwards, from his to Mary's,
from hers to Elizabeth's, and so onward, and round (as occasion is) if the word
of command be ( As ye were) is all from the force of some external Engine, or
other, mostly, that of money (for Qui pecunianon movetur hunc dignum specta^u
Arbitramur) not from any inward Principle or Power of the endless life; no par,
no preach, is their common Custom, so that the powerless forms they foam at
each other about, would soon fall all to the earth, whence they are, and not
from Truth, were it not for that Primum-movens that principale propugnaculum of
Tith; as a dead man that can stand not a jot longer, then propt up by something
or other, ad extra, because Deest aliquid infus, there wants the main master
wheel within. Others like those Inchanters that withstood Moses, resist the
Truth too, men of corrupt minds, reprobate yet as concerning the Faith,
leading^ captive silly women after them, from the Faith of Gods Elect, by
imitating the very Truth it self, as far as they are able to come near it, in
their vain fleshly minds, having stole into a form of the same Doctrine, Words,
and Works, without the life, which they hate and oppose in them that are in the
life, preaching the same Truth and Light themselves in their airy spirits,
since the conviction thereof fell upon them, for which they had very formally
cast forth of their own separated Churches the Children of the Light, who
withdrew from them, and so formally were none of them before, that their
senseless confuse or ejection: This is spoken of some Baptists, who now preach
some Doctrines of the Qua. For which they once cast them out of their
Assemblies.
Like the^fore said Sorcerers, to bewitch their people into an abode among them
in Egypt; where they yet are in bondage altogether, and into a non-believing of
the true Messengers of God to be in anything beyond themelves, and to make them
seem to be no more in the power of God then they, by striving to do all, and as
far as they are able to follow on in a form, till at last they be forced to
confess, a finger of God doing all that by their weak arm of flesh, man's
fleshly will and wisdom, which by the Saints is performed, both in and from no
other Arm, then the Light, Power, Wisdom, and Life of God, dwelling in them:
Of this sort are all the Prophets, that are in a fairer form of Godliness then
those behind them, in dark^r and grosser for^m^, yet with them denying, and not
witnessing the power thereof in their hearts and conversations, to the purging
of them from pride and the other p^llutions and corruptions that are in world
through lust; which Magicians, when they see the Servants of the Lord do any
thing, that is taking among their people, and which they are ashamed to di^own,
then they will do so, and (as the Wise men of Egypt set themselves to imitate
Moses) set themselves to do the like, and ^in a show bring forth an Image of
the same: By all which said several sorts of subtle Sorcerers, who with the
most cunning craftiness they have, lie in wait to deceive, the multitudes of
people are deceived, and so seduced from the narrow way of truth, that among
them very few ever find it, and are so eminently perplexed (as to their
discerning aright between Gods Wor^ indeed, and that which is only pretended so
to be, (viz.) the nak^d letter, that only declares what is his Word, and their
own fallible, and sometimes senseless senses, and sermons, upon that letter, of
all which they ay, in their common Preambles to their people, Hearken with fear
and trembling to the Word of God, when often no more then every man's own word,
Ier. 23.36. is spoken) that though God has given men a light and spirit
within, which is me^sura ^sui and^ obl^qu^, that can most certainly determine
of all spirits, and an ^ar (but that its slopt in most) which can as truly try
words, as the mouth ^asteth meats, Job 34.3. 1 Ieh. 4.1, 6. and also se^meria,
infall be tokens to enable them so to do, yet they can make no discrimination
between right and wrong, faith and falsehood, uprightness and error, honesty
and hypocrysie, holiness and heresy, the simplicity that ^s in Christ, and
that schism from it, into which they are already enchanted, 2 Cor. 11.3. the
light and truth, and that deceit and darkness, in which both Prophets and
People dwell, through the busy battles, and confused noises, these Warriors
make with their loud cryings out each against other, and all with one mouth
against the Truth it self, and the tellers of it, as Deceivers, and all with
one consent mis-representing them as such unto the Powers, mis-advis^^g and
mis-admon^shing their respective peoples to this or the like tune, Beware and
take heed of deceit, and of these deceivers the Qua. not heeding all this
while, or at least not willing their people should heed how deeply they are all
in the deceit already: so like the impudent Harlot, that hopes to outcry and
bear down the modest Matron with a clamor of words, and by calling out Wh^re
first, these foolish loud lewd Women, fearing their own filthy fornications
should else be soon discovered, cry out first on that Sect of Saints, which was
ever and every where so spoken against, Acts 24.14. 28.22. Heresy, schism,
error, darkness, disturbance, madness, enthusiasme, fanaticisme, faction, and
such like; and though they and their flocks of Goats, and herds of Swine, live
in the lust, in pride, covetousness, malice, luxury, and all wickedness, and
have nothing of their own save unrighteousness to be robbed of, and nothing to
be led captive, but that which has captivated the just, nor to be spoild of,
but that which spoils them Souls and Bodies, and naught to be deceived of, but
deceit and darkness it self, yet they are ever noysing it out, Deceit, Deceit;
by means of which unanimous outcries, and simultaneous sounds of these
Heterogeneous, multaneous, multanimous false Prophets, drowning the still voice
of W^sdome, which yet cries aloud too, and utters her voice to these simple
scorners in their streets, Pro. 1. It is not heard nor heeded; though the
Wisdom of God send them now (as of old he did to the like Generation of evil
doers) Matthew. 23.34. Luke 11.49.50. Prophets, and Apostles, and wise m^n, and
Scribes, yet some of them they even kill, and some of them they imprison and
persecute out of their Synagogues, and some they stone, dirt, and bemire, not
only with their belying lips and pens, but also their merciless hands (the dark
places of the earth, Cathedrals, Monasteries, Abbeys, Academies, Colleges,
being ever full of the habitations of cruelty, Ps.) and some they sorely whip
and scourge, supposing they do God service in all this, John 16.2. that the
righteous blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the
world, may come upon them, which verily is to be required both of this, and in
this present evil Generation.

For the Lord is now in earnest, bending Judah for himself, and filling the bow
with Ephraim, and raising up the (Academically-unlearned) sons of Sion, against
those sons of Greek, and making them as the Sword of a mighty man in his own
hand, to do vengeance on those heathenish nursing Mothers, and to punish not
only all others, but more especially their Pope-like Priests and people, to
bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, to execute
on them the Judgment written in the Scripture itself they scribble about, far
more then they are skilled in it, to speak to those Drunkards with the wine of
their own wisdom, with stammering lips, and another Tongue then any they can
talk in, or understand, by precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little,
and there a little, that they may go backward, and stumble, and fall, and be
broken, and snared, and taken, and to reject those Greeks, that seek so much
after man's wisdom, in the promulgation of the things of God, to whom the Cross
of Christ is foolishness, and to reject those Scribes and Disputers of this
world, and by that preaching, which to them is foolishness itself, to make
their wisdom foolish, and to choose out foolish, weak, base things, and
persons, even Laics, Mechanics, Rusticks, Russet-Rabbies (as they term them)
even Babes, Bablers, and such as Are not in their eyes, to confound and bring
to naught these mighty wise and prudent ones that Are, and to draw the night
and darkness over those dreaming Diviners, that they shall no more divine what
things and strange acts are transacting in this time, and to cause the Sun to
set upon their learned Seers, that scoffingly call to the Qua. out of their
Mount Seir, Watchman, What of the night? So that the Vision of all, both to
them and their unlearned people, that live upon their lips, shall be as a book
sea^ed, and to search out the hidden things of those Lord Esau's, that hunt
abroad for their learning, and to supplant them by his plain honest-hearted
Jacobs, that dwell and learn truth at home in their own Tents, and to cover
Egypt with a Cloud, and to mingle a perverse spirit among her Ministers, and
to manifest the folly of these Iannes and Iambres, that resist the truth, men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, as he did theirs that
withstood Moses of old; and to leave the Princes of Zoan to become fools, and
the counsel of these wise Counselors of Pharaoh to become brutish; so that it
shall be said of them, as of old, I^a. 19. Where are they? Where are the wise
men? Let them tell now, let them know what the Lord of Hosts has purposed upon
Egypt (yea surely, these Princes of Zoan, are already become fools, the
Princes of N^p^ are deceived: They have also seduced Egypt, even they, that
Tribe, that is the stay of the Tribes thereof, and to divide in Jacob that
Trip^L^ Tribe of Levi, whose anger and wrath is cursed, for it has been cruel,
and as they have scattered the Israel of God, so to scatter them in his Israel,
and to set these ^o^sheards of the earth to drive with each other about their
own foundation, and to r^ze their own Babel to the ground, and to break
themselves to pieces one against another, like a Potters Vessel^, so that in
the bursting thereof, there shall not be left at last so much as a sheard fit
to use to take fire from the hearth, or water withal from the pi^, and to
render all the works and voluminous Tomes of these Turners of his things upside
down, of no better esteem among men, then the Potters cla^, and to take all
these subtle foxes in their own craftiness, both the great and the little one^,
that Spoil his Vine which bath tender Grapes, and hurt the cluster, or
gatherings of the Saints together, in which is the New Wine, and the Blessing,
and to unho^se this Tripple-crown'd Harlot, that has so long rode and at upon
both Powers and their people, and her nursing Mothers of l^arning true Religion
and piety (in pretense) but (in truth) of all ignorance, superstition, and
abomination, and to call to account the whole Ct Clergy, upon which a
Consumption is determined throughout the earth, and to summon both the Pope,
and his Cardinals, Mount Seigniors, Jesuits, Monks, F^yers; and also all
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and their Officials; also all
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and all Spiritual Persons whatsoever; also all
learned Linguists, Scribes, Text-men, Translators, Commentators, T^eaters,
Tythe-Teachers, Talkers of Truth for their own turns, and Trad^r^ out of the
Scriptures, profit-seeking Prophets and Pastors, that for pay have made a prey
of his people, and to plead with them for his flock, and to come down to fight
for Mount Sion, and for the hill thereof, and to Roar through the mouths of his
Prophets, against these many sorts of Shepherds, that are now so loud, and full
of noyses and clamours, to keep their flocks from fleeing from them, crying
out, Heresy, beresie, Schism, Quake^ism, Fanaticism, etc. and to scatter their
people from them, and to gather his own sheep into his Fold, whom they have
driven to and fro from mountain to hill, in the dark and gloomy day, and to
take their prey from the midst of them, and like a Lion roaring on his prey,
when a multitude of Shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be
afraid of their ^ice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: In a word, to
stretch out his hand so strongly against them all, that those powers and people
that help them shall fall; and those Priests, Universities, Doctors,
Scholars, and other Students there, that are helped by the earthly powers,
shall fall, and they all shall fail together, and not be able to uphold one
another, but be cast, as Iezebell and her Lovers, into a bed of torments
together, and into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds: And as
the espousall of the University, Priestly and Clericall Interest with that of
the Commonwealths, has ever yet obstructed the proceedings of all Parliaments
and Powers in this Land of Resolved on Reformation, and prohibited their
prospering in any of their undertakings, to perfect the propounded Privileges
of the people: So in way of warning to you, whether you will yet hear or
forbear; whether I live to see it, or die before it, I here assure you from the
Lord, O ye the present Powers in this English Nation, the clea^ring of that
mi^e and clay of the Clergies Councels to your Iron, will never hold, but the
Stone cutout of the Mountain without hands will smite your Image, that stands
on such a mixed, brittle bottom in the feet and toes of it, that it shall fall
and become, before the Word and Spirit of the Lord, in the mouths and hearts of
his people, as the chafe of the Summerfloor, yea, as stubble before the wind,
and the Angel of the Lord pursuing it.

And albeit the business of rooting out all Romish Relics yet remaining,
remains yet reeling to and fro, to and fro, in this Nation, so that no man
knows which way the scales will turn, and the case be cast, by looking merely
to men's managing of matters without, in such a wavering, unstable manner do
things stand, while they are under the hands of such double minded men, as are
unstable in all their ways, nothing but wavering like the waves of the Sea,
driven to and fro, and tossed; yet such as look inward, whose eyes and hearts
are toward the Lord, rejoicing in his Highness, whose Excellency is in the
Clouds, and hoping in his mercy, they are come within the ken and clear sight
of RRRomes utter ruin, in all three of her Appearances in this Nation, which
are about the tenth part of the old Roman Empire, and of the P^pedome also in
its late largest Latitude, in which Nations, at the sound of the sixth Trumpet,
the Tenth part of the Clergy or great City BBBabylon, the mystical Mother of
Harlots and Abominations, falls first, Rev. 11.13. as an earnest of the fu^l,
final, and universal fall thereof, which comes after it, Rev. 16.19. in the
Plague of the seventh Vial.

And notwithstanding all that loathness to part with her, and pitiful pining
after her, and pleading for sparing her, and often uprising to uphold her in
her Prelaticall, and Presbyterian Pontificalibus Paroch^a'l preferments, and
excrementirious university Excellencies, and Collegian Exercises and
Concerrments, that is among the Merchants that trade with her, and are made
rich by the abundance of her delicacies: Yet the feet of all these petty
Popelings must also slide in due time, and the things that come upon them and
their Pontificals (though seeming to them sometimes to stand still, or give
back again) make have: and as sure as the old m^nasticall, massy Ministry and
their maintenance and most foggy forms of ministration, Holy water, Latin
Letanies, Ave Maria's, Misereremei's, Pater Nosters, Te Deums, Trigintals,
Dirges, De Profundis, M^rtuaries, Peter Pence, and such like, were sent packing
first, and after them the Protestant imitations, and English Images, of most of
those Popish Latin Ch^^ts ( viz.) D^ans and Chapters Lands, EasterReckonings,
Offerings, Mid-Summer Dues, Christenings with Crosses, marrying with the Ring,
Churchings of Childbed Women, Bishoppings of Children, and the fees belonging
thereunto, goings on Procession yearly to view the bounds of their Parishes,
and reading the Epistles and Gospels at such and such Hedges, Bushes, Trees,
Bowings at the Name of Jesus, Cringings before the Altar, Facings toward the
East, High-Altar-Service, Rayls, costly Windows, Crucifixes, holy Vestments,
Lawn Sleeves, Canonical Coats, costly Copes, Sandals, Su^plices, Anthems, holy
Sing-songs, Organ, and sundry other Popish Pipes and Pictures, Mattens, and
Even-songs, Liturgies, Consecrations of Chapels, of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, Ministers, Cathedrals, and a number more of such like Choristicall
Church geer, and the Stipends thereto pertaining, which Protestant Services,
saving the different Language therein administered, and some certain
expurgations of some grosser Superstitions, in which the P^pish did exceed
them, are now, as they once were under the Pope of Cante^buries patronage,
growing back a pace into a lively, or rather deadly conformity to that of the
Romish Synag^gue they were lately ^ent from, as chips of that old Block, and
certain slips transplanted and set in the same soil, where the old body of that
Oak, they were cut off from, once grew and flourished.

So assuredly all that long train of P^pish Trash, and man's Tradition, used,
whether in, or in order to the worship of God, in either Universities, Schools,
Colleges, or Country Churches, and the respective Romish Rewards belonging to
the men, whether already made, or to be made Ministers of this Traditional,
National Ministration that yet remains ( viz.) Deaneries, Prebendaries,
Presidemships, Masterships, Fellowships, Educations in Universities and
Colleges, together with the Degrees there taken, of Doctorship, Batchellou^ship
(so far as to the thing called Divinity, and as in order to the Ministry of
Christ's Gospel, and not only the great preferments and profits, but also the
many fidling formalities and silly supersluities of Scarlet Gowns, with
Velvet-plush, of Sattanically faced Sleeves, the long rich sa^snet Scarfes
before, the silken Snap-sacks behind, and their many odd mystical Mumblings,
Kissings, Kneelings, Bowings, bare-headed Trottings to and fro, and gaddings
hither and thither, about begging and granting Graces, and much more for did
service of this sort, that was wont (if not lately left off and ceased from) to
be stood upon in our nursing Mothers of naughtiness and heathernish canity.

Likewise all those Country parish practices (viz.) Christening Infants, not
in Fonts as before, with Gossips, but in Basins, yet not without sundry of the
old festival Customs, and plum-cake Ceremonies, (to say nothing of the
superstitious observations of the old Popishly consecrated sacred Seasons, of
Christs-masse, Candle-masse, Micha^^masse, Lam-masse, etc. celebrated and
sanctified with more unholiness then all the year beside, which steal in apace
again among many Priests and people) their Singings of David's Psalms with
Doeg's spirit, by a line at a time, as the Priest or Clark reads before them, in
the ^ime and Meeter that Queen Elizabeth's Musitia^s, Io^ Hopkins and Tho.
Sternhold, have molded them into, which Songs of the Temples, wherein many
People tell to God more lies of themselves then truth, ( While they say they
are not pust in mind, nor scornful, and they water their couch with their
tears, when as they are as proud as they can look, and rejoice to do evil,
and scarce shed a tear in their lives for their sins) must be turned into
howlings, and the eatings and drinkings of gluttons and drunka^ls, and the
communion of Swine at their Lords Supper, and much more such miserable old
Mother-like manner of devotions and meetings together in the ancient
Mass-bouses, at the t^^ling of the great Bell, or the tinkling of the Saints
Bell (as 'twas commonly called) more then at the found or true call of Christ's
Spirit in the conscience, who is now calling out of all such dead Devoutry^^,
together with the large Popish pay of fat Parsonages, Vicaradge;, Blebe-lands,
Tyhes, Augmentations, etc. much of which for an hour or two's work in a week,
is by persecution plucked from many poor folks families, that in conscience
cannot contribute to the upholding and maintaining of such a mess of
Merchandise, and Den of Thieves.

I say all this P^pish and Priestly Bag and Baggage, must once march after that
which is gone before, and be sent packing into the pitfrom whence it came,
before ever this Nation come to know true peace; yea, wrath is gone out against
it from the Lord; and those powers that piece, and patch, and dawb, and mend,
and prop, and repair, and build up again, and plant, and maintain, and uphold,
and help, and heal the fragments of that old Fabric, and form of godliness,
where the power is denied, which God has a purpose to lay waste, and pluck up,
and throw down, and bring to naught, and confound, though they say in the pride
and sto^^ness of their hearts, the bricks are fallen down, but we will build with
he^^en stone, we will reform, and square the materials, but keep up the same
Parish Popish form: the Sickamores are cut down, but we will change them into
Cedars, shall find, that as they seek to plant, the Lord will pluck up, and
what they build, the Lord will throw down, and mingle their enemies together in
battle against them, some before, and some behind to devour, till they wholly
and thoroughly turn to him that smireth them, and that he himself will cut off
branch and rush, head and tail, even the Ancient and the Honou^ab^^, which is
the head, and the Prophet that reaches lies, which is the Tail, (...) d^y; for
where the Leaders of a people d^ long cause them ^o err, both themselves, and
those that are led of them are destroyed, I^a. 9.9 to 17.

Be wife now therefore, O ye Kings, b^inst u^^ dy^ Ru^ers of b^s^ Nations, for
they that by often reproofs are forced to ^eild to let Gods Israel go fully
free to his own service, and then like P^a^^ah, are as f^^ ^ard^^d into
refusals of it, when they are going, or into a pe^secution of them when they
are gone, will undoubtedly know to their own utter over-wh^lming and
destruction, that deliverance will arise some way or other to his people, that
their Chariot Wheels shall be taken off, that their drivings on after them in
the dark, will be but heavily and too sl^wly to ^ve^tak^ or bring them back
again; and that the Lord himself, who has placed between them the Pillar of
Fire, to be a Light to the one, and a Cloud and darkness to the other, does at
this day (as of old) fight for Israel against the Egyptians, etc. sides with
his redeemed and ransomed ones, against all whose hearts are turned against
them, to grutch at the liberty once granted them to go, so as to seek to
entangle, or to reduce them again into bondage: For men are now (as God himself
is) in earnest, and not in jest^, about the matters of God and Truth; and the
Power of the Lord is with them that stand up, and are valiant for the Truth,
and not for the empty shows of it only in this and the other outward form; and
God himself is risen, and rising in the Saints, to be avenged on the flattering
foes of his people, and really resolved to bear no longer, but to break the
head, and wound the hairy scalp of every such a one as goes on still in his
trespasses, and every plant shall assuredly be plucked up, which the heavenly
Father himself has nor planted.

Let us hear then the conclusion of this whole matter, into which, if I have
deviated any thing largely, yet that business can plead its own excuse, since
its not mere method so much as matter of profit that I mind, who know, that
though the Prohhesie of smoother and sweeter things is more desirable to most,
yet Omne tulit punctum qui miseuit utile Amdro.


He hits the nail on the head more, that ministers bitter and rough reproof,
where need is, then he qui miscet inutile dulci, who divines smooth, ngared
bits, and sweet deceits (as our Divines do) to men's undoing; and that he who
faithfully holds forth the trouble some Truth, shall find more favor (as with
God for ever) so with men at last, then he who feeds them with lies, and
continually flattereth them with his lips: And besides, by your difficulty to
believe that God has any true Prophets, or infallibly inspired messengers of
his in these days, I have been drawn not aside, but directly to the proof of
it for your sakes I.O.T.D. and such as are deluded by you; to whom my love is
so great, that as ye have by your denying any such Theopneustian, divine
inspiration, revelation, motion, immediate mission as of old, compelled me to
go a mile with you out (if it be Out) of the way; so I have gone along with
you, or at least over against you, no less then Twain: And now I hasten to make
an end with you altogether.

Of what has been spoken, then this is the sum, there are Prophets, and men
moved, led and guided by Gods Infa'lible Spirit, that by it are fitted (though
ye deny it) to open Scripture; nor was it ever since it was a Scripture more
opened by that Infa'lible Spirit, then now it is, and is soon to be; yet for
all this, men that have no more then the outward Moses, and the Prophets, do
not believe, nor repent, because they listen not to the Light within, that
calls for doing to all as they would be done by, which is the Law and the
Prophets, says Christ, Matthew. 7. for want of attending to which, they not only
repent not at the call of their own dead Prophets dead preachings, who are yet
living in their trespasses and sins, but for the most part also, not at the
preachings of such as minister from the Life (and not the dead letter only) who
are quickened and made alive again from their trespasses and sins, and so not
heeding the light, here is no repentance yet, though they be warned by such as
are risen with Christ, and sent unto them from the dead.

CHAP. II.
NOw then to make a more full and final enquiry into the cause of that foresaid
Grand and Imp^nit^ncy, Is it for want of that saving Light of God that is (if
heeded) sufficient to guide all men, even to that repentance which is to
Salvation, that is never to be repented of? Nay verily, not so neither, for all
men have from God and Christ a light within them, ^ measure of that true light
(saving I.Os. and T Ds. I. T^mbs, R. Bax. dark conceits to the contrary) which
is sufficient to bring them that follow it to Salvation, but only that its not
attended to: And this, together with that about the Letter above spoken to,
which ye lay as your chief foundation, being the chief matters at first
intended by me to be controverted with I.O. but that well nigh at my beginning
in carnest to enter the Lists with him, T. Ds. two young Cub^:, one some while
after another, coming out upon me, occasioned me to make many an extravagant
vagary after them, into some other doctrinal, accountative, and narrative
businesses, for the Truths sake more then my own, that people might no longer
(unless they will) be led aside from it by his lies, and gu^^'d with his
gilded glosses and counterfeit colors, wherewith ^he ^awbs, and smooths, and
sooths them up in sin and sinister su^mizes against the truth, and the tellers
of it in the points abovesaid, and covers himself, and his false doctrines of
Justification, of Saints in Sin, personal Election of all but a very few,
non-pu^gation from sin in this life, and sundry others, either more directly
and largely (as that of Justification) or more briefly, occasionally, or but
interlinearily resured before, in which I.O. is as co-incident with him, as he
with I.O. in the rest.

I shall now betake my self to some more single (though short) Animadversion
thereof, as it lies in difference between the Qua. who hold it out for truth,
and I.O. T.D. I.T.R.B. and the owners of their books extant, in which they
oppose the Qua. in print very much, if not more then in any other whatsoever;
and so I shall have done with them both at this time.

And first, I shall begin with T.D. his two Do-littles, and take account of his
mighty weak mannagement of his many meanings, as to that matter of the light
against the Qu. of which in many things, he means much what as I.O. does, and
is confused and contradictory to himself not a little about it; yet I must
needs say, not by ten-fold so much as I.O. is in his mad mang^nization of his
mind in this matter; howbeit, T.D. as to his Dispute, goes clear beside the
Question, as it was stated about the Light, as he did about the Letter, and
Justification, and strikes much more upon the Anvil, then on the iron, and yet
he gives us the Quest. too, at the very beginning to dispute it, as he did
those two about Justification, and the Scripture; as may appear by what follows.

The Question between the Qua. and T.D. was as he relates, p. 1. of his 1.
Pamph. viz. Whether every man that comes into the World be enlightened by
Christ? which when R, H. affirmed, T.D. (as himself relates) replied thus, viz.
But what Light is it you intend? we grant that every man has some Light, by
which he discernes (though dimly) many sins and duties, and several divine
attributes; but the mystery of Godliness, as it is summed up, 1. Tim. 3. ult.
God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. we deny that all men
have the knowledge of. To which Question of T.D. What Light is it you intend?
When R.H. honestly and truly replied thus, viz. The Light, i.e. the Light of
Christ (about which only the Question was) is but one.

T.D. replies thus, viz. The Lights mentioned, viz. ^aturall and supernatural
Light are two; and though all have the one, yet few have the other.

Rep. 1. Here let all reasonable men judge, whether thou T. D. do not clearly
yield us our Question, which was not at all about the measure of the Light,
whether all have the same measure of it or not? for we affirm not that, but
whether all have some measure of that same light that shines from Christ, the
light of the world, yea or nay? not whether all have so much, as whereby they
actually see all the things of God, and the Gospel, which are to be seen, or
are seen by some, but whether every man has some or no? i.e. so much as
whereby to discern some of the things of the Spirit of God and the Gospel,
several divine Attributes, and many duties, i.e. so many, or such as God
requires of him in particular, who requires of every one according to the
ability and degree of light he gives, and accepts every one according to
what he has from him, and not according to what he has not; which measure
walking answerably to, they stand excused, uncondemned, alias, justified in the
sight of God, but rebelling against stand accused or condemned: and this T.D.
thon consentest to, and affirmest with us, so clearly, that all thy after
dispute upon it does not fetch that again which thou grantest to us, it being
about another Question of thy own starting, which we deny not, ( viz.) Whether
all have the actual knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel in the light yea or
no?

For mark, We grant (say thou) that every man has some light, i.e. is in
some sort enlightened by Christ (for thy grant is to the Question above,
whether by Christ or not, or else thy Answer is beside the purpose) And besides
p. 4. thou denyest not, but the Gentiles before Christ were enlightened by Christ
(as God) (though yet to the contradiction of thy self again, as if the being
enlightened to know, and a man knowing were all one, thou there say they were
afar off from the knowledge of that) by whose light be discernes (though
dimly) (and how dimly or clearly is nothing to the purpose) many sins, and
duties, and several divine attributes.

In which words thou say as much to our purpose as we would desire thee. Its
ill stumbling at the threshold T. D. at the very entrance of thy work, and yet
no less thou did again in Limine at the very beginning of our Disputation
with thee,, about the Scriptures being the Word of God, as is to be read in thy
own Relation of the second days work, p. 25, 26. of 1. Pamph. where thou
say the Question I promised to discourse upon was, Whether the Scriptures
were the word of God (and that indeed was the Question) to which, as soon as in
answer to thy desires of knowing what I held about it, I denied that the
Graphe, the Gramma, the Scriptures ie^te, writing, or outward text is the Word
of God, thou repliedst by way of compliance with me, saying, You cannot believe
us so simple (surely) as to affirm the Scriptures in that sense to be the Word
of God: And I say, if not in that sense, then in no sense are they so truly and
properly, that I know of, but I.O. his foresaid non-se^s^, who, howbeit he is
forced to confess Ex. 1. S. 28.40. to the yielding the cause to the Qua. that
the matter contained in it only is said to be so, but that the Scripture
formally considered, or the littera Scripta, or letter written, is not within,
and is not intended in those innumerable places of Scripture, where the word of
God is said to be preached, published, multiplied, received, which, as is
showed more at large above, is as non-sensicall, as for a man to say, that the
Lantern (though formaliter it be not so, but only the light that is contained
in it, is so) does yet challenge to it self that name of the light, as its
proper name, yet engages himself against the Qua. in vindication of the Word of
God to be the proper name of the Scriptures; so truly, that those are injurious
to it, and oppro^^ious reproachers of it, who will not allow it to be properly
called by that glorious title.

So thou engaging thy self in vindication of the Scriptures to be the Word of
God. 1 Giving us the Question to have been debated, flinkest away into the
proof of another matter, saying, that ye upon the matter contained in the
writing (which, say we, is another business, the holy truth that is there told,
and the Light and Word of God, Law and Gospel there witnessed to, being a thing
to distinct from the Scripture of it, that as it is now where the letter is
not, and was two thousand years before the letter was, so it will be for ever,
for its an everlasting Gospel, when the letter of it shall be no more) Whether
that be your Rule of Faith and Life? a matter in no wise denied by the Qua. if
not only by the Scripture ye mean (as properly ye cannot do) the holy Doctrine,
Truth, Word, Light, Law, Gospel of Christ therein declared, to be in some
measure at least in the heart of every man, preached in every Creature, that
they may hear and do it; but also by thy Term, Our Rule of Faith and Life, that
which de jure ought to be your Rule; otherwise if ye say even of that de facto,
that it is your Rule, or in esse actual that which ye do actually and indeed
walk by; I deny even that also, for howbeit ye should own that also, (and not
the letter and text only, as I.O. does) yet so far are ye from so doing, that
if thou do not, yet at least I.O. both doctrinally and practically denies, and
damnes it down, as a mere nescio quid of the Qua. coining.

Moreover much what in the same manner do thou in the Point of Justification,
give us no less then the Question, as to the Terms wherein it was stated, and
then startest a new Question in thy Sophistical s^^ it of subtil^y, which is
so familiar with thee, that it is seen by any that are but ^^ unculi only in the
thing called Dispute, by staring and translating the old one under new terms.

For witness thy own disagreeing, counterfeited Account thereof, p. 14. 1.
Pamph. the new Terms, wherein (that thou mighest the more easily wrong me by
thy wrong Representation of me to the world, as a rank Papist, and render me
suspicious, and the more securely write me out, as thou do^t in the second Page
of the lying Narrative of thy second Pamp. under that traducing Title, of one
suspected to be a Jesuit) thou with much ado (as thy phrase there is) drewest
and wrestedst the Quest. into, and ^ayest (on thy own head) they were slated in
were, whether Our Good Wor^s are the meritorious cause of our Justification?
which I hold in the affirmative no further, then as by Our good works are meant
the good works of God, and Christ's own working in us by his Spirit, which
(though most truly his) are by the Spirit it self vouchsafed that name of Ours,
witness Isa. 26.12. not as by Ours, those only of our own working in our will,
wisdom, and strength, are expressed and intended, for all such are Our
righteousnesses, which I (who own none of Christ's working in us to be so, as
thou T.D. blasphemously dest, if p. 15. and 22. of thy I. Pamp. be rightly,
soan'd) do own to be but durg, l^ss, and filthy rags, according to Isa. 64.6.

But the true terms of the Quest in which it was stated and debated (if we may,
as sure enough we may, believe the joint testimony of both thy self, and those
Gentlemen and Ministers in the Margent, as in thy Epistle thou stilest them, of
whom there thou say also, they are witnesses of the terms of the Questions
agreed to by the Qu. before the testimony of thy single; double, lying,
self-contradicting self) were otherwise; witness thy own Relation thereof in
thy lying Narrative, which has not any thing at all of that little truth
that is in it, more true then this, wherein p. 58.1 Pamp. setting all these
witnesses ( viz.) Hen. Oxenden, Io. Boys, Esqs; N. Barry, T. Selyard, C.
Nichols, Ministers, over against it in the Margin, to testify the truth
thereof, together with thee, thou relatest thus; The terms of the third Quest.
were, Whether Good Works be the meritorious cause of our Justification, which
was expressly affirmed by them, i.e. by the Qu. Opportet mendacem esse memorem.
in which terms, staring the Question without that term Our, which is of thy
own fois^ing in the other place, where, even thereby, on thy own head, thou
alterest the stare thereof, and make it clearly another Question: I affirm it
to this very day, and ever shall to the faces of any of you (as occasion is)
yet owning no works to be truly good, but what are done by the Believers in
Christ, and his Light, and done by Christ, and his Power and Spirit, whether in
their persons, or his own, who never did evil work in his, or (without
blasphemy) in Paul, that can be called (as thou call'st that he wrought in
Paul, and works in us) Paul's own, and ours, which is but dung, less, and filthy
rags; or deserve condemnation, or any less then Justification, both of himself
and his Saints in the sight of God, by any good work that ever he wrought,
either in himself, or them.

And so my Argument, a Contrariis, ye so ball and squabble with me about, was
both intended, and urged in effect, (viz.) If evil works deserve condemnation,
then good works no Condemnation, alias, Justification; but this is true;
therefore the latter.

Which question so stated, thou T.D. not only affirmest with me: For thou
neither do, nor da^est deny, but that we are justified by the good works of
Christ, or that any of his worksare not good, or are a violation, and not a
fulfilling of the Law, only thou foolishly flamst it off with his good works
done, ad extra, and not ad intra, without only, and not within us, thy folly in
which I have largely enough manifested before, but also urgest the same thy
self, P. 15.1. Pamp. thus; viz. Evil works, which are the violation of the Law,
d*serve Condemnation; Ergo, Good works, that are the fulfilling of the Law,
deserve Salvation, and we know no good works such (say thou) but Christ's;
and so say we too. Thus thou give us that Question also.

And this G.W. tells thee of, and turns upon thee in his Reply to thy first so
plainly, that thou do but add to thy shame in thy Reply to him again, p. 10.
of thy 2. Pamp. which begins with a flat lie, which I Will note here, now I have
it in hand: I did not (say thou) directly affirm that good works, which are
the fulfilling the Law, deserve Salvation, but that from the Rule of Contraries
(which S.F. urged) we might so argue. Now if thou confess, that by that rule we
may so argue, then the thing is so secundum te, or else thou can not truly
say we may so argue, and that is as directly to affirm it as one need be
desired to do: So thou have not much mended thy matter, nor by thy lie lick't
thy self sound of what G.W. laid on thee; but indeed thy words, as thy self
repeatest them in thy first Pam. p. 15. are directly positive, and not
suppositive; for after many other positions, thou layest down that thus, viz.
And again, thus the rule will allow to argue, which if it be not so, then the
rule will not allow us so to argue: As to what follows in that Rep^y, as its
excentrick, as to my purpose here to meddle with it, so it (as well as well
nigh all thy doctrinal doings in thy second Trifle) is no more then what is by
praeoccupation answered above in my occasional considerations of thy first,
termed the Qua. folly, to which thou referrest thy Reader so much, that thou
might well nigh as well have said no more to the world in Reply to G.W. then
thus; viz. For an answer to G.W. I refer the Reader to my Qua. folly, which he
has already answered: Therefore I shall say no more to it here.

So in those two Quest. as I have showed, thou give us the Quest. and then
fallest in with us, in a seeming show of fighting with us about other Quest.
which we deny no more then thou, and thou thy self affirmest as much as our
selves; and so is it in this Quest. about the Light: Thou confessest with us,
that all have seem light, but (say thou) the mystery of Godliness, as summed
up, 1 Timothy 3. we deny all have the knowledge of: And p. 2. if your meaning be,
that the knowledge of the Gospel is vouch safed by Christ to every man, either
I expect your proof, or shall prove the contrary: And so upon a taking it for
granted (as thy own and I.Os. manner mostly is) before its given thee, for no
such thing did we or R.H. consent to, by speech or silence, saving thy hasty
prate (and so G.W. tells thee in his Reply, to whom thou, having as little to
plead in excuse of thy rash charge of us, replyest as little in proof of it) as
that the knowledge of the Gospel is vouch safed to every man; for we own, as
G.W. there says, that some are in the darkness and ignorance of the Gospel,
though the Light is in them, that is able to bring them to know the Gospel,
which they disobeying, and not liking to retain God in their knowledge, are
blind unto. I say, taking, or rather rashly raking that for granted that was
not, thou proceed'st upon that score plainly, belabouring thy self in evincing
a business that none gain-sayes, viz. that all men do not actually and truly
understand the Mystery of Godliness and the Gospel; and as childishly arguing
all along, a non actu ad non potentiam, a non esse ad non posse, from men's not
knowing God and Christ, that they are in no capacity, by a measure of light
shining from them into their Consciences to know them.

The Mystery of Godliness (say thou) we deny, all men have the knowledge
of; and so p. 5.1. Pamph, it is spoken of as a distinguishing Mercy, to know the
Mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven, it was given to the Disciples, not to
others, Matthew. 13.11.

Rep. To which I reply, Who doubts of this? it was hid from some, and the
knowledge of it given so some, not to others; but who were these some to whom
given, when not to others? were they not the Disciples that learnt at the lips
and light of Christ, what he taught them, and saw willingly what he showed
them; when the rest (who might else have come to know, and have had it given
them to know as well as these) were such as had it declared in them, with the
righteousness thereof, but that they shut their eyes, stop their own ears, lest
they should see and hear that, which was contrary to their evil deeds, they
were ^^ath to leave, and reproved them? But what of this, are they therefore
without the Light that showed it, and the means of the knowledge of it? what
idle arguing is here? The Mystery of Godliness as summed up, 1 Timothy 3. ult. God
manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit,etc. We deny as well as thou,
that all men have the knowledge of, for without controversy it is great, and
so great, that (saving all that knowledge thou think thou have, and would
be thought to have of it) it remains yet a Mystery to thy self: But what then?
will it therefore follow, that all men, in case they come to his light, are not
enlightened by Christ in some measure to know it? Because all are not
enlightened so much as some are by Christ, and all do not know what they might
know, if they hearkened to Christ, and heeded that light they have, therefore
some are not enlightened by Christ at all: Here is the sum of T.D's. Arguments;
and (as I shall show anon) of I.O's I.T's. R.B's. also against the saving light
of Christ's being in some measure in all men.

The consequence whereof is as inconsequent as his, who disputes from the Power
to the Act, or rather from the non-being of a business, to the nonpossibility
of it to be, to which from the other no wise man, nor any who is not more
Sophisticos then truly Sophos will once offer to argue.

To be without knowledge is one thing, to be without the means of it is
another; to be ignorant of the mystery of Godliness, the Gospel, and Kingdom
is one thing, and not to be (in potentia, eriam proxima) in an immediate
possibility to know it, or to be utterly without any of that Light which leads
to it, is another.

Men may have light to see by, and the faculty or sense of sight too, who yet
may shut their eyes and not see at all: Men may have the faculty of
understanding given them from God, whereby to know him, as 1 John 5. He has
given an understanding, i.e. th8/6/2003 6:51PMat faculty, that we may know him,
that is true; and this all men have, the inward visive faculty (unless fools
that are d^fective in their naturals, who yet have the faculty too, for defect
in it does not nullify it) though thou T. D. p. 4. f^^lishly and absurdly
limits that as a special gift to ^ome only, as if the Nations of men were
without the faculty of understanding, whereby to converse with spiritual
objects, if revealed to them by the Light, and it be heeded; and some are in
the actual understanding of him that is, (...), and that is indeed the special
gift of God to such as walk by that light, and in th^^ light they have, as John
and Christ's Disciples did and do.

And over and above that faculty they may have a light to di^cover sp^rituall
objects to that understanding, and ^o enlighten them ^o, that they may savingly
(...), and yet may never come to kn^w for all ^his, in case they come not to
this light, as evil ones do not, John 3.19, 20. but hate it, and choose rather
willingly to be ignorant, not delighting in, but saying to God, Depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. From may be to must be is such a
(...) sort of Sillogirt a^^tion, as is not owned in foro Academico, in the
Schools of mere Animal, natural men, much less of Christ and Christians. And
so that men know not, see not, Therefore they may not, cannot see if they will,
have neither eyes, nor light, this is as mere a non-sequitur, as to say of such
as, not being willing to behold it, shut their sore eyes against the sunshine,
that therefore they have no eyes, and the Sun shines not at all upon them.

Yet this is the common Topic from whence our Divines T. D. I. O. I. T. R. B.
as we shall see by and by, and in a manner all our be^ghted Doctors draw their
Dreams and deeply dark Arguments against a measure of Christ's saving light so
shining in every one; and the (now empty) Quiver out of which they have no^
spared till they have spent all they have to shoot, too shoot their sharpest
Shafts against the Quakers: Not having so much light left in themselves, for
want of walking in time by what they had, as to heed that men may know that, if
they be not wanting to themselves, which, if they be by not trading with their
Talent, they may also be as ignorant of, as they might have been knowing in.

T. D. says, Every man has a light, and that light is from Christ too,
witness his own saying, wherein unawares he over-shoots himself again, to the
contradicting of himself, yielding up the Question to us, p. 6. 1 Pamp.
expounding John 1.9. viz. Christ enlightens every man that is enlightened; from
which (ad hominem) I argue back upon himself, out of his own words, viz. Christ
enlighteneth every man that is enlightened; this T. D. aserts from John 1.9.
But every man is enlightened, has some light, whereby he discernes many sins,
and duties, and divine attributes; this T. D. cannot deny, for this is his own,
p. 1. Therefore T. D. (though to the shame, contradicting and confounding of
himself he does so, yet) cannot rationally nor honestly deny what the Qua.
affirm, That every man is enlightened by Christ the light of the World, and
Mediator between God and man.

Indeed T. D. says, It Is but dimly, that all men discern some sins, duties,
divine attributes.

Repl. To that, as its nothing to the Question, so I reply, Every man discerns
them not so clearly as he might do, because he heeds not so heartily as he
should do the Light that shows them.

Its nothing whether men see and understand or no, its enough, that the Light
shines into their hearts and understandings, to give the knowledge of ^^d, and
so it does in them, who are yet in darkness, and in a stare of it, for the true
Light shines in the darkness, though the darkness comprehends it not, Joh. 1.5.

T. D. thinks he mends all in p. 2. of his 2. Pamp. by Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were
sometimes darkness, but now Light in the Lord.

Rep: What then T. D. Did not the Light shine in them when they were darkn^ss,
and did not comprehend it, because not turned to it, as now they were by Paul's
Ministry, who was sent to turn men from the darkness to the Light that shines
within them, by which they became Light in the Lord? yet if your meaning be
(say thou there, and that is our meaning indeed) that all men have the Light
of the Gospel within them, only all m^n do not obey it, it is contrary to the
Scripture.

Rep. Why so T. D? He opposes the state of darkness (say thou) in which they
were, to their present state of light.

Rep. What then T. D? because they were in a state of darkness, had they no
light shining in them, by taking heed to which at last they came out of it into
a state of Light? How often shall I need to tell thee and I. O. that for the
true Light, and Kingdom, and Gospel, and Righteousness to be in us (in semine,
in the Seed) is one thing, and for us to be in that, is another; the Kingdom
of God, even the Seed of Righteousness, Peace, Spiritual joy (as evident as the
contrary seems to be to blind I. O. Ex. 3. S. 42. who there says, In omnibus
non esse justitiam, pacem, gardrum in confesso est; its evident, that
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, are not in all) was sown in the Pharisees, as
the Word of God is in four sorts of ground, whereof but one, that is the honest
heart, that receives it with meekness, when there implanted, inlaid, ingrasted,
brings forth the fruits thereof unto perfection, though the Pharisees never
entered into it, witness T. D. himself, who howbeit he joyus with I. O. in
saying from Luke 17.21. The Kingdom was among the Pharisees, only in the
ministry of it without (mistaking it to be en umin, as if 'twere 'twere enough
against him) for entos umon, which I. O. confesses is used but once more in all
the new Testament Text, Matthew. 23.16. where it signifies the very inside of a
vessel, yet joins with me also, both against I. O. and himself too in the same
place, p. 5. 1. Pamp. saying, The expression may import, that the Kingd^me,
which upon a mistake (such a one (say I) as upon which our Pharisees look for
it without them at this day) they did look for without them, was indeed a
Kingdom within them; and yet he says, this Kingdom in them was threatened to
be (and was too (say I) at last, as it shall from you) taken away from them.

How often shall we need to tell you ( ye blind and deaf) that to have light
shining in one is one thing, and to be in it, in a state of Light, and the
children of it, is another? to have the Gospel preached in men is one thing,
and for men to learn the mystery of it is another; the Gospel is preached in
every creature under heaven, Paul says, Col. 1.23. en pase te Ktisi; yea, have
they not all heard, says he, Romans 10.18? yes verily' (alluding to Psalm. 19.)
by which allusion thou thy self also expressly confesses, T.D. p. 30. 1 Pamp.
the Apostle would intimate, that the knowledge of the Gospel should be of as
large extent in the publication, as the knowledge of God by the ministry of the
heavens and the firmament (which is so to every individual man, that there is
neither speech, nor language, male, nor female, where their voice is not heard)
the found is gone out into all the world, and their words (even Christ's and the
Spirits within, for the outward words and writings of men, preaching the Gospel
thereby, have never yet extended nor reached so largely as to all men) to the
ends of the earth.

Yet all have not obeyed the Gospel (says he) no not Israel it self without,
of whose having the outward Letter of the Statutes and Judgments (which thou
as sillily call (against thy self too, as G.W. truly tells thee in another
case) call in both thy Pamphlets the Supernatural Light, or knowledge of the
Gospel) thou keep such a scraping, as if that fleshly natural seed of
Abraham, and their natural fleshly ways of knowing what they know, which was
little of the mystery, 2 Cor. 3. by that natural reading and poring upon the
Letter, as ye also do, were the most supernatural men and means, as to the
saving knowledge of the Gospel, in all the world; whereas the Jews were as mere
Animal, and Natural, as your selves, who savingly know nothing by the Letter:
I say, that Israel it self obeyed not; and why not? because as husie as they
were with you in their Bible, they regarded not, but rebelled against the
strivings of the Lord himself with them, by his Light and Spirit within;
therefore (says Paul, ver. 21. as the reason rendered by God himself, Isa.
65.2.) All day long have I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and
gainsaying people.

Also, that they have the Light in them, who yet neither believe in it, nor are
the children of it, but yet abiding in darkness, is as clear from Chrihs own
words, Job. 8.12.12.35.36. I am the light of the world, he i.e. he of the
world, that follows me, shall not abide in darkness, but have the light of
Life: Walk while ye have the Light; while ye have the Light, believe in the
Light, that ye may be (it seems they yet were not so, yet had a Light in them
to believe in) the Children of the Light; some of which Light was come, not
unto them only, but into the world also, ver. 26. That who e're believes in it
might come out of darkness; and evil ones had it come to them, as well as such
as did Truth, though they came not to it as the other did, else they could not
be said to see and hate it; and so Christ and the Father, whose will was
revealed in it, as they are, John 3.20.12.48. and 15.22. 23.24.

So Christ is come by his Light (as the Sun by its beams, into some dark
Dungeon) into the dark world, the dark places of men's hearts, and of the earth
that are full of the habitations of cruelty, Dens of Devils, Cages of unclean
and hareful birds, holds of cruel, wicked, fowl, and filthy spirits, to give
life, and that abundantly, John 10.10. yea, he came to the Scribes of old by
his Light, not outward person only, to that end, yet they had not the Light of
Life; why so? Ye hear not Gods Voice (says he) and have not his Word (which ye
put from you) abiding in you; ye search the Scriptures, which testify of me,
who am the Life, and there ye look to have it, and come not unto me that ye
might have life, Joh. 5.37.38.39.40.

Wisdom, Christ the Wisdom of God reproves, cries to men in their own
consciences by his own Voice, Light, and Spirit in their hearts, even to
scorners, simple ones, fo^ls, that hate knowledge, and would pour out his
Spirit on them, as on others; but some hearken not, hate, turn away, so are
slain, and perish, not for want of warning, counsel, Light from Christ to lead,
who is given as the one Leader and Lawgiver to all persons and people, but for
want of taking heed to him who teaches, and looking to his Law in the heart
which enlightens.

Thou call'st, as I.O. does, falsely, the Letter Christ's Light, and the only
means that men can come to saving knowledge by, yet heed'st no more, then he to
his, to thy own satisfaction, that all who have it, and look and read in it
too, as the Scribes did, have not the knowledge of God and his Kingdom by it;
and yet if we should say of those men that come not to Life by the Letter,
therefore they have not the Letter, would thou not say of us, that we are
mad? mutato nomine, the Argument is thine to usward, as concerning Christ's
Light in the Conscience; yet, nunquam videns id manticae quod in tergo est,
thou can not see it.

The Corinthians had the Light shining in their hearts to give the knowledge,
yet all of them had not the true knowledge of God; and that they had not, when
he shone by his Light in them, 'twas their fault, else Paul could not have
spoken it as he does, 1 Cor. 15. to their own shame: And this may stand as an
answer to thy pedling Reply to G.W. when he urged from 2 Cor. 4.6. that the
Light shone in the Corinthians hearts: in whose hearts (say thou) p. 4. 1.
Pamp. not of all mankind, but of the Apostle, and some others, a small number,
in comparison of the rest, who were not enlightened; and to back that thy
shameful blindness, in limiting the shinings of the true Light into such a
little nook, as a small number, thou boltest out much more, saying, from ver.
3.4. the Gospel is hid to them that are lost, and there are some to whom the
Light shines not; not heeding (as I said before) that that may be in men, which
men may hate, smoother, and hide in their own hearts, and be lost for want of
the sight of, when not for want of the Light it self; that men may have the
serse of sight, and the presence of light, and yet not see, but shut their
eyes; that that may shine in them, which, they giving way to the God of this
World to blind their minds, may not shine out unto them; as a Candle may shine
in a Room, yet if put under a Bushel, not shine out to it, and a Talent to
trade with may be given to him, who, hiding his Lords money, shall reap little
profit by it, and at last have what light he had within, taken from him, and be
cast forth without, into the outer darkness.

Did never read of those, that seeing and hearing, would neither see, nor
hear, nor understand, nor perceive, as they might, therefore at last should not
if they would? and because thou ask in whose hearts? I say, in the hearts of
some, who did not see and know; in the Corinthians hearts, so that they all had
the light, and might have seen, but only that some would be ignorant, and of
such says Paul, 1 Cor. 4. If any man will be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

And since thou say, not in the hearts of all mankind: I say, yea, of all
mankind, if any be exempted, it must be the Heathen that know not God, the
wicked ones, that like not to retain God in their knowledge, that have not the
Law in the letter of it (according to thy Principles) but such are not
exempted; for Romans 1.19. That which is to be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it in them, even his eternal Power and Godhead, and the
invisible things of God from the beginning, which (in his own light within) are
clearly seen by the things which are made, for the Heavens declare his glory,
the Firmament shows his handiwork without, and by his light within in the
understandings of men (taking occasion thereby to contemplate on his Greatness
and goodness, as David did, Psalm 8. When I behold the Heavens, Moon, and
Stars, the work of thy fingers, Lord, think I, what is man (says he) that thou
visitest him? how excellent is thy Name? and such like) does God reveal his
Greatness and Goodness in regarding the sons of men.

Object. That makes for us thou may perhaps say; God by these Preachers
without gives the knowledge of himself to the Heathen; but what is this to your
light within? We confess (quoth I. O. p. 40, 41, 42. that God reveals and
declares himself to us by the Works of his hands without, Creation, Providence,
etc. His Works teach, and what they teach they do it in his Name and Authority,
p. 44.

Repl. The Heavens, etc. declare the glory of God only passively, as Books, on
which by the light within men may see and read it (as also they may in the
outward letter, which more verbally, though less visibly declares it) but not
so actively as Tutors, that make a verbal discourse upon it, for that is done
by the light within, by which that To^gnoston tou theou is said to be
manifested more immediately by God himself in them; for howbeit the Works of
God hands, the outward Creation, have a more visible stamp or character of Gods
Greatness and Goodness on them, then the mere outward letter has, that is
the works of men's hands and fingers, though writing (as inspired) what they see
by the light within; and the letter, and outward character thereof makes a more
formal, wordy Narration of it, then the works do; yet that which most
powerfully, and effectually, and actually teaches daily what the other in their
respective more obscure and inferior ways do declare, ad extra, must be
something ad intra, which falls in with, and teaches men, even the Spirit of
God in the faculty of man's understanding and Conscience, and the inspiration of
the Almighty, Job 32.8. that gives the wisd^m and knowledge of him, whether by,
or without the other, which without the other ^an and often does, to men born
blind, give the knowledge of God, as those ad extra, can never do without this;
for whatever knowledge men have of God its by it, and whatever is to be known
of God by men it is, as the Sun by its own light, manifested by this of God in
them only, and not by the outward seeing of a of a w^k, or writing ad extra,
which cannot be seen themselves (any otherwise then as Bruits may behold them
bodily) without not only the faculty of the rational wind, which is the Eye,
but the Light from God also to manifest the object to the understanding which
light is not Eyes (quoth I. O. p. 77.) it is not the visive faculty or
understanding it self, but ano^hing, a b^am of light communicated from the holy
Spirit to the understanding, for the removal of the dark shades that are over
the mind, whereby it is led to see and judge of Truth, as men see by the Suns
light, or else they cannot, though they have Eyes (Howbeit elsewhere, Ex. 4. S.
18. to the shameful contradiction of himself again, I.O. says, this light is
the Eye of the Mind; Lumen hoc est oculus mentis; and S. 3. Lux est facultas
illa intelligendi, Opsis dianoias, omma tes psuches, ophthalmos dianoias;
making light and sense, or the visive faculty as one, whereas before he had
said, one was not the other, O Rotas!) for where both these are not, viz. Eyes
and Light suitable to the object, and the one exercised, and the other improved
also, deest aliquid intus, still somewhat within is lacking, either Eyes or
Light, (or as it is in such as have not forfeited those) willingness to see when
they may, and men can no more see God by the letter, nor his works without,
then Beasts, that can with bodily eyes discern both the Skies and the
Scriptures; and in a word, unless the light within manifest this, and it be
heed by men also, though there be both Skies and Scriptures without, obviated
to men without, and that faculty of the understanding also within, yet can men
in their minds come to no more true knowledge of God, then they can without the
light of the Sun without, which manifests them and it self also, see the
outward Sun, and material Heavens with the outward eye: not only the faculty
of sight in the Eye, and also a light to show the objects needful, (else, as
T.D. himself says, a blind man might see when there is light, and a seeing man
when none) but a third thing is needful too, i.e. an Eye opened to the light,
and to the object, else he that has Eyes and light too, may shut his eyes and
not see it: And as whatever is to be known of God, is to be known by that light
within, or not at all; so by it are men capable to see and know, taliter
qualiter, in such measure as they have of the light, not only some things,
sins, duties, divine attributes, as T. D. dimly and diminitively delivers
himself about this, but also, as they grow in it by degrees, everything, as
well as any of the things of God (To Gnoston) that are knowable, or to be known
of him by man to his own salvation; I say, in such a degree (which varies not
the case) as men have of it, they may come to know all things answerably,
taking head to it, and doing the Will of God as revealed in it, and that not
naturally, as by the help of a natural light (as our Naturalists or mere
Animal Academians call it) but spiritually, as by such or such a measure of
the spiritual light, that flows, not as I.O. sains, and T.D. would fain seem
to make it also, as the rational faculty it self, a Principiis Naturae, but
from God, Christ, and the Spirit into the minds of men; and in such wise as
they know any thing in that, they know it spiritually, by a supernatural, and
spiritual, inward, immediate Revelation of it to them by God himself,
whereupon (contrary to that Vsteron proteron of our carnal, natural, and
litteral Preachers, who say that is supernatural knowledge only, that is
attained to by reading the letter, which letter with I. O. T.D. and the rest,
is the spiritual light, and that but natural which comes from Gods own Light
into all men's Consciences, which Light they will by no means allow to be
called spiritual, but (...) natural) I affirm that to be but the natural
knowledge of the mere Annual, natural man, that is scrued out by the
improvement of their natural faculties of reading, remembering, etc. in their
Academicall, Arteficiall Scrutinies into the Scripture; which natural
knowledge (though theirs, who wrote the Scriptures, to be by immediate
spiritual Revelation I deny not) abounded among the Jewish Doctors, Scribes,
and mere natural Rabbis, that stole the true Prophets words, yet knew not God
spiritually by hearing his words, which are Spirit, nor by that spiritual
Revelation, or inward immediate reception of ought from his own Council,
Light, and Mouth, from which only comes the true spiritual understanding,
little less then it does among our modern Ministers of the Letter, who, not
coming to the Light, know as little of the Spirit, and of God, who is a Spirit
(though they read and preach he is a Spirits from the Letter) and as little of
the Mystery of the Gospel (spiritually) as they.

Though then I. O. and T. D. both call the common Light in men's Consciences,
whereby they know much of God, of his Will, as to marter of sin and duty, and
of his divine Attributes, Judgments, etc. and all the knowledge that comes
thereby, but natural, and call the Letter, and all the knowledge that comes
now by reading of that, only spiritual; see T.D. p. 1, 2, 3, 5. of his 1.
Pamph. p. 1. 3. of his second, by the Statutes and Judgments given to Israel
(which with T. D. is the outward Letter of the Old Testament) are meant the
supernatural light or knowledge of the Gospel; but Romans 2.15. which speaks of
the Light or Law in the Conscience, is spoken (quoth he) of natural light
opposed to the knowledge of the Jews. And I. O. p. 77. The Scripture is a
moral and spiritual, not a natural light: But that in all men's consciences
he calls, p. 42. the light of Nature; and p. 47. where he calls that from the
light a natural Knowledge arising from the innate Principles of Reas^n, and
that which is from the reading of the Letter, a supernatural Revelation; Ex.
4. (where how to the contradiction of himself he also calls it spiritual and
not natural may appear anon) S. 15. speaking of the Qua. negant lumen hoc
natural esse aut itadici debere sed a Christo and Spiritu Christi esse, they
deny this light to be natural, on that it ought to be so called, saying, its
from Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, S. 17. Lumen internum omnibus commune
natural est, The Light within common to all is natural; and so proceeds, in
suo genere, to prove it: Likewise I. T. and R. B. say the same, p. 33. it is
yielded, that there is natural light from Christ, given every man: Such light
as Christ, as Mediator, conferrs not on every person, but all sorts of men, is
termed supernatural: So p. 40. and elsewhere they call it, light by nature,
and humane light: Yet I say the quite contrary, the Letter, and the knowledge
it gives, is the natural, as I have showed above, by which wicked men, that
corrupt themselves also in those things, come to know naturally, and not
spiritually, nor savingly the mind and will of God, ex principiis naturae, by
custom, often use, and memory, etc. as brute beasts may by outward observance
and custom know somewhat of the mind and will of man, Jude 10 but the light in
the Conscience, some of which all have, and the knowledge that comes thereby is
the spiritual, supernatural, and not the natural light and knowledge; (...)
this in the Power of God I trust in brief to make good against you all; though
enough has been said before to any but such as you, that will look for more
proof of it then wise men would do.

One Argument, by which its evident to all that are not blind (as ye are) that
the Law in the Heart, or Light in all men's Consciences, is not natural, and so
consequently is spiritual, is even this from whence T.B. concludes it
natural, viz. because opposed to the knowledge of the Iew^: of the Jews
knowledge by the Letter was but natural; The light within, and knowledge by
that being opposed to it, must be not natural, and so consequently spiritual;
but that was but natural, for they were mostly but natural men, and worse, as
they are at this day, persecuting and opposing ever the things of God, Christ,
the Gospel, and the Spirit, and all that are born after it, and have the
spiritual knowledge of the mystery by it, as the natural knowers by the
Letter do at this day; and that the nature all man discernes not any otherwise
then naturally, and not savingly, and so not spiritually the things of God and
the Spirit, Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 2.14. and T.D. also tells us, p. 3. of his 2.
Pamph. from that very Text of Paul, where he gives this irresistat^e Reason for
it also, Because they are spiritually discerned.

Whence I take occasion to argue further thus; viz.

Argum. 2. That Light which gives to discern savingly (as heeded) the deep
things of God and the Spirit, which none but the Spirit of God and Christ
searches out, knows, and savingly reveals, and which, as to salvation, are not
by the natural man, but spiritually, and by the spiritual man only discerned,
who has the mind and Spirit of Christ, must be not a natural, but a spiritual
and supernatural light, and the knowledge that comes by it is not natural, but
supernatural and spiritual.

But the light in the Consciences of all gives to discern the deep thing: of
God, and the Spirit in some, i.e. in such a measure as its heeded, which none
but the Spirit of God searches, etc.

Therefore it, and the knowledge that is by it, is not natural, but
supernatural and spiritual.

The Mino, which our sore-named Divines do deny, is as evident to such as live
in the light, as the light it self is, and not a little of it evidenced by
their own handy-works who oppose it.

Two Particulars there are in it to be proved; 1. That the Light in all
manifests or gives (as heeded) to discern in some measure the things of God and
the Spirit. 2. That (as heeded) it manifests them savingly.

As to the first, I need go no further then your selves for witness, we have it
under your own hands; T: D: p: 1: Pamph. confesses of that light, of which all
men have some, that thereby all discern, not may sins only, which are the works
of the flesh, which the letter says are manifest (not by it self, but) by the
light Christ gives, Gal: 5: compared with Ephesians. 5^ 13, 14: but also many duties,
and several divine Attributes. Now men's duties to God, in matter of declining
sin, eschewing evil, and doing good, and Gods divine Attributes are things of
God and the Spirit, or else neither I, nor those who wrote the Scripture
neither, know what the things of God and the Spirit are; for they tell us, that
our duties of Love, Joy, Peace, Meekness, Long suffering, Temperance, Patience,
and such like, are the fruits of the Spirit, and that not fulfilling the lusts
of the flesh in the sins of adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
hatred, wrath, strife, envy, drunkenness, revellings, and such like works of
it, is the fruit, effect, and issue of walking in the Spirit; and if these,
Love, etc. be not things of the Spirit, excuse me if I say the Spirit which
moved them to write that Gal. 5. knew not his own things himself; and if ye say
that Gods Divine Attributes, Mercy, Justice, Judgments, Truth, Holiness, are
none of his things, excuse me also, if I favor not foolish fancies so far, as
to spend time, pains, and paper to prove they are to them, which is so clear,
that 'twere as idle a thing to make clearer then it is, as 'twere to light a
candle to show a blind man, qui ad s^lem caecutire vult, that the Sun shines:
And that the light does manifest not only sins and duties, but the said Divine
Attributes also, as we have had T.Ds. witness against him, so let us take I.
Os. testimony against himself too, and then we shall be pretty well as to that:
Which I.O. preaches it out in print in two Tongues, lest one should not be loud
enough, in English thus, p. 42.43.45.46.47. by the innate light of Nature (so
he calls it) and principles of the Consciences of men, that indispensible moral
obedience which he requires of us his creatures, subject to his Law, is made
known; by the Light that God has indelibly implanted in the minds of men,
accompanied with a moral instinct of good and evil, seconded by that
self-judgement which he has placed in us, in reference to his own over us,
does he reveal himself to the sons of men; the Voice of God in Nature (so he
calls it) declares it self to be from God by its own Light and Authority,
there is no need to convince a man by substantial witnesses that what his
conscience speaks, it speaks from God, whether it bear testimony to the Being,
Righteousness, Power, Omniscience, or Holiness of God himself, or whether it
call for that moral obedience which is eternally and indispensably due to him,
and so shows forth the work of the Law in the heart, etc. Those common notions
are in laid in the natures of men by the hand of God, to this end, that they
may make a Revelation of him, as to the purposes mentioned, and are able to
plead their own Divine Original (Mark, of Divine Original here, in-laid by Gods
hand, yet anon, flowing ex principis naturae) without the least strength or
assistance from without; and in Latin, Ex. 4. S. 14. Non tantum multae Coinat
Enn^iai, etc. -- Englished thus, Not only many common notions and principles of
Truth abide fixed in the understanding, by the efficacy of which, men may
discern some divine things, and discern between good and evil, but also by the
help of the Conscience take heed to themselves, as concerning many duties, with
respect had to the Judgment of God, which they know they are liable to:
Moreover, this Light in all at years of understanding, by the consideration of
the works of God, Creation, and Providence, manifesting his Eternal Power and
Godhead, and in some by the Word preached, may be improved and confirmed; but
how far this Light can direct, stir up, and provoke men's minds to yield
obedience to God, and they by it be left without excuse, it pertains not to
this place more precisely to discuss. One of the main things pertaining to this
point, about the Light to be discussed among the rest, yet I. O. I believe was
afraid to thrust his fingers too far into the fire here, for fear lest pr^ying
too narrowly how far the efficacy of this Light extends, he should, being
forced to see somewhat that he is loath to see, both loo^e his cause, and open
his conscience too wide, and therefore would wade no further there.

I need not open it to him that is not defective in his naturals, how in all
this as, if not more abundantly then T. D. in that above I. O. confesses, and
witnesses to the truth of the first part of my minor Proposition; viz. that the
Light in the Conscience of all, as heeded, gives the knowledge of those things
of God, and his Spirit, which the Spirit of God only knows, searches, and
shows, and reveals to such as wait in his Light, to have the mind of Christ
manifested in them therein, which the natural man, by a natural light, cannot
so know and di^cern. Only

Ob. If it be objected, those are the deep things of God there spoken of, 1
Cor. 2. which your Light in the Conscience of all is too shallow to search out;
yea, the glorious things of the Gospel it self, the mystery of which T.D. who
knows it not yet himself, for want of turning to it, says by that Light
within, All know not, and the natural man discerns not.

Answ. That the natural man, which is he that leans to the Letter, and his own
understanding, and looks not to the Lord in his own Light and Spirit in the
heart, as spiritual men do, and in the doing of which, men of natural become
more and more spiritual, de facto, discerns no otherwise then naturally, not
savingly and spiritually, I still grant, but a non esse, ad non posse still nil
valet: Our question is, how far that Light (heeded) avails that way; which I
affirm is so far, that according to the measure of it in men, and their
attendance to it, it leads gradually (as the Light and Spirit, and anointing of
God is said to do, such as abide in it, as it in them) into all truth, the
knowledge of the very deep things of God and the Gospel, a dim shallow sight of
which it gives to such as turn to the least beam of it in them: E. G. the
Judgments of God, are one of the deep things of God; thy Judgments are a
great deep, Romans 11.33. His Judgments and the ways of it, and Wisdom of God
therein, are a depth: O the depth^hewr uns^archable his Judgments, his ways,
past finding out? No natural man, by the improvement of his natural
understanding in reading the Letter can know them; Israel did not, who had the
Judgments and the Statutes in the Letter, for want of looking to the Light and
Spirit any more (excepting the few spiritual ones, and children of the Light,
that were ever hated among them) nay, nor so much as many Heathens that had and
heeded the Law, or Light in the Conscience, yet had no Law in the Letter, but
were more sottish, stupid, fearless of God, ignorant and profane, then the
Heathen, among whom the Name of God was blasphemed for their sakes, insomuch
that Paul says, Romans 2. the very uncircumcision, as to the Flesh and Letter,
doing in the Light, by which they were made a Law to themselves, by nature (not
corrupt nature, as T. D. thinks, nor by the pure nature, in a measure restored,
without, or abstract from the Light, the things of the Law) were better to God,
then the literal professing Jew, and more just and justified, to the very
judging of them, who by boasting of the Letter, and Circumcision without, broke
the Law in the heart, and less liable to wrath then the other; which shows how
God counts more on obedience in Morals, Spirituals, Evangelicals, without the
Letter, and literals, then on all Burnt-offering and Sacrifice, and lifeless
conformity to the Letter.

Yet the Heathen themselves, by the Light in the Conscience (though videntes
meliorae by it, they did mostly deteriwa sequi, see much, and do little) at
least came to know in a measure within themselves, the very righteous Judgments
of God, that th^se that did such things as they did, are worthy of death, Rm.
1.32. And thou I.O. confessest the same in thy words above-recited, Iudicio Dei
se subesse cogu scunt; and the Light within, and moral instinct of good and
evil by it, seconded by a self-iudgement placed in us: Yea, Ioh. 16. The Light
and Spirit of Christ, the Saints Comforter, that walk in it, is in the Office
of a Convincer to the world, of Sin, and Judgment, and the Law, which is the
Light in all, is spiritual, Romans 7.14.

Ob. And if ye say we grant that, but what of the Gospel of the Righteousness
of God, and the riches of his Grace in Christ, and what of Christ can be known
in that Light?

Answ. If ye will needs count the Judgment and wrath of God, which is a depth
unsearchable by any that look only in the Letter, which only tells of his
wrath, or by any, save such, as, living in the Light, have come to feel it
within themselves (for who knows the power of thy wrath? says the Psalmist;
none, say I, but such as waiting in the Light, have felt the weight of his
hand, while Judgment and Condemnation passed on their evil deeds) I say, if ye
will reckon Wrath, Judgment, and the Ministration of Condemnation, none of the
things of God, none of his deep things, nor the things of his Spirit and
Gospel, because your eyes are out; but reckon it to the Law or Old Testament
only, and not to the Gospel, to which yet it truly belongs, or New, which is
the ministration of righteousness and mercy: Yet I answer further, that not
only Judgment and Wrath, but the Righteousness, Salvation, Mercy, and Grace of
God in Christ, and Christ himself is preached and revealed in the same Light,
in which the Judgment and Wrath is revealed; as it is the effectual work of
the Law in the h^a^t, to accuse, reprove, and condemn him that does evil; so (
V^sinet Apello, I appeal to your selves, who assert it is) is it not its work
to excuse, acquit, justify him within himself, who declines the evil, and does
the contra^y Good? Is there true righteous Judgment done, where as well mercy,
comfort, peace, and acceptance with God is not ministered to the innocent
(though Abimelech the Heathen) when they are found in integrity of heart, to
Gentile as well as Jew, as terror, r^proof, rejection, and wrath to every soul
that does evil, Jew or Gentile?

Beside, say not the Texts afore-cited, that the Spirit convinces the world of
Righteousness, as well as of sin and Judgment? and that in the same Light
(which is indeed the Gospel, and called by Paul so, and the Power of God unto
Salvation) in which the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, that withhold the truth told them by
God himself, and his Light in them, in unrighteousness; the Righteousness of
God also is even therein revealed, from faith to faith, among the Just, that
turn to, and own the Light, and live by faith in it, Romans 1? I know and see how
(page 3. 1 Pamp.) T: D: would make a difference, if he could tell how (that he
might maintain his natural, or rather su^te, natural di^course about the mere
naturalness of that Light, that shows Sins, Duties, Divine Attributes) between
that one Light (say I) in which the wrath is revealed, and in which the
righteousness is revealed, where in answer to that unanswerable saying of Paul
about the To Gnoston Tou Theou, when G.W. used it against him thus; Thou say
it is meant of a Natural Light, whereas it is said to be the knowledge of
whatsoever is to be known of God, Romans 1.19. T.D. replies thns sillily. the
Apostle intends, that what might be known of God without the preaching of the
Gospel, was known to the Gentiles, verse 16.17. It Is by the Gospel that the
righteousness of God is revealed.

Rep. As if we must think the Apostle in that phrase, Whatever is to be known
of God, is manifest in men, excluded and excepted the Light of the Gospel, and
inward Word, of which he talks elsewhere, Romans 10. That its nigh to men in their
hearts: And Col. 1.23. is preached (viz.) in every creature under heaven, and
meant only some nescio quid, I know not what kind of manifestation that has
nihil commune cum Scripturis, holds no Analogy with the Scripture, because T.D.
makes his shallow senseless say-so on the place, whose Reply (but it is his usual
way, when he has naught else to say, to make what additions to, and alterations
of a Text he pleases, and then to say, when there is no such matter either
expressed or employed, it intends so and so, or it intends not so, though so
said; God indeed in many Texts makes offer of Salvation to all, but intends it
only to a few; by All, is meant Some, by in us, in Christ, and many of the like
sort) is not worth any other Reply, then to tell him, it is not worth a Rush;
and G. Ws. saying to him out of Paul, stands over T. Ds. head still, for To
Gnoston, what is to be known of God, is any thing that tends to man's Salvation,
without such an exception as T.D. adds, to the making of Paul there (as he does
God and the Penmen in many more Texts) dissemble, like to T.D. himself, so as
to speak one thing, and intend another, that destroys the very sense of his
own words.

But saving T: Ds: mis-meaning of that matter assuredly enough, the same that
reveals the wrath reveals the righteousness (and retro) and that that reveals
the righteousness is a measure of the light of the Gospel of Gods rich Grace
and Goodness, that is given to Impenitents, to lead them to repentance if they
obey it, and so to forgiveness and life, or otherwise to leave them without
excuse, when having trifled away the time of Gods long-suffering and
forbearance, in rebellion against the light, God comes in his righteous
Judgment to take full and final vengeance upon them: Whereupon it is called
the riches of Gods Goodness (which is never the less to them, though they
perish in their wills) even to them that yet despise it, by which they are not
left without faithful reproof, and warning within themselves, but are put in
fair capacity for Salvation from the wrath, for the despising of which Light,
that will not let them sin themselves to ruin, without stopping them, till
they be obstinate, they treasure up wrath to themselves against the day of it.
Romans 2.4.5. Despisest thou the riches of his grace, etc. not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance, etc.

Arg. That which is the riches of Gods goodness and grace to the very wicked
that despise it, and perish, which would else lead them to repentance and Life,
must needs be a part of the Gospel, and its Light; but such is that which
leaves, and is in all men, in the very wicked, leaving them inexcusable if they
repent not by it; therefore that Light in all men, Jew and Gentile, good and
bad, is a measure of the Light of the Gospel, which ye puffers at it would fain
shut up, from shining in common in all men, among a few such unhallowed Elect
ones, and seeming Saints, as your selves; for that the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, where it is, to such as put it not far from them, should be said by
us, as it was of Paul, Tit. 2.11, 12. to appear to all men, is as damnable
Heresy with you in us, as it is undeniable truth with you, as told by Paul:
Yea, this ye are impatient at, that Proclamation of Grace, and good will from
God to all men, with true intent that all should have it, that are as willing
to have it as God is they should, or otherwise then pretendedly, as you make
it, should be made: And yet the Churl, that practices hypocrisy, and utters
error against the Lord, and (howbeit he says, Eat, O friends, drink, yea
drink abundantly every one that thirsts, Life, as well as death is freely and
truly set before you, choose Life, that ye may live, and welcome, Christ is
come, that ye may have life, and that abundantly) yet makes empty the soul of
the hungry, and causes the drink of the thirsty to sail, by telling them that
God freely proffers this to all, but intends it only to a few, would be called
bountiful and liberal for all this, but it must not be in the day that is
coming, wherein the eyes of such as see shall not be dim, and the eye of the
old Seer be darkened, the tongue of the stammerer tell the plain truth, and the
mouth of the University Student be stopped, and the lips of the Liar be shut
up, Isai. 33.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. This common Salvation, Jude 3. ye cannot digest,
'twas wont to be said, Bonum quo c^mm^n us eo Melius: But if I should say
(instead of Pe^us) Bonum quo communius eo Melius, it were not more false Latin
then the tale of a tender of life from God to all men, intended only to a few,
is the false Doctrine of our undoctor-like Divines, which false Doctrine they
contradict and confute themselves in also, if once they could see wood for
trees, as fast as another can well confound them, while themselves tell us of,
not only a Special, but a Common Grace, which is the common distinction of the
Schools; for if it be Grace (though Common Grace) it must be a Light, a Gift, a
part of the Gospel of Gods Grace, out of which Gospel no Grace is, and such a
part and gift too, as must at least, by its sufficiency to save such as improve
it, put all in a capacity for Salvation, and not sufficient only to leave them
without excuse, and aggravate wrath and condemnation upon them, otherwise that
Grace is no true Grace or favor, or if it be, give me none of that Grace, take
you (O ye Graceless Gravers of that Grace, whose Graven Image it is, that has
a being only in your imaginations) that Grace wholly to your selves, that is
given for no such gracious end or purpose, as to put men into possibility of
Salvation (as upon your principles of personal Repro(...), this common Grace
does not) but only to render them unavoidably liable to sorer condemnation, and
fuller wrath, then they should ever have known, had they never had it.

But what e're ye carve to your selves in your own conceits, God had (...) to
the whole world, as well as to you choice sinners, and in as fair a capacity
^^ally to partake of it are the very Heathen, who by you are rep^obated by the
lump, as your Antichristian selves, except ye repe^^, ^u^^ then I^^e by your
books ye have ever, yet done, to a ^ound and sin^^ acknowledgement of the
truth: Nor did God send his Son a Light (...) the w^^^, that mostly perish in
their wills to any such intent, that the world it self should be condemned, but
that the world through him might be saved.

So then its no less then a measure of the Light of the Gospel it self, a dram,
at least, and degree of Gods Grace, and that not natural, but spiritual,
supernatural, sufficient for men, and saving to such as submit to be taught by
it, which from God is imparted, and by his hand (as thou I.O. speak)
indelibly implanted in the minds of all men, whereby his things, and the things
of Christ, and his Spirit, come by such as wait on him in it, to be both
spiritually and savingly discerned. And

Ob. If ye object yet further (as some do) we yield that what is to be known of
God, his invisible things, his Eternal Power and Godhead, Divine Attributes,
and our moral duties to him, in declining moral evils, and doing much moral
good, as to our Creator, eternally and indispensably due, are manifested in
measure by that common light, but deny that any thing of Christ still, and of
the mysteries of the Gospel is so, and so its still but a natural, nor a
spiritual light.

Answ. Though what I said above from 1 Cor. 2. concerning the things that eye
has not seen, etc. and the deep things of God, which must be of the mysteries
of the Gospel, might suffice; yet I shall add thus much more, viz. That it
savours of little less then a little of that gross darkness which is to cover
the earth, and its people, when the Light of God arises upon his own, to say
that God can be known in, or by any Light, in which Christ first is not known:
I know this is a Riddle to you Rabbis, and may seem to all sottish Seers as a
piece of a mad man's Divinity, but I dare aver it to be truth, though I cannot
believe many of our English Infidels will believe it, till they see it so
clearly, that they cannot choose; for how many ways of knowing God ye may coin
to your selves, in your own conceits, I care not for knowing (for more then a
good many ye have) but this I know, that if the Scriptures be true (as I know
they are) which ye profess to be your Rule of Trial for all things, there is
noe true way of coming to the true knowledge of God, so much as a Judge, much
less as a Father, but one, and that is neither the Scripture itself, which
tells of that way, nor any thing else, but Christ himself, and his Light, to
whom God has committed all Judgment, which Judgment he administers by his
Light, before any see his face, as a Father, in righteousness and live: He has
given forth a Light to the world, whereby to know himself, but this Light is in
his Son; he that has the Son, and believes on the Son, in whom is the Life,
and his Life is the Light of men, has everlasting Life; he that has not, and
believes not in the Son, has not life, though he is capable of it, but by the
Light in which he stands condemned, the wrath of God yet abides on him: So
that whereas ye say there is knowledge of God, but not of Christ, by that
universal, internal light, there is in truth no knowledge of God at all, but in
the Light of Christ, who bears his Image, who gives forth the Light of the
knowledge of his own glory in the face of Jesus Christ: I am the way (says he,
John 14.6.) the Truth, and Life, no man comes to the Father but by me: The
Father reveals the Son in men by his Light, before he reveals himself, Gal.
1.16. So that as no man knows the Son, but he in whom the Father reveals him,
so no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him (as he will to all that wait and walk on in his Light) let him search never
so long after, or in the Letter, Mat. 11.27. Ioh. 6.45.46. till he feel after
him in the Light within himself, in which only God, who is not far from every
man, though most men are far from him, is to be found Act. 17. No man has seen
God at any time, the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father,
whose outgoings from thence have been from of old, Mic. 5.2. as well in a way
of manifestation of the Fathers mind to men, from the beginning of the world,
as in way of Eternal Generation, before the world began, Prove. 8.20. to 32.
though T.D. not knowing the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, knows
not how to say Amen to this. See page 4. of his 2. Pamp. he it is, that by his
Spirit and Light within, which the Letter only relates of, does reveal him,
Ioh. 1.18. Men must know Christ, i. e. in his Light which Cornelius was in,
which is his day, that Abraham saw, whether they ever see his fleshly person,
yea or nay, before they can know God, who is known in nothing but his own
Light, the Son, who is known in nothing but his own Light, the Spirit, that
comes from, and leads to him; so that to say, as a Professor of note said in a
public Assembly in Ireland, of a Friend of Truth, called a Qua. whom I know,
having heard him speak, This man knows much of God, but little of Christ, is
little less then a Bull that favors, for all the natural, literal knowledge of
both, of little less then a spiritual ignorance in the mystery of both God and
Christ.

And this gives me the hint to make mention of another Argument, That this
Light is not natural which is in all, viz. because it comes from God and Christ
into every creature, not by Creation, as the rational Soul, and its faculties
of understanding, will, mind, memory, conscience it self do, and such
properties as are, de esse hominis, whether constitutive, or consecutive, so
that a man is no man at all, or has not the essential form of a man, as
distinct from the outward Brutum, or Beast of the Field Though in the
Antitypical sense it is true enough, that some men not turning to it, being
deprived of it at last, for not improving that measure of it, more or less,
which as a Talent they were instrusted to trade withal at first, Mat. 25.
become, as to the things of God, as blind and brutish, and short of what those
men are that arise out of the fall by it, and beastial Image of Satan, into the
Image of God again, who at first created them upright, as the bruit beasts of
the field, which are figures of man in the fall, as to the things of the
animal, or natural man, a^^ s^^rt of him.
for a man may remain Phusicos, a natural man, or rather Psuchicos (as the word
is in many places, where rendered natural, as well as where sensual, 1 Cor. 2. 1
Cor. 15. Iam. 3. Jude 15.) a true animal, soul-ly man, a man that has a Soul
rational and sensitive, though in its faculties defaced, clouded, darkened,
benighted, and lost from the Lord, and his Light now withdrawn from him, even
after the Light is kid from his eyes (as it was ever at last from such (as to
any life by it) who would not be led to life by it, while they had it; witness
the Pharisees, and Jerusalem) and after he remains now irrecoverable for want
of Light, to the primitive pure nature, which only loves and obeys the Law,
and delights truly in the Light.

The Light, then I say, comes from God and Christ into the mind and Conscience,
not as the Soul, and its essential faculties of understanding, will etc. do,
which with the Organical body, make that one compositum called man, that may be
either in unity and communion with God and Christ, or in onmity and separation
from them, according as he walks, or walks not in the Light that shines from
them, but by way of immediate infusion from them into the mind and conscience
(which of itself is a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. and destitute, as to the
knowledge of God, without a measure of it) as a thing distinct and separable
from the man in whom it is, and a witness against him, when he runs from the
Will of God revealed to him in it, though eternally one with God and Christ,
from whom it shines and flows (and not ex principiiis natura, as I. O. says)
with whom it ever sides, let the man go whether he will, never consenting to
any, but condemning all iniquity committed by him, and counselling continually
(whether heeded or no) before hand against it: And lastly; from whom it is as
unchangeably inseparable, as the light beams and rays of the Sun are from the
Sun it self from whence they shine, with which they are in conjunction still,
whether this or that part of the world be actually enlightened by it, or by the
Moons interposing eclipsed from it, yea or no.

So that upon these considerations it cannot be natural as I.O.T.D. I.T. R.B.
deems it, but do nothing at all to the purpose in proof of it so to be. So that
in further proof of it to be spiritual, and supernatural, and disproof of their
proof-lesse position, that its natural; to save the pains and charge of laying
them out at length, I lay down these following proofs, which wise men may argue
out more at large, to their fuller satisfaction within themselves.

Argum. The Light in all Consciences shines thereinto from God, Christ, and his
Spirit; therefore it is not natural, but supernatural and spiritual; for these
two; viz. natural and spiritual, natural and supernatural, do tollere se
invicem are inconsistently denominated of one Light, and that it is spiritual,
is showed after also: The consequence I. O. denies not, but confirms, while
himself Ex. 4. S. 15. opposes all Light that can be called natural, to that
which is from Christ and his Spirit, Negant lumen hoc natural esse aut ita
dici debere, sed a Christo and Spiritu Christi esse.
and as for the Antecedent, that its from God, Christ, and his Spirit, is as
evident from their own Confessions and Declarations; I. O. calls it the Voice
of God, page 44. indeed he adds in nature, by which it is like he intends that
which nature utters, or the voice of nature; but there is no Voice of God,
which is natural to man, that I know of; he that finds out that Chimera, must
have it in the nineth Chapter of no where at all, or else in the tenth of Go
look it, for he will never meet with that monster in the Scripture, nor in any
rule of right reason: Indeed Nature may be said to have a voice, as well that
of man, who is fearfully and wonderfully made, as that of the natural, material
Heavens, all which declare suo modo (ut prius) the glory of God the Maker; nor
is there speech or language where this voice of nature is not heard; but that
this voice of nature, is the Voice of God in the Conscience, or that Light
within he speaks of; or that the Light or Voice of God in the heart, is a Voice
of God, de esse hominis, essential and natural to man, credat Apella.

He calls it, page 43.45. A Light God has implanted in the minds of men, that
which speaks to man from God, of a Divine Original, and such like terms as are
exclusive of its being but natural (for himself pleads the Divine Original of
the Letter, as now, which yet is not of so immediate a Divine Original by far,
as the Light by which God speaks nigh in the heart; for at first it came to men
from him through the hands of holy men, and now to us rem^tely through the
hands of how many unholy men we know not, in proof of its being a true
spiritual, and not a natural Light) and also exclusive of its being the mind
and conscience it self, as some call it, saying, it is Conscience, it is
Conscience, when as it is as distinct a thing from the mind, understanding, and
conscience it shines in, and as little essential to it, as the candle is (
respectively) from and to the dark room wherein it shines: But this that God by
his Light within shows something of himself to all, is not much denied by you,
nor are ye easily persuaded by us, but that all that is but natural still; but
ye deny light in common to all, coming from Christ and his Spirit, which though
I have showed so plainly above, from John 1.9.16. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. Col. 1.23.
where Christ is said by his Spirit to have strove with, and preached to the
Spirits in prison, in the world of old, to convince the world, and enlighten
every man in it, and the Gospel to be preached in every creature; yet a word
more with you here as to this; let us see how far your selves confess to it,
and deny it.

T. D. confesses, page 4.1. Pamp. or at least denies not the Gentiles to have
been enlightened by Christ (as God) before his coming in that Body at Jerusalem,
but it seems denies he did, or does enlighten all ( as Christ) and I. O. sings
much what to the same tune with him, Ex. 4. S. 25. saying, Nihilnon natural,
nihil spirituale, nihil specialiter a Christo mediatore emanans communicatum,
etc no Light that is spiritual, none but what is natural flowing, or no Light
shining out from Christ (as Mediator) nothing but what men, yet destitute of
all saving knowledge of him, may have without Christ, and apart from him, is
mentioned Romans 2.14.15. and Ex. 4. S. 17. Christus sub nulla, etc. Christ in no
case has vouchsafed saving light to all and every man; in all which sayings I.
O. seems to confess with T. D. that God indeed, and perhaps Christ (as God) may
vouchsafe to all Lucis cuasdam scintillulas, reliquias nonnullas Primitivae
lucis (as he diminutively speaks) Some relikes of the first Light man was lost
from, some small sparks of light, etc. to all men; but these are but merely
natural, neither supernatural, spiritual, nor saving, or sufficient to bring
men (however heeding them) to any saving knowledge of God; but as for Christ
(as Christ) the Mediator between God and Man; there is nothing, no Light at all
that is saving, or by the best improvement of which, that can be made, they can
possibly come to Salvation by him, so much as vouchsafed by him to all, or to
any, but some Elect ones. Yea, Ex. 4. S. 11.12.13. Christian, etc. That Christ
does not indue; and savingly enlighten all, and every man, but some only that
is the Elect, with that Divine Light (in respect of which we confess him to be
the Light of the world, and consequently of al men) is so ascertained from
innumerable Testimonies of Scripture, and the experience of all Ages, that he
must even be blind and destitute of all spiritual understanding, that shall
once dream to the contrary: And S. 17. Lumen hoc, utcunque ei attendatur, non
est ullo respectu salutare sed in ribus-emnibus divinis, finem ultimum quod
attinet, meraetenebrae and caecitas; This light howsoever attended to, is in no
respect saving, but in all divine things as to the utmost end, mere darkness
and blindness it self: thus these men; and the same in effect is asserted by
R: B: and I: T: as will appear more by and by.

I must therefore down rightly address my self, as the Lord shall lead me, not
minding the method so much as the matter it self, to reply to all this stuff,
whereby T: D. and I: O: I: T: R: B: in special, who as Generals to other blind
Guides of poor, blind people, against the Qua. strive to storm the plain Truth
out of doors.

And to evince it, that some measure of that true, spiritual, and (if attended
to and improved) saving Light and Grace, in respect of which he is said to be,
the Light and Savior of the World, which is spiritual Light) for in the same
senses, men are said to be darkness, are they enlightened (quoth I. O,) but
without controversy the men, the Spirit speaks of, John 1.9. were not
naturally blind, but spiritually darkness) is vouchsafed, and shines from
Christ (as Christ the Mediator between God and man) even to all, and every man
in it.

First I shall follow on in the way I was going on in to clear it, that Christ
(as Christ) the light of the world, by his light and Spirit, and not (as God
only) enlightens every one, in the proof of which the rest is all concluded,
though yet I may grow on to take notice of the rest in particular also.

And first I shall minister the Truth to you from that Text, which you
Ministers against the Truth do so mangonize among you, as to make neither more
nor less then just as many meanings of, as ye are men; for between you Four
there are Four senses put upon it, whereof though some of them, in terminis,
are true enough to serve Truths turn against you, yet as ye mince your matter
in the minds, and as ye mean and wrest your own true words, as well as the Text
it self, the wrong way, there is never a one of all four that falls fully upon
the white.

That Text is, John 1.9. That was the true light, which enlightens every man
coming into the world.

That the true Light here spoken of is Christ, and the light that comes from
him, which John Baptist, a shining light in his season, but inferior to him,
was not, but only bare Testimony to, in whom is Life, and whose Life is the
light of men, that shines in that darkness, which comprehends it not; and so
consequently not a natural, stuens ex^^^piis naturae, much less as natural to
man as his Intellect, Mind and Conscience it self, as I. O. says that Light
which all have is, ( Ex. 4. S. 18. Lumen h^^ est naturalis propria and
niseparabilis mentis and conscientiae vis and efficazia; eculus (and yet, p.
77. light is not eyes) and acies me^tis est. St lumen hoc non (...) natural,
neque intellectus neque men's neque conscientia homin naturalis est) and
insufficient, but a spiritual, supernaturally and all sufficient Light to save
all ^^ch in whom it is, in case they believe in it, is a truth, which as it is
undeniable in it self, so I never yet met with any, Minister or other, that was
so deeply darkened as to deny: Yea I. O. positively affirms it to my hands,
Ex. 4. S. 24. Lucem and illuminationem quarum hic loci mentio facta est
Spirituales esse a^que ad renovationem gratiae, non naturales atque ita ad
creationem pertinere apparet, etc. It appears that the light and illumination,
mentioned John 1.9. are spiritual, and pertaining to the renewing of Grace,
not natural, and pertaining to the Creation: So that were there as little as
there is much to be said beside, all those particulars (if the universality of
it hold but as well from the latter part of the verse) stand proved without any
more ado: the Question then which alone we are concerned to enquire into, is,
Whether this Light (which, as I. O. says, Ex. 4. S. 19. non est salutare cum
sit natural, so I contrary, non est salutare cum sit salutare) be so common to
all, that every man that comes into the world be enlightened with it in some
measure, yea or no?

Now we have the express words of the Spirit on our side, and are sure enough
(as to our selves) that we have the mind of Christ in them also, which is but
one; but on their side are their own senses, minds, and meanings, which are so
many, even no less then four to that one of ours, which most properly answers
to the words, so that if they cannot carry it by weight, yet they hope to have
it by number, and choose to out-word us since they see they cannot outweigh us,
hoping that several senses may well stand and take place against one single
one; but as a dram of honesty, and naked simplicity, is to go further then a
deal of subtilty, and hypocrisy in the days that are coming, so one of the
Qua. proper constructions of Scripture will be preferred by honest people
before a fourfold improper one of the Priests imposing: The Qua. are in
possession of the plain Terms of the place, and of that meaning which most
properly answers to them, saying, That by every man coming into the world, is
intended, honestly and plainly, truly and properly, without dissimulation,
every man indeed, as it is there expressed, and that the Spirit means nakedly
and truly what he says; these stand proking, pelting, and stickling, with a
company of stones, and sticks, and strawes to storm the Qua. out of the strong
Hold they have in it.

1. As for T. D. he lets fly out of the Devils Bow (in which he shoots, which
L. H. has unstringed and enervated not a little as to many false matters of
fact he charges the Qua. with, by his discharging at them out of it) no less
then three several senses, or senseless shafts, viz, two p. 6 and one p. 36.
of his 1 Pamph. every of which has truth in it, as to the terms he utters
himself in, but so false, as he pinchingly intends by by his own words, that
all three of them, put together, do not reach far enough to make up the whole
truth, that is there intended, and so by short shooting he loses all.

His first sense is this; viz. That Christ enlightens every man that is
enlightened.

Repl. So say I; that makes for us, that is every man without exception; for
thus I argue ( shooting back T. Ds. Arrows against himself, who overshot
himself in one sense as much, when he gives this sense to that place, in his
words, by which he gives us the cause, as in his mind he undershoots the Truth
in another, for he means not by them (though his phrase imports it) that every
individual man is enlightened.

Christ enlightens every man that is enlightened.
But every individual man is enlightened.
Therefore Christ enlightens every individual man.
The first Proposition is T. Ds. own; the Minor, viz. That every man is
enlightened with some light, is his own grant also, p: 1: where he says, We
grant, that every man has some light, by which he discernes many sins, and
duties, and several divine attributes: So that let his meaning be what it will,
if he means as he says, (as it is fit he and and every honest man should, and
as the Spirit does) we have his own words, as well as those of the Text, on our
side also against himself; therefore T. D: if he own himself, must (of all men)
own the Conclusion, viz, That Christ enlightens every individual man.

2. Whether T. D. saw any advantage he had given us by this sense thus
expressed, or no, it matters not; but expressing his mind, as to the
interpretation of this Text, p: 36: there he adds a clause, by which he
imagines he mends the matter, and so he does, as much as one that makes it
never the better; for there he shoots out his sense thus, That Christ
enlightens every man, who is (spiritually) enlightened.

Repl. Which is very true, yea so say I again; but this Arrow does no execution
against us, nor that universal sense in which we expound the words, according
to the universality of their expression; of which it is no way at all
exclusive; for what though Christ enlightneth every man that is spiritually
enlightened, it does not follow (unless T. D. had said, as its like he means,
but that his sayings and meanings so seldom agree together, that he measures
the Spirit also by himself, as saying one thing, and meaning another, and so
would set the Spirits words and the Spirits meanings at odds, and together by
the ears against themselves) Christ enlightens only such men as are
spiritually enlightened.

Nor secondly, if he had said so, would it have followed, that every individual
man is not enlightened, for of a truth every individual man is not only
enlightened, but also spiritually enlightened; for he that is enlightened to
discern spiritual things, good or bad, spiritual wickednesses or spiritual
righteousness, many sins, and duties, and divine attributes, which are all
spiritual objects, and some of them some of those things of the Spirit, which
the mere natural man, without the Spirits revealing, cannot know, because they
are spiritually discerned, that man must be spiritually enlightened; so out of a
better Bow then the Devils, even that of Joseph's, which abides in strength, I
shoot back T: Ds: second Arrow again, thus against himself, as that which has
done us no harm, howbeit he meant it otherwise, it being in his mind to have
mischief'd the Truth: viz. Christ enlightens every man that is (spiritually)
enlightened, witness T:D: p: 36: but every individual man is more or less even
( spiritually) enlightened, i. e. to discern spiritual objects, which by the
Spirits revealing them only, and not naturally, but spiritually only, or by the
Spirit are to be discerned, witness T:D: again p: 1: therefore Christ
inlightens every individual man.

3 T: D: who has mostly two, has here a third string to his Bow, left the two
first should not hold, from which he shoots thus, viz. He enlightens some of
every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and People, as the phrase is Rev. 5.9.

Repl. And this, however he means pinchingly, yet is true too, in terminis,
that Christ enlightens some every where, a number in all Nations, as he
expresses it over again p. 36. for the terms ( all) and ( every one) are
conclusive continually of ( some) but that Arrow reaches not far enough to
wound our universal construction, so long as the terms ( some) (a number) (
many) without a ( but) put to them, whereby to bolt out othersome which is
wanting here (though elsewhere added and by and by to be talked with) is not
exclusive of all men, of every man, nor of any man; and so his bow and bolts
shoots too short to hit the Butt still: Nor is the Phrase Rev. 5:9: which T: D:
in his fancy, fellows, and Identifies with this in John 1:9: like it in any
wise, for one is ( enlightens every man in the world) the other ( Redeemed us
out of every Nation, etc.) were it, Redeemed every man in every Nation; and
made every man in every Nation: and Kindred, etc. a King, a Priest to God, etc.
then it had been somewhat nee^ a Kin to it indeed.

Thus T: D: by his single self, with all his sharpest shafts, or sorry shifts,
can make nothing stick to the gaining of any ground against us, nor so much as
to stir us a hairs breadth from our interest in it, much less to storm us
out of the strong Hold we have in that high place of Scripture, wherein the
Qua. stand over the head of the Serpent, to the bruising of it: Let us see
(since vis unita fortior) what the joined forces of him and I. O. together can
do, for they two, who fight as under from that Text in some of their several
senses against the Qua. fall in together in one of their four or five senses
(even that which has the least sense and reason in it of all the rest) and so
of two make one most senseless head against the Qua. and the Text, and the
Truth, or true sense of the Spirit, no less plainly imported and employed to
any, but that darkness which comprehends not the true light when it shines in
it, then it is plainly end evidently expressed therein.

That sense I shall join issue in against them both at last, but there lies on
single sense of I: O: wherein T. D. joins not with him, wherewith I. O. shoots
out of the same Bow, as hard as he can, against us; though too short to hit or
hurt us, the which must be shot back again upon himself first, in the service
of the Qua. and the Truth, which it serves perfectly, while not at all
themselves, nor their own false doctrine, and then I shall have the more
Field-Room to fight them both in about the other.

The sense of I. O. which is not only his own neither (though T. D. appears not
to own it with him) for I have seen others besides as himself seeking to
shuffle off the Truth with it, is this, viz. Christ coming into the world
inlightens every man; and this sense seems to be ushered in with a deal of p^mp
and ceremony, as if I: O: was confident of carrying the cause by it, when it
first Centered within his conciet, and so intended to act his Triumph over the
Qua. before his effecting of the victory: I shall set down some of his
triumphant matter, wherein he marches on toward the Text, where he meets us,
and make some occasional notes on some cross whets to himself, and halts, and
inter-feeres he makes by the way.

I.O: Videan^us porro quid contra garriunt Fanatici, ut que operam dent quacum
ratione aliqua insanire videantur, etc. Ex. 4. S. 23, 24. Lets see (quoth he)
what the Quakers prate to the contrary, and how they do their best to show that
they are not mad without some Reason; but they bring no new thing, they are old
worn out Arminian matters they bring, a thousand times confuted already: they
have nothing more frequently in their mouth then those words concerning Christ,
John I.2. They never make a more horrid outcry, then when they come upon this
place; here they fain wonderful triumphs to themselves, and not a little cast
ignominy on their adversaries.

Repl. No otherwise, I say still, do we reproach, then as the Virgin of Sion,
Isai. 37.21, 22. Despised, laughed to scorn, shook her head at the insolent
filliness of the haughty Assyrian, that reproached, blasphemed, exalted his
voice and lifted up his eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel, in his
Truth and People, over whom he looked so superciliously, as if he would pluck
them out of Sion by the eare^, when he was not so much as to shoot an Arrow,
that should reach to do any execution there: No otherwise then as plain
Ephraim, the people, and the honest hearted Sons of Sion are at this day, in
the Spirit and Power of the Lord; to be raised against thy silly-seemingly-wise
Sons, O Greece, and to be made against you Greekish Scribes and Disputers of
this world, as the Sword of a mighty man, and a polished Shaft, and his Bow,
and Arrows, and Battel-Axe in his hand, to beat down, and break in pieces the
Horse and his Rider, and, as the Potters Clay, the works of them that turn Gods
things upside down, so that it shall be said, Where is the Scribe? where the
Disputer ^ where is he that counts the Towers, etc. Mich. 5. per totum, Zach.
9, 10: per totum: Isai. 33. 1 Cor. 1. And thanks be to God, who always makes
us thus to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge
by us in every place: which ye Doctors and Divines cloud and darken with your
di^, dry Divinity, for we are unto God (though a stink to your unsavory selves)
a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish
through their hatred of the light that enlightens every of ^homs, without an
illumination by which there were (...) to them for rejection of it: neither are
we as the many (...) that hu^ksterin^^ and deal decei^fully about the Word of
God, for their own self ends, but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of
God speak we in Christ, (...)

J. O. They say that Scripture Speaks of Christ, he therefore is the light,
Christ is the light, and moreover be inlighteneth not this and that man only,
but every man that comes into the world, that is, all men, and every individual
of them, neither could anything be affirmed more clearly.

Repl. Neither could it in truth, but that the selfish Seers are all blind, and
its ni^ht unto them so that they cannot divine.

I. O. That the Scriptures are to be interpreted (extorsimus) we have enforced
it from own Adversaries.

(...) w^ll do (...) thou say, extorsimus, we have wrested it from them by
force (...) how (...) own the interpretation of the Script. (which is no way of
any procure interpretation) may be interpreted by the same public Spirit of
God that gave it forth, and by those that open it in the light of that Spirit;
yet we never yielded it to you yet, nor never shall, that the Scripture is to
be opened by that dark, private, narrow, selfish, sottish spirit of Satan, that
in you lusts to envy against the truth; nor by that fallible Spirit that ye are
searching the Scripture, and preaching out of it by, who your selves deny any
man (as is above showed) to be in these days guided by any infallible
direction of the infallible Spirit of God: for that fallible Spirit of yours,
which leads you into as many meanings on it well nigh as ye are men that meddle
with it, (and more too sometimes, one man putting two or three senses (as T. D:
does) and two men no less then four between them, as I.O. and T. D. on one
Text) does but make such a nose of wax of the Scripture, as may be and is too
(whereby ye may see what a steady Rule ye have of the Letter without the Light)
turned and twined by every of you into his own turn; till (as the Picture that
every Passenger had liberty with a Pensil to mend, what he thought and fancied
to be amiss in it as he passed by, at last became a misshapen Monster) so the
Scripture is scrued into such a multiformity of men's monstrous meanings, that
he must be monstrously blinded indeed, within a while, who will not see a
necessity of a more stable Standard to measure Truth by, then a transient, much
mistranscribed, much more mistranslated, most infinitely misinterpreted Text,
Letter, or outward writing can ever possibly be, which more stable Standard is
that of the infallible Light and Spirit, not (as I. O. judges it must needs be,
if not the letter) that pretended unerring Popes breast and bosom, and his
infallible chair.

J. O. The sense of this place comes now in question.

1. Christ is light, to wit, in the same sense in which we have showed God is
light; he is light in respect of his essential Majesty, Holiness, and Glory;
also he is light quatenus, and^ as he is the Fountain, Author, and Cause of All
light, that is essentially, and efficienter, as the efficient of it.

2. Christ is said to be the light of men, not that light which is in men; he
is the cause of all light, not all light, not that accidental and corrupt
light, whereof we speak.

Repl. O yes, hear all manner of people, who is so blind (but I: O: himself,
who is in suis Tal^^) as not to see how I: O: gives up his Cause by the way,
while he is but upon his triumphant march toward the Text, before he touches
it, whereabout the pitched Battle is to be.

The grand Question, about which his Quarrel with the Quake^s is, is, Whether
Christ as an Efficient does enlighten all men, yea, or nay?

That all men have some light, are in some measure enlightaed within
themselves, to discern sins, duties, divine attributes, moral good; and evil,
the things of God and themselves, this is not denied, but abundantly affirmed
by T: D: and I: O: specially, who often over and over tell us of a Voice of God
by which he speaks so in all men, that there is no need of other witness to
evince it, that its God that speaks; by which he reveals his Will, and that
obedience which from us is eternally indispensably due to him, and abuudance
more id genus, as abovesaid, then is fit or needful here to be repeated^ Only
the case sticks here, whether this come from God only or from Christ also (n^^
as God alone, but) as the true light of the World? whether Christ be the
Efficient, Fountain, Author, Cause of this universal light, that is confessed
to be in common in all men, without exception of any (unless Infants, and
natural fools.)

We say yea; Christ the true light of the World is the Cause of all that Might,
whereby anything of God is to be known by them, that is at all in any, or all
men.

T.D. and I.O. say no such matter; they will fight with us before they will yield to
that, that Christ as the Cause enlightens all men; and we stand upon John 1.9.
Out of that strong Hold I. O. draws nigh in a very audacious, daring way to
storm us; but behold, as T. D. in other cases, in ipso lumine, he stumbles at
the threshold, before he euters the Garrison where our Guard is, he yields,
falls down, and flatly consesses it is so as we say, in the^e words which are
his owns Christus lux est eodem sersu quo Deum lucem esse demonstravimus. etc.
Christ is light in the same, sense as we have showed God is light: Ex. 4. S: 24:
How is that? Thou may read it, Reader abundantly in I. Os. 42, 43, 44, 45:
p. where he shows how God enlightens, speaks in, shows himself and will, and
their duty, even to all men in their own hearts and consciences. But what says
he here? Expressly thus, As God, so Christ is light, not only essentialiter in
regard of his own Majesty, Holiness, Glory, but efficienter also, quatenus
omnis lucis sons, etc. as he is the Fountain, Author, and Cause of All light,
he is the light of men, that is the Cause of All light: So then I. O. before he
comes to the fight upon the place, sides with us against I: O: and his fellow
T: D: so far, as in effect to argue thus, viz. Christ is the Cause of all
light, there is none but what he is the Efficient, Author, and Fountain of,
from whence it comes. But there is some light in every individual man,
therefore that light which is in, and where with every individual man is
enlightened, is from Christ, as the Efficient, Cause, Fountain, and Author of
it; and this is like T. Ds. confession, that Christ enlightens every man that
is enlightened at all: which is no less then to ^ay, all men without exception.

Thus far has I. O. confessed, and failed in his way to the attempt, and he
had as good have lain still where he lay, as ri^e up again and fall; yet up
again he gets to the Text itself, and from that he assaults us, Andabata^um
more, blindly, and in the dark, on this fashion.

Non dicitur Christum, etc. J. O. It is not said that Christ enlightneth every
man coming into the world, but that he coming into the world enlightens every
man; for which sense, besides the Latin Tongue, he all along assaults the Qua.
in, he repeats it over in Greek also.

Rep. Itane? Is it so I. O. indeed as thou say? will it hold and carry
itself clearly in thy own conscience, and singly, as in the fight of God, when
thou read the words in that order, wherein in the very Greek they stand in
the Text, without shuffling and twinkling, that the Particle E^chomenon,
coming, must relate to that word and Substantive that is furthest of all from
it in the Text; i.e. to To P^gs, and not to that which it immediately follows,
and is joined to, not only in order of place, but of construction; i. e. to
Panta Anthropo^; that thou (...) so positive and peremptory in putting that
drossy gilded gloss upon that Scripture? I do not deny but that Erchomenon Eis
Ton Cesmon, if it stood as near to To Phos, as it does to Panta Anthropon,
might (as to the Syntax) as well agree with that, as its evident by the placing
of it, it rather now agrees with the other; were it En To Phos To A^ethinon
Erchomenon Eis Ton C^smon O Photizei Pava Anthropon; as it is Panta Anthropon
E^chomenon, etc. I would say more then I will now, in way of yielding to thy
mere will, which thou standst for, more then Truth in this matter (howbeit,
even then, as thou shall see by and by, unless thou will still shut thy eyes,
thou would not have the strength of a straw more by it toward thy cause) but
as now it is, I summon thee from the Lord God, and in his Name and fear, to
read it over once more solemnly, as in his sight and fear, before thou have run
thy full Career yet into condemnation, and see whether it sway not that way we
say, and be not cogent in thy own conscience to the very contrary, as to the
c^ooked construction thou make of it; being persuaded, that if prejudice have
not already blinded thee well nigh perfectly to thy Perdition, that thou will
rather consent to the sense wherein all Translators that ever I read of that
Text into the English Tongue at least, and Expositors too (unless some two or
three, who with thy self in these days, have happened to find and insist upon
that silly sense, and conceited crotchet against the Qua.) do as one man agree
to render it against thee, and with the Qua. viz. That was the true Light which
enlightneth every man coming, or every man that comes into the world; and if
thou will be so blind and obstinate, as in thy malice against the Truth and
Qua. to withstand the whole current of Translators and Commentators, whom thou
can not but commend above thy self (as I veri^y believe not one of an hundred
of those Scholars that are yet eminity to the Qua^ will do with thee, for all
that esteem thou would^t stand in for One among them) yet what will thou get by
the busness when all is done? Will thou gain one grain of ground against us by
it, if we should give and grant thee to read it thy own wrested way, as we will
not? Nay verily, though thou have got nothing by thy naming of such a thing,
but disadvantage to thy self many ways; yet we (as thou shall see) who will
loose as little as thou getrest, as to the cause in hand, shall improve it to
our advantage against thee more ways then one, or then thou who mostly make
more have then good speed, a^nt well aware of; and indeed, as men that meddle
to mend old Kettles that are fit for naught, do often, instead of stopping one
hole, make two; so have thou by meddling this way to mend thy bad matter against
the Qua. made more work for thy patching self; so that with all thy ^inking and
thinking, thou will never fasten thy tackling (which thou have loosed by it) so
well, but that at last it will all drop to pieces.

For first, Let it be noted down upon the score before all the world, how this
I. O. rather then he will not maintain his malicious ends against the Qua. and
the rich Gospel of Gods Grace, and true Doctrine of the universality of it,
held out by them from God (not in pretense, dissimulation, and mockage, as
themselves do, saying, God offers life to all, but intends it only to a few,
but in truth) will maintain that the Translators most, if not every one of them
that have translated the Scripture into English for the use of poor people,
have done not only ignorantly and blindly, but abusively also, to the Text, and
to this whole Nation to this day; for if there be one English Bible throughout
the Nation that reads it otherwise then thus, as the Qua. read that Text, viz.
The true light which enlightens every man coming, or that comes into the world;
Let him that doubts go look it; I here profess I never saw any of our
Translations, which were done by as wise heads as I.O. that ever Englisht it
his way. 2. He disparages the grave Doctors and Commentators that himself so
much accounts on; for Qui^ legi^ hae? who reads and expounds as I. O. does? vel
duo, vel n^mo, some two, or none; but none that ever I saw of any, either
An^ient or modern Expositors, of any nore or credit among themselves. 3. And so
still he preaches it out, how by the Doctors, Scribes, and Scriblers about the
Scripture, the poor people^ and rich too of the Nation, that understand no^
H^brew and Greek, are abused, nosed, gulled, and befooled, being fain to be of
that Faith still about the Scripture, and sense of the Scripture it self, which
is their Rule of Faith, as their Pha^isaical^ Fathers are of, believing (as
they do at Rome) as their Church, alias Clergy believes; who, if they happen to
be out (as they are^ seldom in, unless Out be In with them, as In is Out with
T. D.) the people, whose eyes all, as of one man, should be, as the true
Isreal's are, Zach. 9.1. toward the Lord, being toward their Spiritual
Lordships the Clergy, do all as one man err after them, and drop together in
gross with their blind guides into the Ditch: And whereas all have hitherto
(following the old Interpreters, who say the truth with the Qua^.) read that
Text thus, The true Light enlightens every man that comes into the world; they
(if I.O. may have his will against the Qua.) must now read otherwise.

4. Suppose we should for Trials sake (and no otherwise will we) grant thee
that the Greek Text, in respect of the words, as they may be construed, may
equally bear I. Os. construction, as well as that of the Qua. and of most or
all Translators and Interpreters hitherto, does not this then overturn the
whole business thou so much buslest for throughout thy book, viz. the Greek and
Hebrew Texts, being such a sure, fixed, steady, stable, infallible,
unchangeable, inalterable Rule, Canon, Measure, Touchstone, Standard, for all
Truth to be tried by, and all Spirits, Lights, even that infallible one which
gave it out, as well as any other, the infallible guidance of which thou
deniest to be now in the world, or to be the stable Rule, Standard, or
Direction about Doctrines, Duties, etc. for verily if it be so, as in some
places it is confes^ by me to be so far more clearly then in this ( viz. Job.
5.39. where Ereunate may be read either Indicatively, as a Complaint, Ye search
the Scriptures, and look for life there (which is Christ's mind there) or
Imperatively, as a Command, Search ye) that one and the same phrase in the
Greek may bear ^ivers constructions, from which, being differently construed,
according to men's mere different conceits upon them, may arise not only various
(...)ons and senses (such as T. D. gives when he says, it is either (...), of
else perhaps it may be so, and the word or phrase may import so, and may imp^rt
so, etc. up and down in his book) but also such as are even contr^ y,
contradictory, and absolutely destructive one to another; must not he then p^t
out the eyes of men first, that makes them believe that which I. O. contends
and spends himself throughout his whole Book about, that not the Light, Spirit,
Word, and Truth of Christ in the Hearts and Consciences of men, nor any
immediate Vision, or Revelation, of the old inalterable, infallible, eternal
Will and Truth of God to man in his own heart, as he waits at Wisdoms gates,
at Gods own Mouth for counsel, is to be the Rule, but such an uncertain,
doubtful, fallible, flexible thing as an external Text and Letter, that may be,
and is, turned twenty ways, and made to stand even in one verse many ways at
once, according as men in their foolish, vain thoughts are minded to thrust it?
Art thou so benumbed I. O. and hardened against this Truth, that the Light is
the Rule, and not the Letter, that because the Quakers rell it thee, against
whom thou art risen in wrath, therefore thou will not believe it, no not though
preached to thee by thy own mouth, hand, and pen, as well as theirs? Quid cum
iis agamus qui cum revera sintadeo infeliciter stupidi ut nulla neque ratione
neque experientia erudiri possint, quasi tamen ipsi soli superent,
vanaperswasione siderati, in contemptu eorum quae non intelligunt audaciter
persistunt, atque cum Comicoillo clamant, dicat quad quisque volet nos exhae
opinione non dimo vebimur, Ex. 2: S. 28. Read that to thy self I. O. if thou
can tell how, and see how thou loosest thy ground against us one way, while
thou seek to gain against us another way by thy extortion of the Text, and
thy playing Legerdemane about the Letter.

5. Suppose we should (as for trials sake again we will, not otherwise; for our
Nay is stronger then thy Tea, as to this place) give thee thy own reading of
that Text wholly to thyself, Jet's see what thou can make of it against the
^ue lights enlightening every man, which is the thing thou denyest, and would
disprove by it: Nempe To Pan, hoc est, vere nihil; just as much, and not a jot
mere then thou had ^^ before: If thou will not read it the true way; ^ake it
then in thy own, and make thy best on'r: The true light coming into the world
enlightens every man; here is thy reading, which amounts not to one attome more
against every man's being enlightened with the true light, then if thou quietly,
without quarrelling with the Quakers, read'st it with them thus; The true Light
enlighteneth every man that comes into the world: for it still proves, that
every man in the world, since the true Lights coming into it, is enlightened by
it: and all that thou thyself concludest and entailest at the end of thy tale
about it, is no more then an exclusion of that part of the world that died
before Christ's fleshly coming into it, from being mentioned in this Text; for
so run the words of thy Conclusion; ( Ex. 4. S. 24. Ad maximam ideo partem
humani generis, quaescilicet ante adventum Christi in mundum fato functa
fuerit, non pertinet haec assertio.)

Therefore to the greatest part of mankind, namely, such as died before Christ's
coming into the World, this Assertion appertains not.

Repl. In which Assertion of thine, thou, according to the manner of Error,
which is a Quick-sand that, when men are once in it, sucks them in further, art
sunk more over head and ears then before, considering thy meaning of thy own
words: for how beit (if rightly understood) there are no men that ever lived or
died in the World, who had a being in it before Christ and the true Light of
the World, or Word, of which it is said, John 1.1, 2, 3. It was in the
beginning with God, and was God, and (as God) is not denied by any of you to
have enlightened all men from of old before that Juncture ye count from, and by
which men and all things were made, so that without it not any thing was made
that was made, in which was the life, which life was the light of men, which
shines in the darkness (even the wicked, who are yet darkness) though not
comprehended thereby. Yea, to the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. That leads men in
the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of Judgment, that it may
cause those that love it to inherit substance, and fill their treasures, was
the very beginning of Gods way, was set up from everlasting, and in being when
the heavens and earth were founded, and established, rejoicing in the habitable
parts of the earth, and delighting in, and lightning the sons of men, ever
since there were men, and blessing those that attended to him, Prove. 8.20. to
the end; and in all ages entering into holy souls, made them friends of God and
the Prophets, Wisd. 7.27. And so thy Fancy and Falsity falls to the ground, who
speak as if Christ, as Christ, the Wisdom of God, and true Light of the
World, did not enlighten any before that Ensa^co sun as thou speak, or
appearance of him in that flesh that died at Jerusalem, for he was in the being
of a true light to the World, though slain as a Lamb in men from the very
foundation thereof, and such as walked in the beams of that which came from
him, came up to the sight of his day, and glory, with rejoicing, as Abraham and
others did, Isai. 6. and was the Christ, or Anointed One of God, to the doing
of his Work, and showing of his Will in the World, before any Letter was
written of him, and before he assumed to himself that outward appearance
wherein he died (or else how did Moses suffer the reproach of Christ in his
days, who lived so long before that body, ye only know him in, was born? and
how did Christ preach by his Spirit in Noah's days, if there was no Christ then
come? 1 Pet. 3.2) and was the same light that he now is to the world; and so it
is said in the Text thou so much talkest on, but that thou read it at
random, as thou do the rest; for its said, that was the true Light (in
praeterito) which enlightneth (in presents) every man that comes into the
world, that which was the light before his coming in that flesh, that is the
light which now enlighteneth (as it did then) every man, and that that it was
it ever will be, O On, kai O En, kai O Erchomenos, Rev. 1.8. he that before
then was come, and then came, and is come, and comes, and is to come, from the
beginning to the end, the first and last, the light of men, and life of such as
will be lead by him to it, the only way for all that have life to walk in,
whose light all they that hate, love death.

Yet if it were so (as God forbid, for then what became of not only the
rebellious part of the world, but of Abell, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
etc. were it so) as thou say, that to the greatest part of mankind, to wit,
that whole part (so thy words import) that died before Christ's coming into the
World, which thou countest but from the period of some one thousand six hundred
years upward, this saying, that the true light enlightens them, relates not: I
wonder what light thou deemest then they were enlightened by, if not the true
Light? for God is the true Light, and the Spirit is the true Light, and if thy
Letter were the true Light, which it rather only came from, yet those, who
lived before that, had it not; or were they enlightened with any accidental,
false, corrupt light? for such a One thou speak of in the foregoing Section,
saying, Christus est lux, non ill ^ accidentalis and corrupta, de qua loquimur;
Christ is light, not that accidental, corrupt light, of which we speak; where
if by (We) thou meanest thyself and thy fellows, tell us what light that is?
but if thou mean thyself and the Quakers, what e're thou speak of, I know no
such Monster, as a corrupt light, that the Qua. either own or speak of, for
they own and know no other light (whatever may falsely pretend to that name of
light) then that which is pure, uncorruptible, and uncorrrupted.

2. However if no man till about one thousand six hundred years ago were
enlightened by Christ the true Light, yet it is enough for us that thou grantest
every man to be enlightened by Christ the true Light since that time; let them
before stand or fall to their own Master, the Quakers call men to that Light
they are now enlightened withal; and that every man is enlightened by his
coming into the world at that time, thou affirmest from the Text, taken thy own
way, and do not hitherto, in thy own interpretation of it, deny, though
afterward thou denyest it with a witness, and T.D. too, who witness both to
that same false sen^e upon the Text before hinted at, and now to come under
consideration, and it is this:

Ex. 4. S. 24. He horum verborum sersus est cum omnes homines essent merae
tenebrae, etc. Tois (quoth I.O.) is the sense of these words, when all men were
mere darkness, and blind to heavenly things, the Son of God, the eternal Word,
the eternal Light coming into the world, sent the holy Spirit to enlighten Some
of these men that were by nature darkness, and so was made the Light of them.

Respondemus ideo (quoth I.O.) per omnem hominem non omnes and singulos
intelligi debere s^d qu^s vis tantum, etc. hoc est Syncate gorema istud Omnis,
non absolute, sed relate ad electos dicitur prout aliis locis innumeris
usurpatur, etc. By every man, not All and every individual person must be
understood, but Some only; All is not spoken absolutely of All, but with
relation to the Elect, as it is used in innumerable other places, Col. 1.6, etc.

And Ex. 4. S. 13. Christum non amnes and singulos sed quosvis tantum, hoc est
electos, luce hac peyfundere atque salutariter illuminare ita certum est ex
innumeris Scripturae Testimoniis, and emnium seculorum experientia, ut caecus
sit opporret and omni spirituali intelligentia destitu^us qui contrarium vel
unquam somniaverit: That Christ does not with this divine light indue and
enlighten All and every person, but some only, that is, the Elect, is so
certain, from innumerable Testimonies of Scripture, and the experience of all
Ages, that he must needs be blind and destitute of all spiritual understanding,
that shall ever so much as once dream to the Contrary.

And S. 17. Christus nulla sub consideratione lumen salutare omnibus and
singulis ir dulsit. Christ under no consideration both vouchsafed Saeving light
to A^l and every man.

In these and the like expressions we have I.Os. both opinion in this point,
and his sense on this place, and his meaning on this Clause (every man) and in
all this T:D: joins in one with him against the Qua. both as to the
universality of the saving Light of Christ, whom God has (as the Qua. truly
assert, according to Isai. 42.6. 49.6.) given for a Covenant to the People, for
a Light to the Nations, that he may be Gods Salvation to the ends of the earth:
And the same strait-lacing, pinching, and particular sense he puts upon those
most universal terms ( All) and ( every man) in that place, Job. 1.9. and many
others, witness his Answer to R.H. who truly told him thus, the Scripture
says, Everyman, and thou say, But some: Who shall be believed, Thou or the
Apostle? thou make John a liar: No such matter, quoth T.D. I make not the
Apostle a Liar, for the indefinite phrase has a restrained sense, as elsewhere
in the Scripture, Christ tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. when as he died
but for a certain number.

And as for I. Tom and R. Baxt. (which two heads that knock so hard against
each other about Baptism, make but one hasty head to push against the Qua. and
the true Light, in that Book of I.T. published by R. Bax. ^^il'd. True Old
Light Exalted, etc. many blind passages whereof are here animadverted, in which
piece of work of theirs there is (as there is in I.Os.) not only Light, but
more or less in one place or other all sorts of Light treated and tasted of,
yet little or no Light at all found, but rather a mere mist of darkness) these
two (I say) are neither less bold, nor less blind, then the other two in their
confused opposition of this eminent Truth, viz. the universality and
sufficiency of Light or Grace from Christ in men to save them (if they take
heed to it) from both transgression and condemnation, about which I shall ^et
down so much of that their book, as whereby it may appear how far they are
contradictory to the Qua. and then show how all of them (who yet speak out no
other then the sense of the whole Brotherhood of the personal, particular
Electionists, that deny the general love of God, and his gift of Saving Grace
to all men) are therein no less contradictory to the Truth: And for as much as
R. Baxt. is found justifying of what ever is said by I.T. falsely in that
foresaid book, I do R.B. no wrong in my judging them both for it in my Reply,
if R.B. had not (as he has) vented out his vehemence of blind zeal in his
Epistle so ridiculously, as to excuse such as accuse him of ignorance and
error, in words enough of his own, for which I.T. not only mutually justifies
him, but All-to-be-reverences him also, as R.B. does him, and most Divines do
each other mutually, when they jointly roar out their rude reasons against the
Truth, though they rather tear and rend, then reciprocally reverence one
another, when they open at each other about their own Opinions. To let pass
then their unanimous impatient prittle-prattle against the Qua. as Popish, and
promoting the Papists Interest, as savouring of Popery, Polagianism,
Arminianism, Socinianism, page 36. and such like stuff and strange outcries,
with which the Clergy ever fills poor peoples minds, to the rendering of them
ill-affected to Friends of Truth, as AntiScripturisme, Enthusiasm, Fanaticism,
etc. having dealt with I.O. and T.D. already about that trish-trash of our
being Jesuits and Papists, See Baxt. Epist. The principal work of Papists and
Quakers is to take off people from the holy Scripture, and from the reformed
faithful Ministers.
to which I refer them all, who, eodem cum idis herentes luto, found it out to
the same tune against us in that and the rest; Arminiana sunt omnia jamdudum
profligata; they are all Arminius his matters (quoth I.O.) Arminia^ points
(quoth T.D.) thus they stun men's minds, not knowing that Arminius (though
deem^d and doomed an Heretic by that Divine and domineering denunciation of
the Divines at D^rt) was as no less learned, so full as holy and honest as
themselves.

Letting pass also abundance of other lies and abuses of the Qua. Of like sort
with those of Underhill, and Blome, in the Fanatic History, who with ground of
shame enough (if he were not past it) having found a Legend of Lies, collected
out of T. Ds. and others books against the Qua. by he knows not whom, dedicates
it, together with his own Haman-like desires, to have them forcibly suppressed,
unto the King.
sundry of which call aloud for a Rod of as rough reproof as the rest have had,
for the backs of both Tombs and Baxter, among which I shall here hint at no
more then that of R. B. in his Epistle concerning Iame; Nayler, which (as he
says) is regardable, and so say I to R. Bs. shame, who so basely belyes James
Nayler therein, representing those words at large, wherein I.N. renounces those
unclean Spirits that are gone out, to the dishonor of God by many wild
actions, from the unity of the Truth, and Light into which the Qua. are called,
gathered, and in which they abide, as if therein I. N. had written a
Recantation of all that ever he wrote against R. Baxter, and others, for the
Truth held out by the Qua. and as if I. N. had for ever renounced the Qua. as
unclean spirits, and Ranters, and such like; when as its most evident to any
but the blind, that as I. N. still iustifies the Truth and Light, and all the
Qua. that abide in it, and to which by the Grace of God he now stands a true
and faithful servant, so that his Recantation and Renunciation, is of no other
then of that old Spirit of the Ranters, which makes head against the Light of
Christ, condemning filthiness in every conscience, and Life of the Cross, which
(however many may turn away from, as they did of old) yet many thousands of
Qua. continue walking in to this day.

But I say, passing by all I: T: and R: B: gross abusiveness of this sort
against the Qua: of that Universal Light, and sufficient or saving Grace of God
to all, which the Qua: testify to, they assert thus; Bax: Ep: p: 7: Their
great pretense, when they dishonor the Scripture, and the Ministry, is to lead
men to a Light, or Word of God within them and this is their cry in our
Assemblies and our streets [Hearken to the Light and Word within you] and the
sufficiency of this they clamorously defend, and accuse^us grievously for
contradicting them, etc. So p: 34: Out of the Principles of those men (viz:
Pelagians, Arminians, etc.) these People (meaning the Qua) have drawn, their
Tenet of an Universal Light in every man that comes into the world, without
Bibles, Preachers, Church Communion, Christian Ordinances, to know his duty so
as that he may be perfect, which is indeed the reviving of old Pelagianism, or
worse, and tends to the making of Christian Religion, if not all Religion
whatsoever unnecessary.

Sol: 35:36: by way of complaint against the Qua: they say, This is their
conceit, that every man that comes into the world, even the Gentiles that have
not the Letter, yet have from Christ a Spiritual Light, etc. That every one
has a Light within him, or there is such Revelation imparted to every man in
the world, that if he would use it, he might come to saving knowledge: This
Universal Light is so magnified by G. Fox, that he tells us it shows all the
ungodly ways that ever a man has acted in, with it a person will come to see
Christ the Savior of his Soul, from whence the Light comes to save him from
his sin, it brings to Christ, to confess him, gives the knowledge of the God of
the world that rules in them that are disobedient, this Light gives the
knowledge of the Glory of God, the true knowledge of the Scriptures, its one in
all, they that come to, and love it, come into fellowship one with another, out
of this they are in jarrs and confusions, it lets see Sin that has separated
from God, and the Mediator, and the Kingdom of heaven, and lets men see they
must be meek and humble, keeps from error, guile, all distraction, distemper,
drunken thoughts, imaginations, and a man's own reasonings; its the Gospel, the
first Principle of pure Religion; they that profess to believe the Scriptures,
in God, in Christ, yet believe not in this Light, deny Christ; and though they
profess some of Christ's and the Apostles words, yet none confess Christ, but
who confess the Light; that they who teach not this, are Teachers of the world,
Antichrists, Deceivers, etc. the Letter, i.e. Scripture is not the Light, nor
the Word: More to the same purpose is (say they, and truly enough, say I)
delivered by G. F. Hubberthorn, and many more, insomuch that Fa^nworth says,
Loving the Light, it will guide you to God from all men, that ye need never
look at man more.

And page 37. They i.e. Qua. assert: 1 That there is a Light in every man: 2
That this is sufficient to guide them to God of it self: 3 That it is a Rule to
show duty and sin: 4 That there need no other teaching of man: 5 That this is
one in all: 6 That it is the Gospel. This is the main prop of the new
Antichristian Religion, or frenzy of the Qua.

By all which its plain, that these Four do as one man withstand and resist
this Truth the Qua. testify, concerning the general love and Grace of God in
Christ Jesus to all mankind, i.e. every individual man, in their above cited
sayings, so far as to give them All any such measure of saving Light, as puts
them but into a possibility for life, if they never so well improve it, and the
universality of a Light in men, sufficient to save them; or (which is all one)
the sufficiency of that Light to save from sin, which is asserted by the Qua:
to be in some measure given by Christ universally to all men.

I shall therefore address my self to a little farther examination of what the
Scriptures declare for, and our Four Divines, against the Truth of God in these
particulars, whose oppositions of it are much what from the same grounds, and
those no other then the same that are made use of by all personal Electionists,
to push at that precious Doctrine of the general Love of God to the Whole
World, in vouchsafing some measure, of no less then truly saving Grace
universally to all, and every individual in it, or of Light, sufficient to lead
to life such as follow it, to each particular person among mankind, so that not
any perish for want of the Love of God and Christ to them, or of willingness in
God and Christ to have them saved, or of true strivings of their Holy Spirit
with them, to draw them from the way of death, or of Light sufficient to lead
them out of that darkness that destroys them, or of Power and Saving Grace
given them from God to work out their own Salvation, or of Christ the Saviors
dying for them, and offering himself a Ransom for every one, as well as any
one, or of sufficiency in him to save such as come to God by him, or of true
tender of life, peace, and Reconciliation with God to him, or of true purpose
and intent in God and Christ to receive them to mercy, on condition of their
repentance, or of space given them to repent in and return, or upon the account
of any particular, personal P^^destination, or R^p^bation of them to
condemnation per saltum, peremptorily, inalterably, before they were born,
without reference had to impenitency in ungodliness foreseen, or upon any such
like considerations, as our Divines hold forth, but merely through their own
slighting of that Love, resistings of the foresaid strivings, despising of the
riches of that Grace, long-suffering, and forbearance, refusing to be led to
Repentance by that Light, and by it to come to that Savior from whom it comes,
not turning at the reproofs of it, not improving the said Gift of the Power of
God, and manifestation of the Spirit given to profit withal, not putting
themselves forth according to the measure of it in them, but receiving it in
vain, not trading with the Talent, but trifling away the acceptable time, the
day of Gods Salvation, the day given to them, wherein the Lord would hear and
succor them, not minding therein the things that make for their peace, till
hid from their eyes: These, and such like, as fall out only on man's part, who
remains in the Enmity, when God is in Christ reconciling, not imputing
trespasses to the world, but as the world goes on obstinately therein,
destroying themselves (whilst in God still is or was their help, nevertheless,
whether they hear or forbear, live or die, be saved or damned) are the sole
causes of men's destruction and perdition, who perish not at all according to
the Will of God, desiring it should be so, if ( salva veritatis, voluntatis,
immutabilitatis, and justitiae gloria, without violation to his Justice, Truth,
and purely good, and immutable will, which is, that the godly shall prosper,
and the ungodly perish) it may be otherwise, though yet permitting it so to be,
when there is no remedy.

CHAP, III.
ANd this, that Christ died for all men, without exception, and God in him
intends salvation to all, as truly willing they should have it, rather then not
(if in their own obstinate wills they withstand it not by refusing to return
when he draws them) as he truly tenders it to them, and has of his own free
Love and Grace empowered them, as well to receive it, if they will, as to
reject it if they will, and vouchsafed them all some measure, though not the
same measure of the true Light, which is sufficient to guide All that follow on
to know him in it to that saving knowledge of himself, and Christ, which is
Life eternal, is from the whole scope of Scripture as certain (to him who is
not blinded, with that Sorcerer that could not see the Sun) as it is that I: O:
says (falsely) the contrary is certain from innumerable places of it; out of
which I argue, in proof of the foresaid Truths, as follows.

Argum. 1. If it were so certain (as these men say it is by their spokesman I:
O: Ex. 4. S. 13, 17.) that God does not savingly enlighten all and every man,
but some only, i.e. the Elect; that he must be blind, and void of all spiritual
understanding, that dreams to the contrary, and that Christ in no wise
vouchsafes saving Light to all and every man, nor any measure of that Grace
that is sufficient to save men, let them attend to it never to well, Vt cunque
ei attendatur I: O: Ex. 4: S: 17.
then he could not say truly and honestly without a lie, Absit blasphemia, far
be from us that blasphemy once to think that God lies.
that this ways are equal; and as he lives he had rather the wicked should
turn from his wickedness, and live, then die in and for it; fith he might (in a
way of consistency with the unchangeableness of his unchangeable Decree.
concerning the death of final Impenitents) put them, at least, into a
capableness to choose life, and possibility to come to it, if they would, as
well as to choose death, if they would, and thereby have showed the equally of
his ways, in letting men have what they will, and as they do, yet would not do
so much for them as that.

But most certain it is, that Gods ways are all most equal, so as to let men
have from him what they choose (viz.) Life, and Good, and Blessing in Christ the
Light, or Death, and Evil, and the Curse, in the deeds of darkness, when both
are set before them, Deuteronomy. 11.26.30.19: Isai. 66: 3, 4: and as certain it is
that God so says as abovesaid, and truly wishes rather that the wicked, even
those that do die, should turn and live, (as else they cannot,) but that they
will not; mark Ezekiel: 18: throughout, and Ezekiel: 33: v. 8: to v: 21. Yea. O
(says he) that there were such an heart in them that they would fear me, etc.
that it might be well with them, Deuteronomy: 5: 29: with a number more of the like
wishes, Matthew: 23: 37: Luke 13: 44. Luke 19:41, 42. And whatever God says or
wishes, he does it truly and honestly, meaning as he says, and is not such an
Hypocrite, Liar, and Dissembler, as T: Ds: Doctrine, of his tendering what he
never intends. does make him.

Therefore he vouchsafes to All and every man, even those that come to perish,
but that they neglect it at some time or other, same measure of saving Grace,
and a Light sufficient to lead them to Salvation.

Arg. 2: If God did not give at one time or other to all men such Grace,
Liberty, Light, and Power, as is sufficient to bring them to life, if they will
choose the life, and well improve that Light and Power, to the working out of
their Salvation, when he bids them, by it, then God could not to all men render
life by his Ministers, nor say, Work out your own salvation, choose life, that
ye may live, else my soul shall choose your greater destruction, without mocking
of men in in their misery, before that time wherein he says, he will only, and
may justly mock at their calamity (which is only when they have filled up their
measure of scorning at him, set at naught all his counsel, and utterly rejected
his reproof, Prove: 1:) ( Si enim lumen seu gratiam salutarem suam dare omnibus
Deus nolit, and tamen omnes ad salutem pervenire (Sub poena) requirit; quid ni
per talem gratiam millies mill miseros homunciones ludos facere (absit
blasphemia) ^stimandus est?) Nay, nor yet without horrible cruelty, absurdity,
and nonsense: For as much as it is no less then non-sensicalnesse, absurdity,
mere mockage, and cruelty, for a Prince to say to a condemned helpless
Malefactor that is locked up in chains, ready to be led away to execution
(without affording him sufficient help so to do, and with much threatening of
so much the worse torture and pain in his death, if he do it not,) ^ would not
at all that thou should dye, choose rather to live, shake off thy chains, run
from thy Guard that leads thee, save thy self, and here is a Pardon for thee;
but if thou do not take this my counsel, thou shall be tenfold more severely
executed: Yea, it is against the very nature of choice, to lay two things
before a man, saying, choose which of these two thou will, and yet leave him
under a necessity of taking the worst, and put him into no possibility of
taking the other, but rather lay it utterly out of his reach, so that he must
needs have the worst or neither: such choice (as the Proverb is) is no other
then Hobson's choice, which is, choose whether thou will have this or none.

But it is certain, that God speaks in such wise, as aforesaid, by his
Ministers to men, and it cannot be denied by your selves (unless you deny your
own Doctrine) for ye usually preach so in his Name to all men; yea, could the
whole World (to use T.Ds: phrase in his Ep. 2 Pamph.) be brought in the reach
of your voices, ye would offer Salvation to them All, (as much as ye seem to
your selves to know, that God intends it only to a Few) and would say, We (as
Ambassadors from God) set life and death before you, Choose life that ye may
live, God would not have you die, Why will you die? Work out your own salvation
(though ye (falsely) believe he has wrought but in a few a sufficient Light,
Grace, and Power, to will and de what ye calls them to) turn your selves, and
live, here is plenteous Redemption for you, else if ye do not, this call,
warning, tender, fair proffer, shall be to you but the sorer condemnation: And
yet God neither is non-sensicall, nor absurd, nor cruel, nor a mocker of men
in their misery by his Ministers, till they have utterly set at naught all his
council, and finally rejected his reproof.

Therefore God has undoubtedly vouchsafed a measure of his saving Grace, and
Power, and a light sufficient to lead them to life, if they use well, improve,
they, follow, that Eight, Power, and Grace, to all and every man.

3. If God have not sufficiently and savingly enlightened and empowered all and
every man everywhere by such measure of that Grace of his, as may lead and
enable them to act that Repentance which is to Life and Salvation, but some few
only, i.e. the Elect (which, according to your Principles too, are scarce one
of a thousand in the world) then he not only requires and commands utter
impossibilities from most men, but also judges and punishes them most severely,
yea eternally, for the not doing of that in their own persons, which he knows
they neither can, nor in their own persons ever could do; for as much as sub
poena Iudicii, on pain of Judgment and Condemnation at the great day of it by
Christ, he, now at least, commands all men (says Paul, Acts 17^.30, 31.)
even everywhere to repent, and yet he knows, that without him and his Grace
they can do nothing, all their sufficiency to will and to do good must come
from him, and that his Grace, which in the least measure of it, is sufficient
for them, and that he gath given but to very few (though he requires of them,
that have it not, to do what they only can do, that have it) and to give it to
the most he never intends it.

But God does not command from most men (though sinne^s) utter impossibilities,
and require of them with such rigor, as own pain of his doubling condemnation
on them, the doing of that in their own persons, which he knows per se they
neither can do, nor ever could; for this were utterly inconsistent with that
tender Mercy, exceeding great Love, Bowels of compassion, and true good Will,
which the Spirit every where declares God hears to all Mankind, even in the
Fall, to the World, even in its Enmity, who proclaims Peace, Reconciliation,
Good will toward Men, (An indefinite phrase aequivalent there to an universal)
incomparable Love to the World, though it perishes for hating that Light that
is come into them, which he sends to save them: See and mark Luke 2, 14. John
3.16, etc. Romans 5, 8. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. utterly inconsistent also with the
truth of that professed willingness, that all should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth, which only saves and makes free indeed, 1 Timothy 2.4. and
willingness that all should come to Repentance, and unwillingness that any
should perish, 2 Pet. 3.9. inconsistent (as abovesaid) with the equality of
Gods ways, and the integrity of those vehemently pretended wishes of his, that
men would rather live then die, and with the sincerity of those sayings, that
he would gather them into life, but they will not, Deuteronomy. 6.29. Ezekiel. 18. Ezekiel.
33. Matthew. 23.29. Luke 13.34. Since (if our dim Divines Doctrine were true That
he gives not to all Light and Grace sufficient to lead and save them, and
Arbitrium (vel lib^rum, vel liberatum) a liberty, a power, to choose, to will,
to do, what he requires to work out their salvation, as he says he does, Phil.
2.13, 14. of his own good will and pleasure, to which only belongs the glory
therefore, and not unto us, of the salvation so wrought out by us) the case is
clearly otherwise then Go^ says, for men might be put (at least) in
possibility of living by such Grace, Light, and Power, if God had given it, but
he would not.

And lastly, This would make God like to, or worse then Pharaoh himself, whom
he plagued for the self-same cruelty and tyranny, even a rigorous Requirer of
men with many and sore stripes, yea on pain of his eternal Wrath and Vengeance,
to make Bricks without any allowance at all of any straw, fit for such a
purpose, an austere man, a hard Master, a tyrannical Task-master (as the idle,
unprofitable Servant falsely represented him) that looks to reap where he never
sowed, and to gather where he has not strawed; that calls, on peril of
perishing for ever, for a crop of Good works from those hearts, wherein he
never sowed the Good Seed of his own Word; Fruits of the Spirit from such
Souls, into which he never sent his Spirit, from whence only they can grow up;
a walking in that Light of the Lord, (which is said to be given, not to condemn
them, but that through it they might be saved, under penalty of being condemned
for not walking in it) when yet not the least beam of that saving Light was at
all vouchsafed them, but a Light of another sort (as our Seers say) which could
never have served their ta^n so as to have saved them, had they attended never
so strictly to it, but only Gods turn against them, so as to damn them further,
and leave them without excuse, and excuse him in his condemning them: Finally,
a growing in that saving Grace of God, on pain of condemnation, for turning it
into wantonness, and receiving it in vain, which was never received at all by
them, because not at all given them of God, from whom the most have nothing
(say our silly Sophisters) but a certain common, highway, insufficient Grace,
to know God, or do good by, that accommodates them that have it in their
hearts, to serve God acceptably by it not at all, and therefore not half so
well as the stubble did the Israelites to make brick withal, which they
gathered instead of straw; which Divinity of our Divines yet (howtrue soever
they deem it) is but a turning of G^ds Gospel, Grace, and Truth, upside down,
and is esteemed of him and his no better then dirt and Potters clay, and is
utterly contrary to the Wisdom of God in Scripture, which justifies him still,
as accepting every man according to what he has, or has had, and not
expecting (much less with rigor exacting) of any man, according to what from
him he neither has, nor never had; as requiring from men no otherwise then
according to what is committed to them, which is one Talent, some true saving
Light within at least, even to him that has least, which, if he be faithful in
it, though but a little, shall lead and let him ( de Iure) into the Masters
joy, if neglected, shuts him out into the outer darkness: Yea God calls for no
more from any man, then improvement of his own money, that he commits to him to
trade with, which money, if every one put into the bank, that the Lord at his
coming may receive but his own, with the use thereof, and increase in the same
kind of Grace that he freely gives, he will never enter into judgment with
them to condemnation.

Therefore undoubtedly God has sufficiently and savingly enlightened and
empowered all and every man every where, by such measure of that Grace of his,
as may lead and enable them to act that Repentance, which is to Life and
Salvation.

Arg. 4. If God have not vouchsafed some measure of sufficient and saving Light
to all men, then its either the Children of the Light that believe in it, who
have it not, or else the Children of the darkness that believe not in it; but
both they who believe in it, and so are the Children of it, and they who
believe not in it, and are not the Children of it, have it; That the first have
it, none do deny; and that the second sort have it, is most evident to all; but
such Children of the night, as neither believe what the Letter says of, nor
what the Light it self shows concerning it self within themselves, since Job.
12. Christ says to such as were not yet the children of it, but of the
darkness, because though 'twas in them, they were not believing in it, but
walking besides it, in the deeds of darknesswhich it condemns: While ye have
the Light, walk in the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children
of it, which over-turns that profoundly, bottomlesly deep, and groapably dark
imagination, which is I. Os. and T. Ds. who in their muddy minds make no
difference between the Lights being in men, and men's being in it, the Kingdoms
being in men, and men's being in it; whereas it was in the Pharisees, who never
came into it. Of I. Tombs, and R. Baxt. also, who page 44. in the fifth of those
thirty thredbare Argum. there urged by them against the true Lights enlightening
all and every man (which all must come to Judgment by and by) cloudily
confound these two so distinct businesses into one; viz. to have the Light, and
to be the Children of it; saying, (with as great confidence, as small
consideration) That to be a Child of Light, is all one, as to be a person that
has Light in him, to guide him so as to please God; when as all the children
of the darkness (in which the true Light is said to shine) though the darkness
(viz. I. Os. T. Ds. I. Ts. R. Bs. and other dark hearts comprehends it not,
Ioh. 1.) have, if not a Letter without them, yet (which is more) light in them
to guide them to please God ( de Iure) and to tell them when they displease him
( de facto) as the Letter does not, which shows men what they have done, should
de, and be, but no men (as the Light does) what they have done, do, and are;
but the Children of the Light are not all that have the Light in them, for all
men have it, though ill men hate it, and (because it condemns the evil deeds
they love, and are loath to leave) condemn it, love the darkness more then it,
whereupon it is, though, as from God, intentionally their Salvation, yet
actually their condemnation, John 3.16.17.18.19.20.21. etc. but all and only
those who are actually led and guided by it, who are, and walk in it, as it is
in them, and as God is in it, guiding them into the way that is well-pleasing in
his sight, and into fellowship and acquaintance with himself, 1 Ioh. 1.7.8.
These I say are the Children of the Light, who are justified by it, by whom
also it is justified, while the world condemn it, who are condemned by it, as
Wisdom is justified of her own Children.

Therefore God has undoubtedly vouchsafed some measure of sufficient Light, or
Saving Grace, to All men.

Arg. 5. If any have not, some measure at least, of this saving Light, it must
be either the Reprobates that are rebellious against it, or the Heathen (as ye
call them, who are in name Christian, in nature as Heathenish as they) which
have not any Letter without, nor knowledge of Christ Jesus after the flesh; for
yourselves, who name the Name of Christ, and so think ye are Christians, would
deem your selves disparaged, if we should say, they have that Light ye have
not, and ye cannot deny but true Christians that obey it, and depart from the
iniquity it condemns, must much more have the gift of (...) saving Light and
Grace, if the Rebellious have it.

But the very Rebellious (though they improve it not, and so dwell in a dry
land, and find not the green pastures the Sheep of Christ feed on, who hear his
Voice, yet) have this gift of saving Grace, by Christ the Mediator received for
them, and vouchsafed to them, by the leadings of which, if they follow it, they
may come to witness the Lord God dwelling in them, Psalm. 68.18. Yea Job 24.13.
If the Rebels against the Light had it not shining in them in that time in
which that was spoken, which (as is generally judged, was before any of your
Scripture was written) they could not be said to rebel against it: And beside,
to the rebellious and gainsaying people in Israel, God says, what should, or
could I have done more for them, that I have not done? which he could not have
said in the judgment of Reason it self (as much as he had done for them, in
giving them an outward Scripture) if he had not vouchsafed them withal, some
measure of that Light and Grace, which is only able to guide men that improve
it to Salvation, for less then so much could not put them into so much as
possibility of Salvation, for all their Letter, and in all Reason he should
have put them at least into a possibility of it by a Grace sufficient (if
improved) to bring them to it, or else all he did for them beside, was little
worth, or worse then nothing to them, and he had not done enough on his own
part toward their deliverance from damnation, let them have put forth
themselves never so far, but rather that which (according to your principles)
must unavoidably tend to their sorer condemnation, but doing that, and putting
them by the gift of his own Light, Grace and Power, into a capacity to work out
their own Salvation (whether they would walk in that Light, or not walk in it,
improve that Power, gift of Grace, or not improve it) he would be clear of
their blood, and their miscarriage on their own part, and they perish on the
score of their own putting the Salvation of God far from them, when he brought
it nigh them, and as he might truly say, what could I have done more then I
have done for them (unless I shall force them to live whether they will or no,
and so change my Decree unchangeable, which is to put men again by my Grace, by
my Son, whom I give to be my Light to the Nations, and my Salvation to the ends
of the (...), into a posse peccare, and posse non, at least Which is a state
different from a non posse peccare.
a liberty and power to abuse life or death, when I set the way of both before
them, and then leave them, ad libitum, to embrace which they please) so they in
all reason could expect no more, it being pity enough to provide meat and set
it before poor perishing men, though one do not put it per force into their
mouths, when they are capable to feed themselves; and if any, when they are
made videre meliora, will deteriora sequi, and needs take the wrong way, which
they know to be the worst, and its end to be death, when not only the Right is
showed them, but they willed, and wished, and enabled to walk in it, that they
may live thereby, as to be in Potentia ad actum, to have from Free Grace the
power to choose life or death, is grace enough to condemned men; so to them that
choose to die, no wrong is done, fith Volenti non sit injuria. Besides, the
Wisdom of God it self is said, Prove. 1.21 etc. to call very Scorners that
delight in scorning, fools that hate knowledge, and love folly, to turn at her
reproof, promising more and more to pour out her spirit on them, and make
known her words to them, they hearkening to her reproofs, who talks with them
in their beds when they awake, and by the way, etc. otherwise it is the turning
away of the simple from her teachings, not being without her teachings that
slayes them.

And as for the Heathen, how they have that which is to be known of God (even
enough as to their Salvation) manifest by God himself within them, and not only
the Wrath of God against all their ungodliness, but also the Righteousness of
God revealed from heaven, even by him that speaks from heaven in their own
hearts, so that they both know God in some measure (though not liking to retain
the knowledge of him in them, nor glorifying him as God, answerably to what
they know of him, their foolish hearts are darkened, and they given over to
vileness) but also know the Judgments of God, that the things they do are
worthy of death; as also, that Life and Peace from God, should be to them in
the contrary, and so are condemned, accused, and without excuse, when they sin,
as well as cleared, accepted, justified before God within themselves when they
do well, by the work of the Law of God written in their hearts; by which,
though they have not the Law in Letter, or a literal Copy of it, as Professors
have, whom they will Judge, and be justified before, for all the Professors
boasting, if they do the things contained in the Law, as its written in their
consciences, and much more to this purpose; is so clear to them that in the
Light with any solid understanding, and not in their own benighted minds, and
prejudiced spirits against the true Light, which the Letter points to, read the
first and second Chap. of Paul to the Romans thoroughout, that all the
Objections, to the contradicting of this Truth we (even thence) plead against
them, made by our hasty opposers, will appear to be but Obulaty sticks and
straws, reeds and rushes, when (as anon we must) we come to examine them:
Therefore the premises well considered, it will plainly appear, that some
measure at least of that saving Light and Grace, which is sufficient to lead
such as follow it unto Life, is vouchsafed to all and every man.

Arg. 6. If Christ the Savior, and the Salvation of God it self, be a Common
Salvation, given in Common to All and every man without exception, so that All
that will may have it, then that sufficient saving Light that leads to it, and
the gift of that Grace of God that puts men into a power and possibility to
work it out to themselves, brings it to them, and (being not neglected, but
improved) brings them to it, must be given also in Common to All and every man,
else it cannot be said properly, they are in posse to it, or so much as that
they may have it: But the Salvation of God is freely given in common to All
men, so that every man who will may have it: else God (who means as he says,
and mocks not most men in such cruelty, as to say to them whom he knows are
locked up, so that they cannot come at it (unless loosed by him who yet never
intends to loose them) here is Salvation, here is plenteous Redemption for All
you sinners, which I would you should All have without respect of persons; Take
it who will freely, as it is freely tendered, else far greater vengeance shall
fall on you, then if I had never been gracious to you, for refusing my rich
Grace and Goodness which I would have had you enjoyed, but you would not) would
not utter his mind with so many strong and serious Asseverations, Complaints,
Commands, and seemingly compassionate C^mpellations, by which to take all
scruples away, and put his great and true love to them out of doubt, as he
does; saying, Look ye unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth.
Behold my Servant, I g^ve him a Light to the Nations, to be my Salvation to the
ends of the earth. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye unto the waters, and he
that has no money come, yea come, and buy wine and milk without money and
price. Hearken unto me, and let your souls delight in farness, hear and your
souls shall live, Why will ye die? turn and live; Choose life that ye may live.
The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that is athirst come, and
whoever will, let him come and take of the water ^f life freely. The Son of man
is come to seekout and save that is lost: I am came, that they might have life
abundantly: Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. He has laid help
on One that is mighty, who is able to save to the utmost, all that come to God
by him: Him that comes unto me will I in no wise cast out: In the Lord is
compassion, and with him is pl^nteous Redemption. Let the wicked forsake his
way, the unrighteous his thoughts, and turn to the Lord, for he is gracious,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon; he is long suffering, not
willing any should perish, but that All should come to repentance, wills that
All should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son that whoever believes in him may not
perish, but have everlasting life; for he sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved: He that
believes shall not be condemned, but he that believes not is condemned
already, because he believes not on the only begotten Son of God. This is the
gift that he has given us, eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son ( the
Light:) He that believes not makes God a liar because he believes not the
testimony God gives of his Son; In him is life, and his life is the light of
men, and the light shines in the darkness, but the darkness comprehends it not
He came ( A Light) into the world, and the world knew him not. This is the true
Light, which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world. Glory be to G^d
on high, on Earth peace, good will toward Men. Glad tidings of great joy,
which shall be unto All People, to you is born a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord, the One Mediator between God and Men, Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom
for All, who died for All, and by the Grace of God tasted death for every man.
God commends his love to us, in that when we were sinners Christ dyed for us,
dyed for the ungodly, justifies the ungodly (i.e. from, not in sin) the
Savior of the world given as Gods witness to people, a Leader and Commander
to people; if any man sin, A Propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole World, in whom God was reconciling the world
( his enemies) by his blood to himself; not imputing trespasses to them, that
will not persist in their enmity, giving out a Ministry of this reconciliation,
by whom, as by Ambassadors for God, men are besought in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God, who made him sin who knew no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in Him; The Wisdom of God, that cries out; How long ye
scorners will ye delight in scorning, simple ones love simplicity, fools hate
knowledge? Turn at my reproof; I will pour out my Spirit upon you, make known
my words unto you: Wherefore is a prize put into the hand, of a fool, seeing he
has not a heart to make use of it? Because I call, and ye refuse, stretch out
my hands to a rebellious and gainsaying people, and no man regards, but ye
set at naught all my counsel, will none of my reproof; I also will laugh at
your ca^amity, and mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish
comes upon you, because ye hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord; for the turning away only of the simple slayes him: And this is the
condemation ( nothing else irrecoverably) that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness more than Light, which is come into them to save and lead
them to l^fe, because their deeds are evil: But who so hearkneth to me shall
dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of evil.



And a number more like to these, of solemn Compellations, Complaints,
Counsels, Consolations, Compassions, Wishings, and wouldings; Adju^ations,
Corrections, Condemnations, Entreaties, Threatenings, Persuasions, poured out to
All Men, the most, even a thousand to one, of which are personally,
peremptorily predestined, never to have none of all this Good, nor Life, nor
Salvation, nor the least dram of any such Grace, Power, Light, as may be of any
efficacy, or have any sufficiency in it, but a common Grace only, that has
nothing but insufficiency in it ( u^cunque et aetendatur, howsoever attended
to) to bring them to it. Is all this talked out to men bolted out from it all
before ever they were born, by an absolute Decree, for the personal
transgression of one individual man, and pre-ordained to have their portion in
manifold more wrath and condemnation, for refusing to come to God when they
were called, but never capacitated by any measure, of such Light and Grace, by
which only they can possibly do ought that is required?

Is all this openly, as from the true, merciful God, merely tendered in
hypocrisy to millions of miserable sinners, to whom it is never intended, that
they must and shall come within the bounds of so much as a possibility of it?
nor have so much as Arbitrium Libertatum, a Liberty lent them to take or
refuse, but he kept down under a certain necessity of perishing, contracted to
them (as is supposed) from one single sin of one, whom they never chose to be
their Proxy, and Representative of their persons to God, so as that they would
live or die for ever, as he should stand or fall, from whose loi^nes, it is
doted by our dreaming Divines, that there is drawn and derived such (by them)
inevitable damnation upon all individuals, that for want of a sufficient Light
and Grace vouchsafed them to lead them out of it, to escape it (as the Four men
aforesaid intimate to us) the most must necessarily, unavoidably, unalterably
(as by Gods particular private Decree, without reference to their final
rejection of God first) sin from the Womb to the Tomb, that they may, by
filling up their measure, become vessels of wrath fit for destruction, and
(upon account of that personal Decree still concerning them) not so much as
possibly escape the condemnation of Hell?

Must the most on the account of no Saviors dying for them, but for a very few
only, never see the Lords Salvation? and yet be always called upon to look to
him for it, and told that Christ died for them, and have the Salvation tendered
to them in the Name of God, and be enjoined to believe he died for them, for
whom (on their principle of Christ's dying not for all, but the Elect only,
which with these men are but very few, one of a thousand in the world) its a
thousand to one whether they be of that small number he died for, yea or no;
and yet for not b^lieving that viz. each person that he died for him, when he
died but for some, all must be condemned, even because they believed not on
him, for that is the cause of All Judgment and Condemnation to the world that
perishes for sin, John 3. John 16. even because they believe not in me (says
he) who enlightens all that come into it: Must the glad tidings of great joy,
that a Savior is born, be proclaimed as glad tidings to All people, when he is
intentionally sent to save but some few, and all the rest must hear the sad
tiding^ of a certain s^^er condemnation, then if he had never come into the
world at all, because they believe not in him still, that he died for them, for
whom yet he died not, if he died for none, but such a few as these men call the
Elect?

What a strange uncouth representation of God and Christ in their great
goodness, multitudinous mercy, inconceiveable kindn^ss, large love, rich grace,
good will, tender bowels, incomparable compassion to the whole world, is this
of these men? what a most grievous kind of Glad tidings of great joy concerning
a Savior to All people is this, that he died to save one of a thousand, but a
thousand to one are remedilesly, and more inexcusably, irrecoverably,
unavoidably, incontroulably, and intolerably destroyed, by occasion of his
dying for every man, then if he had never died for any man at all? tell me, O
ye narrow mouthed old Bottles, that vent out so much of the old wine of your
own wisdom, and Sent so sparingly of the new: Suppo^e a thousand of you were
sentenced to die, were it a way to show the mercy of the King to be matchlesly
more then his severity? And would you count him gracious to you all, and deem
it Glad ridings of great joy, that is so truly to you All, to have a Pardon
tendered to you all on terms imp^ssible by you to be performed, but intended
really but to one of you; so that the benefit of it shall effectually extend to
but one, and that in such a way as shall occasion the more severe execution of
all the rest, when it is in the Kings Power, if he be minded, to show the riches
of his mercy to be beyond his severity, to save 999. and execute but one as an
Example? were the other a Common Salvation to them all? But I say the Salvation
of God is Common to all and everyman, what ever these men say, and even
intended as truly, as it is tendered and proclaimed to All, or el^e God, who
cannot lie, would never so proclaim it, nor his Spirit style it a Common
Salvation, as he does, Jude 2.3.

Therefore much more common is that saving Grace and Light, which brings it to
All men, and All to it, who walk in the teachings and leadings of it, or else
it could no more be Grace, Gospel, Good news, Glad tidings to All people, as it
is, but Sad tidings truly to the most; whereupon it is said of it by such
Ministers as sought to magnify it of old, as much as our churlists modern
Ministry-seeks to minifie it, to be saving Grace to All men, though all are not
actually saved by it, Tit. 2.11.12. The Grace of God that brings Salvation to
all men, has appeared; as it could not be said to do, if Christ under no
consideration had vouchsafed it to All, but to some only, (as I.O.) and the
salvation it brings in a true tender to All men were intended only to few (as
T.D. diminatively declares of it.)

Yea in a word, as Grace were no Grace to that man to whom its given, if it
were not saving or sufficient (he using it) to save him.

So saving Grace is no saving Grace, and so no Grace nor glad Tidings of great
Joy at all to All people, as it is called, though it bring Salvation where it
is, if it appear to be given, and to appear only to a few: Besides, your selves
tell us of a Common Grace, which is vouchfased to All men.

But Friends, a few words with you, and to all you Followers and Fainers of
this Fantastical piece of mere falsity, not to say foolery, who in the night
(while men sleep) dream out this dark and Grace-darkning Doctrine of Divinity,
which, with the abundance of Absurdities and Confusions that are concatenated
to it, make up such an incredible kind of Creed, such a Braky mess of Belief,
such a Lab^rynth of lightlesse Literature, such a Wilderness of wondrous
Wisdom, as no wise men, nor any (but such drunkards of Ephraim, as lie (like
Briars and Thorns) enfolded together in one false Faith, that at last they may
be consumed as stubble fully d^y) can find any other then a winding way into,
nor when he is in, any other way easily out of, but that of the Spirit of God,
which searches and traceth out all the twinings and turnings of the Serpent
upon his Rock.

Are you not yet ashamed (the night being so far spent, as it is in England,
and the day so nigh at hand to them that watch for it) to appear upon the stage
(ye may well say, not without a Blush, as T.D. does) before the world, with
such a Gospel of glad Tidings to it, and all Mankind in it, as this, That God
loves all mankind, wills not (unless they will) the death of any of them, nor
of any sinners, but had much rather they should turn from their wickedness and
live, and would have them all come to repentance and life, and not any to
perish, but all to come to the acknowledgement of the Truth, that in it (unless
they hate and turn from it, and then his Justice and Wrath has place to show
it self to so many persons) they might be saved; and has sent Salvation among
them in his Son, the Light of the World, and Word of Life; not bolting or
excluding any from it, but such as put it away from them, and thereby judge
themselves unworthy of eternal Life, and Bath so loved the World, as to send
his only Son into it, to such as were else lost, and likely else to perish, not
to condemn them further, but to save them; even ( qua sic) as lost, so
consequently all men (quatenus ipsum, ever including de omni) from
condemnation, or that, alias, to that end, intent, or purpose, that (unless,
against his honest, true, sincere wishing and woulding otherwise, they needs
will) they might not perish, but have everlasting life: and so loved men also,
as to send his Messengers among them to make universal Proclamations of his
large love to all mankind, and in his name to publish glad Tidings of great
Joy, even to All people, and the good will of God toward men (An indefinit
phrase in a necessary matter equivalent to an universal) and to call to every
one that will, to take of the water of life freely, without exception of any
positively, personally, or nominatim, who exclude not themselves by their own
personal unbelief of his Love to them, and refusal to come, and without
accounting any unworthy of his Supper, but such as come not when called, and
put not on the wedding Garment, which renders them (as taking away all their
sins, guilt, and filth) beloved, accepted, pure, and justified in his sight, as
well as fit and meet to come into his holy presence, as by their own
righteousness that they work, and not Christ in them, they are not any more
then by unclean things dung, loss, and filthy rags; and send out Hue and Cry
also, to summon all in to himself, and blown a Trumpet too, even to All people
to come and welcome, promising (to the removing of all obstacles and and
objects of discouragement, and giving good ground of hope to every man) that
there is mercy with God for him, whatever his sins have been, if he come in
time, before the door be shut, and while God calls, and woes, and knocks at the
door of his own heart within, by the motions of his Spirit, that he will
receive all comers, and though they have r^n a whoring from him, after many
other Lovers (and few men will receive their wives again, that so do) yet
returning he will receive them, so that whoever comes to him he will in no wise
cast out, but as he has sent his Son a Propitization for the sins of the whole
World, and provided plenteous Redemption, and purchased Salvation by his blood
sufficient for them All, so that he is able to save to the uttermost, and will
too, effectually, All that come to God by him; and that it is his will they
should All come also, and reveals and publishes it as his will too,
expostulating very angrily with all men too, for despising the riches of his
Grace, for not being led to repentance in the day of his long-suffering and
salvation by his goodness, telling them he waits upon them, that he might be
gracious to them; saying, O that thou would hearken to me that thy peace
might be as a River, will thou not be made clean? (for thus cry out Clergy to
All people where they preach) when shall it once be? Why will ye die people? I
have no pleasure in it that ye should, and if any do, I delight not in the
death of him that does, but that he will, and there is no remedy, unless I
alter my unchangeable will (as I will not for man's wills sake, fith I have done
so much for him already, that he may be saved, unless he choose to perish) which
will of mine is, that the soul that sins, and turns not from his wickedness,
that he may live, shall die for ever, and the very wicked, turning from his
wickedness, and doing right, shall not die, nor yet have his sins mentioned,
unless he turn back from his righteousness into sin again, and then be must
die; and though I forgave him before, yet he taking his fellow servant by the
throat after, I must lay him up for the whole debt: Wherefore why, why will ye
die, turn, turn your selves and live, and work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling, for I have done my part, a friends part, toward you, I have
wrought in you both to will and to do, of my free grace, of my good pleasure,
it wants but your putting that into act, which I of my free Grace have put into
your power, and your willing and doing accordingly, and your getting up, and
trading with your Talent and turning to the light that I have entrusted you
with, and reprove your evil deeds by; will ye always resist my holy Spirit,
when it moves in your hearts, and be stiff-necked, and stubborn? Turn yon at
my reproof, though ye are fools, scorners, delighting in scorning, and I will
pour out my Spirit upon you, and make known my words to you; if not, as I call
and ye refuse, so the time will be, ye shall cry, and I will not bear you,
because ye did not choose the fear of the Lord, would none of my counsel, set at
naught all my reproof, which otherwise you should have found to have been the
way of life: I am in Christ reconciling the world to my self, not imputing
trespasses; and I have sent out a Ministry to declare this my Reconciliation to
the world, as concerning all that is past, if they now do not (...) and abide in
enmity, I am friends, unless they will needs fight on, and fight it out with me
to the last, and then they will have the worst (...) I have made him sin, that
knew none, that they might be righteousness, who are yet in their sins; I have
given him a Ransom for All, and he has offered himself, and died for All that
were dead in their sins, and tasted death for every man: Now then hear my
Ambassadors that pray you without, as in my Sons stead, who also himself by his
Spirit strives with you to the same end within, that ye would be reconciled to
God; and having those promises, and received so much Grace as brings Salvation
with it to such as despise it not, receive not this precious Grace of God Tins
shows you that men may have a gift of Grace, and yet receive it in vain.
in vain; but ^korse your selves from all uncleanness of (...) spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God: I have dra^n you with the cords of my
love, ye will perish if ye refuse to return.

I say are ye not ashamed to go out, as from God (in whose name yet I am sure
ye never went with the Doctrines that here under follow) to publish to all
people, as Ambassadors from him, his so large love, and the great and wonderful
things that he does for the whole Creation of mankind, saying, What can he do
more for you (People) the he does, unless you will have him violate his own
unchangeable will for your sakes, and save sinners in sin, which he has
decreed never to do, as irrevocably as he has never to refuse such as come to
him when he calls, and has enabled them thereunto.

And yet after all this good news, glad tidings to the whole world, offers of a
Gospel of Salvation to all people, as far as ye are able to proclaim them, then
to come in with such cold comfort again upon them as this, and put such a Bit
into peoples Iaws, and bridle on their mouths, ^^nsing them to err, so as to
go Round, and tell them, that of a truth, and for truth they must take it from
them and believe it as an Article of their Faith, as O^b^dox Doctrine, that
they are Heretical if they deny it; viz. that though ye thus largely tender and
offer Salvation from God to them All, without exception, on condition they
come, and so, that if they come they shall be accepted, and there is Grace,
Mercy a Savior and Salvation for them in Christ, in whom they are All to
believe, even every mothers child of them for himself, that its there for him,
that he died for him, and is his Savior (which is the only good news to
individuals, and to the universal world of mankind also for its no glad tidings
to a thousand to one in the World to hear that Christ will save some one of a
thousand among them, and damn All the rest, or All the rest he is preached to
(doubly) by his coming into it, because they believe not in him, who yet was
never given for them) and this on pain of double condemnation.

And though ye reveal this to them as the Will of God, yet there is no such
matter of Universal Love or Salvation intended to them All, as ye tender,
extend, talk of, proclaim, and offer from God to them All; but his Will in
secret is otherwise then ye say, these proffers are to another purpose then to
this intent, that they All, or half of them either, or any but a very few of
them should have it, even but to leave men the more in sorer condemnation;
though ye bid All come and welcome, yet All cannot come, nay, none without God,
who calls, give his Saving Grace (that is true enough) and most can never come
for want of that Saving Grace, for want of a sufficient Light to lead them,
which Grace and Light they want also, upon no other account, then because God
never did, nor never intends to vouchsafe it them; and that he has a reserve
in his mind, a certain secret will within himself, not known to man, which runs
otherwise then his revealed will does that ye declare, even a secret purpos
(which yet as secret as it is, ye it seems pretend to know it, and must be
babbling about it, to the shaming and contradicting your selves in the the other)
even to give this Salvation but to a certain small number in comparison of the
rest whom from Eternity he has Reprobated, and purposed personally upon Adams
score, shall go without it; which sin of that single man shall so remain on the
score with him for ever, that upon the account thereof, a thousand to one of
mankind his posterity (though yet he would (in words) show himself more rich in
mercy to them All, then severe to take advantage against any, ^o as to have it
told thus in universal terms, that his Son died for them All, for every man,
the whole world, etc.) should be left without any interest or share in it, or
potential title thereunto; and howbeit he will have them all called to come and
lay hold on it, and promises made of Life to them, on condition they come, and
believe in his Son, and his love to them in him, yet he so hates them
(personally) before ever born, or doing good or evil, that they shall never
from him be sufficiently empowered to come or believe (as he could empower them
if he so pleased) nor be put into any capacity by him to ch^se the Life, though
set before them, as well as the death, with a choose life that ye may live, but
be left for want of a will, set at any liberty to choose the good, under a
necessity of having the evil, and to choose either that or none, and yet if they
do not choose the good too, that advantage shall be taken the more against them
to double vengeance on their heads, for that ( helpless) unavoidable fault of
refusing the good, and a quarrel pic^t against them (upon the account of the
old intended praeterition) and so double execution be done upon them now as
rebellious against the Gospel of Gods Grace, whereby he would (in words, alias,
seemingly, though secretly he never would, nor intended it) have saved them,
and for not believing in his Son as theirs, when yet he left them locked up when
he called on them to believe, so fast, that he knew they could not answer, and
would not so much as un^o se them neither, to see if they would accept his
love, believe, repent, and make use of the remedy, yea or nay, in whom also if
they had All believed, most of them had (as the case stood) been deceived, and
believed but a lie, a matter that was no such matter; viz. That Christ died for
every individual of them, if they would believe it; and^ so his wrath shall
abide on them the more heavily for ever, even because they believed not the
testimony God gave by his Ministers, openly of his Son, that he died for them,
whom yet he died not for, but only for a few Elect one: And so whereas God
says, He that believes not the testimony that God gives of his Son, viz. that
he gives Eternal Life by him to every man that believes in him, makes God a
liar; If every man should believe in him, as they all are bid, and take the
testimony of the Life by him to themselves to be true, either some must believe
a lie (since he died not for every man, but for some only, as they say) or else
their testimony is a lie, and they All liars (which is indeed the truth) who
testify that God gave his Son intentionally, but for a very few, when Gods own
testimony of him is, That he gave him a Ransom for All.

And moreover, if they walk not in the Light they have to Salvation, they shall
be condemned; therefore, upon the account of the highest crime of All, which
Light that each individual has notwithstanding, never was Salutare, so much as
sufficient to guide them to Salvation, but Natural, a thing that was too weak
to such a business, and ( fines salutares quod a^rinet) mers tenebrae and
Caeritas, as I.O. Are ye not ashamed thus to ingross the Grace of God, which is
great to All, among your selves, and a few like your sinning selves, who think
that ye shall escape, as Gods choice elected ones, upon your blind confidence of
it, the wrath of God, though ye are found living and dying in the same evils,
and not purged from sin, nor believing ye ever shall be, while ye live here,
for the sake of which, wrath must come for ever on all others, as on children
of no other disobedience, then that ye live, and look to die in some degree of
your selves? Seems it a small thing to you, O ye wofnlly blind, pitiful, or
rather pitiless Shepherds of this English Israel (as ye call it) to eat up the
good pastures your selves, and in your fancies feed your selves, and a few
choice ones more ye count upon, that lie in wickedness, as the rest of the
world, with all the fine things of the Gospel, freely, fully, fairly, and
unfainedly offered to All, as well as you, as things truly intended to your
personally from everlasting, but to the most only extended, without any true
intent that ever they shall have them, so impropriating the benefit of
Salvation to your sinful selves, as if ye were such whom God so indulges, as to
wink at your infirmities, and justify you in and under the guilt of them, if
ye should happen (with David) to fail and slip aside into adulteries and
murders, whilst other men's failings and infirmities of a less hideous nature,
must be the faults and heinous crimes, which God will show no Saving Mercy (as
not intending it to them what e're he talks) to a thousand to one of those that
commit them, and that unavoidably, upon the account of a certain Inherent
necessity of sinning, drawn out of Adams Loins, together with their very being
as men, from under which necessity God never intends to help them so far, as to
give them sufficient Grace or Light to guide and lead them out of it, or into
so much as a liberty of doing better? and all this, before they have ever
actually in their own persons so much as forfeited their share in that special
Grace or favor of his, that is in common offered to all men, by any Personal
Rebellion and disobedience, and so interesting your disobedient selves still,
as Gods Darlings in all the riches of his Grace, but detruding a thousand to
one, for the Elect are very few with you, as little disobedient as your selves,
irresistably into the depth of condemnation, preaching out that which is your
mea^, as their poison, and so designed to be from Eternity, without reference
to any default in their own persons, but such as is derived on them only from
Adams action? Seems it nothing to you to eat up all the good pasture among a
few of you, but ye must tread down as mud and dirt, and soul the residue with
your feet, and make all other people, but your pretended Saints and Elect Ones,
to eat and drink that Doctrine about Gods Grace and Gospel, which ye make no
Grace or Glad tidings, but gall and wormwood, and Sad tidings, when ye have
trodden and fowled in this filthy, pudly wise with your feet, Ezekiel. 34.18, 19.

By these, and the like sowrestuff, which is like Colloquintida in pottage, do
you spoil all your dainties ye set before men, in your pretended Gospel
Ministry of Gods large Love, rich Grace, and matchless mercy to mankind, and
with your tenders of things to All men from God, that yet ye say God intends
not to All, to whom you tender, and he by you extends them, make men Tantalize,
and set them all a gaping and staring after that, which yet you tell them All
may not, must not, cannot have, because God purposes to give them but to a few:
Hereby ye make your selves, and God too, like your selves, a Liar in one or
other of his wills, and a mere mocker of men out of your mouths: Hereby you
make your selves from God Ministers of impossibilities to men; ye must go
about, and be paid largely for your pains too, to call All men to do that, on
peril of eternal ruin and condemnation, which yet, on pain of condemnation
too, you charge them to believe (as truth, the contrary to which is Herefie)
the most of them neither can do, nor ever could, nor shall ever be vouch^afed
any ability by God sufficient to perfo^m it; hereby do you not only coop up the
infinite, saving, special Grace of God into a corner, as I have showed, but
make it utterly of none effect to a thousand to one of mankind, nor through any
default or defect in the particular persons, that have no share in it, but in a
certain Common Grace that can do them no good as to Salvation, only helps on
their condemnation, and given to no other end, but to leave men more liable to
wrath without excuse (as ye say) and that on the account of Adams sin only,
which particular act of his, has l^ft all men for ever under sin, wrath,
guilt, and incapacity to live, without Gods Grace, which he yet will not
vouchsafe but to a few, which upon a personal appointment thereto, must
necessarily be saved, and cannot choose, while all the rest are as personally
and peremptorily decreed to dumpation; alias, never to be so helped, but that
they must lie under the guilt of Adams old sin, and add new ones, to incur a
thousandfold more wrath upon their heads, and condemnation, for not coming from
under the old, which they were left locked up from coming out of, and so hereby
ye make God like some merciless mocking Tyrant, tha^ calls to another tied to a
post, Come hither, with sooming pretenses and promises of great matters, which
he swears also he restly would have him have if he will come, and yet he will
not loose him, when it is in his power to loose him, and yet at last too,
because he comes not at his ^all, pretending for no other thing then that, or
else he desired not his death, but had rather he should have come, and enjoyed
the good things he hold out to him, comes in wrath on the said lockt-up-man,
and knocks him on the head for his refusing, before ever it was tried by any
liberty or ability given him, whether he would come, yea or nay.

Hereby ye make God a Liar again, on that ye draw down damnation on ^^ost of
Adam Sons for their Fathers fault, while they yet are innocent in their own
persons (for all personal transgression, ye say, Is the punishment entailed on
it, and consecutive of the Original sin) when yet God has long since said, The
son shall not bear the fathers sin, whiles not actually succeeding him in the
same, and that Proverb be used no more in Israel, of the child's teeth edged by
the fathers eating four grapes, but that soul that sins only, it shall die,
Ier. 31.29, 30, 31. Ezekiel. 18.19, 20. and every soul for his own iniquity only,
and not another under the new Covenant, or Gospel, for that was of Old, and
concerning temporal things, signifying, how the seed of the righteous, that
succeed one another in righteousness, are all blessed, and the whole seed of
the wicked cursed, that succeed one another, not in a way of fleshly
generation, but spiritual sinful degeneration in wickedness and blood: And so
the blood of righteous Abel, and his seed, to this day, shall be required at
the hands of Cain and his seed, that has shed it, in this very Generation.

Ye use to say, the Qua. condemn all but themselves, who condemn only in order
to men's being saved: But how do ye draw down to condemnation irresistably
before they are born All but your selves, i.e. a few Elect and chosen Ones, and
such Saints, as ye are your selves, that never mean to leave sinning (for how
can you, when ye believe ye cannot) so long as ye live in this world?

Hereby ye show your selves the Niggards and Churls, that would sain be called
bountiful and liberal too, and yet make empty the souls ye would seem to fill,
and cause the drink, ye call the thirsty to, to fail from their throats, and so
bring Tantatalus his condemnation on them (as I said above) before their time.

Hereby ye show your selves to be the narrow-mouthed, Old Bottles, that have
none of the new Wine in them, but are pouring out for money to men such sour
Vinegar and Wine of Sodom (as ye have to fell) to the setting of the teeth of
God and good men on edge with your cutthroat Gospel, which to the whole World,
to which Gods Grace and Gospel is to be preached, and to most of them ye preach
your, so called, Gospel to also, has a thousand fold more condemnation,
judgment, and remediless wrath and misery in it, then it has of Salvation,
Grace, good News, glad Tidings to All, or tender Mercy to every man in it, to
whom you tender it, in which Attribute of Mercy yet, ye say your selves, God
desires more to be known by to the whole World of mankind (if man himself
hinder not himself from the Sight and fruition thereof, then by all his
Attributes besides.

When the wide-mouthed Qua. as you call them (truly) in one sense, though
(scoffingly) in your own, are those liberal Ones, that lay not the large Love
of God up into a little nook, as ye do, but lay it forth in truth at large, as
it is, and, while you Churls are evil toward them for it, working iniquity in
your hearts, and practicing hypocrisy, delight in, and devise the liberal
things, by which liberal things they shall stand.

I say, Are ye not ashamed thus to confound and contradict your selves, as ye
do, upon your Principles, and to belly God, and mock men as from him, and make
as if he meant not as he said, and make him, who was not so bad to Pharaoh
himself, as to burden and heighten him to destruction, till Pharaoh had
hardened himself (for though God did harden him, and said he would, yet it was
on the account of his seeing how he would first rebel, or swell in pride
against him, as he had done all his life before) even worse then Pharaoh
himself, whom he destroyed for so doing, that punished men for not making brick
without straw, by how much Pharaoh showed himself but like himself from the
first; but God (as ye represent God, as walking under a cloak among men) makes
men (if your doctrine is to be believed) believe he loves them, and truly
wishes well to them All, and yet within himself (though outwardly saying, he
would not they should perish, conditionally they be willing to come to him for
life) wills absolutely, unavoidably the remediless destruction of a thousand
to one of them.

Are ye not ashamed to make God not only tyrannical, but hypocritical, and as
dissembling as your selves? And not meaning truly as he says, but meaning a
few only when he says All; to say that by every man he means some few, seeming
Saints only, such as your selves; and that his meaning cannot be as his words
import, and that Christ may be mistaken, if his words be taken in the ordinary
literal sense of them, as if there were no hold to what he says.

And to say that Gods love is large to All, and yet that under no consideration
he has vouchsafed saving Light, saving Grace to All, but only such a common
Grace as shall inevitably serve to damn them more, then if he had never given
it, and then if Christ had never come into the world, and the Gospel had never
been preached, and Salvation never tendered to them; but in no wise be
sufficient to help them?

Are ye not ashamed to force maintenance from men (as ye do) to maintain you in
your mock ministry, and for running on such a sleeveless errand (as this is to
most men) from God to all men, and to bear your charges, to the overcharging of
a sinking Nation for your sakes, in your Message of contradictions, lies, and
utter impossibilities, for so it is, on pain of condemnation to call All to
come to Christ for Salvation, and to believe it, every man for himself, that
Christ died for him, is tendered truly, sincerely from God to him; and in
particular, each is to believe him as his Lord and Savior, or perish, and thae
he is now freely proffered, and as truly, and unfeignedly offered from God to
him, as he did once offer himself to God for him as his Ransom, as well as for
any, and that there is this good ground for each particular man to believe it
for himself; because All, without exception of any sinner in the World, that
does not exclude himself by his not coming, are freely, without respect of
persons, invited to come; and this ground also, that as he is truly, without
m^ckage, held out to All, and All bid to come, so God is willing they should
come and have the Salvation, and to that end has sent his Son, not to condemn,
but save them; and his Son his Ministers, to entreat them to be willing as he
is, and reconciled to him as he is to them; and they declare from him,
according to Gods words in the Scripture, that he died for a^l and every man,
is a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, and died for the ungodly,
and came to save them, and heal the sick, and seek the lost, and such like; and
therefore every man may conclude its for him, one as well as another, that can
say, he is a man lost, sick, sinful, ungodly, and of the World; and that God
has also wrought in them, of his good Pleasure^ to will and to do, and
therefore now they must up and be doing, and work out their salvation, which if
it be not wrought out, God has done his part, and the fault is only in their
own particular persons, and yet in Adam too, and God is no hard Master, but
has given to every one one talent at least, which if he hides, he will be cast
into utter darkness, and weep, and gnash his teeth at the remembrance of it,
that once he might have been happy, had he not been wanting to himself, and
been an unprofitable servant with what he had, and had not in his own person
still (Mark) put the Salvation from him, and hated the Light and instruction,
and that God requires of men but the improvement of his own, and much more to
this purpose, which all is sound, true, plain, wholesome, and saving Doctrine:
And then to come with a new tale, whereby all the good grounds before laid for
every man, that is called thereto, to come and believe upon, are utterly razed
and removed, and to tell them, that though all are called, invited outwardly,
yet an hundred to one are by a Decree in Gods secret Counsel so secluded by
Adams sin, that they cannot come, nor have any right to Christ, he did not so
much as die for them, but for some Elect ones, nor offer himself for the most,
but a few, though God indeed says All, every man, sinners, ungodly, the lost,
the whole world, and makes offers to all, where his Gospel is preached, yet by
All, and such like universal terms, we must understand God and Christ, meaning
another matter far otherwise then they say, for in innumerable places where God
says, Omnis, All, its the Elect only, one of a thousand he means ( so I.O.) and
it is an usual thing for God and Christ to speak words of a doubtful sense.

If we object; But its the most ordinary and literal sense of the words, and
the very letter of the words so imports.

Tush, Tush, (quoth T.D.) never talk of that, man, I tell thee, it is usual with
Christ to speak words of doubtful sense, so that his meaning may be mistaken,
when his words are taken in the most ordinary and literal sense, and so 'twould
be here, if by every man we should understand every individual man, I know and
confess the words import so, John 1.9. but the indefinite phrase (so T.D. calls
it, though every man is an universal) has a restrained sense, as elsewhere in
the Scripture, Christ tasted death for every man, when as he died but for a
certain number, and the meaning of those words cannot be as the letter of them
does import, for then the Scripture would contradict it self, but it must be,
if not in the other way in which I said it might me, then in this way as I say,
that every man is not every individual man (so T.D.) And besides, as God
intends not the Salvation to all its offered to, so all its offered to on pain
of sorer condemnation if they believe it, cannot believe it, nor accept it, and
he offers it to All upon condition of acceptance: Indeed, could you suppose
that all would take him at his word, and accept his offer, they should have the
benefit thereof; but that must not be supposed, on pain of being Heretical in
the Faith, for it is not Orthodox, that men can come to God when he calls them,
nor accept of what he proffers, nor believe in him, whom he bids them believe
in, that he died for them in particular, whom if they should believe in, that
it is so, then it is so in deed, and in truth, that he died for them, else not
(as if he died not for sinners, qua sinners, and lost, but qua believers, which
is absurd) for men must have this first as a ground to believe upon, that he
died for them, because for All, every one, sinners, ungodly, lost, Romans 4. Romans
5. while yet sinners, otherwise they have no ground on which to believe, nor
can any man that does believe with any Faith, save that which is but mere
fancy, believe that Christ died for him in particular, but as he died for All.
For thus a man may safely conclude, Christ died for every man, for sinners,
lost, ungodly, the whole world, therefore for me: But bid a man believe Christ
died for him in particular, and tell him he died not for All, but for one of a
thousand, the Elect only, and tell him also (as T.D. does) the Masters know
not the Elect, and ye cannot assure him, he is that one of a thousand, one of
those few Elect ones, nor he himself neither know, or be assured of it, till
after he believes it, and ye utterly take away the ground he is to believe
upon, for he will argue thus rationally against you, or expostu^ate with you,
to the showing of your exhorting him to believe, to be a piece of frivolous
foolery.

Arg. Ye bid me believe Christ died for me, has Salvation for me, which God by
you offers to me, and you call me to come to him for it, as that which, without
hypocrisy or feignedness, God would have me to enjoy, being not willing I
should perish: But what ground would ye have me to come upon, or of assurance I
shall be welcome, or accepted in my acceptance, or of believing assuredly that
God is really willing I should have it?

Ans. Its sufficient for all.

Arg. That Is not the Question, I doubt not but there is sufficiency enough in
Christ to save All to the utmost that come to God by him, but what is that to
me? that is not a sufficient ground for me to believe upon; many things are
sufficient for many things, and to many more men then are ere the better for
them (as some greedy Grandees have many thousand pounds a year, which is
sufficient for an 100 honest men to live honestly upon; but he that shall go
upon that account to feed and live at one of their Tables, may for all that be
likely thrust out as an Intruder) but can you tell me the glad tidings that
that is for me, if so, I Will believe it, and accept it, and come with all my
heart, if you can lay a ground for me to be confident on, that I may, if I
come, not be more bold then welcome.

Ans. All are invited and called to come, and called freely, fully, without
exception, to believe; therefore why not thou?

Arg. But Friends, though all be called to come and welcome to God, by you who
say ye are his Ministers, Is this in sincerity and truth, or in hypocrisy and
^^ackage? is God as willing as ye seem to make him, that all shall come to life.

Arg. Yea without hypocrisy, for God cannot dissemble, nor mean one thing and
say another (though we say so of him sometimes, as T.D. does) he is freely
willing, if thou art willing, he would not have thee die, but much rather live.

Arg. But how shall I know that yet for my self? does he intend the Salvation
to all as really as ye pretend he does in the universal extent and proffer, or
to some only? for some of you say, he does offer it where he intends they, to
whom ye say so sincerely offered, shall never have it, but are by a secret
Decree of God bolted out from it for Adams sin before they were born, in the
guilt of which (though he will save a few, that he may show his Mercy, Live,
Grace to All (as some sillily say) to be of more extent then all his works,
which few are only known to himself, and not (as ye say) to you and me) he will
praeterire, pass by, even a thousand to one, to perish unavoidably,
notwithstanding Christ's death, and so I may be one of those many, for ought
either you or I know, yea a thousand to one but that I am proe-ordained to
perish, and therefore still I have far more reason to believe, according to
those principles, that I am one of those thousands to one that must perish, and
to whom Christ is not intended by God, for all your fair proffers of him from
God to me, then that one of a thousand Elected to life by him: There Is no small
odds in these two, for if but an hundred men were sentenced to be hanged, and a
pardon should be proclaimed to them all, and yet such an after-clap come, that
its not intended to the whole hundred, but to one of them only, and ninety nine
must be hanged for all this, and he that is so free in proclaiming the Pardon,
cannot tell me neither that I am the only man that must be spared, I should
think him a fool if he should stand pressing me to believe it, that I am he,
and can show me no evidence of it, and shall still rather believe (do what I
can) that I am of the ninety nine, and should think him little less then mad
too, if he should tell me, that if I do not believe it, that I ^^ithe man (when
yet he bids all the rest believe it too, each for himself, upon that same
penalty, in case they do not) I shall be hanged for this very thing, as he
says every of them shall too, as the chief account on which they perish, even
because we do not believe every man for himself, that he is the man, and for
despising the mercy tendered, and the large love of the Pardon-sender, and such
like, and that in a more severe way of execution, even with quartering, etc.
whereas nor I nor any of us all should perish, if we did believe it; now does
he intend it to all of them, if so, there I may safely believe he does to me,
else I cannot.

Ans. Not so in any wise.

Arg. Does he intend it to the most?

Ans. Nay, but to very few.

Arg. Do ye know I am one of those few that he intended it to, or of those many
to whom not?

Ans. No not I, we are servants, we know not what the Master does, not which
are the Elect, which not.

Arg. On what ground then bid you me believe I am one of the few, its more
likely I am of the many that must perish, even by how much they are so many to
one more then those are that must live?

Ans. All that come shall have it.

Arg. How can that be, when yet ye say its not intended to All, which if it be
true, suppose all should accept it and come (as ye say all cannot neither for
want of power) they cannot have it, because not intended for them?

Ans. Yea, its offered on condition of acceptance, faith, and coming, so that
could ye suppose All would take God at his word, and accept the proffer, they
should have the benefit.

Arg. But that must not be supposed, nor cannot rationally, according to your
principles, who tell us All cannot come, cannot believe nor accept, for to
accept, believe, the power at least must come from God, and he has not, say
you, given that, nor saving Light, under any consideration to All, but to those
few only to whom he intends the Salvation, which I still demand a ground from
you whereupon to believe I am one of, which till then I cannot believe any more
then groundlesly, and groundless faith is no better then vain hope, which is
fancy that will fail when men come to give up the Ghost?

Ans. Believe only in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved; believe, and the
Salvation is thine.

Arg. But that is Idem per Idem still, the thing ye are to give me a ground to
do, but cannot; I should believe it, if ye can show me a ground whereupon; you
would have me first to believe it, and then my believing it will be a
sufficient ground for me whereupon to believe it, whereas I must first have
some ground wherein that faith ye call me to must stand, and whereon it must be
founded, for Faith is not the ground of it self; and your Creed quod habes and
habes, s as foolish a conceit, as if ye should tell me that a man I never saw
intends to give me an inheritance in particular, when yet ye never heard him
say so, and would have me believe it, yet can give me no good ground whereon to
believe it, but your single say so, who yet say ye know not that I am the
particu^ar man he intends it to neither, only ye have heard say he proffers it
to a thousand, not me by name; and yet for all it is proffered to so many, its
intended only to one of them.

Ans. If thou will believe it is so.

Arg. But is it so that he intends it to me really and particularly?

Ans. Nay, I cannot tell that, its hid from me; but this is all we can say,
that he intends it to some really, and he offers it to all conditionally they
believe, so that if thou believe it its thine.

Arg. I cannot believe that though you bid me, nor ought neither, which you,
who bid me believe it, can give me no ground for, nor evidence of, that it is
so, and confess your selves you know not whether it is so or no; that he died,
I believe, as ye say, for some, and so they believe all over Christendom, and
in England, and also believe mostly every man for himself, that Christ died for
him; where yet for all your saying, he that believes so has him, there is not
one of many h^th him, as your selves confess; whose faith therefore, which ye
beget many to, is mostly fancy, for they have not the Salvation yet, which is
from the sin, but to believe it without more evidence for it, that it is a
truth, he died for me, even for me in particular, then I see upon what
principles ye are able to give me, were as fond as to believe a piece of news
for truth, which the man who tells it, tells me, he knows it not, whether it be
a truth or no, but much doubts it, or glad tidings of great joy to all people,
which the News-m^nger himself can give me no evidence at all, that it belongs
to me at a^l; but after his most universal publication of it, that he has
tidings to all and every one, and would have every one believe it so to
himself, begins to fall back into such a diminutive prate, or pinching publik^
privication, or private publication, as, when demanded about his news in this
manner, Friend, a^t thou sure this thou extendest to all, is good news intended
to all, is it so to me in particular, whom thou bidst believe it good news to
me? Replies in this wise; Nay, I cannot say that, I say its to all and every
one, but by those terms I mean but some, and those very few; and I cannot say
which nor whether in particular, thou art one of them or nay, yet thou must
believe it, or else sad tidings will come after it, thou shall be hanged up for
not believing its glad tidings, which said News; monger I should judge so
little worth much heeding, crediting, or believing in what he says, that I
should rather think him out of his wits, and to have suffered some shipwreck
(as our Priests have done of the true Faith) of his very common sense and
reason Show me therefore what evidence ye have of the truth of the thing ye
tell me, and bid me believe, or else its but as Implicit Faith ( as at Rome) if
I should believe it, and not because I see it likely, but because ye say so,
who yet tel' me of what ye say, or bid me believe, viz. that Christ died for
me, for he died for some, (...) the Elect only; that he cannot tell at all
whether I am one of those Elect Ones for whom, yea or may.

Answ. We say still it is offered to you as it is to all, on condition of
acceptance and of faith, so that who believes it shall have it, whoever he is,
and it is believing evidences it to be so.

Arg. Still ye run but in a round (as the Colliers faith does) and say no more
in effect then thus, first believe, and be confident, that Christ died for
thee, and then this faith and belief of it, that he died for thee, is a sure
good ground or evidence for thee, upon which thou may believe and be
confident, that he did die for thee, and that thou art one of those few he died
for, and not of those many to one, to all whom as freely as to thee he is
offered, not one of whom yet he died for, or was by God ever intended to.

Answ. But mind the Condition though; he is offered to all on condition of
acceptance, so that if thou perform the condition, as most do not, for few will
come, thou must have the thing promised thereon, that is, the Salvation.

Arg. The Condition! I know Christ is not only offered to all on condition, but
intended also to be the Savior of All, on that condition they reject him not,
but believe in his Name, come at his Call, and obey his Voice and Counsel,
which God also by his Truth, Grace, and Love, puts men into capacity to do, or
not to do, at their choice.

But as for your Condition, I say, it is more monstrous then all the rest, while
for all your offers to All conditionally, they believe ye say it is peremptorily
intended but to few, and those few shall not choose but perform it, and an
hundred to one are as peremptorily intended by God, to be never interested in
it, nor enabled to perform the Condition ou which only its meant.

Ye say indeed God offers and tenders Salvation by Christ to all conditionally,
they believe in him, each man that he died for him, but what is this, so long
as it is not intended to all, and there is no such matter ( as ye say) to b^
believed, unless most men believe a lie, as that Christ died for All, and
every man? For a man to tell an hundred condemned men, there is life offered to
them all, on condition they every man of them believe it is so as he says, and
to bid them believe it as the Truth, for want of believing of which only they
shall be executed more cruelly, in believing of which they shall be saved; and
then to tell them, the said Pardon is really, positively, and peremptorily
intended but to one of them only, and not one of all the rest assuredly shall
ever have it, its absolutely, unalterably decreed, that the ninety and nine
shall be hanged, is to destroy all the ground of the belief ye would beget them
to, and to carry an hundred men up on high into a Steeple, in vain, aerie hopes
of some glorious sight pretended to be showed to them all, that from thence
advantage may be taken, as the thing intended, for all the fair pretense, to
throw ninety and nine of them down, go the breaking of their necks, and the
mischieving of them more, then if they had never been so fairly premised, and
so highly elevated, and but one of them be showed the Light, which to all was
promised; for the absolute Decree and intent of God must ever inavoidably stand
and take place against the conditional proffer of that which in the Decree is
not intended; so the proffer on condition still is not worth a straw, nor any
thing, but a mere mockage of men, and such a one as is before that time wherein
God says he will mock and laugh at men, which is only when they have finally
rejected what once they truly might have had, and was indeed as truly intended
as tendered on condition they by their wills refuse it not, Prove. 1. Psalm. 2.4.
For what God absolutely wills and intends, ever is, and does come to pass, but
what he intends (much more what he does but offer us, and tender, and not
intend at all) but conditionally, of men's standing or falling, rejecting or
receiving, when he has put them into an Equilibrio, for either, may be one way
or another, this or that, so or so, and yet Gods absolute Decree stand
inviolable, unalterable ( ^ut Alibi) as namely, Adam when he was stated f^^m
God upright (as a stick may be set upright by a man, resolving which way it
falls it shall lie, either in mire or on fair ground) had posse peccare, posse
non, God left him to his choice, intending, as to the man, conditionally, that
if he fined, he should die, if not, live, and should have love or hatred from
him, according as he did; but as to the two states of sinning or standing, ^^
is Decree was absolutely unalterably thus, viz. tthat the Life should be the
reward of the standing, and the Curse the reward of the sinning, happiness and
blessing he felt in the one way,?oe, and wrath, and misery in the other: so is
the Election and Reprobation of God not absolute, but conditional only (as to
persons) but absolutely without condition, and inalterable (as unto stares,
things, ways, actions good or bad, wickedness, or righteousness) so that in
the way of righteousness he has absolutely intended Life shall be enjoyed, and
in the path way thereof no death to any, as found therein, and as absolutely,
that the way of the wicked, or of wickedness and ungodliness, shall perish, and
they in it, that forsake it not; that the seed of the Serpent shall be bruised,
Satan and all that serves him (as so) and the seed of the woman only blessed.

But now (as to persons) his Decree and intent is truly ^^ his proffer i^
(i.e.) universally and conditionally to all, that as they do they shall hav^^,
as they sow reap, corruption or life; the seed is they serve, and are one with,
their portion shall be, as the way is they choose finally to walk in, of good
and evil, truth or deceit, light or darkness, life or death, which are both set
before them, so their end shall be without change, because (though he would
have all persons choose life, that they may live, yet so as leaving them to
their choice) yet to this way he has everlastingly intailed the Blessing, to
that the Curse, without alteration for ever (ut alibi t) Ways are absolutely
approved or reprobated, Men only conditionally, as choosing the ways, either
approved or reproved; so that while ye say God proffers conditionally only to
all, but intends absolutely, that one of a thousand shall not have the benefit
of the Salvation, besides the mockage that is in that offer, he cuts the throat
of all that comfort that is or can be conceived by it, and is also a flat
contradiction to say, God offers Salvation to all, which is as much as to say,
pretends himself willing that all truly should have it, and yet to say also (as
T.D. does) that God does not pretend to intend the benefit offered to all to
whom it is offered; for however ye say (falssy) that he in himself really
intends it not to all; yet this is true, that so long as he proffers it to all,
he pretends thereby to intend it to all to whom it is offered, or else ye run
on a much more sleeveless errand then before, viz. pretending that to men,
which yet ye say your selves, for all your offering it in his name, and
pretending to offer it as from God, God neither intends, nor yet so much as
pretends they all shall have it, to whom ye offer it; which err and God never
sent you on, but ye run on your own heads, with your heels upwards, to the work
of preaching the Gospel, and so no marvel that ye turn it upsidedown.

That God intends not Salvation to all to whom it is offered, and yet though he
offers it, saying, Look to me and he saved, my hand is not shortened that is
cannot save, nor my ear heavy that it cannot hear, if your sins separate not
good from you; as I live, I would not have any of you perish, I would have all
saved, and know the Truth, and come to Repentance and Life; I have sent my Son
that ( alias, to that intent) ye should not be condemned, but saved; And yet
thereby to say he pretends not to intend it, as if all his fair proffers are
not only without any intent to save, or do as he says he is willing to do, if
we be not wanting, but as willing; but also not so much as Tantamount to
apnetence of such a thing, is such a mess of Propositions, as by which the
Propounder thereof little less then pretends to intend to proclaim himself ^^
self-confounder before the whole world: Yet this is T.D. prittle pra^le in his
parcel I am yet in hand with, whose deep Divinity in it I shall take notice of
yet a little more as follows.

T. D. I do not affirm God offers it to all men, for many Ages and Generations
never had one proffer, 1 Timothy 3. last.

Rep. The mere shame for thee that thou deniest it, to the damning of All men
in All Ages before the time of Christ's appearance in that flesh that died at
Jerusalem, as thy quoting that intimates: Was the Gospel of Salvation, because
more clearly offered, as to the promulgation, then, not at all offered before?
was it, because now more revealed, then so hidden, as not at all revealed to
any Ages above? what abominable grossnesse is here? had not All the Jews, and
some Gentiles (as Ninivee by Jonah) the Gospel preached to them as well as to
us, though to us more plainly, but that they believed it not? That very Text
also says, God was manifest in the Flesh, was justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached in the Gentiles, En Ethnesin, believe on in the World,
received up into Glory: Was the preaching of the Gospel, En Pase Te K^sei, En
Ethnesin, in the Gentiles, in every Creature (though a Mystery I confess, and
so to you at this day) never manifested in any man, or in any measure at all
before?

T. D. But I do affirm its offered to more then intended.

Rep. Then, as R. H. said, the proffer is to little purpose.

T. D. Yea, it is to some purpose too as the Light is given (i.e.) to leave men
without excuse.

Rep. A cold piece of comfortless glad Tidings, a Gospelless-Gospel, a
Merciless-Mercy to the s^nf^l World, that is given not to save, but to this
purpose and intent, further to condemn most of them, to leave them without
excuse (as thou say, and thy three fellows also) yet I shall show by and by,
does not, as ye hold it, leave them without excuse neither; a Truth, that if it
were so (as thou say it only) were a belying of God, as R.H. truly told thee.

T. D. No, for he pretends not to intend it to all to whom its offered, the
election obtains it, the rest are blinded; and beside, he offers it on
condition of acceptance to all; and could ye suppose all would take him at his
word, and accept his offer, they should have the benefit.

Rep. But that must not be supposed from the Principles of thy personal
Election of a few, and blinding all the rest from the very birth, nay cannot be
supposed; thou should say could, suppose they could take God at his word, and
accept; for, by thy Principles and I. Os. of denying the saving ability so to
do, the most, they to whom it is not intended can no more accept or believe,
then it is possible, if they should believe, they should obtain that which they
are personally and absolutely reprobated from so long before: for if God do
not, will not give, has not given, as ye say he has not, some measure of the
saving Grace, whereby to believe and accept it, to all whom he offers life to
on that condition of acceptance, but calls, and requires them to believe and
accept, what he knows they cannot without him, this makes him as much a Mocker
of men still, as such a merciless Tyrant and Arrand Hypocrite, as shall stand
aloof off from one hungry, that is locked in the stocks, with a dish of meat in
his left hand, and a Pole-Axe in his right, saying, why will thou starve thou
self-murdering man? come to me, and here is meat for thee, I am freely willing
thou should have it, and not perish (never coming near to unlock him all
this while, nor bringing the meat within his reach) but if thou will not come I
will knock thy brains out; and so because he comes not, when yet he knows he
cannot, runs on him, pretending to do just Vengeance on him for his wilful
refusing his own help, when he might ( alias, never might) have had it, and
cuts him to pieces indeed: for he that on pain of punishment, death, and
condemnation, if the Terms be not performed, tenders Life and Salvation on
Terms and Conditions utterly impossible to be, or ever to have been performed
by the person to whom the tender is, unless a Grace be given him, which yet
never shall be, is an Hypocrite and a Tyrant, (and such a one ye make God by
your Doctrine, who yet is no such, but that ye belie him) as such as he that
shall say, he truly desires to make me his Heir, and so tenders me a good
Estate, conditionally I will take a journey to the Man in the Moon first, to
get it confirmed there, when I come back again, but if I refuse to go thither
he will kill me, and so because I cannot climb up to the Moon, falls on me,
and puts me to death indeed.

Arg. 7. Moreover, Gods offer of Salvation to many, to whom he intends it not,
on conditions he knows they cannot perform without him, and yet not so much as
enabling them all to perform them, when he might, but some few only to whom he
intends it, makes God a Respecter of Persons, as R. H. truly said of it, when
yet God is no Respecter of Persons, as the Scripture says, but in every
Nation, Men that fear him, and work righteousness, are accepted with him, and
not otherwise.

T. D. To that of making God a Respecter of Persons this answer will suffice,
did God give Salvation to some, who accept not of it, out of particular fancy
to them; but exact of others that acceptance, and for default thereof deny them
Salvation? then there might be some ground for the cavil, but now that its
offered upon equal terms there is none.

Rep. Does not God upon your blind Principles of personal Election, or loving
of a few, out of a particular Fancy to them, and peremptory Reprobation, and
hating the most of Mankind before they were born, without respect to foreseen
good or evil to be done in time in their own persons (excepting the respect to
Adams sin, which the Sublapsarians prate of against the Supralapsarians, whose
blind wranglings, whether Election be ex massa corrupta, or pura, are not more
wearisome and toilsom, then they are both no^some and loathsome to look upon,
by any that love and know the Truth, give Salvation to some out of fancy, who
accept it no more then others; but as he (as you say) makes them to do it by an
irrestible power, which he denies to the other) and exact of the other that
obedience he enables them not to, and that for default thereof, not only deny
them the Salvation, but also damn them down into double condemnation? Does not
God do so, I say, according to your Principles? and if so, then is there not a
ground by thy own confession, for that Assertion thou call'st a cavil, i.e.
that God by your doctrine is (doctrinally) made a Respecter of persons? And
whereas thou say, Salvation is offered to men on equal terms, and
therefore there is no ground to assert God a respecter of persons: I say, it is
the Truth we hold indeed, that it is on equal terms tendered to men so far, at
least, that till some put the word of life from them, and the salvation that is
sent to them, so making themselves unworthy of it, when others receive it, it
is so brought by Christ the Light, that the whole World might be saved as well
as some of it, 1 John 2.3. John 3.17. and where it is offered, there are none
to whom it is not as sincerely intended; on condition of acceptance, as it is
to some, and so God is in truth no respecter of persons. But dare thou say,
and is it not a contradiction to thy self for thee T.D. as thy Principles are,
to say Salvation is offered on equal Terms, who said above, that among those
where the Gospel is preached, Salvation is offered to more then to whom it is
intended? if it be truly intended to any one, and not truly intended to every
one to whom it is offered, but it is (for all the fair offers) absolutely
decreed a few shall have it, and shall not choose but perform the condition of
it, which is acceptance; and as absolutely decreed that the most shall never be
enabled to perform the said condition of acceptance, which is exacted of them,
and so shall unavoidably go without it, are these equal Terms? Is not this
offer upon as unequal terms, as if a man should tender to two condemned
prisoners bound up in chains, that they shall both live, if they will come out
of prison, but if not, they shall be more cruelly executed for refusal,
intending to unlock one of them, that he may come forth, and to light, lead,
and compel him irresistably to come forth also, that he may have the benefit of
the Pardon, and live; and as absolutely intending to leave the other locked
under restraint in his chains, utterly devoid of any liberty to come forth, to
the end that he may cut him off from any benefit of the promised Pardon, and
take double vengeance on him for non-acceptance thereof? and are these equal
Terms? are these ways so equal as God says his ways are? Ezekiel. 18. who
absolutely wills not the death of any that are as willing to live as he would
have them, and that do not wilfully die for want of turning from those
iniquities in which they cannot live, and from which he impowers them to turn,
but that they refuse it, as well as leaves them to choose death too, if they
will neees have it? Who sees not the foolish frivolousness, and
self-contradiction of T.Ds. Divinations?

T. D. And for Christ's being given for Salvation to the ends of the earth, that
imports not so much as that the offer, much less the benefit should be of such
extent in all Ages and Generations, as the fulfilling of that Prophecy bears
date; from the Apostolical Commission, Ma^th. 38.19. and it intends that no
Nation, how remote soever from Judea, should want the offer, nor some of it the
benefit of Salvation.

Rep. See how unsound Judgments jump together, Christ's coming a true Light
into the world to enlighten every man in it, I.O. (as is seen above) dates but
from about the time of his appearing in that Person, that 1600 years since died
at Jerusalem, and his being a Light to the Nations, and Gods Salvation to the
ends of the earth, is dated from much what about the same period, according to
T.D. his Calender: But as for the extent of his Light and Salvation, which is
said to be to every man that comes into the world, and to the very ends of the
earth; This is extenuated by them both into an extreme little compass, in
respect not only of time and seasons, but of places and persons also* For
first, as here is a cutting off of all Ages and Generations before the
Apostolical times, by both I. O. and T. D. from any benefit from Christ and his
Light, and from any interest in his Salvation, and of all Nations for 4000
years together, as it were by the lump and wh^le sale, unle^s happily they
except the little nook of the Jewish Nation, which (saving a few that walked
with God in the Light of Christ, as some in other Nations al^o did) was, in
moralities, well nigh as wicked generally as any people, yea, to the justifying
of her Sister Sodom it self. And secondly, even of these last Ages, since the
said appearance of Christ in flesh, the major part, by thousands to one, are,
in the Doctrine of our Divines cut off, not by their own obstinacy and
rebellion against Christ's Light (for so we say most are without the benefit
justly enough, for hating and not coming to Christ's Light in their hearts,
which else would save them) but by God himself, for want of his vouch^a^ing
them such a Light, as, if improved, is sufficient to Salvation; for if all
Nations have the offer of it now (as in an outward Ministry they have not had
since Christ, nor yet have, there being not a few at this day to whom the
outward news of Salvation is not come by any outward Ministry, and therein T.D.
is also out in his accounts; yet where the offer is, there is not one of many
(according to these two men) that have so much grace ever given them of God,
whereby to be in capacity to lay hold on it because its intended but to few,
even of such, and so the offer is but a mere mockage still, all have not the
offer, and of such as have that, but few the benefit of the Salvation, because
not intended, though rendered to them, and they not put in possibility for it
for want of Saving Light, or sufficient grace to accept it, or to perform the
condition on which its rendered; and so as universally as is talked of in
Scripture, in Terminis, as belonging to All, yet by the restrained senses they
put on these universal terms, as some, a few, the Elect, and^. its not one of a
1000 that can have the thing, or are intended by God to have any share in it.
But O ye Niggards and Churls, that are called by the name of Masters in Israel^
Is the Spirit, and Saving Light, and Saving Grace, Saving Health and Salvation
of the Lord thus straightened and limited, as ye limit them? Are these his
doings? Does he mean as ye say he does, when he says All, every man, the whole
world, and not rather as he says himself? Are not the^e your doings, thus to
pervert the right words and ways of the Lord? and with your narrow senses to
distinguish the most infinitely immense Mercy, and incomprehensibly large love
of God to all mankind, and every individual person thereof, that does not first
personally slight and sin against it, and so pull more misery upon themselves,
into such a diminutive matter, as amounts truly, seriously, and intentionally,
to the redeeming of some one of a thou and from misery, to no more then a mere
making of a thousand to one more miserable, then if he had never sent the news
of that mercy in Christ, and a most cruel mocking of those individual persons
in that (as to them from the first) remedilesly derived and decreed misery
also? Is this the glad ^^dings of joy to all people, and all mankind, that by
their own neglect do not loose their share in it, to tell them by general
Proclamation, that there is Salvation and life for them All in Christ without
exception* and its offered on equal terms to them All without respect of
persons, and then to tell them after, that this Salvation, which is so
infinitely sufficient for all, is intended but to few among them, and those are
ye know not which; and these few shall assuredly partake of it, and many to one
shall as assuredly never see it, nor be made capable to come to it by any Light
sufficient to lead to it, though never so well attended to, because it was
never intended to them, but from all Eternity the very contrary was intended,
and irrevocably decreed, as conce^ning their particular individual persons,
that they shall perish for, and not be one jot the better for that Salvation,
do what they can by the improvement of that Light and Grace they have from God,
which is only common, and not saving, nor able to help them, and God in no wise
will help them to more, but leave them helpless, that the Salvation may pa^s by
them to the few to whom its intended, and be (as to the rest only) as a means
to make them liable to more wrath for their refusing it, and more without
excuse in the midst of that misery too that is increased by it? Is this your
G^spel of Gods infinite Grace to All men in Christ, that very few shall be
saved, but unavoidably, by any thing that God will ever enable them to do to
the contrary, most men, perhaps a thousand to one of those to whom its offered
shall be according to Gods unchangeable and personal Decree concerning them in
that kind, doubly damned by Christ's coming into the World, of whom ye shameless
ones do you not hear God say, he sent him not to condemn, but to save the
world, which yet through the despising his true Grace, and hating his (saving)
Light when its come to them, are (his love notwithstanding) the more sorely
condemned? Is this good news to an hundred, to hear that one of them shall be
highly preferred, and none shall hinder it, but as uncontroulably his rise
shall be the ruin of all the rest, and and an occasion whereupon the ninety
nine shall come all to be hanged? Ye fools and blind, Is this your liberal,
universal rich Gospel to the whole world? O ye graceless, ungod-like,
ungospel-like Gospel Ministry of England, and Universities of the same, about
which there is such ado among the Powers, Parliaments, Armies, and their
Generals Courts Committees, Cities, and their Common Councels of late, that ye
may be so richly, liberally, and universally maintained in your private
promulgations of it, not far from your own fire sides, much less so far as
Christ gave Commissian to his Ministers to publish his Gospel going out into
all the World, all Nations, every creature, the ends of the earth; but like
Gospel, like Minister of it, a private particular, publication of it for pay,
and impiop^iations by each Preacher in his private particular Parish, or place
of preferment, is most proper to such an impropriated, private, particular
Gospel as yours is, whose care is more, according to the provision the Earthly
Powers, that are bewitched by you, make for you in that particular, to make
augmen^^tion of your own means in the Earth, then an augmentation of Gods true
Gospel so far, as to all ends of the earth, by exposing of your own persons to
the pains, and weariness, and travels, and hazards, that many of Christ's
Servants have gone through, and some even in these days for the sake thereof,
or for the sake of your non Gospel either, which yet since it is your own, and
another then that which Paul and others then preached, its no great matter (for
a private preaching of it is fittest for it) whether it go so far, yea or nay,
as to the ends of the earth; and indeed much farther then it has gone it must
not go, neither in respect of time nor place, and no great ma^vel, for Paul's
Anathema is entailed to it, and the folly of i^ is beginning to be made
manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, 2 T^m. 3. even Iannes and Iambres,
who of old withstood Moses and the Truth: If any man judge me too long in this
business, let him excuse me if he please, or if not, let him choose, I matter it
not, for I here honestly profess the Doctrines that are entailed on each other*
in this matter of particular Election of a few, and personal Reprobation of
most men by God, from both Salvation, and all possible sufficient means of it,
either upon, or before Adams fall, without reference to personal good or evil
first performed, or committed, do hang so together; like some tangling bushy
brake of b^yars and thorns, to the cumbring of the ground where the Truth it
self should grow out, and are such a wild Wilderness of Contradiction and
Confusion, that being, by the way whereinto I. O. and T. D. dark distinctions
have driven me, once entered into it* I cannot easily on a sudden find any way
out of it again, and must walk yet a little further, before I can be so clearly
quit of as I desire to be.

I. O. says, that its so certain, from innumerable places of Scripture, that
Christ has not savingly enlightened All, but some only; that he has no
spiritual understanding who once dreams to the contrary; whereas I say, he has
yet no more then a mere mysty ^nsight into the mystery of Gods love in Christ
to the world, who limits it only to a few: I know the Scripture from one end to
another, yet I know not so much as one place wherein there is the least hint
against the universality of his sufficient (G^ace^to All, 'twould have been
more to my satisfaction, had I. O. named but one testimony of Scripture, and
directed us to it, then to give us intimations of innumerable Texts, and
testimonies to that purpose* and set down not so much as one, which till he
does, I shall be so bold as to tell him; there is not one at all of any true
tendency that way, but very many more, besides those above-alluded to, which
evince the universality of Christ's death, the commonness of his Salvation, the
generality of sufficient Light, Grace, and of the gift of his Righteousness
unto All, and upon A^1, as they believe, without difference or respect of
persons, Romans 2.10.11.3.22. 1 Pet. 1.17.

The usual common silly shifts, and pedling put offs, that are made against
those Texts which speak in universal terms, are that by All, All men, every
man, every creature, the World, All the World, the whole World, not All and
every one indeed is meant, but some, the Elect only, which T. D. calls few in
comparison of the rest, All manner of people, not Jews only, but Gentiles also.
So J. Tom. and R. Baxt. p. 60.62. The senses in which Christ Mediator
enlightens with spiritual Light every man that comes into the world, 1 John 9.
That Text may be understood of this Light two ways: 1. All who are enlightened
with Spiritual Light: 2. All sorts and Nations of men, Gentiles as well as
Jews, not singuli generum, but genera singulorum, some in All Nations, some
Jews, some Gentiles, and among the Gentiles some Barbarians, some Scythians,
some Englishmen, some French, some Turks, some Tartars, etc. not All in every
Nation, not All of every sort, but some of All sorts, some Kings and men in
Authority, some under Authority, some rich, some poor, some Masters, some
Servants, etc. not the whole Globe, or Wheel of the World; but I.Os. whimsie,
or Wheel within a Wheel, that is his Church, or as others, Mundus Electorum ex
mundo Electus: This and such like is the narrow strict, restrictive rattle of
I.O.T.D.I.T.R.B. and the rest of that Fry, whose restrained senses of so
universal terms, let us reason together about a little.

Rep. 1. Is it so indeed Friends, that these so eminently comprehensive terms,
All, everyone, etc. signify no more then some, a few, etc. as aforesaid? Is
this Syncategorema istud Omnis, the Con-signification of that Adiective All? Is
it so as I.O. says, per omnem hominem, non omnes and singulos, sed quosvis
tantum intelligi debere, that by All and every one, we ought to understand not
All and every man, but some only; All not absolutely, but respectively to the
Elect; which are but few? This is more then ever I could yet understand since I
left off to be (as ye are, and will be more ere long, if ye go on to fight
against the Light) without understanding to this very day.

To say that All may signify many (as many is sometimes expressive and truly
conclusive of All, and not exclusive of any; as Romans 5.15.18.) is much better
to be born with; but that All, or at least that every man, which is more
indigitative of every individual without exception, should be said to signify,
not so much as the major, but the minor part of men: This is one absurdity more
then I ever learnt before from any, but the unlearned labors of your selves,
and such as side with you in your silly-come-sensless senses upon the Scripture.

2. If it be no absurdity but usual and proper to intend, not All men, nor Ill
men, which are the most; but the Elect, a few good men only, by those terms All
men, every man, All the World, etc. and not every individual ( prout innumer is
aliis locis usurpatur^ as it is used (quoth I.O.) in innumerable other places)
then I shall the more willingly excuse him, who shall interpret those Texts,
viz. Romans 3.9.10.11.12.22.23. Romans 5.12. Gal. 3.22. and many more Texts (which
must be some of I.Os. numberless number, there being not innumerable places
besides them) that speak of All men's being gone out of the way, etc. All men's
having sinned, and falling short of Gods Glory, dying in Adam, etc. All the
worlds becoming guilty before God, etc. All Believers being justified, All
Saints honored, etc. Also such places as speak of Gods being avenged on All
that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 2. and such like (respectively) not of All
and every man, every Believer, every Saint, every Rebel, against the Gospel,
but of some few, a few Believers, a few Saints, a few Rebels against the
Gospel, which were an absurdity unsufferable, if not no less then madness in
the abstract. But I.O. that he might at least insanire cum ratione, in proof
that there are innumerable places besides, John 1.9. where these general terms
are so restrained, makes a shift to produce one, which is as much to his
purpose as one can be, that over-turns it, that is Col. 1.6. where Paul says
the Gospel is come into All the World, by which term All the World, I.O.
understands not All men, but the Elect only, heeding as little, as he does
other matters, that the same Apostle in the same Chapter, ver. 23. speaks of
the same Gospel in the same way as here, that it is preached, En Pase Te
K^isei, In every creature that is under Heaven.

So that the 6th ver. which is I.Os. instance, does by (All the World) intend
the same Subject as he does, by the term ( every creature) which is not such a
pi^^a^^^, as the Elect only; for then the absurdity would be no less in these
two verses, then it would be so to interpret it in Mark 16.16.17. where both
these terms stand together; and how gross would it be when Christ says to his
Messengers, collectively considered, Go out into (All the World) and preach the
Gospel to, or in (for there is no Preposition) (every creature) He that believes
shall be saved, etc. to read and render these general terms not absolute (as
I.O. says Omnis must not be) but relate ad Electos, with reference only to the
Elect* a Fool may see: For as I showed above from John 3.16. of the word World,
so may I much more here show from the word ( All the World) the folly of them
that will have it signify no more then the Elect, it being then to be thus
read; viz. Go out unto the Elect, and preach the Gospel to every Elect one,
whoever in all the world, that is among the Elect, believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved; but whoever among those Elect ones, believes not, shall be
damned: Here Is I.Os. Syncategoremaistud (Omnis) yet surely, as far as both he
and T.D. are from holding the Gospel to be intended by God to any, but those
few they call the Elect, neither of them is such a niggardly Churl, but they
are both rather so free as to have the Gospel (excepting ever what large pay
the Preachers must have for it) very freely offered from God to no less then
All; whether this be any of those innumerable places I.O. means, when he says
the word Omnis, All, is so used in them, or not, I know not; but here is the
same terms, every creature, and All the world, as are used in that Col. 1.6.23.
which he alludes to; and if this be not one, I doubt his number will come short
of numberless; for at present (as I shall look no further) so I mind no more
then one place, where the same term of ( All the World) is used; viz. Romans
3.22. where its said, All the World is become guilty before God, which if I.O.
read non absolute, but relate ad qu svis tantum; that is, ad Electos, excluding
All the rest (as he does the worst from the Grace of God) so as to say a few of
the world only, that is, the Elect, are become guilty before God; then let us
eat and drink, that we may live and dye Reprobated from God, and so become
guiltless, ^ith none but his Elect become guilty before him, who are of all men
then indeed most mi^erable.

And as I.O. so T.D. seems not to dote without at least some seeming show of a
Reason for his most impossibly proper sense of that term, Every man that comes
into the world, John 1.9. by which R. H. truly told him he makes John a Ly^^,
and so say I too, while he understands it of but some of every Nation, and
those so few, that page 5.1 Pamp. he styles them a small number in comparison
of the rest who are not enlightened, T.D. No such matter (quoth he) I make not
the Apostle a Liar, for the indefinite phrase has a restrained sense, as
elsewhere, Heb. 2.9. Christ tasted death for every man, when as he died but for
a certain number.

Rep. To which I need say no more among wise men, then to tell T.D. that if he
over-shot himself unawares in saying ( every man) is an indefinite phrase, let
him only fetch back that Bolt of his which was so soon shot, and I shall freely
give it him again, and there is no harm done; but if he shot it not in have, but
wittingly, 'twas with so little due deliberation, that (as brief as he is, page
3.2. Pamp. to take on him to teach G.W. who in things of God may be his
Teacher) he had need to be taught again (notwithstanding the flourishing his
Title page with M.A.) by such as hold it fitter to forget, then to teach others
any of that Tyruncular kind of learning, That (man) and (men) are indefinite
phrases in such necessary matters, are equivalent to an universal, though in
some contingent business they are aedaquate only to a particular; but as for
Omnes homines, Omnem hominem, quoseunque unumquemque (All men) (every man) and
such like; These are so far from being but indefinite, as hominem, quosvis
homines a^e, that they are the most express universal terms that can be spoken;
yea, nothing is more universal, according to the very litteral sense of the
words, then Vper Panton Anthropon, Panta Anthropon Ercomenon Eis (...): for All
men, every man that comes into the world; these, specially this last ( every
man) is so indigitative and absolutely conclusive of each individual, that it
is not at all exclusive or exceptive of any at all; and if every man ^n the
wo^ld be an indefinite phrase (as T.D. ayes) I know none is universal, for All
is not (if it be so much) more comprehensive, then that, of All without
exception; and if (as he says) every man that comes into the world, be but
some, a few of every Nation, Kindred, Tongue and People, then I Will read and
render (by the same rule) the word every, as affixed to Nation, Tongue, etc. so
restrictively too (for who shall forbid me? T.D. of All men cannot) thus; viz.
Every man of every Nation, that is, only some, a few men, of a few Nations, ^f
a few Families, Tongues and People, and then I Will carry the boundl^ss Grace of
God, and incomprehensible Light of Christ, into a small compass, and diminutive
corner of the world indeed.

But T.D. perhaps deems se imperatorem esse, and so may Leges dare, non
accipere; for when we use any term in a sense that troubles him, then the
phrase imports otherwise (quoth he) the words intend so or so, it must bind and
be cogent to us, saying when he says Rex sum, sic volo, sic Iubeo, Nil ultra
quaero Plebeius; but when we tell him, as we do in this, the words import
otherwise, the very literal sense of them cannot be that, then he tramples that
down: Tush (quoth he) the meaning of those word; cannot be as the Letter of
them does import, for then the Scripture must contradict it self; it was an
usual thing with Christ to speak words of a doubtful sense, his meaning may be
mistaken, when his words are taken in the most ordinary and literal sense, and
so it would be, if, by every man, we should understand every individual man.

Rep. Where note, first, that T.D. yields, that the most ordinary and literal
sense of (every man) is every individual man, and that the letter of those
words, every man, John 1.9. does indeed import no other then we say against
T.D. and I.O. viz. That the true Light, which is that of Christ, enlighteneth
every individual man that comes into the world.

And so secondly, to the contradiction of himself, who so calls it, that every
man is not an indefinite, but an universal phrase, and so cannot have such a
restrained sense as in some cases, not all, an indefinite expression may, for
mostly an indefinite it self is equivalent to an universal; and if it be taken
according to the proper import, ordinary, and literal sense of it, it is to be
read every individual man.

3. That in those three places, John 1.9. Heb. 2:9. 2 Cor. 5.14. Christ
enlightneth, tasted death for every man; died for all: The letter, and the
true, proper, genuine, ordinary, and litteral sense, which the words All and
every man import, is on the Qua. side, by T.Ds. own free, or rather forced,
confession; and (whether they, who fighting and scoffing at the Light and
Spirit within, which only reveals it, know it not, or will grant that or no) we
know that we have the true meaning and mind of Christ.

4. What has T.D. and I.O. left then on their sides to help themselves with?
Nempe velle suum cuique est nec voto vivitur uno; every man his own will, even
what opinion he pleases: Quot homines, bis tot s^ntentiae; as many more minds,
as men, for they do not both in every thing fain the same, nor does each of
them fancy the thing at all times alike, but is at odds about it within
himself: I.O. has two shifts, as I have showed, but never a good one, to slide
away by, but one of which T.D. shuts in with: T.D. has three, two of which (as
short as they are of truth in his own intent) extend far enough, as is said
above, to give the cause contended for to us; and the third, which is I. Os.
also, has nothing to say for it self, but that it is a wresting and restraining
the phrases All and Every man, besides their ordinary literal signification and
import; it cannot be, as the words and letter of them does import, therefore it
must be in this or else that sense, which the letter of the words does not
import; Somewhat they would say, but they cannot tell what; Somewhat it is, but
no matter what, so it be not the right meaning, or true literal sense; in a
word, all they have to trust to is, their own muddy meanings, foolish figments,
false (...), unccuth imports on plain phrases, which none (but that some will)
need at all to mistake, which who is such a fool, as to be taken with the
^oy^shness of them, may take, and who will not, may safely let alone, and every
wise man will feel to be foolish, and every reasonable man will refuse as so.

5. It Is to be noted, that when the proper, ordinary, literal sense of any
words do but seem to tend toward their own turns, our Divines insist much upon
that intent and purport of them, though they will needs make them mean another
matter then they intend, or truly import, when the true interpretation of them
over turns and thwarts the tenure of their false Doctrines, and so Rule o'^e
their Rul^ as they list, according to their own unruly will, and lay out the
Letter, like a piece of lead into what shape, sense, or form seems good to
their own lewd, Lesbian, or petulant fancies; and when it does not ^^and
handsomely to their particular private purpose one way, they set it another,
and sometimes two or three ways at once, not determining which it is, but
saying, Its either this, or that, or both: So Io. Tom. and R. Bax. page 60.62.
that Text, John 1.9. may be understood of this Light two ways: 1. All who are
enlightened. 2. The other sense is, All sorts and Nations, etc. but not that of
the Qua. though the letter it self imports it: But page 35. 1 Pamp. both
meanings are the Holy Ghosts, the phrases will bear either senses, and either
of them cross the Qua. interpretation; and when they deem they can make any use
to help their crazy cause, by the literal sense and import of the words, then
they will have that; and so what a deceitful deal of-Do there is with T.D.
about the import of the words, a very Boy may behold up and down in his two
Trisles, page 5. 1 Pamp. That expression, Luke 17.21. may import, that the
Kingdom which the Pharisees did upon a mistake look for without them, was
indeed (Mark) a Kingdom within them.

Here it seems T.D. unawares, thought the import of the expression would have
served his turn, and was mistaken, it serving the Qua. for truth, whereupon
upon second thoughts (as he says) gives another, which he judges the most
genuine interpretation En Vmin among you; so the Preposition may be rendered
(quoth he) when as there is no such Preposition at all as En in that Text, it
being Entos Vmon, as is showed above. So page 14. the phrase does not import
the perfection of any on earth; that likes him not it seems, but else the
phrase imports it well enough, for he says, ye are come to the Spirits of just
men made perfect; as its said, The Saints are all to come up to the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ, Heb. 12.23. Ephesians. 4. So page 16. Perhaps
the clause should b^ referred to Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6.11. or else it may be
meant of the Spirits application, forte ita, forte non. So page 4. 2 Pamp. as
the Apostles expression is (there he is for the import of the expressions) So
page 47. 1 Pamp. The expressions of freedom from sin, do not note freedom
from the being, but dominion of sin. Page 4. 1 Pamp. As for the phrase in your
hearts, it imports but the same with that expression, the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened. Page 9. Does not commit sin, that cannot be
meant of freedom from sin, but either there is an Emphasis in the word sin,
intending under that general term one kind or sort of sin; i.e. the sin unto
death, or if not in the Substantive, then on the Verb Poiei, which notes to
make a trade of sin, (as the Priests do, who preach sin up, and down for money)
So somewhat it is, if they could tell what, and no matter what, nor where the
Emphasis lies; whether we can distinctly tell, yea or nay, so we may keep that
Doctrine of sufficient Grace against sin to All men, and that danmable Doctrine
of Devils (that is, of not sinning any more which the Qua. teach up among men,
from taking too much root, and bringing forth fruit to perfection of holiness;
that spoils all their ^^ading as well as the Lawyers, which stands but upon
men's trespasses and sins, if once men come to leave sinning, and hating, and
envying, and stealing, etc. and come to live in love, innocence, honesty, and
peace, that marres their Ministry; therefore they will beware of that Leven
however, which will sour all the sweet success that they have from Generation
to Generation, into the Popish preferments of their deceased Predecessors, if
that way be showed how to live without sin, it turns their rich trade of
preaching down sin, and talking against sin, up by the roots; and therefore,
though their Trade is for money to declare against sin, yet they must preach it
up, and talk for it a little too, and do their work not too hastily, all at
once, left there be no more work for them ere long to do, but such as they were
never bred up to live by.

Thus not only T.D. I.O. R.B.I.T. but in a manner all our literal Preachers,
when the Letter leans not that way themselves, for their lusts sake list to
have it, make no more to wrest it besides its own ordinary, proper, and literal
sense and import, which when it smiles with them, they plead, as much as they
implead it, when it makes against them, then a man need do to turn a Nose of
Wax which way he will, and no less then twenty ways one after another, if they
please; yea, it is but saying when they are minded so to do, upon mislike of
the Spirits plain, naked, honest meaning, thus; viz. The Spirit does not mean
here as he says, but means another thing; it is usual with Christ to speak
words of a doubtful sense, his meaning may be mistaken, when his words taken in
the most ordinary and literal sense; and so it would be, if by every man, we
should understand every individual man; the meaning of th^se words cannot be as
the Letter of them does import, then this and that absurdity would follow (say
our reconciling self-contradictors) by which they import themselves to be very
little insighted, either into the Letter it self, which they are Ministers
merely of, and much less into the mind of the Spirit which gave it forth, which
never does, as these in^aners and Opinionists would make it, speak one thing,
and mean another, but means truly what he says, though his very sayings are
mysteries to the misty Ministers; when he says All, and every man, he means
not some only, a few, one of a thousand, as the personal Electionists do, who
extend the large Love of God so far, as to say, its intended but to few, and
streighten the boundless Mercy of God into a Mi^e, which is stretched out
matchlessly beyond measure over all his works, which universal terms (All men)
(every man) if they were to be restrained, as they tell us, how much more
legally may indefinite terms be taken in a restrained sense, and be made
equivalent to particulars, and upon that account we may except the most sinners
(as they indeed do some of them personally and absolutely from all Judgment
and Condemnation, and the most, as absolutely from Mercy and Salvation) from
the fear of any evil befalling them for their sins; so as to say, when God
speaks indefinitely, he will rain snares, fire, brimstone, storm and temptest
on the wicked; that is not All, and every wicked man, but a few only, therefore
fear not; Wh^remengers and Adulterers God will judge, Liars, Murderers have
their part in the Lake; that is but some few only, at least not All, nor the
most, not the Saints, not his upright hearted David's, when gone from their
uprightness (for so David was in that matter of Vriah, when guilty of Murder
and Adultery) therefore droop not ye murderous, adulterous Saints of this
English unclean-hearted Israel: If God had said All, and every Adulterer, and
every Murderer he will judge, and divide him his portion in the Lake, his
meaning had not been as those words import, it is usual for Christ to speak
words of a doubtful sense, ye mistake his meaning, if you understand him
according to the ordinary and literal sense of the universal terms All, and
every man, as speaking of every individual man, but he speaks but indefinitely,
Sinners, Whoremengers, Adulterers, Murderers, not expressing All and every such
a one, which had he expressed, he had dot employed, though the terms import so,
for he offers one thing often when he means another, offers that to all in words
in his revealed Will, which in heart and his secret Will he intends but to a
few, and if an universal cannot, without going aside from the literal sense it
imports, yet the indefinite phrase has a restrained sense.

Ob. Nay, this cannot be, though in the other case it may, because this is
contrary to the Faith, the other is not, and we must keep to the Analogy of
Faith in our interpretings of the Scriptures.

Rep. Herein ye are more miserably bemoped and befooled (if ye could once see
it) then in all other your absurdities put together, for I ^row whence, or from
what Church, Principle, Ground, Foundation, comes that Faith, according to the
Analogy of which ye are to conform in your interpretations of the Scripture, it
must be either the Infallible Chair, and bottomless pit of men's dunghilly
Traditions, which is the Foundation of the Church of Rome, and her Faith, which
Foundation, Church and Faith that is built on it, ye would seem in words at
least to deny, or else the Infallible Light and Spirit of God in the heart,
which the Letter came from; and the Qua. according to the Letter, and together
with it, call men to, and are themselves, as to their Faith founded on, whom
together with their Faith (which stands not in men's words, writings, nor
thoughts, but in that Light which is the Power of God) and that Foundation of
it also, with no less, but a little more detestation ye deny; or else the
Scripture it self, which (as much as ye live by (yea by Popish) Tradition in
many things, as the Papists do) yet (in words) ye own. Now the two first being
denied, this last is the Rule of your Faith, according to the Tenor and Analogy
of which, the Churches Faith, which ye must interpret Scripture by, is to be
framed and conformed: See then your most abominable confusions and rounds ye
run in: 1. You have the Scripture, before which the true Faith was delivered to
the Saints a 1000 years, which Scripture is the Foundation of your Church and
Faith (whereby ye might see, were ye not blind, that your Church and Faith has
not the same Foundation as the true had) Next, you have a Faith which must be
squared by the best interpretations ye can make of that Scripture, alias, a
common stock of Divinity, that stinks as the blood of a dead man that has no
life in it: Then again, this Scripture, by the Analogy of which (as the Church
interprets it) your Churches Faith is to be framed, must be bent to, and
interpreted by the Analogy of that Faith which was thereby framed: So Riddle
me, Riddle me, what is this Round of our reasonless Rabbis? 1. The Scripture is
the Rule of our Faith (say they according to our Churches interpretations of
which her common Faith must (as to the Articles of it) be framed and conformed.
2. The common Faith is the Rule, according to the Analogy of which the
Scripture must be interpreted, and all our Expositions of it framed and
conformed: Oh the brutish brainy notions of our of our British Nation! A
false Faith about personal Election and Reprobation, about Alls signifying some
men only, and every man only a few, being framed in John Calvin's fancy upon his
miserable mistakes, and misinterpretations of the Scripture (Scilicet) ever
since All Scripture must be interpreted according to the Analogy of that false
Faith: ^^a ferunt and circum-feruntur, T. D. J. O. R. B. J. T. Ignoramus,
Sm^ctimnuus, and others.

The Blood of Christ cleanses us, in presenti, from all sin, that is the guilt
(say they) not filth of it, though the very phra^e imports otherwise; cleanse
your selves from all uncleanness of flesh and spirit, that is not as the Letter
imports, All indeed, but All gross iniquities; we must have our infirmities
while we live here, and and if he meant them, he commanded impossibilities,
which the Apostle did not: He that sins is of the Devil, he that is of God,
sins not; that is not as the word Amartanei (nemine c^ntradicente) imports, but
it must be expounded by the other phrase Amartian Poiein, operam dare peccato,
etc. (which Amartian Poiein, but that they stretch it out upon the Tenters, is
no more then Amartanein; for he that sins does sin, and he that commits sin
does no more, and does so much, as that while he does sin, he is (as Christ
said, John 8.) a servant of it, and not of Christ in that; they do no iniquity,
that is, not as the Letter imp^rts, but they do none as the wicked do it, that
is, with all their might, but more moderately: Perfection, that is only such an
uprightness and sincerity, as respects all Gods Commandments, whether they be
kept or broken; saved from sin, is from the dominion, not being of it, while we
have a being here, it has not potestatem dominandi, nor damnandi, but
operandi, bellandi, captivandi, only led Paul captive; while he lived, to the
Law of it; so that with his flesh he served it, but it domineers not, damns
not, because the mind approves it not, while the flesh commits it, if it chance
to be murder and adultery, as that of David, whose heart was upright (say they)
though the Scripture excepts him from uprightness in that case, and therefore
justified (quoth T. D.) alias, held guiltless (O Criss-Cross) while under the
guilt of it, being weak, and temptation strong, and an hundred more such
fetches do our formally holy Fathers find, wherewith to feed up themselves and
their failing Flocks from fainting under their ^^^lest faults, minifi^d into
the name of Saints infirmities.

Thus they swim up and down in their non-sensical senses and notions, so that
nothing must be taken as the words import, but when a meaning serves their
licenticus turns, and then they urge, the words import it so; one while it must
be as the phrase imports, other whiles it cannot be so, but otherwise then the
Letner imports it, for then the Scripture (so it seems indeed to the Owls and
Batts, whose eyes dazzle at the Light it came from, so that they see more by
night then by day) would contradict it self, and be at variance, and disagree
within it self, and cannot approve it self to their own understandings, without
the mediation of their (own) meanings and interpretations, and therefore they
must reconcile it to it self, though they are at never so much odds among
themselves, and each man within himself, about this matter of setting it to
rights, even one saying this is the meaning, the other that, a third in my
opinion it is so, a fourth, I think it must be either so, or so, but which he
determines no more then T. D, till they have reconciled it into nothing, but an
irreconcilable enmity with it self, and an occasion of irreconcilable enmity
about it between themselves.

And this I know not only as one of those that now see in the Lords light their
dotage herein, and the wrong and crooked ways wherein they are at work, to set
that to rights, and strait, which is so already in itself, if they could let it
alone, without wresting it into constructions as crooked, as they are in their
conversations, but as one that was once as busy as the best of them in the
same blind, fruitless, frothy work, of beating the brains about the meaning of
this and that, which the Spirit only reveals to the poor in Spirit, and not to
the proud, haughty Scorner, that deals in proud w^ath against the righteous,
having been my self (when I was where they yet are, who where I now am cannot
come, but with the loss of that life they yet live, and through the death of a
cross thereunto) looking, and skimming, and scraping among the learned
Scribes, into the Scripture for the sense of it without the Spirit; I can tell
them by experience, as well as by the Light, in which it is seen, and told them
by my self and many more, to what little purpose or profit, either to
themselves or their people, who dea^ly pay for it, they are by the best
improvement of their natural capacities Academical Parts, and such mere Animal
Accomplishments, p^ying into the privities of the Scriptures, which according
to I. Os. and specially T. Ds. his Principles and way of interpretation and
giving meanings, is more made to patronize and partize with the transgressions
of supposed Saints, then to promote the perfect purging from them in this
world, which yet the Scriptures truly plead not only a possibility, but a
necessity of before men die, unless they mean to die for ever, when T. D. and
his abettors, implead it as a very doctrine of Devils, pleading rather (because
an impossibility of living without it) a necessity of living in it, while in
the body.

Which said Doctrine of Perfectior, or full pardon from sin here, I shall have
a few words about with T. D. by and by, after an Addition of some few Arguments
more in proof of the universality of Gods Love in the death of Christ for All,
and of the gifts of his saving Grace, or Light sufficient to lead All that
follow it to Life, vouchsafed to every man, and some brief Animadversion of
what more our Four fore named Antagonists argue to the contrary.

Arg. 8. If Christ died not for the whole world, and for All and every man in
it, but for a few only: and God gave him not, A Light, to be his Salvation (as
it is said Isai. 49.6.) to All the ends of the Earth, All which also he calls
to look to him and be saved, Isa. 45.22. to hear him, that their souls may live
to come to him, even whoever will, that they may find rest, and have of the
water of life freely, Isai. 55.1. Matthew. 11.28. Rev. 22. Then the world, and
most men, who generally are damned for this very sin, even because they believe
not in, hear not, look not, come not to Christ Jesus, John 3.18. John 16.8, 9.
are damned for not looking to, coming to, nor believing in their Savior, when
yet they had no Savior of theirs to look at, or come to, or believe in.

But All men have a Savior to believe in, and look to, and come to, which for
not hearing, looking, nor coming to, nor believing in, they are damned (yea
this is the worlds condemnation, that light is come into it, yet the world
comes not to the light) otherwise as it is sottish Absurdity, and lamentable
mockage, to call All to look, and come to, and believe in him; so such
inconceivable cruelty, as ( Absit Blasphemia, far be it from us to think there
is in God) to damn them, upon the account of not coming, or non-believing in
him: Therefore he is given a Light, a Ransom, a Savior for All and every man.

Arg. 9. If it be a lie, that Christ died for every man (as we say he did) and
a truth, that he died but for a few only (as they hold) then, since God requires
A^l on pain of damnation so to believe, if every man should believe Christ died
for him, God, on pain of damnation, requires most men to believe a lie, and
damns them for believing the very truth, viz. that he died not for every of
them, and for not believing that, which if they All had believed, the most of
them had believed a lie.

But ( Absit Blasphemia) God damns no man for believing the Truth, or for not
believing, that which if they did All believe, most of them must necessarily
and unavoidab^y believe a lie.

Therefore Christ did undoubtedly die for every man, and not for a few only.

Arg. 10. If the Redemption and Salvation by the death and blood of Christ,
which we confess actually to extend to none, but such as actually believe, be
not truly given from God to every man as his, as well as any man, so that at
least every man may really have it, if he will, then either it is 1. Because
Christ is not a Ransom sufficient to save All: Or 2. Because God wills and
desires not that should save every man, which is sufficient so to do: Or else
3. because most men neglect that so great Salvation, and put it away from
themselves, and will not have it when God would they should, and thereby judge
themselves unworthy of it: Or 4. else for some other Reason.

But it is not the first, for your selves and All men confess a sufficiency of
Redemption and Salvation in Christ for All men: Nor the second, for that were
to make God, whose ways are all exact and equal, so inequal in his doings, as
no wise man is, to cut out a plaster as broad as a bushel to lay to a scare no
broader then a shilling, or rather (upon your Principles of unavoidble, sorer
condemnation to the Reprobate part of the World, by Christ's coming into it to
save it, then if he had never come a Savior into it at all) to provide a
plaster sufficient to heal the whole sore, with an intent effectually to heal
some very small part of it only, but to render all the residue more outrageous
and far sorer, or to pay a Ransom sufficient to redeem a thousand prisoners
for debt, with intent actually to set some one at liberty, and for ever lay all
the rest up closer prisoners in the Dungeon. Which absurdity, and mockage, and
perfect hatred, under pretense of love too, far be it from any good man to
father and fasten upon God, and from me to fasten on any good man, that in the
least measure is merciful as God is merciful. Moreover Deus nil facit f^nstra.

If ye say the third, ye say no otherwise then that Truth with us (that yet ye
fight against) viz. That God, as he has provided life in his Son, so he is as
truly willing All men should live, but that some will die, and would gather men
unto life, save only that they themselves will not.

If any other thing be the Reason, why every man may not as truly be saved by
Christ's death as any man, it lies in you to assign it, I know none. Therefore
Christ died intentionally to save every man.

Arg. 11. If All men are not put into possibility of life by Christ's dying
intentionally for every one of them, if themselves choose not death; then it
could not be said, As by sin condemnation is come on All men, so justification
of life is come on All men; and that the gift of Gods Grace, and gift of God in
Christ, and the benefit and blessing is every way, at least, as large, and some
ways larger and abounding, beyond the mischief and Curse that comes by the sin.

But it is in effect so said, Romans 5.15.18: 23. Therefore All and every man is
made as capable to be saved by Christ, as every man is liable to be damned by
reason of the sin.

Arg. 12. Christ could not be truly or properly said to be the Propitiation for
the sins of the whole world, nor the Savior of the whole world, to be given a
Covenant to the People; a Witness to the People; a Leader and Commander to the
People; a Light to the Nations, Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth, much
less could All People in any consistency with mercy, or ( ut prius) without
foolery and mockery of most men in the midst of their remediless misery, be bid
to behold him, or all the ends of the Earth be summoned with promise, yea
assurance of Salvation if they do, and on pain of more cruel damnation if they
do not, to look and come to him for it, and hearken to his voice (or else be
cut off) in All things whatever he says to them, and such like, unless he were
truly, properly, and intentionally, at least, given to be All this to all Men,
all the People, the whole World, and every man in it.

But he is said so to be (as abovesaid) to All, and all People, even all ends
of the Earth, etc. are on such Promises and Penalties, summoned to behold him,
look, come, and hearken to him (as aforesaid) Isai. 42.16.45.22.49.6.55.1, 4.
Acts 3.22, 23. John 3.19. 1 John 2.12. and in unspeakable more places.

Therefore he is a Savior, a Leader, a Light, etc. which (in some measure at
least) savingly enlightens no less then every Individual.

CHAP. IV.
I. Os. T. Ds. I. Ts. R. Bs. and all other our common Adversaries common
Exceptions are but frivolously foolish, boyish, toyish, shameful Tergiver
sations, and as senseless as helpless Escapes, when they tell us the whole
World, 1 John 2. is meant of the Gentiles only, as in opposition to the Jews;
not only for our sins, that is, of us Jews (say they) but also for the sins of
the whole World, that is, of the Gentiles, which division there savors of
shallowne^s enough, for John writes that Epistle not more peculiarly or
specially to the Jewish then to the Gentile Believers (as he must be understood
to do, if their sense on that clause were true) but promiscuously and generally
to All the Saints among both, whereupon it is superscribed the General Epistle
of John: But the distinction there made relates to all Men in the World,
B^lievers and Unbelievers, of what Nation soever, for All whom, while they are
yet sinners, enemies by wicked works, he died, and became a Ra^s^m^, a
Sacrifice, a Light, that All Men in him might believe, and thorough faith in
his Light might be saved (quoad posse) i. e. potentially, or if they will,
whether actually or ( quoad esse) they ever are saved, yea or nay; Though he
prayed not for the world, as it lies in enmity and wickedn^ss, but for such
only as come out of the World, and the wickednesses thereof, and that in all
Ages believe on his Name thorough the one Word, as John 17.20. Neither pray I
for these alone, i. e. that do now believe, but for All that ever shall
believe, etc. that they may be one in us.

For (as mysterious a Riddle as this is to our misty-minded Rabbis, who cannot
see Wood for Trees) yet Christ can be truly said to die for men in some cases
and conditions (qua talibus) whom ( qua talibus) as in the same cases and
conditions considered, he cannot pray for, that (in that state) they may be one
with him and God, who can have no unity with iniquity; he stands, in esse
actuali, actually offered up a Ransom, a Propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, even in that state, while it lies in enmity and wickedness, as yet
unreconciled to God, by whose giving himself that way, All men may be
reconciled to God through faith in him, whether ever they will be reconciled,
yea or nay: but (howbeit he may wish so well to his Adversaries, as to die for
them, that they, in that way of faith, might live through him, and may wish
also that they would believe, that so in that way they might be forgiven, yet)
he stands not actually, nor immediately, an Advocate, making actual
intercession for any, that they ( immediately, or in their present state) may
stand accepted with the Father, but for such only as already actually do
believe; Wherefore John says (with appropriation of i^ to himself, and other
Saints, as are found confessing and repenting from their sins) We have an
Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ, etc. but of All Men (without
exception, without limitation of Christ to himself and other Saints) the same
is the Propitiatio^, not for our sins only, i. e.: ours who do already own, and
have believed in him, but also for the sins of the whole W^^l^; i. e. for All
other men's sins, as well as ours, whether ever they own and believe in him so
far, as to have any actual benefit by him, yea or nay.

Besides, if we grant them, whose sense on it is otherwise (as we are free to
do, it being a Truth al^o, though not the di^ect distinction there intended)
their own distinction of that clause, not ours only, but also of the whole
World, into the Jews and Gentiles, their own distinction is enough to ^^^f^^nd
themselves, as to the Question in hand; for the whole World being divided into
Jews and Gentiles, Jews and Gentiles are Terms comprehen^^ and conclusive of
the whole World, and of no less then every individual (...) therein as well
as, any man.

And as for their Some of all Nations, some of all Ports, some Jews, some
Gentiles, and among Gentiles of every Country, Tongue, Kindred, and Condition
some, not All of All Kindreds, Countries, Conditions, etc. not each man between
this and the utmost parts of the Earth (as the literal sense of that phrase,
All the ends of the Earth, imports) but here and there some, the Elect, a few
in comparison of the rest, that are left without any Savior, or saving Grace,
or sufficient Light to lead them to life, and so (as personally decreed
thereto) left to perish doubly, for not believing (Secundum te O Sacerdos) in a
Savior, when they never had one; The People, i. e. some (a poor pittance among
All People) not All the People without exception, not the whole World, but that
whole small part of Elect Ones, elected personally out of that whole, a
thousand to one whereof are as personally from of old for eve^ remedilesly
Reprobated; and such like sour stuff, and dark dribling, as is found in this
case among the Divines (As age) away with it, it is unsavory, and stinks as a
dunghill of doctrine, and becomes in the sight of All, but the blind, as the
blood of a dead man that has no life in it at all, and as little of that which
is called common Sense and Reason, and unworthy to have so much time spilt upon
it, as to be too particularly talked with, or of any other Return, then to be
returned back, as deceit, together with its Father, by whole sale into the
deep, from whence it came; only there might be enough picked out of it, whereby
to show the shallowness of its Authors.

We know well enough it is but few, and some of every Nation; Tongue, Kindred,
and People, that are actually redeemed unto God, but it is not because there is
not Redemption as truly intended as tendered to them, as well as sufficiently
purchased for them, but because they put it away from themselves, by not
turning to the teachings of that Light, Word, and Grace of God that is nigh in
their hearts, and brings it nigh unto them, else All, even Gentiles, as well as
well as Jews, Heathens, and Indians, as well as English men and Christians (so
called) and among each of these, All, as well as Any of them* have some measure
of that Grace nigh them, which in the least measure Gradus non variant naturam
Rei.
is enough and sufficient to help and heal them, were they as continually and
earnestly within attendant on it, as they commonly and eagerly ever turn
outward from it (whereby it becomes to them of no effect) when God either
without, or within, or both, calls upon All ends of the Earth (which word
cannot be exclusive of Any, but must be conclusive of every Individual) to look
in unto it, and in it to look unto himself, and to behold and hear him, whom he
has given as a Guide, a Light, to show good and evil, a Law, a Witness for God
against them, when they do evil, within themselves, a Leader and Commander to
all people.

Object. It Is not to All People, but to the People, an indefinite phrase that
has a restrained sense.

Rep. The indefinite phrase here has an enlarged sense, and is Aequivalent to
an universal, Isa. 55. the People, v. 4. answers to, H^ every one, v. 1. and
and if it were to be restrained, there ought to have been some restrictive,
exceptive expression, but there is an express enlargement, and I may as well
^^mit it in other places (as the Churles with the evil Instruments of their own
inventions do in these places, so as when God says often in the Psalm^s, and
elsewhere, Beh^ld he comes to judge the World in righteousness, and the People
with equity, to say, God will not judge All People, nor the whole World, and
every Individual, but some few People only in Righteousness and Truth, and so
coop the wrath and judgment of God up into a corner, and prate it as perversely
into a pinfold, as the Priests of those piteous Principles do his Mercy, who
prate of a peremptory predestination (without respect to sin, or at least any
other then Adams personal Act) of most persons, before they had any being,
remeditesly and unchangeably to damnation.

Object. What then do the Quakers deny Gods unchangeablenesse in his Decree?

Rep. Gods Decree I deny not to be unalterable, but blind Priests mistake that
unchangeable Decree of his, which is to be toward men, as they toward him,
merciful to the upright, wrathful to the froward and wicked; to show himself in
his love as a Friend, Father, Forgiver for ever, even inalterably,
unchangeably, world without end, to the penitent that turn to him, and come to
him by Christ, in his Light, keeping his Commandments; and as unalterably,
unchangeably, without variation or shadow of turning that immutable Mind and
Will of his, to show himself in his wrath everlastingly, eternally to the
finally impenitent sinners, who are found living and dying in that seed which
is unchangeably reprobated from him: So whom he loves he loves to the end, and
whom he hates he hates to the end, that is, for ever; but those whom from
eternity he has thus immutably decreed to love, and own, and honor to
eternity, are the righteous ones that honor him, the Godly in all Ages,
whoever they are, which are those only that he chooses to himself, Psalm 4.
(whether foreseen who they will be in time by him, or not, that is nothing to
the purpose) and whom he thus, as immutably from all eternity decrees to
disregard, hate, and reject to eternity, are the seed of evil doers, that
lightly despise him, who are never to be renowned; so whatever changes fall out
among men, who are sometimes better, sometimes worse, and among their states,
which are some good, some bad, there is no change in the mind of God, what ever
the thoughts of men's hearts are, his unchangeable Counsel stands the same, his
Purpose and Decree the same, which is from eternity, to own the good, and
refuse the bad, to justify the walkers in his Light, Christ Jesus, and judge
all that rebel against it; so he does not change his Will, but his unchangeable
Will to persons is, to be unchangeably affected to them in either love or
hatred, respectively, as they respectively are found at any time the Subjects
of sin or not, and so consequently objects of either the one affection
mutually, or the other; as if a King Decrees after the manner of the Medes and
Persians, inalterably, that his People shall have as they do, he that does well
shall be beloved, and he that does ill and repents not from it, shall be hated,
hanged, one and the same person may (at different times) be under the two
different affections, viz. now under the favor, and now under the displeasure
of the King, as he does well or ill, and by and by love and in his favor
again, as he repents, or else as not repenting be so under his hatred as to be
hanged, yet the Kings Mind, Will, and Decree, stands the same unchangeable as
it ever did.

So in the case in hand, there is Muta^i^ Rei non Dei, a change of the case of
man's will and manners, and (accordingly) of his state, or standing the object
of either Gods love or hatred, under either his favor or displeasure, but Gods
Mind, Will, Decree, Counsel, Love and Hatred, stands unchangeably and
everlastingly to the same Subjects that were the Objects thereof at first; viz.
whether sinners or Saints: And thus God did not at all change in his Decree,
Mind, Will and Purpose, to perpetuate the Priesthood to Eli's house for ever,
though he once said it should con^inue for ever, and after said, But now be it
far from me, forasmuch as his purpose was at first to continue it, in case he
honored God in it, and his unchangeable Counsel is ever this, viz. That those
who honor me, I will honor, but those that despise me shall be lightly
regarded, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Ob. This gives the glory of Salvation not to God, but to man's will, which is
All in All, then in the busine^s.

Rep. It Is not for want of ignorance, that the narrow noddles think thus, for
Originally and Supremely still, the glory is to the universal Grace of God, who
in his love freely to all men sends his Son a Light into the world, and by him
puts all, as well, as some into a capacity to live if they list, and if any die
then, Gods Grace and Love is nere the less for all that; and though secondarily
and immediately the case be left by the Lord to depend on man's choice, as it
was in the first Adam (though yet I know such as are perfectly restored by the
second, stand a little surer then he did, I say, when perfected in his life)
yet if man choose life and live, when life and death are set before him (as they
are) God is no more robbed of the glory of his goodness, then he would have been
by Adams standing, if he had stood, when God set him in aequi librio, to stand
or fall, and made him upright, as he has done (...) not him only, but mankind,
till they go out from him after their own inventions, Eccl. 7.29. and that was
not one jot at all; for though the shame of Adams sinning fell justly on
himself, yet the glory of his standing would have been to God, who made him
able to stand, had he stood, neither would Adam (had he stood) have played the
fool so as to fall a praising and thanking himself for the life and happiness
he would have had, but God, who in his love and bounty originally stated him in
it, though for his misery he may (as all men also) most justly thank none but
himself, and the Devil: E.G. If I should see two men ready to starve for want
of money to trade with, and out of true equal bowels of pity to them both,
should freely bestow an equal stock of money on them, or if not equal, yet so
much to each at least, that each (using and improving well what he has) may
come to live like a man; one of them plays the good Husband with what he has,
and thrives, whom shall he thank, when unavoidably else he had perished? for the
money he had given him, and now has? Would you not think him a fool to fall a
thanking himself, never thinking on the man that first set him up? of whom
(unless besides his wits) he would say, I am bound to thank not my self, that I
now live, when my fellow starves, but that honest man that took pity on me and
him too, if he he had but used what he had ^ The Other spends all his portion in
riotous living, and is as likely to starve as ere he was, for want of improving
what I gave him, whom shall this man thank for his present poverty? me that
gave him whereon to live, or himself who lavish't it? every wise man will see
my love was nere the less, and though he perish, yet the thank that he might
have lived, belongs to another bounty, and the thank, shame, sorrow of his own
woe to himself alone; O Israel thy destruction is of thy self, but in me is thy
help, Hos. 13.9. That Judas is damned, he may thank himself, who sold his
Master, as Esau his birthright and blessing, that Peter and Jacob live for
ever, the thank of this belongs only unto the Grace of God.

Moreover, if Christ who is often, either expressly or implicitly so called, be
not a Saving Light to the whole world, the Leader, and Commander, and Witness,
for and from God to All people, without exception of any individuals among any
people, or in any Nations, I would fain know of any one of these; 1. How it can
be truth, which themselves are fain to confess, That God will and does in all
Nations, out of every Tongue, Kindred, and People, effectually save some? And
2. In what manner, or by what way, means, Light, or Leader, he leads them few
of all Families of the Earth to Life, whom he does save, if it be not by that
Light, Law, and Spirit of Life that is from Christ, some of which is in every,
as well as any conscience, since its evident, that neither All nor half those
Nations, in each of which some are saved, have not the Scripture or Letter
which they call the only Saving Light, the Way, the Rule, Foundation, the most
effectual means, etc. and in a manner every thing, which the Letter it self
says Christ only is: Indeed I find I. O. telling us such a tale of the outward
Text, as if in respect of the giving out of that only by the motion of his
Spirit, through some Holy Penmen, Christ were the Savior and Light of the
world, and of All men in it, that are at all savingly enlightened, and saved.

Ex. 4. S. 11. Futetrur quidem Christum lucent esse Mundi, omniumque adeo
hominum, quia lux illa Scriptura Sacra fulgens est sufficiens ad perfundendum
omnes homines luce Salutari ad quos per Dei providentiam pervenerit.
We confess (quoth he) Christ is the Light of the World, and so of All men in
it, because that Light shining in the holy Scripture, is sufficient savingly to
enlighten All men, to whomsoever by the Providence of God it shall come: But
(to bespeak him in his own Language to us, more proper to himself and his
Followers then to us) Quod hoc ad Fanaticorum delirium? (...). What Is this to
that piece of dotage of himself and his Fellow Doctors, who deny the
vouchsafing of any saving Illumination to most men, yea, to very many to one in
the world? scilicet, a little deeper discovery of their dotage; Scriptura nempe
(...) omnia; belike I. O. deems All the ends of the earth to be so fully filled
with his adored Transcripts and Texts of Scripture, that by them Christ saves,
and enlightens All he saves, which are (say they) in every Nation some; whereas
(Ridiculum Caput) who knows not that the Scripture or writing is so sa^ from
appearing in every dark corner of the earth (where I affirm the true Light
shines in every conscience, so that there is nor Speech, nor Language where it
shines not, and the Voice of Christ the Light may not (...) heard) that the
Text has scarce been heard or (...) of, bu^in some few corners of this (so
called) Christian world, which yet more idoli^ing (...) only loving the Letter,
and hating the Light, are, for all their Letter, as much as any, in the
unfruitful deeds of darkness also, even until now.

Oh the Inanity of these men (called Divines) in the matters of God and the
Gospel! as if the Letter only were that Voice of Christ which is every where
heard by some; that Light, which in every Nation savingly enlightens some; that
Rule, which All the World is required to walk by, in order to peace, and on
pain of damnation, which Letter yet was never read or seen (perhaps not so much
as heard of) in half the world, the only rule of the whole whereof it is to be
(say they) and not the Light of Christ in the Conscience at any hand, the
Expansion, Beams, and Rays of which (but that few heed it, and the darkness
comprehends it not) reach into the darkest inmost corners of each (...)
Conscience, throughout each corner of the whole Creation.

The Letter is not in, every Nation to save some out of each, or if it were,
and be the Saving Light, whether men walk by it or not, 'twould be a Light to
every as well as any man in each Nation, and so saving Light (though not used)
would (contrary to I. Os. tale) be vouchsafed by Christ to every man in every
Nation; but the Light is not only in every Nation, but in every heart, in each
Nation; and because it is so, though few are saved by it, because few heed it,
yet every man may be saved by it as well as any man.

Arg. 13. To conclude this then, I confess that it is either the Letter that
these Scribes talk for, or that Light we talk for, and they against, which is
that one only universal, unchangeable, infallible standing Law, Light, Witness,
Word, Guide, Rule, Touchstone, and saving way to Life; in respect of which,
Christ is said to be the Leader, Commander, and Witness from God to All people,
the Light of the whole world, and consestuently of All men in it.

But it is not the Letter, therefore it is the Light we speak of, in fuller proof
of this last, and disproof of the former: Consider the Rule, Law, Light, etc.
and means of Life and Salvation (what ever it is) must be adequate in its
expansion and extent, to the men that ought to be ruled, guided led to life by
it, on pain of further, perishing and cursing if they be not.

But the Light of Christ in each Conscience is so, teaching there whatever, God
requires of each person, as to his own peace, and what God in the doing thereof
will accept him in, and the Letter not so; therefore the said Light, and not
the Letter, is that by which Christ is Gods Witness to the world, and All
peoples Leader (if they will follow him) unto life.

The Plaster should be adequate to the sore, and not short of it (as the Light
is not, but the Letter is in its extent, in respect to all ends of the earth)
else there is as much folly in this extreme, as I said above, there would be in
the other (it being as little wisdom to be too short, as to overreach) for a
man to make a Plaster no broader then a penny, for a wound as broad as a Crown
piece, as it is to cut a Plaster of the compass of a bushel, for a sore no
broader, then a six pence.

That Rule, Law, Light, and Word, by which All are to live, and be judged, and
tried, and for nor living by which to be condemned, must universally be
extended to All and every man, those who have a Copy thereof without, and those
who have no such Copy, but are without it; for Lex and papulus cujustex est;
Verbum and hi^ qum^um officium est illud ^^dire (...) obedire, Lux etc
illuminandi, mensura and Mersierandum, Regula and prebandum debent esse
adaequata: The Law, and they to whom its given, as that by which they must live
or die for breaking it, the W^rd, and th^se that are bound is hear and obey it;
the Light, and such ^^ are to see by it; the Rule, and such men, as well as
manners, as are to be measured, and (...) by it, on peril of damnation, if not
agreeing with it, must be so adequate, that the Rule, Law, Light, Word, must by
the Providence of God be made to reach and extend to the u^most corner in all
ages, wherein the men to whom its given are abiding, that they may see it,
whether that be the Letter without, or the Light within; so that if that in the
Conscience we assert so to be, be that saving Light, Law, Means, Rule, etc.
then it must be by the Lawgiver ordered to come within the cognizance of every
man in the world, who is to live or dye, and (as he keeps or breaks it) to
stand or fall by it for even; if the Scripture be it, then that must be ordered
to come as universally to All and every man; otherwise, As that King or
Parliament might be said to mock the Nation, and make it miserable, that should
make a certain Law, which whoever keeps shall live, and who keeps not shall be
hanged, and yet, keeps that Law within the little corner of that City of
Westminster, and and never suffers or orders the Copy of it to come to the
sight of others, neither in our known Mother Tongue, nor yet so much as in an
unknown Tongue, in one of which at least our English Laws, as much as they are
lapt up, not a little from the cognizance of poor people among the Learned
Lawyers only (as J. O. laps his lying Labors, learned Leagu^es, and loud
Challenges against the Quakers, from the Lai^ks (as he thinks) within the cloud
of his Latin Language) or as that man who should in a dark night hang out one
single candle in a Lanthorn only for all London to see by, or he that should
preach at Pauls-Cross, and command all ends of England, at their peril, to hear
his voice from thence, might truly be called a Mocker.

So (to use I. Os. own words again, Ex. 2. S. 27.) Si Scripturam vel ab omnibus
percipi^ nolit, and tamen omnes qui doctrinam e^us non observant vel ideo
condemnas; Quid ni millies mill miseres homunciones Deus per tale Verbum,
Medium, Regulam, Legem, Lucem, ludos facere (absit blasphemia) oestimandus sit?
If God give out a Law, Light, Rule, Word of Life to all, which he will condemn
men f^r not obeying, and yet would not have it by All so much as to be seen;
why may not God be thought (which were blasphemy to think) to mock millions of
men, and make them miserable without their personal default, by such a Word,
Means, Rule, Light, or Law, etc. which instead of going forth of Sion and
Jerusalem, to the whole earth, is confined within the little Hill of Sion
itself?

But now the Light within the Letter calls all to, is in All men, the Letter
without not so universal, but extending to very few; therefore the Light
within, not the bare Letter without, is that saving Means, Word, Rule, Law,
etc. besides, if the Letter were the Law, Light, Word, and Rule (which yet was
never seen by most in most Nations, then that respect to Persons and Nations,
which was (once) more to the Jews then any people upon earth, as to the giving
out of a mere outward Letter of his Law to beep, which respect was ended in
Christ, who brake down that Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 20 is
hereby set up again which woe be to him that builds, when God has destroyed*
bu^ up again, that must not come, for though he once gave his Laws and Statutes
to Israel in an outward Letter and Copy, which thing he did not do to any
people else, nor other Nation (if I. O. will believe the Scripture) nor does to
any Nation at all to this day, at their sole rule and guide, yet of a truth I
perceive, says Peter, Act. 10. 34. 35. (and he who is not blinded may perceive
it also) that God is now no respecter of Nations one above another, nor of
persons in the Nations, so as to give his Statutes, Judgments, Laws, Rule, and
saving means of Life (if the Letter were so) to one Nation or Person, and not
in any measure to another, but in every Nation he that fears God (whose fear
is to depart from what evil his Light in the conscience makes manifest) and
works righteousness (which none do who live not by that, and all do who live
by it, for sin is no other then the transgression of that Law (which is the
Light) is accepted with him.

Arg. 14. Again, let me argue with thee I. O. out of thy own words; if others
will not answer affirmatively, and assent to this as truth, yet thou I. O.
must, who asserts it for truth thy self; for this Argument, in ^o^idem verbis,
is no other then thine own; for with reference to Ioh. 1.9. the very place that
we argue the self-same from, thou thy self, though intentionally against us,
yet unawares really arguest for us on this wife; viz. The Light and
Illumination mentioned in this place, Ioh. 1.9. are Spiritual; without all
controversy, and pertaining to the Regeneration by Grace, not Natural, and so
pertaining to the Creation, for in the same sense Ex. 4. S. 24. Lumen and
Illuminationem, quarum hie loot mentio facta est, Spirituales esse at que ad
Renovationem Gratiae, non Naturales at que i^ a^ad Creationem pertinere; quo
sensu enim h^mines tenebrae dicuntur, eo etiam Illuminarr, aliter Aequi'voca
esset Apostoli Oration at, homines Spiritualiter fuisse teneb^as extra
controversiam est.
in which men are said to be darkness, are they said to be enlightened, else the
Apostles speech would be aequivocal; but men are not said only Spiritually,
but universally also to be darkness; therefore are they by Christ not
spiritually only, but universally also enlightened. And as Contrariorum eadem
est ratio, so Contrariorum contraria est ratio, not only in, the same sense in
some respects, but also in other respects, in the very contrary sense to that,
wherein men are darkened by the Devil, are they enlightened, by Christ; but All
mankind is not only spiritually and universally, but also damnably darkened by
the Devil; therefore mankind is not only spiritually and universally, but also
savingly enlightened by Christ.

From what has been said and showed above then I affirm, that the Grace and
Light in the conscience, which in some measure or other is from God and Christ
given in common to All men, is not only universal, but saving; and though most
are by it no more then accused, reproved, condemned, and left without excuse,
and not ^astified nor saved, yet there wants not sufficiency in it to save, and
that men are not saved, but mostly condemned by it, it is only because they
answer not the Mind of God revealed in it, but love the darkness more then it,
which they hate to come to (as Christ saves) because their deeds are evil:
whereas did they but glorify him answerably to what he requires of them, who
no^ exacts nor expects from any the doing more of his Mind and Will, then what
he one time or other manifests to them to be his Will concerning them in
their own consciences, they should not be without excuse, nor stand condemned
in Gods sight, but be accepted, justified, and saved from the wrath which comes
only on the Children of disobedience, it being the Power of God as sufficient
to the excuse and Salvation of those from sin and wrath that obey the measure
of it in themselves, as to subject those to accusation, rejection, judgment,
wrath and condemnation, that rebel against it.

To all the abovesaid Arguments therefore I shall subject this one, after the
prosecution of which, in proof of the sufficiency of that Light to save, which
is given in common to All men, I shall take some notice of R. Bs. and I. Ts.
arguings to the contrary.

Arg. 15. That Light which (rebel'd against) (...) sufficient to accuse and
condemn, and render a man guilty, reprobate, or reproved, is (if obeyed)
sufficient to excuse, clear, justify, save from condemnation, and render
approved.

But the Light in all is sufficient to condemn all that rebel against it,
therefore to save, as abovesaid, such as obey it.

The Minor is your own* the Major I shall proceed in proof of.

And here since I am so near it, I shall take occasion to refell that foolish
conceit and dream of our Divines, in which both thou T. D. and I. O. I. T. R.
B. are all Four found (for in most of this main matter of the light ye run
parallel, and are coincident, except now and then a cross whet each to other)
concerning the non-sufficiency of the Light to save (however improved) though
yielded to be sufficient to leave excuselesse and condemn, for here ye dance
between these two Stages still in your stickles with the Qua. against the
Light, cutting capers to and fro with your legs acrosse, and sliding out of one
f^orry shift into another; when they tell you the true Light of God (which is
but one, and that not natural, but supernatural, though in never so many
different degrees in men's hearts) is common to All, ye yield (for ye cannot
stand against it) that it is so, but then it is not saving; when they prove it
saving, ye yield it is saving, but then not common, which that it is both, I
have showed above against you All; some words only here as to that absurdity,
it is sufficient to leave man inexcusable, if not obeyed, and to condemn him,
but not to save, justify, or render him accepted, if obeyed.

That the whole body of the Gentiles are enlightened (and that by Christ) thou
T. D. do sometimes confess in Terminis (as I have showed above, though at
other times thou denyest it) but thou addest p. 3. 1 Pamp. not by Christ with
the knowledge of salvation (alias secundaunte) with a light sufficient to save,
Salvation is of the Jews (i.e.) among such as have the letter only, and by the
law of the letter without; I speak but thy sense p. 3. 1 Pamp.

I. O. also denies this same light ( however attended to) to be sufficient to
bring to justification of life or salvation; that still he ascribes to his
only, all sufficient Greek and Hebrew Text;, and outward Scriptures, Ex. 4. S.
17. Lumen hoc, utcunque ei attendatur, non est ullo respectu salutare, sed in
rebus omnbius divinis finem ultimum quod attinet mera tenebra and cae^itas: So
S. 20. Sufficientiam quidem habet ad Antapologesian, ad salutem non-item: This
Light indeed is sufficient to accuse and condemn, but not so to save. So T. D.
again p. 40.1 Pamp. natural light (so ye call it still) is to this purpose, to
leave men without excuse, Romans 1.20. so that they cannot say, as we suppose the
Heathens might, Had we known of a remedy for our misery, we would have used it;
But as for salvation, many Ages and Generations never had one offer of it; and
among those who hear the Gospel, it is offered to more then it is intended.

R. B. and I. T. say the same, p. 40. The Gentiles light by Nature (so he calls
it) though insufficient to direct for Justification and Salvation, yet was
useful for two ends.

1. To restrain from sin. 2. Besides this end God has another, that they might
be inexcusable who sinned against the light in them, and God might be justified
in his Sentence and Judgment upon them, Romans 1.20. that they might be without
excuse, who held the Truth [Mark how the light in all is called the Truth,
which men withhold in unrighteousness, therefore it must be the Righteousness
of God it self that is revealed from Heaven and justifies] in unrighteousness,
and when they knew God glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but
were filled with unrighteousness, though they knew the judgment of God, that
they that commit such things are worthy of death, v. 29.30. Whence it is, that
Gods judgment is proved to be according to Truth, Romans 2.2. and God found to
be true, though every man a liar: Ignorance of the law [Mark again how they
call it the law, by which is the knowledge of sin, the transgression, of which
is sin, which Paul calls, spiritual, holy, just, and good, these men all but
natural, and sometimes no better then diabolical] being not to be pleaded by
them, that sin against the innate light of their own spirits; forasmuch as that
fact must needs be voluntary, which is done against the knowledge and judgment
of a man's own conscience.
Thus far these men of the Light within, it condemns (say they) but cannot
save, accuses, cannot excuse.

Rep. Monstrum Horendum, etc. cui lumen ademptum! What are our Ministers become
Monsters now adays, that take on them the name of Seers for poor people, and
yet have never an eye to see the Truth withal themselves? Is there any Law in
the World that (being broken) brings penalty, accusation, cursing, judgment,
or condemnation upon the Transgressors, that does not as well hold guil^less,
acquit, clear, justify, and save from the said cursing and condemnation, its
obeyers and observers?

1. Consider its impossible that any light should leave without excuse, and
condemn a man, when sinned against, and not excuse, justify, and keep out of
condemnation, when it is answered: for what I wot can condemn that man who walks
up in exact obedience to that law or measure of light (be it never so little)
which is lent him in particular to live by? Where there is no Law nor Light at
all, there is no sin (imputed, Romans 5.12.) where no Law is broken there is no
transgression to condemnation, for such sin is Anomia, no other then the
transgression of the Law, and that in such particulars only, wherein it is made
known, for to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin,
Iam. 17. not to him that never did, nor could; for if Abimelech had took to
himself Abraham's Wife for his own (not knowing but that she was his Sister
only as she said) he had been clear, and not guilty, nor had sin been impured
to him, or laid to his charge to condemnation, though the fact had been sin in
it self, yet not sin unto his d^amnation: Whereupon he pleads, when the Lord
comes by the Light o the thing upon him, Will thou slay a righteous Nation? In
the integrity of my heart, and innocence of my ^ands have I done this; and God
answers, Yea I know thou did it in the integrity of thy heart, Genesis 20.4, 5,
6.

Can that possibly leave men without excuse or plea for themselves in their
condemnation, when God comes to enter into judgment with them, that must be
understood and believed by them, never to have put them by the best improvement
thereof, and attendance to it (as I. O. and T. D. say, the light of God in all
does not, utcunque cui attendatur) so much as in possibility of Salvation, nor
was sufficient (had they never rebelled against it) to have excused and
acquitted them in the sight of God? cannot they that have no Light and Grace,
more then what (had they obeyed and answered it) would not have rendered them
accepted in his sight, they being also personally, particularly, peremptorily
predestined to be damned, and to be disobedient to the light, that they might
be damned (as our Divines say from 1 Pet. 2.8. Jude 3.4.) when God comes to
plead in no other but a righteous way against them, and to damn them for that
sore appointed disobedience to it, and to reckon and reason with them thus, Why
would you die, and not live? A: I live, I had much rather ye should have lived
then died, but that ye would your selves destroy your selves, when in me was
help, and I would have helped you, and therefore sent my Son, a Light, to lead
you to life, not to condemn, but to save you, had you walked in it, for hating
and want of walking in which alone it is, that ye now must be condemned for
ever; had I not sent you light, and spoken to you by my self and Son, you had
had no sin; but now seeing ye knew my Will and did it not, in the doing of
which ye should have entered my Kingdom, but stopped your ears, closed your eyes,
despised my counsel, set at naught all my reproof; to you this is sin, for
which he have no cloak, plea, etc. nor excuse, or if you have let us hear it.

I say, cannot such plead again, Lord it is true, thou art out Sovereign, and
may do with thy own as a Potter with his clay, and dash us to pieces at thy
pleasure, but thou art also a God of righteousness and Truth, who have said,
thou will do right, as the Judge of all the earth, and thou will not do that
thy self which thou damnest others for doing, as thou did Pharaoh for
requiring men to make such a tale of brick as they had not sufficiency of straw
for; and we hope thou will not damn us for not doing what thou know we never
could, being never sufficiently empowered by thy self, and we trust thou will
not condemn us (at least not with the sorer condemnation) as accessory to our
own death, and for not coming to Christ that we might have life, and for want
of coming to the saving knowledge of thy Self, Mind, and Will, and for not
obeying the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, and for nor coming to him in his light,
and not believing in him as our Savior, and for want of improving our talents
to the utmost to our salvation, for non-improvement of which alone, and for
non-obedience to which Light and Gospel alone, and non-belief only in which
Christ, thou now tellest us we must perish, which Gospel had we obeyed, which
Christ had we believed in as our, which saving knowledge of thee if we had had,
which talent or talents had we improved to the best, we should not have
perished, but have had everlasting life; fora^much as it was told us for truth
from thee by these that say they are thy Ministers (if they did not lie) and
however they made us believe so, that we were never put into any capacity for
life and salvation by all that best Grace that thou vouchsafedit to u^: they
told us, not only that many Ages and Generations never had one offer of
salvation from thee, but also, that in these very Nations where thy Gospel,
rich Grace, and large Love (as they call it at least) is proclaimed and held
forth, in words, proffers, preachings, and pretenses to all, yet there is not
one of an hundred (that is, as they say, no more then the personally elected
ones, which are very few also, as they say, in comparison of the rest, that
were a certain determinate, but much more numberless number also, as
unchangeably reprobated from everlasting, without reference to good or evil
foreseen to be done by them in time) that the salvation so universally offered
in thy name, was ever so truly intended to by thee as it was tendered; and that
the Savior of the World, of whom they say, He came to save not the righteous,
but sinners and ungodly ones, to seek out that which is lost, and of whom they
say, Thou in thy love sentest him, not to condemn, but save the World, was sent
to save none but that foresaid few, set number of elect ones, of which number
we could find little ground to hope we were (since an hundred to one were not)
any more then if an hundred were sentenced to die, and but one of them to be
saved, and a Pardon should be proclaimed to them all conditionally, that every
man believed for himself, that he were the man to whom the Pardon is intended,
any one man could have ground of confidence, that himself was he; and so we
were quite discouraged by the Preachers of thy grace from believing the
Salvation to be intended to us, since an hundred to one it was not; and they
told us, that the said Savior did not die for all, but for a few, even the
said choice ones, whereupon, though he was held forth to us all, to be believed
in, as the common Salvation, in thy revealed Will (as they call it) on pain of
eternal condemnation to every one of us, that should not believe in him, as our
Lord, and our God, and Savior, and with promises or eternal life to us all,
conditionally we would all so believe; yet we could not see how this could
rationally hang together, or how we could all truly have believed such a thing,
every man of us for himself (without the most of us should have believed a lie,
and we thought, whatever they said, that thou would have us all believe no
more then the Truth, and not have any of us believe, much less be damned for
not believing a lie) we could not see, though they bad us every one believe in
Christ as ours, how the most of us had a Christ to believe in as ours, since
they told us al^o, he was not intended to all to whom he is offered, but to a
very few even of them, and since we were by themselves, who bade us believe in
him, every of us as our Salvation, bad to believe this doctrine also, on pain
of being held Armenians, Socinians, and Heretics in the Church, that he did
not offer himself a ransom for all (as the Scripture in plain terms says he
did) but as much as be is offered to us all, yet he offered himself not for
all, but only for the foresaid few; and that by A^l and every one in the
Scripture, and the lost ones, and sinners, and ungodly, and the whole world,
which he is said to die for, we must at no hand understand A^l indeed, nor
think that thy meaning was as thy words imported, nor according to the literal
sense of them, for then we might mistake thee; but that by All and every one,
the whole world, thou meanest but a very few only, and by sinners and ungodly,
thy Elect ones only, neither could we see (upon the account of their personal,
particular principles) as universal as thy tenders of Christ to us all were, or
at least theirs in thy name, that we could possibly believe the truth, if we
should all have believed in him as ours, or that we could all have a share in
him; and we saw, that it being so, that he was not intended to be a Savior to
every man to whom he is offered, some men had no Savior to believe in, as
their, and for ought we saw, 'twas an hundred to one but we might be the men,
and to believe it that he was ours, we had no ground from their doctrine for
such a Faith, and so might if we had, yea must most of us, if we had believed
it, have believed a lie; and tho say, thou will damn men for not believing
the truth, and will thou now damn all us for believing the truth? for he was
not intended by thee, if our Ministers did not belie thee to us, to be our
Savior who are Reprobates, and we did believe him not to be so, according as
it proves, and so our Faith was of the truth, and if we all had believed it,
that he died for every of us, it had been a lie (if our learned Leaders did not
lie) and will thou now damn us for not believing that, which if we had
believed, all of us, an hundred to one, but the most of us must have believed a
lie, and that which was not so? if we had believed it we had been deceived, for
'twas not so, it their doctrine be true; and now we did not believe it, we are
to be condemned, because we believe not in thy Son, and apply him not every one
to our selves, in particular, to whose Salvation he was never appointed, but in
thy unalterable Decree before ever we were born ( though offered to us a ours
upn equal terms (as they say) with the Elect, whose only in particular be^is)
designed altogether to another purpose, even to be the Salvation of some few,
but the unavoidable further condemnation of us Reprobates, and only to leave us
the more excuseless in our suffering of it.

And howbeit its true, we did not obey the Gospel, nor do thy will, we must
need confess, in order unto life, yet it was never savingly nor sufficiently
manifested to us in all our lives (as, they said) nor was any measure of that
true Light in which is the Life, nor one grain of that (as our Divines told us)
which is sufficient for us to bring us to life vouchsafed, but a Natural Light,
in attending to which, had we ever so well heeded or improved it, 'twould not
have helped us, imparted to us only, a certain common Grace and Light (as they
told us) which had we answered, it could have availed us nothing, as to
Salvation; and a Talent, which had we traded with (as they tell us) and
doubled, it ^ad increased into but more of the same kind, and common sort, not
obtained any. Special, nor (what ere the Scripture seems to say to the
contrary, which we poor ignorants durst not presume to walk by our sense of,
but to take, as interpreted by our Textmen and Churchmen) have let us into thy
joy.

And whereas thou swearest thou would not have had us died, but much rather
lived if we would, had we but known indeed, as we never did ( since we were told
that was Free Will, a most fearful damnable doctrine) that we had had but
Arbitrium Liberatum, a freed will vouchsafed us from thee, whereby to choose
life, when life and death was set before us, or but a power wrought in us from
thee to have willed and done what thou requiredst, we might happily have chosen
Life, and have come and to turned thee, then we had either turned to thee, or
else been utterly inexcusable (we confess) and thy ways had been as equal as
thou say they are, and our blood had been altogether on our own heads, and
our destruction of our selves alone; had there been but any of that sufficient
help that is in thee vouchsafed to us from thee, it would habe been tried then
whether we would have turned to thee or no: But alas, Lord, thou know we
were told ( and we thought it our duty on pain of damnation to take all for
truth that our Churchmen, and Schoolmen, and learned Doctors, and well read
men in the Scriptures, and Unviersity-made Minister told us) that all men had
not, and that few have so much as sufficient Light or power at all to will or
do, or think good communicated to them from thee; we know indeed that without
thee nothing can be done, and that all man's sufficiency to good must come from
thee: But now thou queriest of us, why we did not do thy will, and wilt judge
us for the neglect of it; we beseech thee Lord consider and pity us, we never
knew ye that we were under power and possibility, form the most, and best, and
greatest measure of ability, Grance and Light given to us to know, or do that
will, thou now art going to require with vengeance the violation of at our
hands; for if it were so, as some said indeed (viz. the Qua. seeming also to
bring Scripture for it) that we and all men have, or had, though n^ne of our
selves, yet some, and so much in our selves of it, as we should have stood
justified, accepted, uncondemned in improving, and not have had that sin thou
say we have now no cloak for; had we known it, we hope we should have done
according to it, but being out of hope of having strength to overcome, we sat
still in di^couragement and despair, for our Ministers told us, the Qua. were
lyar's and seducers, not to be believed, and their doctrine damuable; ou^
Ministers belyed thee to us, as a hard Master, reaping where thou have not
sowed, and gathering where thou have not strawed, and requiring that of us,
even that we should turn to thee and live, which thou (as they say) do not
enable by Light and Grace enough, or suitable thereto, scarce one of a
thousand, and so we were disheartened from trading with the talent we had, and
hid, and laid it not out, as believing we had as good do nothing at all, as
nothing to the purpose; and upon many more such like considerations as there,
seeing we were but-mocked by our Ministers, telling us of Life, and tendering it
to us, yet telling us as their faith, and as that which must be ours, that it
belongs but to few, and that this was thy Secret Will, whatever thy Revealed
Will was (they profested also to be men acquainted with thy secrets) we gave
our selves over to security, to eat, and drink, and do no good, and satisfy
our wills in evil, for let us do better or worse, or the best and most which
the best and most of any of us Reprobates could do, we saw we could but die;
and if we happened not to be of the few Elected on es to life, that are
ordained to be brought to it some time or other (as a thousand to one we saw we
were not) we must unavoidably die, and perish without hope or remedy: From such
evil communications of our Clergy, which corrupted good manners, concluding,
that we could do no good without thee, and had no grace to do good given us
from thee, we said, Let us eat, and drink, for tomorrow we di^; therefore let
us be excused Lord and held guiltless, the rather because we were in ignorance
and unbelief of this truth, that we could do ought toward our own Salvation by
any power or measure of sufficient grace imparted to us from thy self, or at
least show us mercy as thou did to Paul, who obtained it of thee, that in him
thou might show forth an example of thy long-suffering goodness and patience
to poor sinners in ^ime to come, even to a^l that ever should live ungodly, 1 Timothy 1. for as he, so we, seeing our Teachers traduced us so to think of the
Qua. that now we find hold the truth, supp^sed innocently, or as least
ignorantly, that they were Enemies to God, Christ, Scriptures, Word of God,
Righteousness of Christ, Justification by him alone, seduced and seducres, and
the vilest persons on earth, and so thought verily that we did thee service in
persecuting, killing, stoning, stocking, mocking, haling them out of
Synagogues, and into prisons, little deeming what we now see, that men are not
accepted and condemned the more for not knowing so much (as our Professors tell
us) of this and that notion of doctrine, and point of Divinity in the head, as
for not doing that (be it little or more) that is already made known with all
the heart, and that had we done thy will but so far as '^is made known, we (as
Christ said indeed) should have known more and more of the different doctrines
that were, which were of God, and which men, for mere money and maintenance,
flesh and livelihoods sake, taught only of themselves.

I say, may not the Reprobates, even in these Nations so plead? and can the
Light and Grace of God given and tendered to them, leave them without excuse at
all, if it be not at all sufficient, if never so well improved, to lead them to
Life and Salvation? Can the Law in their hearts accuse them doing ill, and not
justify them doing well? Will it kill them if they break it, and kill them if
they obey it also? but how much more excuse the poor Ethnicks (as ye call them)
that have nothing but that Light within of Nature (as ye term it) which ye your
selves sometimes seem to confess, and say excused them; as T. D. page 40. We
may suppose the heathen might say, had we known of a remedy, we would have made
use of it; yea, thou deniest not T. D. nor do any of you, but that the work of
the Law written in the hearts of All is accusing and excusing, and that the
said Law within is sufficient to both these, I. O. page 43. owns the same,
saying, that by the Light within, the Heathens thoughts excuse or accuse,
according as the Cons^ience thereby enlightened bears inward witness both of the
Ius, and the fact, and that the moral instinct of good and evil that is within,
by that is seconded by a self-judgement, i. e. an inward justifying, clearing,
and acquitting, as its answered, or else a terrifying and condemning as its
transgrest: This therefore is another argument, of the common Lights
sufficiency to save from condemnation such as walk by it, from which I may
conclude it.

Arg. 16. That which can and does excuse its observers, does not only serve to
restrain sin, and to leave he transgressors of it without excuse, but also save
from condemnation; but the Law in the heats of Heathens, excuses it observers,
witness Rom.2.15. from which place ye are fain all to confess the same, where
its said, That by the work of the Law which the Heathen showed written in their
hearts, their inward thoughts not only accuse, but excuse; yea, very Ethnicks
are not left without Plea or excuse by it, if it be not sufficient to save (as
is showed above) asd as T. D. confesses, page 40. 1 Pamp. We may suppose (quoth
he) the Heathen might say, had we known of a remedy, we would have made use of
it; therefore it not only leaves without excuse, when men violate it, but saves
from condemnation such as obey it.

That Is a strange unheard of kind of Law, that kills as well its keepers as its
breakers, or that takes vengeance on the violaters of it, and cannot keep the
keepers of it from the vengeance of it neither; yet T. D. says, page 5. 2
Pamp. The Light condemns the Heathen when they dis^b^y it, but cannot save them
though they do obey it; indeed he adds without Christ; and so say I too; but
that Light is in them from Christ, and so if it save them, as it does if they
obey it, it saves them not without him, for its he that saves them by it; but
our Diviners Divine enough to the contrary, to the utter confutation of
themselves in this, when by their own confession, the common Light in the
Conscience, they more commonly, then properly call Natural, does not only
accuse such as go from it, but also excuse such as keep to and walk by it
within themselves; for is not Justification, noncondemnation, absolution, and
consequently Salvation from guilt and wrath, where excusation is, as well as
guilt, wrath, and condemnation, where accusation, and no excuse? Is it possible
there should be any condemnation, where no transgression, but an answering to
the Law lent men to live by? for sin (as before) is but the transgression of
the Law or Light that every one has, and as where no Law is, so where no
breach is of the Law where it is, there is no transgression, and where the
Conscience gives a good answer, and the heart by the Light in it, that shows
Ius and Factum, condemns not, does God condemn? is there not acceptance,
boldness, and confidence toward him, as there is fear, terror, wrath, and
condemnation from God where it does condemn? yea, your selves confess it, yet
the Law in the heart, the Light is sufficient to accuse, yea, and excuse well
and ill doing respectively, but not to save, justify, or give life, say our
light treacherous Prophets, dark Divines, and lifeless Leaders.

Ob. The Letter kills, cannot give life.

Rep. True, but why is it? but because its desobeyed, and cannot give ability
to any to do what it requires: The Law, or Light, and Gospel, and All, kills
such as transgress it, I say, the Gospel it self condemns, but whom is it? none
but such as hate and take not heed to it, that thereby they may come from under
the curse and death, into the life it calls for, else, it being the power of
God to the Salvation of such as believe in it, Life should be by the Light, one
way more then it could come by by the Letter; for the Letter could keep them
that keep it, from the Curse denounced in it to the breakers of it, yet cannot
give any an ability to keep it: But the light is not only able to acquit,
justify, clear, absolve, secure, and save from wrath all such as believe in,
and obey it, but al o to enable such as look to it, and empower them more and
more to obey and walk by it (and consequently by the letter, which cannot be
transgressed by such as abide in the light) all such as singly come to it, and
continue waiting on the Lord in it.

Object. The Law cannot give life, if it could, righteousness should be by the
Law, Gal. 5.21.

Rep. True, the Law in the letter, the Old Testament, which he there speaks of,
as in opposition to the New, which is the Gospel, the Light, and Spirit,
cannot, in regard of the weakness of flesh to fulfill it, and its weakness to
enable any to the fulfilling of it; for the Righteousness declared and required
therein must be performed, or else it utters nothing but accusation and
cursing, and yet to perform that Righteousness, the letter can no wise empower.

But the Law, which is the light in the Spirit, that is and comes from Christ
into the Conscience, is the Law of Life, forasmuch as, howbeit it takes
vengeance en men's inventions, and ministers first judgment and condemnation to
the transgressors for transgression, and wrath on the evil doer and his evil
deeds, yet when it has condemned sin in the flesh, wherein it is committed, so
long, till it has condemned it out of the flesh, and brought forth judgment,
in th^se that wait on it, unto victory over the sin that is judged, it
ministers the righteousness, and the peace, and the liberty from the sin, and
the Life of God it self, it requires, calls for, and through the Judgment
leads too, and then justifies those whom it has this way enabled to perform it.

In both which respects (though the Law of the letter is not so) yet the Law of
the Spirit of Life, which is the Light in Christ, and in us from him, since it
both 1. enables the followers of it to fulfill it; and 2. secures from wrath and
condemnation the fulfillers of it, who e're they are ( Jew or Ge^tile, such as
have the letter without, or have it not) that obey it; it is not sufficient
only to accuse the rebels against it, (...), and condemn them within
themselves, but also (as utterly insufficient to save and bring to life,
utcunque ei attendentes, such as never so punctually observe and perform it, as
our Preachers prate it is) altogether, even every way sufficient to save to the
utmost, all such as come to God by Christ, from whom it comes, and to Christ in
it: According to Romans 8.1,2,3,4. There is now therefore no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the
Law of sin and death. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Thus then it is evident, that the Law of God (which is not the letter of it)
but the light, is powerful and sufficient to save (save only that men turn
from, and transgress it, and that it is universal, and in all men, is as
evident out of Romans 2.13, 14. where it is said, that those ye call Heathen, who
have not the outward literal copy of it, do show the work of the Law written in
their hearts, which w^rk of the Law T. D. (who yet grants the Law it self to be
spiritual) in his mere natural understanding, calls natural, as if the work of
the Law of God, which is Spiritual and perfect, were not spiritual as the Law
it self is, which work or effect of the Law, Psalm 19.7, 8, 9. is said to be
the conversion of the s^ul, rejoicing the heart, enlightening the eyes,
cleansing, purifying, etc. and not only the showing of sin and good, and
censuring for the obedience o^ disobedience (as T. D. dotes) who undertaking to
teach G. W. what the work of the Law is, and how it differs from the Law it
self, p. 3.2 Pamp. understands neither what he himself says, nor whereof he
affirms, which works of the Law the Scripture there mentions, which di^covers
T. Ds. ignorance of the works or effects of the Law, if they be natural I know
not what ^s* spiritual; and yet to get out of that absurdity, in proof of it he
runs into another, saying in the next clause thus; viz. the Heathen do by
nature the things contained in the Law; as if that were corrupt nature in the
Heathen that did conform them to the Law; when as the nature there spoken of,
by which they are said to do the things of the Law, is, that rature, after
which God at first made man upright, and after his own Image, in righteousness
and holiness of truth, before they sinned and run out into their own
inventions, and so fell short thereof* which nature and image is in it self,
^are, divine, perfect in reason and understanding, and doing the Mind and Will
of God, though men mostly become degenerated. from that into another swinish,
brutish nature, even the nature and image of the Serpent, the subtillest of
beasts, of the Devil and Satan himself, and so of men (as they were made)
become beasts of the field, and of noble Vines of Gods planting in his Garden
at first, and wholly a right seed, turning from the light into the darkness of
their own vain thoughts and imaginations, became a seed of evil doers, and a
degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto the Lord; in which sta^u corrupto, and
by which contrary nature (not created by God, but contracted to themselves) the
other nature, image, and glory of God, which when man sinned crept inward, lies
hid and covered in them, till by the Light of God, which is given to that end,
they are, as by a line or clew, led down into themselves, and through the
laborynth of their own learning and lusts, which lies a top of it, to find it
out again, and till by the said light the house be swept, and the lost money
seen, and that swinish nature destroyed, and the lost sheep sought out and
saved, and till the works and image of the Serpent, who has in the dark stamped
his own likeness on them, be again defaced, and till the tares which he has
sowed in the night, while men slept, in the field or inner world of the heart,
and that earth which has overgrown the other, and brought forth bria^s and
thorns, weeds, neetles, thistles, etc. which is accursed, be burnt up and
consumed, from above that which brings forth herbs meet for the Masters use, to
which the blessing is, by the spirit of judgment and of burning; in which
selfish nature, which is that of Cain, and Ishmael, and Esau (the three Elder)
that have no acceptance, men will be sacrificing, serving, and glorying in
Righteousnesses and Church-works of their own devising, which All are
abomination with God, because done in that same nature still in which they are
disobedient, sinning, and serving diverse lusts, and so by that nature become as
well in their very righteousness, as in their wickedness, children of Gods
wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. Tit. 3.2. incurring his displeasure by their doing of such
things, as are not only besides, but against the Law or Light of God in the
Conscience, and contrary to that pure primitive nature, by which only (as men
by the light come back to it, as many do, without the letter) the things
contained in the holy Law can be done: And this contradicts that grossly absurd,
sottish, false, blind, and ignorant Assertion of T. D. which as A. Parker
related to me, he uttered in a discourse with him at Sandwich, before many
people, since those three more public disputes held by R. H. G. W. and my self
with him and his Confederates and Associates against us (who yet are at odds
amongst themselves, some Prclatick, some Presbyterian, some Independent) viz.
that it is the corrupt nature, by which the Nations are said, Romans 2. to do the
things contained in the Law: Which is, I say, the grossest absurdity, false
doctrine, and contradiction to the Scripture that can well-nigh possibly be
given; for by that corrupt, sinning nature (by the yet T. D. is not ashamed,
and blushes not to say, men do the things c^ntained in Gods Law, alias, keep,
obey, observe, conform to Gods Law, which is the pure light shining in the
Conscience, that is, spiritual, holy, just, and good, that never did, nor can
p^ssibly consent to the least sin, or do other then reprove and condemn it in
the heart.) I say by that corrupt nature (which men have by the fall from God,
who made them upright, contracted to themselves, which is the very enmity it
self against God and all good) men do, and can do no other, then sin against
God, and do the things that are not contained or commanded in, but are contrary
to the Law, and walk in the trespasses and sins, in which they lie dead,
according to the common course and custom of the World while it lies in the
wickedness, not minding the light, according to the Prince of the power of the
Air, the Spirit that works in the children of disobedience, and have their
conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
of the mind, drinking in iniquity as naturally as the beast drinks in water,
without satisfaction, working uncleanness with greediness, 1 John 2.1, 2, 3,
14, 18, 19. and so are by that nature children of wrath: But in respect of
which said pure primitive nature some Gentiles that have not the letter, but
the Light of God, and Christ within, leading them back into it out of that
corrupt one, by which Light they are a law to themselves before God, are said
to perform by nature what things are required in the Law, which are (as ye say)
moral duties indeed, yet such as (saving your ignorance in that) are truly
righteous and acceptable with God, and evangelical, being done in Christ,
though they know not his person, whilst done in his light; for men may do much
by the light that comes from the Sun, while they see not the body of the Sun it
self, and be guided and strengthened to do much by the Light of God and Christ,
that is his Will, and acceptable, and good, though yet they have not heard of,
nor known him so much, as some that hear and read of such things by the letter,
as to his appearance in that body of flesh or mere external incarnation;
Witness Cornelius, whose Prayers and Alms were heard and accepted, being done
by one that feared God, and eschewed the evil, which by the light he had
discovered, whilst as yet he had not heard of Christ's personal Birth, Life,
Death, or Resurrection, Acts 10.1.2. etc.

Yea, every moral duty that is done in some obedience to the light that is in
the Conscience, and not for base ends and glory of men (which ends have been
and are found more among many Literarists, Jews, and Christians too, then among
many that by them have been (lighted as Heathens) are Evangelical also, yea,
whatever is done from an honest, and not selfish principle in the Light or Law
in the heart, is of the same nature as that both Moral and Evangelical Law is,
even spiritual, and holy, and just, and good, and all transgression that is
acted against the Law, is not only against the Light of God and Christ, whose
Commandment that is, and against the Gospel or free Promise of life held forth
also therein, but also against nature, not that corrupt na^u^e into which men
are run (for the sin is committed in that) but that divine nature, or
similitude of God, or right Reason, in which men stood at first, til they ran
out into a reasonless kind of Reason of their own, which is not after God, a
remnant of whose nature is in man still, and his light in the Conscience, which
is right Reason it self, leads to it^ and therefore all sinners, who are in the
deeds of darkness, and out of the true faith of Christ, which is in his light,
are said to do things contrary to nature (though pleasing and answerable to the
viperous nature they are gone out into) Romans 1. 24: 25: 26: 27: 28: 29: 30: 31:
32. and to be without natural affection, or against nature, unnatural and
unreasonable, 2 Timothy 3.3. 2 These. 3.2. and wicked, for all men that have the
true Light in them, have not Faith in it.

I say then, the Heathen who have not the letter, by the Light of God, which is
saving, are a law unto themselves, and do show the work of the Law written in
their hearts, their Conscience also, by the Law enlightened, bearing witness
within them, and their thoughts thereby accusing and excusing one another so
that the Law is not only a light, and saving, but universal also and common, in
some measure, to all men.

To which may be added as an Argument ( Ad hominem at least to the stopping of
their mouth) in proof of the universality of Christ's enlightening All men,
another consideration out of R. B. and I. T. his own Book, and that is, the
need that all men that come into the world have of Light from Christ, and the
universal necessity of Christ's enlightening them all, because of that universal
corruption and blindness, which is asserted by them to be in all men at birth.

P. 24, 25. John 1.9. Where it is said of man coming i^to the world, Observe
here how these men contradict one another; I. O. says that clause, Coming into
the World, relates to the light, so as to say, the true Light coming into the
world enlightens every man: I. T. says nay, coming into the world relates to
man, so as to say, every man coming into the world, see how they concur
together by the ears among themselves.
must be meant (say they) of humane birth, and accordingly this point is thence
(say they) deducible. That every one that comes into the world needs light from
Christ, which Position (say they) is true, 1. Because every man is bo^n
destitute of spiritual light in the things of God, concerning his duty, and the
way of salvation. 2. Because every man is liable to death, and trouble, and
wrath, and evil from God, as he is born into the world; and Christ came into
the world to remove both these sorts of darkness, and none else can do it.

These are the express words of these two men, R. B. I. T. from which howbeit
they most unreasonably conclude against our doctrine, saying, The former of
these overthrows the main Position of the Qua. That every man has a light
within him sufficient to guide him, so as that following it, he may please God,
and be saved without the light of Scriptures, or preaching of public Teachers.

Yet I do and may most truly argue and conclude, to the fuller establishing of
the said Position from their own words on this wise.

Arg. 17. If every man that comes into the world needs light from Christ, and
there be a necessity of Christ's enlightening, in regard that every man is
irrecoverably lost else, and not some only, then Christ does enlighten (so far
at least as to a possibility for salvation) every man, and not few men only;
otherwise God were (as is abovesaid) a most apparent respecter of men's persons
(as he is not) and his ways were not equal (as they are) and his words were
not true (as they are) when he says he would have all men to be saved (unless
they will die) and to come to the knowledge of the truth, and such like; nor
were his clearing himself and charging of men that perish right (as it is) when
he says, their destruction is of themselves, but in him is their help; nor
were his Judgments just and righteous (as they are) in condemning men for not
believing in the light, while they had it, when they never had it, nor were his
pretended great Love, rich Grace, matchless Mercy to All people in Christ's
birth, Luke 2. ^ John 3.16: 17: 18. so sincere (as it is) but ra^h^r feigned;
since (else) he did not so much as put them all into a possibility of coming out
of their m^sery, but rather left a thousand to one to perish in it unavoidably
without remedy; nor were his fairest offers of salvation and life to all, if
they will walkin his light, so fair (as they are) but mere mockage, since else
he had not given them any measure of any such light as could lead them to it;
nor were his saying, What could I have done more for them that I have not done?
any other then a lie (as it is not) since else he had not done so much as was
needful, yea so absolutely necessary toward their living, that it was not
possible they should live without it, when he both could, should, and ought in
equity, by some measure of true light, to have made them capable to come to
life, and see their way to it.

But every man needs light from Christ, and there is necessity (in respect that
every man ( else) is blinded by him to his destruction, as well as some men) of
Christ's enlightening with his true and saving light, every man as well as some
men only; This we need not prove, since R. B. and I. T. assert it so universally
of every man that comes into the world.

Therefore undoubtedly, more or less, Christ has with true saving light
enlightened every man, and not some few men only.

CHAP. V.
I Shall now betake my self to take some brief view of R.Bs. and I.Ts. trivial
talk, and to consider some of their inconsiderable arguings, and confused
oppositions to the contrary, at least so many as whereby men may judge probably
of what sort the rest are, who in disproof of the saving sufficiency of the
Light in every man (which they call sometimes the Light that comes from God,
sometimes every man's own light) to lead him unto God, have mustered up together
no less then thirty or forty Arguments and Reasons, as they call them, not one
of all which has so much weight in it, as can truly render it worthy of the
name of a Reason in that case its brought for: They lie all together in one
Litter, between page 42. and 54. making up the whole sixth of those nine dark
Sermons, and no small part of the seventh, not more seemingly for, then
shamefully against the true Light there said to enlighten every man that comes
into the world, prated out from John 1.9. by I. Tom. and backed by R. Baxter.

Their thirty Arguments, to which they add ten Reasons of their own, they say,
are out of Scripture, and so I confess they are in one sense, there being not
one at all of them to be found either in, or so much as truly deduced from the
Scripture.

The Scriptures the first Argument is ( far) fetched from, are Romans 3. 11. None
understands, none seeks after God, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man discerns not
the things of the Spirit, etc. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Every imagination of man's
heart is only evil, etc. Jer. 10.14. Every man is brutish in his knowledge,
Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things; whence they argue thus,
Their Light, of whom these things are said, is not a safe rule to guide them
into the pleasing of God, but these things are said of All, or some men;
therefore every man's Light in him, is not a safe Guide to God.

Rep. We confess these things are said not of some only, but of All men, as
they are in the fall, who are All gone out of the way: But what of that? Are
All men therefore, because gone out without any measure of Light sufficient to
guide into the way again? in that Ali^nation none seeks God; Are All then
without any of that true Light, wherein God is to be found of such as will seek
him in it? All natural men (such as All are, till they turn to be led by the
Light and Spirit) by their mere animal wisdom, see not spiritual things: Are
All therefore without the least measure of that Spirit and spiritual Light;
that shows them, viz. the Law of God in their minds, which is spiritual,
lusting in them against the flesh, though they are carnal? every man's
imagination and thoughts are evil, every man is b^^itish in his own knowledge,
every man's heart, as he is gone out from the truth told by God within himself,
after the Devil that abode not in it, is there therefore true Light in no man
that manifests the deceits of his heart in some wise to him? Is that truth in
no man which he is to abide in, and which if he abide in it, it will teach him
the Will of God? I say, is no measure of this in no men? For this Argument of
these men, could it conclude any man to be without the said sufficient Light
(as it does not, there being no consequence in it) would consequently conclude
every man to be without it, as he is in the fall, and come out into the world,
and then instead of reading that Text, viz. John 1.9. that I. Tombs talks from,
and R. B. repeats his Sermons on thus; That was the true Light that enlightens
every man that comes into the world, as it is in the Bible; or thus, That was
the true Light that enlighteneth the Elect, or some few men, or some of all
sorts, etc. as I. O. T. D. R. B. I. T. interpret it besides the literal sense
and proper import of the term every man, we must henceforth read thus* viz. The
true Light that enlighteneth no man that comes into the world, every man being
brutish, every man's heart (till he comes to the Light that is come to him)
being deceitful as well as any man's; and so the saving, Grace and Light shall
no more be coop't up in a corner among a few, but be allowed no place in the
world of any man's heart at All; but who will say thus (as they say in effect)
but such as are become brutish, and besotted with them?

And if they tell us they speak and mean not of Gods Light here, but of man's
own Light, as no good guide to God, what do they band against the Q^akers for
then, and bend the force of their frivolous Argument against them? who look
upon every man's own light, and thoughts, and imagination of his heart, wisdom,
knowledge, and understanding, which he is gone out into, from Gods Light, to be
natural, and weak, and foolishness, and darkness, as much and more then
themselves (who are yet found in no other) for whatever they mean when they
prate against the Light the Qua. testify to, calling it natural, man's own, and
blindne^s, and darkness, which Andabato um more, they confusedly fight against
in their dark minds, under the terms sometimes of the true Light Christ bids
men believe in, that they may be the children of it, which is no other then the
Gospel Light of God and Christ himself, sometimes of every man's own Light, man's
own thoughts, imaginations, Merae tenebrae and cecitas, quoth I. O. of it.
yet Merae tenebrae and cecitas, quoth I. O. of it.
the Qua. plead for nothing in man that is merely of man, but for that Light
alone which is of God, and by which what is to be known of God, God manifests
in man, yea in All men, the very Heathen that have not the Scripture, which
Light is that Law in the mind, which is not evil nor natural, but holy, just,
good, and spiritual, by which alone, though these mere Humanists and
Naturalists discern them not, the things of the Spirit of God are discerned,
every man in the fall is become brutish, and, like the bruit beast of the
field, lives more by sense then reason, is not regulated by right reason in
what he does, it may as well therefore be concluded, that All men have not the
least measure of reason in them, while they live besides it, as these men
conclude from men's living besides the Light, in the deeds of darkness, that
therefore they have no Light in them; but an Argument it is rather, that these
Pastors are like those Ier. 10.14.21. who are become brutish, and have not
sought the Lord in his Light, in that they argue so bruitishly, not only
besides the Spiritual Light of the Lord, which would lead them to a right
understanding of the truth, but also below that common sense and reason that
naturally belongs to man, for which therefore woe unto them, they shall not
prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered, for which a great commotion
is already come out of the North, to make their Cities, their Assemblies
defolate, as a Den of Dragons.

Thus far as to R.B. and I.Ts. first Argument, by which men may judge of the
constitution of the rest, which are all of the same complexion.

The second is drawn from Act. 17.22.23. Romans 1.21.22.23. the sum of which in
short is this; The most improved Gentiles (for all that Light which was in
them) were in all things too superstitious, were carried about to dumb Idols as
they were led, had their foolish hearts darkened about their thoughts of God,
worshipped him ignorantly, and such like; therefore they, much less the most
barbarous, and consequently none of the Gentiles, who had not the Scripture,
nor such other teaching as Gods people were taught by, had not a Light in them
that was sufficient without the Scripture to guide them to God, etc.

Rep. That the Gentiles were generally superstitious, fool^sh, dark, blind,
idolatrous, and ignorant in their worshippings of God, I deny not; howbeit, I
close not cordially with that clause (the most improved) in the Antecedent, for
'twas through non-improvement of the Light they had; and because at the best
they were ill improved in it, that they became so, for had they heeded the
Light, they had been led out of Idols, to the knowledge of God by it, for what
is to be known of God, is by it manifest in them, Romans 1.19. But what if the
best improved Gentiles were so as ye say, vain in their thoughts, etc. they
might have better improved the Light then they did, and the Reason why they
were so fortishly superstitious was, not because they had not sufficient Light
to lead them in the true knowledge of God and his Worship, and direct them to
discern the truth, but because they looked not to the Light, because they went
out from the Light they had, by which they had some measure of the knowledge of
God, into their own wisdom, leaning to their own understanding, and so became
vain; therefore is it said, They were without excuse, because when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, and professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of God into an
Image, and changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more then the Creator, not liking to retain him (and that true worship
of him, which the Light would have led them to) in their knowledge, and the
Gentiles there were not so vain and foolish, ignorant of God, and superstitious
for want of Light to guide them, as R. B. T. D. dote they were, to Gods true
worship, but for want of being guided by the Light they had: So what is this to
their purpose? Who sees not the blindness, weakness, folly, nakedness, and
falsity of this argument? one absurdity in which also more notable in it then
the rest is this, viz. that in the conclusion, is inferred aliud a negaro,
another thing then that which is denied by the Qua. and undertaken to be proved
against them by themselves; for therefore, say they, the Gentiles who had not
the Scripture, nor such other teaching as Gods people are taught by, had not a
Light sufficient, etc. the words in which conclusion are true, though nihil ad
Rhombum, if there be any such Gentiles that have neither Scripture, nor such
other teaching (Mark that phrase foisted in by them, whereby they conclude
another matter then is denied by us in the Question in hand; for the Gentiles
that have not the other teaching, i. e. that of the Light within, have not the
Light within that is true, who doubts it, but none such are to be found that
have not that Light and Grace in some measure by which God teaches his and Al^
people, though most Gentiles are found destitute of an outward Letter) as God
teaches his People by, which other teaching is that of the Light within, which
is that other, yea, that chief teaching God teaches his and All people by,
whether they learn by it yea or nay, I shall say more to them when I see them,
but at present I know none such, nor ever have done.

Before I pass to the third Argument of R. B. I. T. from this second, I shall
consider their tenth and thirteenth Arguments, which are co-inciden, and in
effect the same with this second, by which three Arguments (which yet in
substance are but one) I. O. and T. D. both are found fencing in their fool^sh
minds, together with them, against All men's having a sufficient Light to guide
them into the true saving knowledge of God, his worship, and the mystery of his
Kingdom, about which I have dealt with T. D. already in p. of my first
Exercitation, who All urge peoples ignorance of the things of God, his Worship,
and mystery of his Gospel and Kingdom, in proof of their want of a Light
whereby they might know them, which is such an idotish, ignorant piece of
arguing, as he makes who argues a non actu ad non potentiam, a non esse ad non
posse, which is as silly as to conclude, that because a man sits still,
therefore he cannot go, or he has no power to walk, because when he shuts his
eyes, and neither will, nor does see the Sun, therefore he never could see it,
for which a man would be hissed out of the Schools by very Boys.

As for R. B. and I. T. they are so enamoured with the Eminency and and
strength of this their argument (the childishness and weakness of which is
evident to any, save such whose own it is so, that (being blind at home) they
will not own the blindness and absurdness of it that they seem to put more
stress upon it, then on all the rest beside.

Hereupon it has more then one, or two, or three places in their book, viz.
not only in the 43 page forecited; but also page 28. and page 29. where they
conclude, that because men stumble, and their imaginations are evil, their
hearts deceitful and wicked, therefore they want light to direct them, and to
rectify their thoughts; if men stumble and fall, its an Argument (say they)
they want Light, of such corruption want of Light to guide us in the way to
happiness (oh gross) is a chief part: Ieremies sayings, Every man is bruit^sh,
etc. the heart is deceitful, etc. do express such a destitution of Light,
Truth, etc. Also page 40. and 47. where their tenth and thirteenth Arguments
(which are one, and wrested from sundry Texts, viz. Romans 16.25.26. 1 Cor.
2.7.8. Col. 1.25.26. 2 Timothy 1.9. Matthew. 11.25.26. Mat. 13.11. from all which it
follows, that all men have not some saving Light as fully, as the B^^re goes
freely ^o the stake) are on this wise: The Mystery of God was hid from the
Gentiles, God hid the things concerning the knowledge of himself from some,
when he revealed them to others, and 'twas given to some (as a special gift
quoth T. D. who^e words and argument, this is, above spoken to at large by me)
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, not to others; therefore every man has
not a Light in him, as a sufficient guide to direct him to God.

As for I. O. his way of Argumentation against the sufficiency of this light
within to save, is in sum the same: Among his other things; or rather nothings
to the purpose, of which he says, Contrarium proba^t, they prove the contrary,
to our assertion of the Lights sufficiency to save, he names the universal
experience of all ages, from the beginning of the world to this day* Quis enim
lucis huius ductu ad ver^^^ Dei cognitionem pervene^t? Qui post homines natos
ea op^ime usi surt, etc. Ex. 4. S^^o. For who ever came to the true knowledge
of God by the guidance of this Light? Those among all men who have best of all
improved it, have every man of them become vain in their imaginaons, and their
foolish heart has been darkened; in all which forecited argumentative matter,
these four men reason unreas^nably, from men's not knowing and being saved by
the ^^ne Light, to their wanting of the true Light to know and be saved by,
when as it follows not at all, that becuse they know not, and are not saved,
therefore they are destitute of Light, but the cause of their perishing in
ignorance, is not walking in what they have, not because they have not
sufficient Light to walk by, or are not put into possibility of k^owledge to
Salvation by some measure of that Light which is saving: Their Syllogiring is
as silly in this, as to say of a man that voluntarily hoodw^inks himself, he
does not see, therefore he cannot, that man stumbles and falls, therefore he
cannot do otherwise, when yet he may, but that he, blind-folds his own eyes (or
gives way to others to do it) from seeing his way, as most men do to the God of
this world, lest the Light of the Gospel, which they have, because it reproves
them, should shine out in them, and as a potentia ad actum, so a non actu ad
(...) non est confequentia (...) Men can no more wisely nor (...) infer from
men's not knowing of God truly a non-ability or insufficiency in that Light they
have (if they seek him in it) to reveal him, and make him truly known, then
from the being of a Power, to a necessity of the Act, which is a non sequitur
with a Witness: We know that most men know not the mysteries of the ^^ingdome,
but it is not because they may not, or (...), for w^^^ of Light, but because
they will not come to the Light by which they may: And therefore when as the
Question is ask (...) the Light which is in some measure in the con^cience of
all men, be sufficient to make kno^^ God savingly, why do not all come to be
saved by the knowledge of him, whom to know is Life Eternal? (...), because
they give not up to be guided by it, and come not to it when its (...) to them,
in order to their Salvation; for God sent it (...) the world, (...) would,
though the world is condemned by it, through their not coming to it, but that
the world through it might be saved, for the Light which judges the sin, is
saving to the Soul, and by it, that one Law giver, who is able both to save and
destroy, does both judge and destroy the works of the Devil in men (for which
end he is manifested in the world) and men, as they will not be weaned nor
saved from those works, and saves also from those destructive works, all such
souls as give up to be guided by it.

And firh^ I. O. says,^ Who^ever came^ to the true knowledge of God by the
guidance of this Light? I answer, All that ever did come to the true knowledge
of God at all, and those (as little as these men know them) are not a few
(though few in comparison of those that are ignorant) who by walking in tha^
Li^ght, while they had it; have come to experience that Life of God, which is
yet hid from you wise and prudent ones, and ever will be more^ and more, as ye
are alienated from this Light within yourselves, much more while ^ye are such
vnter Banders of your selves against both it, and the Children of it.

And whereas thou I. O. say, Qui^ea optim^usi^sunt, etc. They who have best
of all improved it, are become vain, etc. thou utterest thou know not what;
for Romans 1.21. which thou citest^in proof thereof, does no less service to the
Truth, then to disprove that thy false Assertion, for all who look not beside
the Light; may see it speaks not at all of as well improve it, but of such as
Improved it not ^at all, but when they knew God by it, who ver. 19. by it
manifested in them (...) was in (...) of himself, glorified him not as God, nor
were thankful^ answerably, no^ (...) to retain him in their knowledge, but ran
from his ^Light into their own thoughts, and so into the things which they knew
the Judgments of God and Death were due unto the doers of.

And as for the Mysteries of the Gospel, it is true, they are hid from the most,
and it is given to some to know them, not to others: Bat look ye blind, that ye
may see, how came they to be hid from some? Why was it given to some, and not
to others to know them? and who were those others that knew them not? Were they
such as could never see them, merely for want of Light to show them? Does the
Text of your own alleging, viz. Matthew. 13.11.12.13.14.15. in proof of that
your sigment say so? does i^t not plainly say, as we say, against you, that it
was because first there was a time wherein they might have seem them but would
not, had ears to hear, but stopped them, eyes to see, but closed them, beca^se
they seeing s^w not, hearing heard not, ^or would understand, nor perceive, nor
be converted, nor healed, when God would have converted and healed them, and
such like? So Qui^ boc omne ad Doct^um delirium ^ What Is all this to dreams of
our Doctors, who from thence, and such like places as overthrow themselves,
divine out Arguments against All men's having sufficient Light, speaking evil of
the Light; and judging the Light as imperfect, which is the Law of God, which
is perfect in each measure of it, of which they will not be D^ers, but Judges;
for which judging and evil speaking of what they know not (while in what they
know naturally, and but Psuchicos, animally, as bruit beasts^ in those very
things corrupt themselves) woe is to them from the Lord, all such Judges and
their Judgment, must come to Judgment, (...).

Moreover, might we lawfully so argue (but first, we need not, there being
enough besides to urge in di^proof thereof; and secondly, we do not, there
being little force in such arguments) against the sufficiency of the Letter to
save, as they think they may against the sufficiency of the Light, need we do
any more then turn the edge of their own Weapon against themselves in that
particular, who not only call the Letter a saving Light, but also argue for it
as such, with a non obstante to the small number of such as are actually saved
by it, even among those that both have it, and often read it, for (say they, in
way of Plea for the dead Letters being a saving Light where ere it comes) no
matter how few come to Salvation by it, because they refuse to walk by it, its
never the less saving and sufficient, though men that have it perish, because
its come to them, and is able on its own part to give Life, but that on their
parts its not made use of not obeyed, etc: Its no argument its notable to save,
that most men where it is are not actually saved, but rather perish: The
self-same say I ep^^ehal^ of the Light, which they are so foolish as to argue
so fillily against. A non esse^ad non prsse, non est arguendum; there is no
arguing from its not being actually so or so, to the non-possibility of the
thing to be: We cannot conclude that there is a non-sufficiency in that to save
all men, by which all men actually are not saved, for then not only the Letter
which only kills, yet they plead this self-same way is saving, and brings to
Life, but even God and Christ himself, as well as their Light in men's
consciences, who call to all ends of the Earth to look to than for Salvation in
it, Isa. 45.22. 49,^6, must ( absit blasphemia) be judged also as insufficient
to save, by whom, though supremely all are saved, that are saved at all, yet
all men actually are not saved.

I Suppose then there were fewer that come to life by the Light then do (as
there be none at all that ever came to it by the Letter, even of those
Scripture-searching Scribes that therein look for the Eternal Life, John 5.)
yet will is not follow, as they judge it will, that the Light within all is not
sufficient to lead to life; or if it will, and these men will needs have it so,
then let them take what comes along with that their own consequence to
themselves, for it pays them home in another kind, whilst 'twill much rather
conclude against the Letters being a saving Light, which against us and the
Truth they eagerly argue so to be, fith by their own confession, not one of
many that have it come to Life or Salvation by it. And whereas they say, the
defect and default of this is not therefore because the Scripture is not a
saving Light, but because they walk not in it, the self-same say we of the
Light within, which the Letter came from, in which there is no defect, which as
Paul says of it (for its the Law of Life, Romans 8.2.3.) is weak to save, no
otherwise, but because it is not answered, else life should come by it; so that
their own pen is their own paymaster still, which ever and anon pulls down at
one time what it builds up at another, and contradicts, thwarts, and razes out
(as false) in one place, the same that it writes for truth in another; yea, En
and Ecce, behold the confusions of these self-confuting men, a non actu ad non
potentiam, from the non-being of the effect, i.e. the Life, to the
non-efficaciousness of the Light to lead to it such as ^earn of it, is no
lawful argument (say they) when they plead against us the sufficiency of the
Letter to save, yet from All men's not being ac^tual'y and effectually saved by
it, we may strongly conclude there is not efficacy nor sufficiency in the Light
within Al nan to save All men in whom it is, how strictly soever they attend to
it (say they) when we plead against the sufficiency of the Light to save; it
being therefore but meet, that out of their own measure where with they
me^asure to us, it should be meeted to them again. I shall conclude my answer
to Al these four men, and to All men else whose it is, as to this their
argument, a non esse ad non posse, against the Lights sufficiency, in the very
words (Mutatis mutandis, interpositis interponendis, and additis addendis)
wherein themselves only speak either by way of concession against themselves of
this truth we plead against them, or by way of Answer to such as they suppose
to use the same (though I do not, for he is no wise man that uses it at all)
against the sufficiency of their dead Letter.

1. Those of R.B. are as follows, who in p. 7. of his Epistle to the Reader,
prefixed to I. T. his Book, says thus of the Qua. Do they hold that common,
supernatural Light, outward and inward, objective and inherent, is given to
many (at least) of the unsanctified that live under the preaching of the
Gospel? who contradicts them in this?

Answ. Those who deny any, but meet natural, any supernatural, saving, or
spiritual light to be given in common to All, or to any but the sanctified
ones, i. e. the Saints, and the Elect, as yourselves do, saying (as I. O.)
Nihilnon natural, nihil spirituale, nihil a Christo Mediatore, etc. lumen
salutare, nulta sub consideratioue, etc. Christ does not in any wise vouchsafe
supernatural, spritual, saving light to any but the Elect, he is blind that
once dreams the contrary, and such like, as are to be found up and down his
book; Ex. 4. S. 13, 17:25. R.B. Do they hold, that as the Sun is appointed in
nature to be the light of every man that comes into the world, though some
parts of the earth were never illuminated by it, and blind men partake not of
its light, and the night, and shutting our eyes and windows may exclude it, so
Christ is by Office the Sun in the world of Grace, giving men actually all the
gracious light they have, and being sufficient in himself to enlighten all, and
giving them an illuminating word, which is sufficient in its own kind to do its
own part, though many are blind, and many for their sin are deprived of the
communication of this light? Why all this we maintain as well as they.

Answ. The more shame for you to stand up against that ye maintain yourselves,
when the same is maintained by us, as ye do, when ye argue from some men's not
seeing, because they shut their eyes, therefore they have not light by which
sufficiently to see their way to life: As for your Simile, from the Suns not
enlightening all parts of the world outwardly, from which its like ye conceive
Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, has not inwardly enlightened all men, it is
but a quibble, for as there is nothing hid from the heat thereof, nor from some
participation of the natural light and heat of the Sun, at least, neither by
night nor day, though some times, places, and seasons are darker then some
(semblably) no hearts from some measure of the Light of Christ, Psalm. 12.
1:2:3:4:5:6:7. compared with Romans 10.16:17:18.)

R.B. Do they say all this light (within us and without us) is to be hearkened
to and obeyed? Why what man did they ever speak with, that is a Christian, that
denies it?

Answ. None but such Anti-christians as yourselves, who, for all your prate
here and elsewhere, saying, p. 41. in way of warning to men, that they act not
against this Light within; That certainly it concerns every man so far to look
to the Light within him, that he do not, as it is said of some, Job 24:13:
Rebel against the Light, And p. 68. That no light which is truly such is to be
rejected: Yet elsewhere, yea in the self-same pages, How ur safe it is to obey
the Light within, it leading and guiding men well in somethings, in most into
crooked and dangerous, unwarrantable and sinfulwayes, as some Ig^is Fat^us, in
the beastly, blasphemous blindness of your benighted hearts, imputing men's
murders, and Paul's persecutions of the Saints, to their following thereof,
which things only arose from their following their own thoughts, and forsaking
and leaving the Light of God within, which lead to better, even ever to good
only, and never at all into any evil; as I. O. also after his strict challenges
of obedience from every man to the Light in his own conscience, as to that
which infallibly speaks to him from God himself, etc. page 44.45. of his
English Treatises, in his blind, hasty hatred against them, whom he mainly
encounters in his Latin Th^ses, cries out against this same verbum, Spiritum
and lumen internion, which the Qua. call all men into the obedience of, in
mockage, as figmentum horrendum crasse excogitatum, D^etorem Infallibilem,
nes^i^ quid, quod lumen, quem Deum, Christum imaginarium, To Panz nihil,
rejiciendum and detessandum; Some horrible sigment of the Qua. Imaginary
Christ, infallible DoEtor, I know not what God, some spiritual everything, just
nothing, but mere darkness it self, to be rejected and detested.

And as for I. Os. words concerning the sufficiency of the Letter; I shall use
them in answer to himself and yourselves, as concerning the sufficiency of the
Light on its own part to save, though few are saved by it, only where he sets
that term Scripture, and Word of God (by which all along he means the outward
Scripture) I shall place the term Light within, by which I intend that inward
Word that is nigh in men's hearts, adding and interposing in a different
Character what clauses are not his or distinctions sake, and so carry on this
my General Answer, to that their foresaid General Argument, to an end.

No^ does it in the least impair this sufficiency of the Light within to lead
to life, that its a moral, and spiritual, not a natural Light, because all men
come not to life by it, it suffices that there is nothing wanting on its own
part for the discovery and revelation of the way to life. To argue that the Sun
is not the Sun, or the great means of communicating external light into the
world, because blind men cannot see it, nor will believe so much of it as they
are told, will scarce be admitted, nor does it in the least impeach the
efficacy and sufficiency of the light pleaded for, that men stupidly blind
cannot comprehend it, John 1.5. I do not assert that where ever the Light
within (Scripture, quoth I. O.) is brought by what means soever (whether in a
Ministry of it, without, calling men to turn to it, or a measure of it within,
calling men to turn to God) All to whom its preached, and to whom it preaches,
must instantly of necessity assent unto it, and come to the saving knowledge of
God by it, many men (who are not yet stark blind) may have so abused their
eyes, that where Light is brought into a dark place, they may not be able to
discern it; men may be so propossest with innumerable prejudices, principles
received by strong Traditions, corrupt affections, making them bate the Light
(as woeful experience shows that I. O. and many others do) that they may not
behold the glory of the Light within (word, quoth I. O. i.e. with him the
Letter, with me the Light) when it is brought unto them (as it is nigh in the
heart that they may do it) but its nothing to our present discou^s^, whether
any man living (in sin) do discern this Light, whilst the defect may be justly
cast on their own blindness, 2 Cor. 4.2.3.4. by the manifestation of the Truth
we commend our selves to every ones conscience in the Sight of God, but if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are losts, in whom the god of this world
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of the Gospel
of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them: There is in the
dispensation of the Light within (word, quoth I. O. meaning the Letter) an
evidence of Truth, commending itself to the consciences of men, some receive
not this evidence, is it for want of Light in the truth, or Light itself? No,
that is a glorious light that shines (as the bare Letter does not, for it was
never there) in the hearts of men; is it for want of testimony to assert this
Light? No, for many daily testify it, but merely because the god of this world
has blinded the eyes of men that they should not behold it: Where ever the
Light within (word, quoth I. O. meaning the Letter) comes, by what means
soever, it has in it self a sufficiency of Light to evidence to all (and will
do it eventually to all that are not blinded by the god of this world) the
knowledge of God its Author, and the true way of Salvation, and the only reason
why All are not saved, is because all do not receive its Witness; and the
reason why it is not received by mary in the World to whom it is come, and in
whom it is, is the advantage that Satan has to keep them in ignorance and
blindness, by the lusts, corruptions, prejudices, and hardness of their own
hearts; the Light within (word, quoth I. O. meaning still the Letter) makes a
sufficient Proposition of itself, and is sufficient to save where ever it is,
and he to whom it shall come (As it is to all in their hearts) who refuses it
(as Darkness, Error, Delusion, Euthusiasone, Fanaticisme, etc. 'because it is
testified against (as so and worse) by I. O. and his Followers, who calls it
Nihil, and in a mockage, an Imagined Christ, etc. whether it be I. O. himself
in whom Satan testifies all this against it, or any other that refuse it upon
I. Os. false testimony against it from Satan in him) will give an account of
his Atheism and Infidelity: He that has the Witness of God, which is the
Light within, for the Letter without is but man's witness for God, as moved by
his Spirit to declare outwardly what he inwardly knows of him, need not stay
for the witness of man, which is the Letter without, which Letter yet does
abundantly testify to the Light, as greater then itself: Wheresoever the Light
within (word, quoth I. O. meaning the Letter still) is received indeed, as it
requires itself to be received, and is really assented (...) ^^ the Word of
God sufficient to save, it is so received upon the evidence of that Light and
sufficiency, which it is found and felt by such as walkin it, to have, and has
in itself to such, manifestly declaring it self so to be: Its all one by what
means, by what hand, whether of a Child or Babe of stammering lips, or of a
Church of God, for both those ways its witnest to without, the intimation and
knowledge of the Light within us, comes to us from God, and toward us, by
being the Word of God it has its power of manifesting to us the way to life,
and of manifesting it self so to be from its own innate Light: Now this Light
in the Scripture; i. e. which the Scripture, which is not it, declares to be,
in the heart for the sufficiency of which to lead to life without the
Scripture, as it did before that was, we contend, has an impress far more then
the Letter has of Gods Excellency upon it, distinguishing it by infallible
Tekmeria, from the product of any creature, or of the mere principles of
nature, as I. O. dreams; for though it was in men from the Creation, yet it is
not his natural faculty of understanding, or the mind, or the conscience, as he
and his fellows foolishly fancy, Ex. 4. S. 18. but some thing that is of God,
and from him, which is a witness to him in the conscience, and in the mind, it
is that Spirit in man, and Inspiration of the Almighty, which gives him
understanding, Job 32.8. that he may know him, 1 John 5.20. though all that
have it do not know him by it, for from may to must there is no arguing; by
this God dives into the consciences of men, into all the secret recesses of
their hearts, into a which such a gross thing as a mere outward Manuscript
cannot get; guides, teaches, directs, determines, and judges in them, upon
them, in the Name, Majesty, and Authority of God, if the men who are blinded by
the god of this world will yet deny this light, and not come to it, that they
may be saved by it, because they perceive it not to be sufficient to save them,
it shall not prejudice them, nor hinder their Salvation who do: By this
self-evidencing sufficiency, I say, does the Light within (Scripture, quoth I.
O.) make such a Proposition of itself, as the Light and Power (word, quoth I.
O. meaning the Letter.) of God; that who ever rejects it, does it at the peril
of his eternal ruin, and thereby a bottom and foundation is tendered for that
faith which it requires to repose it self upon.

For the proof then of the sufficiency of the Light within (Divine Authority of
the Scripture, quoth I. O.) to lead to life, unto him or them, who as yet on no
account whatever do acknowledge it, I shall only suppose that by the Providence
of God, he or they be brought to the Light (Book, quoth I. O.) so as that he or
they be engaged to the consideration of it, or do attend to the leadings of it,
upon a supposal hereof, I leave them and the Light (Word, quoth I. O.)
together; and if it evidence not its own sufficiency unto their consciences, it
is because they are blinded by the god of this world, which will be no Plea for
the refusal of it at the last day; and they who receive it not on this ground.
All never receive it on any as they ought: The Light within (Scripture, quoth
I. O.) is enrolled among things of that nature, as do manifest their own
condition^: It is absolutely called the Power of God, and that unto its proper
end; i.e. Salvation, which way lies the tendency of its efficacy in operation,
Romans 1.16. the word concerning the Cross, that is, the Gospel, or the Light:
(for the Light is the cross to the carnal mind, will and wisdom) is the Power
of God, 1 Cor. 1.8. and faith, which is built on that Light, (word, quoth I.
O.) not the Letter, without other helps or advantages, is said to stand in the
Power of God, 1. Cor. 2.5. This, and not the naked Letter, is the Rod of his
Power or Strength, Psa. 110.2. giving all manner of assurance and full
persuasion of its own Authority, Efficacy, and Sufficiency.

By virtue of this power it has ever brought forth fruit among such as came to
it in all the world, in which it is, and into which it is come, without sword,
without for the most part miracles, without humane wisdom or Oratory, without
any inducements or motives but what were merely and solely taken from it self,
consisting in things that ^y has not seen, nor ear heard, nor could enter into
the heart of man to conceive has it, does it, and will it much more now then
ever, exert this its power and efficacy to the conquest of the world, causing
men of all sorts, in all times and places, where its Ministry comes, so to fall
down before its Divine Authority, as immediately to renounce all that was dear
to them in this world, and to undergo whatever as dreadful, terrible, and
destructive to nature in all its dearest concernments; it is now the work of
many to insist on the particulars where in this power exerts it self, yea, it
sell f does more and more manifest its own sufficiency to condemn and save, so
that I need not enlarge upon them, the workings thereof are spiritual, such as
have their seat, dwelling, and abode in the hearts and consciences of men,
whereby they are not liable to any exception, as though they were pretended;
men cannot hard in themselves in the rejection of the testimony the Light
gives, by sending for Magicians to do the like, or by any pretense that it is a
common thing that is b^ fallen them on whom the Light (Word, quoth I. O.
meaning the Scripture) puts forth its Power, as it will do when the Book of
Conscience begins to open, the Seat and Residence of its effects is
safe-guarded against all Power and Authority, but that of God; its diving into
the hearts and consciences, and secret recesses of the minds of men, its
judging and sentencing of them in themselves, its convictions, terrors,
conquest, and killing of men, its converting, building up, making wise, holy,
obedient, its administriag consolations in every condition, to which
consolation belongs, and the like effects of its Power and sufficiency are
usual'y spoken of, and appropriated to the Letter, by such as are ignorant of
the Light, who speak what they read and hear of more then feel, as death and
destruction, that hear the same of that, which is hid from them, I^b 28.22. but
are effectually felt, and experimentally known by the children of the Light,
who love and live in it.

These are the foundations of my Answer to I. Os. T. Ds. R. Bs. and I. Ts.
grand Argument above mentioned against the sufficiency of the Light to guide
men into the true knowledge and life of God, drawn from the non efficiency of
that its end in all men: The Light, say we, the Law of God which is the Light
in All, is not only testified to as saving by the Letter, and as powerful and
sufficient in all those fore named respects; in which I. O. says the Letter it
self is, which the Letter faith not of it self, for all that I. O. faith in the
thirteen last Sections of the fourth Cha. of his first Tr. in whose own words I
have mostly spoken, by way of Answer to himself, is most true, if applied to
the Word of God indeed, which is nigh in the heart, and of the Light of Law of
God in the Conscience, but every ^ot of it false, as applied by him to a wrong
subject (viz.) the outward Scripture, or bare Letter; and (as the Letter bears
testimony to the Light, so the Light bears testimony enough to it self of its
own sufficiency in the conscience, that testimony is the Witness of God
himself, which who so does not accept and believe, he does what in him lies to
make God a Lym; to give us an infallible assurance, that in receiving this
testimony, we are not imposed upon by cunningly devised fables, the Light (the
Scriptures; quoth I. O.) or Law in the heart, has that glory of Light and
Power of God accompanying of it, as wholly distinguishes it by infallible
signs and evidences from all words and writings nor divine, conveying its truth
and Power into the Souls and Consciences of men, with such an infallible
certainty, that it is believed, though men act contrary to it; for when that
within tells men what they should not do (viz.) not lie, steal, murder, cozen,
nor do evil to others, that they would not have others do to them, though they
do these evils, yet they cannot but believe through that Light in them, if they
had never seen the Letter, that they should not do so, and that the Judgments
of God are due to such as do so, and when by that they are told what they are,
they by it believe truly what they are, and cannot, while they behold
themselves in that glass, believe themselves to be otherwise, or better then
they are, no more then a man's natural face that is beheld in a true outward
glass can seem to him, or be believed by him to be fairer then it is.

Thus having at large answered the main argument of these four men against the
universality of a sufficient Light in All men, to lead to life such as follow
it, drawn from All men's nor actually coming to life by it, which one R. B. and
I. T. aiming at number more then weight, make three of their thirty, viz. the
second, tenth, and thirteenth. I shall run thorough the residue more briefly,
they being not worth any long insistance on them.

Their third and fourth, which are but one and the same also, divided needlessly
into two, they ground upon such Texts as directly prove the contrary against
them; viz. John 1.5.9.10.11. Ephesians. 5.8. Matthew. 14. where its said, The Light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not; the true Light was in
the world, and the world knew him not; he came to his own, and his own received
him not; ye were sometimes darkness, etc. To them that fate in darkness, light
is sprung up:. Whence they argue on this wise, many of the Jews and Gentiles
sat in darkness, did nor reciive the Light, nor comprehend it, and were
darkness, when the true Light came to and shined in them, therefore they had no
Light in them, much less every man.

Rep. Whence I argue in proof of the very contrary thus; The true Light came to
such as received at not, to such as knew it not, springs up (as they heed it)
to such as sat in death and darkness, and shines in the darkness, Joh. 1.9.
though the darness comprehends it not; but All men, as well as some, at some
time or other, are found not receiving the Light, not knowing it, sitting in
darkness, and are darkness ^^ therefore All men have in some measure the true
Light shining in them: Besides, if this would prove that the true Light is not
present with All men, because most neither know, nor receive it, but abide,
dwell, sit still in darkness, and remain darkness it self, then at least it
will conclude against these men another way; viz. in disproof of the outward
Letters being the true Light; as they contend it is, since the Jews, and most
Christians, so called, both do, and ever did dwell in darkness, and continue
darkness, notwithstanding the Scriptures abode among them.

Their fifth is as a very Fiddlestick as any of the former (and all that follow
it are no better) fetched from Luke 16.8. in such wise as more clearly
concludes that R. B. and I. T. (as wise Disputers of this world as they seem to
be ( in suo genere) in their be-nighted Generation) are yet but fools as to the
true Faith, and children of this world and darkness, then that All men have not
some true Light in them, and it runs thus: If every man had a Light within him
sufficient to guide him how to please God, then every man should be a Child of
Light, but every man is not a Child of Light, therefore every man has not a
Light, etc. to guide him to God, etc.

The Major of which is such a palpable inconsequence, as the least Child of
Light, and of the day, cannot but both discern and be ashamed of; for however
in proof of it, it is asserted by them, That to be a Child of Light, is all one
as to be a person that has Light in him to guide him to please God, yet if
they would but consult with that Light of God which is yet in themselves (if
they have not by fighting against it cast themselves forth into the outer
darkness) and not merely with their own dark animal understa^dings, they could
not choose but see that (as I have showed above) the Light is in them that are
not in it, nor as yet believing in it, and that they ^only that believe in it
are the children of it, according to what Christ says, John 12.35.36. to such
as had Light, and yet neither walked in, nor were children of it: while ye have
the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the children of Light.

Their sixth, in proof of which is cited Act. 26.18. where Paul says, Christ
sent him to the Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, from the power of Satan to God, is so silly, that it shows its Authors
and owners shrewdly to be besorted; whence they argue;

They who are to be turned from darkness to Light, had not a Light within
sufficient to guide them to God; But so it is said of both Jews and Gentiles;
Therefore sure they had not such a light within them as the Qua. say is in All,
if they had such a Light, they should have been directed to follow it, not
turned from it; the Apostles should have called them, as the Qua. do, to follow
the Light in them, and not have called them out of darkness, nor should we do,
as the Apostles did, b^d men leave the darkness in them, but as the Qua. do,
follow the Light in them.

Rep. Flocci, Nauci, Nihili, Pili, Assis, Hujus, Teruncii!

Did ever the like toying and trisling piece of Dispotation drop from the hands
of men before, as does here from the pens of these professed Disputers? Where
are the eyes of these men that they cannot see? or is it so, that they will not
see how they turn that very Text upside down, they would seem to take their
Tattle out of? Was it not the business of the Apostles, to direct men to follow
the Light, when they were sent to turn men to the Light? Were they that were to
be turned to the Light in that very Call they had from the Apostles to turn to
it, turned from it? Do not they who call men out of the darkness which is in
them, even in that very thing call them to follow the light which shines in
them also, 2 Pet. 1.19? Must not they who leave the darkness, of necessity look
to the Light? Can men leave the paths of uprightness, and not walk in the ways
of darkness, Prove. 2.13. or leave the ways of darkness, and not walk in the
way of the Light? Is there any medium between these two? Are men to be bid to
come from the power of Satan unto God, and yet have they no Light safe and
sufficient lent them (in case they be willing to come to him) to lead and guide
them unto God? Ye blind Guides, did not Paul (as he was sent to that end as
that Text declares) turn men from the darkness only? Did he not turn men to the
Light? Did he turn them from it; as in that clause (m^n should have been
directed to follow the Light, and not turned from it) ye intimate he did? And
did not John, whose Message and Ministry was the self-same as Peter's and
Paul's, and that of all holy men of God, was even from the beginning, 1 John
1.5.6.7. as well that of Christ himself, John 12.35.36. declare to men, that in
order to fellowship with God, is whom is no darkness at all, they should not
only cease to walk in darkness, but also should walk in the light, as God is in
the light? Are ye not in this, as well as in many more matters, justly given
over, and left of the Lord, for your enmity to his Light, to babble out such
gross blindness and groapable darkness, as ye here do, in saying, that if men
had such light, they should have been directed to follow it, and not turned
from it, according to Act. 26.18. as if Paul were there said to be sent, that
by his Ministry men might be turned from the light, who is there expressly said
to be sent to turn men to it? For shame utter no more such wretched ignorance
as this, left the shame of your nakedness appear at last to all men, as it does
already to such as read your sapless Sermons, and have not fold themselves to
see rather with your eyes, then with their own.

Their seventh is on this wise wrested from Romans 10.14.17. Heb. 11.6. where its
said, Without Faith it is impossible to please God: And how shall they believe
in him, of whom they have not heard? How bear without a Preacher? So then Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God; which (say they) were vain
speeches, if there were another ordinary way by the Light within us to beget
Faith; therefore the Light within us is not of it self, without Preaching, a
safe sufficient Guide in our way to God.

Rep. True Faith is in the Light of Christ, and in the Word of God, which is
that word of Faith which the Apostles preached, and testified of in their words
and writings, that it was nigh to men, even in their hearts, that there they
might both hear and do it, Romans 10.1. neither does any man either hear or
believe in Christ to Salvation, any further, then as he heeds, hears, and
believes in that Light and ingrafted Word whereby Christ counsels him in his
own conscience, although he should (as the unbelieving Jews did) hear him
speaking to them with Audible Voice, or believe (as all unbelieving Christians
do) the whole History of him according to the flesh: So then Faith unto life
coming by hearing, and hearing unto life being of that Light and Word of God,
which is nigh in the heart, which is the Word of both Faith and Life, the
Apostles Speeches were in vain, if there were not such a Light and Word within
to be believed in, to the hearing and believing in which the Apostles were sent
to turn men, men's obeying of which Word within, was the end of their using
those words they spoke and wrote to them in from without. Moreover, we deny not
Preaching without by such as are sent, as Paul was (but Parish-Hirelings are
not) to turn men to the Light within; but the Light within only, is that which
guides and leads those, that are turned to it, and continue attending to it,
sufficiently and safely unto God.

Their eighth is to this purpose; All that have access to God, must not be
conformed to this world, but be transformed, renewed, put off the old man, Romans
12.2. Ephesians. 4.23. Col. 3.10. Therefore they have not a Light within them, as a
safe sufficient guide to lead them to God Antecedent to this renewing, for if
they had, what need (say they) such transforming, renewing, nonconformity to
the world, putting off the old man.

Rep. Therefore they need such renewing, transforming, putting off the old man,
nonconforming to this world, because that is the good will of God concerning
them, and also millions of men, who have the Light in them, that condemns and
reproves them for their Rebellion against it, are not conformable thereunto;
and therefore they both have and need such a Light within them, Antecedent to
that renewing; and need also to be called upon to turn unto it, that they may
thereby see how conformable they are to this evil world, and non-conformable to
that Will of God, that they may thereby first know the good Will of God, which
is manifested in that Light; and secondly, by obeying that Light, be conformed
to that Will, and no more unto the world, but transformed by the renewing of
their minds: So that whereas they conclude all men ought to be renewed after
Gods Image, etc. therefore All have it not; I contrariwise conclude, All ought
to be renewed according thereunto, etc. therefore All have a light sufficient
to lead them, as they follow it, into the Image of God.

Their ninth is a sottish shameful Tergiversation, a Re substrats, from the
Question, into another matter, as clear contrary to the subject in hand, as
light and darkness are to each other; yea, instead of persevering to prosecute
the proof of their Proposition, concerning the non-sufficiency of the Light in
All men, they fall a proving the insufficiency of the darkness in All men, to
be a sufficient rule to life, and safe guide of men unto God; at the end of
which they entail a most abominable lie against the Quakers, saying, The Qua.
prescribe that unto men as their Rule, which God counts their Curse; and what is
that? Scilicet, the thing that of All things the Quak. of all men, who call men
to Gods Light within, do call men out of; viz. the counsels, imaginations, and
lusts of their own hearts, which men (say the Qua.) walking in, and b^ides the
Light of God, and hearkening to, and not to the Voice of God (which I. O.
confesses, page 44. (though in his folly he calls it Natural) to be Gods Light
in every conscience) come under the Laws curse, and make their own misery great
upon them: The A^gument is briefly thus:

To leave a person to h^s own imagination, lust, to walk in his own counsel, in
his own way, which is all one as to leave him to the Light within him, is
reckoned as the greatest Curse and Judgment to a man from God, for refusing to
hearken to Gods Voice, as the Text shows, Psa. 81.11.12. Therefore the Light
within each person, is of it self no safe guide.

Rep. That the Qua. call to the Light within, and to stand in the Council of
God which is the Light within, which condemns all the lusts of men's hearts, and
their own vain counsels and imaginations, is most true: But, if ye be not past
shame, be ye ashamed and blush, both at your own blaspheming the Light of God,
and belying of the Qua. who in your blindness (for which Woe is unto you except
ye repent, Isa. 5.) call good evil, and light darkness, and cannot see to put a
difference between Gods Light, and man's lust, the Council, Law, and Way of God
in every conscience, which leads to life, blessing, and peace, and the vain
ways and thoughts of man, and Law of sin, that lusts to envy and all evil, and
leads to cursing and condemnation: And secondly, cannot understand the Qua any
otherwise, then as calling men to their own hearts lusts, when they expressly,
and in Terminis, ca'l Ad men to that Light of God in them, which makes
manifest, and condemns every ones own lust in every heart: Generation of
Vipers, where did ye ever hear, or hear of any Qua. or any one that is owned by
them in their Ministry, prescribe man's own counsel, imagination, or hearts
lust, to him as their Rule? Do they not as John Baptist did, bear witness to
that true Light which enlightae^th every man that comes into the world? Do
they not as Christ did, call men to walk and believe in the Light while they
have it, that they may be the children of it, least utter darness come (as it is
already on your selves, so that ye know not whether ye go) upon them? Do they
not with Paul, (whom ye wot to have received some message to turn men from it)
speak to men to turn from the darkness to the light, from the power of Satan,
the Ruler of the darkness of this world, unto God? Do they not tell men with
Peter, That there is a sure word of Prophecy for them, to which they do well to
take heed, as to a light that shines in the dark place of their hearts, till
the day dawn, and the day star arise there? Do they not with John tell men,
That God is Light, and in the Light, and that in him is no darkness at all; and
that if men (be their form never so fair) say they have fellowship with God,
and walk in darkness, and the lusts of the flesh (as Papists, Pralaticks,
Presbyterians, Independents, and other our-side Professors do) they do but lie,
and do not the truth; but if they walk in the Light, as God is in it, then God
and they have fellowship together, and there the Blood of his Son is felt
clearsing from all sin? which ye say men cannot be thoroughly cleansed from,
while they live here, and so harden men in their own hearts lusts; and is all
this of the Qua. a prescribing to men their hearts lusts, as their rule? Do you
understand Christ, Paul, Peter, John, and All the Prophets calling to the
Light, Isa. 2. as Isaiah, Come ye, let us walk in the Light of the Lord, he
will teach u: of his ways, we will walk in his paths, so as ye do us, when we
restifie the same truth often in their own words, as calling men to follow
their own ways, thoughts, counsels, imaginations, hearts lusts? If ye take us
as intending so, when we call to the Light, why not them? If not them, why us,
who say the same? Is the word Light more offensive, more unsavory, more
difficult to be understood, more savouring of lust, more sounding like lust out
of our mouths, whom ye superlatively abhor, then out of theirs, whom ye now
superstitiously adore? But so it always fell out, as I.O. truly says, page
59.60, 61. that scarce any Prophet that spoke in the Name of God, had any
approbation from the Church, in whose days he spoke, people being so eminently
perplexed with false Prophets (in the latter days, of the Jewish Church
especially) both as to their number and subtilty, speaking lies against the
truth; therefore no marvel it is so now in these last days of the Church of
the outside Christians; and as the next Age to that which flew them, began
still to build Sepulchers in remembrance of them, so the time is near to come,
wherein ye, or your Successors, who cast out the name of Gods People called
Qua. as evil now, shall (what ere ye dream) be forced to say there is a Seed
among them which sincerely serves the Lord, which shall be counted to him for a
Generation, and to confess (as much as they are now a curse among men) that
they are the Seed whom God has blessed.

Virtutem incolumem odimus
Sublatam ex oculis Quaerimus invidi.
Their eleventh argument from Jude 19. Having not the Spirit, John 14.17. The
Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive, is this, Every man has not the
Spirit of God; therefore every man has not a light within sufficient to guide
him to God.

Rep. Every man that has not so long resisted, grieved, quenched the motions
of the Spirit of God striving in him, that it thereupon is taken from him, as
it was from those sensual ones Jude speaks of, whom God had given over to their
lusts, has the Spirit striving within him, and that is enough to our purpose,
who own such a state, that some may be given over to, for not using what they
had, while they had it, as wherein to have wisdom (at whose reproof they would
not turn) withdraw and leave them to the way of folly, and the good Spirit
depart from them (as he did from Saul, Judas, the Jews, and others) and leave
the house, even their hearts wholly desolate and destitute of his presence, for
the evil spirit, that lusts in men to envy, to enter and totally to possess
them, and the talent, or measure of Gods Light within (since they would not
trade with it) taken away from them, that the outwa^d darkness might come upon
them, and the grace of God that brought Salvation to them (which at some time
or other appears to all men, Tit. 2.11.12.) since they would not learn of it to
to deny ungodliness, but turned it into wantonness, and received it in vain,
despising the riches of it when it would have led them to repentance, leave
them to the impenitency and hardness of their hearts, that they might fill up
their measure of sin, and so wrath come upon them to the utmost; but all this
proves not, but that once they had it, or else Christ would not have said to
such as yet walked not in it, Walk in the light while ye have it, least
darkness come upon you, and ye know not whither ye go; nor could your selves
say rationally (as ye do to wicked men often) O people! now while his good
Spirit moves in your spirits, resist not, quench not his motions, left (like
them that lay at the Pool of Bethesda, not stepping in while the Angel moved on
the waters) you be left unhealed forever: Work whilst its day, left the night
come on you, wherein none can work, his spirit will not strive always, etc.

As for the worlds not receiving the Spirit, so as to walk in it, it proves not
that God gives it not any more, then that they have no grace given them of God,
because they receive it in vain; and ye may as well say unreasonable men have
no principle of reason left in them, because they live not by it, as that they
have not a sufficient light in them to lead them, because they do not walk in
it: Besides, it is expressly said of Christ, that by the same Spirit by which
himself was quickened, he went and preached to the spirits in prison, i. e. to
their own lusts, which were disobedient in the old world, in the days of Noah,
which was not by his Ministry without only, as the dream, but within also in
their own hearts.

Their twelfth runs thus; The Son did not reveal the Father to every man, nor
did every man come to Christ; therefore every man had not a light within him
sufficient to guide him to God.

Rep. The consequence of this is utterly false, for though the world hates
Christ the Light, and comes not to him, yet he is come a light into the world;
this he, that is not willingly ignorant of it, can scarcely choose but see, if he
read John 3.16.17.18.19.20.21. it follows not because men come not into Christ's
Light, that therefore it is not come into them, it being (as is showed above)
one thing for the Light to be in men, another for them to be in it. I am come
that they might have life (faith Christ of the Jews) John 10. yet ye search the
Scriptures, and therein look for Eternal life, but will not come to me that ye
may have life (faith he to the Scribes, John 5.) both these comings of each to
other are necessary to the life, else though the Light that is able to lead to
it be in men, they, not being led by it, cannot have it. Moreover, Christ does
by his Light reveal the Father to such as hate both him and his Father, though
they like not to know him thereby, else he could not say truly (as he does) to
such, Job. 22.23.24. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had
sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin; If I had not done in them the
works which none other does, they had not had sin, but now they have both seen
and hated, both me and my Father: In what measure men see the mind and will of
Christ and his Father manifested in them by the Light within, Romans 1.19. and
hate that, they see and hate both Christ and his Father, whose Light, and Mind,
and Will that is which appears to them.

Their fourteenth is urged by them from Texts of Scripture, every of which most
clearly prove, or rather positively asserts the very thing they contend
against; viz. that Christ is come a Light to them that sit in darkness, and so
all men do, a Light to the Nations, a light into the world, that whosoever
(that is in the world he is come into) believes in him, should not perish, nor
walk, nor abide in darkness, but have the light of life, John 3.19.8.12.
9.5.12.46. for not coming to which, nor believing in which, not loving but
hating of which, not living by which only, the world comes to be condemned:
Were ever men so blinded? But (say they) Christ's coming a Light into the World
would be needless, if every man had a light in him before Christ's coming into
the World, sufficient to guide him in the way to God: Therefore the Quakers
Opinion about the light in each person is a manifest error.

Rep. Your apprehension of the Qua. Opinion, is either a manifest error, or a
wilful piece of ignorance, or a miserable mistake, or something, for they hold
no such thing as a light in each man sufficient to guide him without, or
besides that of Christ, or before Christ's coming into the world, but that the
whole world lying in wickedness, and sitting in darkness, Christ is sent a
Light to enlighten them, who without him are lost, and that he who is that true
Light does more or less, by his coming into the world, enlighten every man that
comes into it.

The fifteenth concludes a lie against the Qua. as denying the use of, and
dehorting from searching the Scriptures, which while Christ, John 5.39. bids
search; and Paul, 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17. says are useful and profitable; the Qua.
say no (say they) but look to the light within you.

Rep. I say, though the Qua. say, look to the light within (as Christ and Paul
did) yet they no more deny the usefulness of the Scripture, then either of
those Scriptures ye quote proves that absolute necessity of the Scripture as to
Salvation, which ye seem to plead, though Christ and Paul never did so; nor do
we any more dehort from searching the Scripture, then Christ, John 5.39.
exhorts to search them, which is not at all in that Text; for howbeit
Ereunate, search, may be rendered either Indicatively, or Imperatively, as to
its own signification (as I elsewhere show) its most evident that he speaks
there by way of complaint of the Scribes, for looking for life in the
Scriptures, without coming to him who is the Light, ver. 40. and not by way of
command to search them, ye search, not search ye.

Their sixteenth is from Isa. 8.20. Psa. 119.105. To the Law, and to the
Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, there is no light in them:
Thy Word is a light to my feet, a lamp to my path; whence they sillily argue,
or rather blindly assert the Qua. Opinion and Speech concerning a sufficient
light in All men, to be contrary to the Law, and Testimony, and Gods Word,
Ordinances, Ministry, and many other things; and therefore erroneous, and
without light in it.

Rep. The Antecedent here is most false; for the Law, Testimony, and Word there
spoken of, which is a Lamp and Light to the feet and path, and according which
who speaks not, it is because the morning is not yet to him (for the word is
(...), through the mistranslation of which phrase thus, there is no light in
him, many (not knowing the Hebrew) and many that know it (not heeding it) make
no small ado against the Lights being in All men (as Vavasor Powell did once at
Eltham) is no other then that Light within, even that word which David had, and
hid within him, that he might not sin against God, by which young men taking
heed thereunto, may come to cleanse their way, Psa. 119.9. that Word of Faith
that is nigh in the heart, which the Apostles preached or witnessed to, Romans
10. that Law and Commandment, which is said to be a Lamp and Light, Prove. 6.
that inward testimony of Jesus, or Spirit of Prophecy, which we, with all the
Prophees of old, by words and Scriptures, bear our outward testimony unto,
called by Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19. the more sure word of Prophecy, to which men do
well to give heed, as unto a light shining in the dark place of their heart,
till the day dawn, and the day star arise therein.

This I say, and not the external Text (as ye all triflingly talk) is that Law,
and Testimony, and Word, there spoken of, even the Law and Testimony that
comes, and is written, and is given and received immediately from and out of
God and Christ's own Light, Voice, and mouth, in the hearts, minds, and
consciences of all people, which his own people only give ear and hearken to,
even the Rod, the Spirit, the Word and Sword of his mouth, which Priests and
all people are summoned to seek to, to stand in as Gods own Counsel, and to
take counsel at, and be covered with, and take heed to their way by, that they
may not sin against the Lord, and which all the wicked that sin against, must
once be slain by (Psa. 37.31. Isa. 51.7.30.1. Ier. 31.33.32.40. Ezekiel.
11.19.36.26. Zach. 2.6.7.8.9. Ier. 23.15.16.17.18.22.26.27. etc.) Hos. 4.6.12.
2 These. 2.8.19. Rev. 15.28) which the Priests above all others usually depart
from, and forget, and are partial in, and cause people in stumble at, and
forget, who therefore neither profit people, nor thrive in any thing but
ignorance and deceit themselves, because they stand not in it, from whom,
though their Schools are called Nurseries of learning, Well-heads of true
Religion and Divinity, there goes forth no true Divination, but sottishness and
profaneness into all lands.

This is that Law and living Word, and true testimony, even the Light and Word
of God in the heart, a testimony that is said to be bound up from the outward
Israel, which may have the outward Bible bound among them; a Law that is said to
be sealed up among Christ's Disciples from the sight of the be-nighted Seers,
which such as seek to, seek to the Lord himself; and such as forsake, go from
the Fountain of the living water, to broken Cisteers; and such as leave for an
outward letter, leave the living for the dead, and seek for the living Lord
among the dead: These are the Wells of Salvation, out of which Souls should
draw the living Water, which the Philistines in envy to the Seed of Abraham,
will strive always to slop, till the Lord make room for them to flow out to the
full.

These are that Word, Law, and Testimony, and not the most Original Copies of
the Letter, as I.O. and ye all with him do emptily imagine, page 216. which who
so deprives of the Hebrew Punctation, by proving the novelty thereof, do with
Abimelechs servants, no less then utterly stop the Wells or Fountains from
whence ye should draw all your Souls refreshment.

These (as I have showed so abundantly above, at the end of my third
Exercitation, in answer to I.O. that I shall need say no more here in proof
thereof) are the matters meant by the said Law and Testimony, Isa. 8.20. which
are not contrary to the writing without neither, and the true outward Ministry
and Ordinances, but consonant thereunto, which inward Law, Word, and Testimony
your selves being contrary to, and opposing, are therein contrary to Gods Word,
and the outward Scripture of it also; therefore not the Qua. who own all these,
but your own Opinion is erroneous, and your speech is without light.

The seventeenth from Ephesians. 4.11. runs thus: The Opinion and practice of the
Qua. makes every man a Teacher, and Teachers set by God for the work of the
Ministry needless, as if they were no gift, but a burden to the Church, cries
them down; therefore its contrary to Gods and Christ's way, and so Antichristian.

Rep. The Antecedent here is a false tale, and a mere slander of the Qua. for
neither do they so much as doctrinally make every man, a Teacher, for they deny
both your selves, and all that side with you, to be men fit to be Teachers of
others, unless ye were better taught your selves, or had learned the truth of
God much better then as yet ye have done; and howbeit they know your Ministry,
who are set by men to minister for money, to be not only needless, but also
useless, fruitless, unprofitable, burdensome, chargeable, and more destructive,
then saving both to peoples Souls, and to the Nations; yet we own All Teachers
set by God for the work of the Ministry (which are such only as are made
Ministers by gifts of God from above, and not such as buy their gifts at
University, that they may fell them again) to be both needful, useful, and
profitable, both to the turning people of the world to the Light and Word
within, that thereby they may be begotten into Christ's Nature, and also to the
edifying of the Saints in their faith in that Light, till they come up into the
measure of the fullness of Christ's stature (a state which ye deny to be so much
as attainable in this life, so far are ye from building any up into it) neither
(as much as we are called to cry out against you, as all the true Prophets ever
did against the hireling Priests) do we at all cry down such gifts, or gifted
men, as God gives to his Church; but wot you well, that your selves are the men
who are found fighters against such, who making the Gospel a mere trade to live
on, ingross that trade wholly to your selves, and make every man a Teacher that
has been trained up at University, and can handle his tongue well to talk for
the Priests and Tithes, though never fitted for that holy calling by the gift
of Gods Grace, or good life (witness the general blindness and bruitishn^ss of
the British Priesthood) but own no men as true Teachers, but Deluders and
Fanatic, that in their Ministry do but pretend to be immediately gifted and
guided by Gods Infallible Spirit: And whereas we say, that Christ Jesus
receives gifts for all men, even for the rebellious also, and that no less then
this gift, that the Lord God may dwell in them, if they look to him in his
Light, in which he draws nigh unto every man, yet contrary both to us and that
Text, out of which you talk, which, compared with that Paul alludes to, Ps
68:18. betokens such gifts for the rebellious, do you deny All men to have so
much as the least measure of such light, as however attended to, can lead to
God, oe to witness Gods dwelling in them.

The eighteenth is from Ephesians. 1.17. where Paul prays, That God would give them
the spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation of the knowledge of him, that the ^yes of
their understandings might be enlightened: The Opinion of the Qua. (say they) of
each man's light in him a sufficient safe rule and guide in his way to God,
makes it unnecessary to pray for the Spirit to enlighten men's eyes in the
knowledge of God; therefore indeed it is impious.

Rep. Who would think men should be so blind, unless they wilfully shut their
own eyes? having some grace, some measure of light, renders it needless, it
seems, by these Seers, to pray for more, and praying for more and more of Gods
Spirit, Light, and Grace, supposes (it seems) that there is yet none at all; and
so upon this account, the Church of the Ephesians as yet had no illumination by
the Spirit, any more then the rest of men, because there was prayer made, that
they might be enlightened; and David had none of Gods Spirit, because he prays
to be established more and more by it, and the humble have none of that Grace
of God at all which is sufficient, because they may have, and God promises to
give them more: What f^ivilosity is this for Divines to be found in?

The nineteenth is urged from Psa. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? In
brief to this effect, No men understand their errors; therefore each man's Light
in him is not a sufficient and safe rule, and guide to him, in his way to God.

Rep. If the falmists Interrogation affirmative concludes negatively, and
exclusively of any men's having any sufficient Light, then it concludes
universally also against All men's having any such light, and so upon this
account the Saints themselves are excluded, as having no such Light, as well as
other men, since (according to R. B. and I. Ts. sense on that place) they
understand not all the errors of their lives; but R. B. and I. T. will not
deny but the Saints have some measure of such Light; and therefore why others
have not (though they use it not, that ignorance of all their errors
notwithstanding) is more then these two men can give any good reason for.

The twentieth from Act. 17.30. runs thus, God commands all men every where to
repent of their ignorant worship of him; therefore each man's sight in him is
not a sufficient guide for him to go by in Gods worship.

Rep. From which premises I contrariwise conclude thus; viz. therefore all and
each man every where (though few heed it) has a sufficient Light in him from
God (as the Heathen had, though they glorified and worshipped him not according
to that Light and knowledge of him they had, Romans 1.19. etc.) to guide him
aright in Gods Worship, who commands no impossibilities, nor injoyns any man to
worship him, otherwise then answerably to what of himself and of his Will, is
by his own light made manifest in him.

The 21. is from Prove. 3.5.6.7. Romans 12.16. on this wise; The Quakers Opinion
concerning each man's own light in him, makes men proud, and lifted up, and
prudent in their own sight, to which woe is, Isa. 5.21. and to lean to their own
understanding; and not to depend on God for teaching them in his ways;
therefore, etc.

Rep. Cuius contrarium verum est; If by own Light, these men straggle so far
from the Question in hand, as to intend, as they seem to do, man's own wisdom,
churs^l, thoughts, conceits, imaginations, etc. no men in the world call men
more out of these things so plainly, so earnestly, so constantly, as the
Quakers do; but if they be steady in their dispute (as good Disputants ought to
be) ad Rem substratam, to the matter debated, which is some measure of the true
Light of God and Christ^s the calling to this is so far from making men lean to
their own understanding, and Independent, on Gods teachings; that there is no
man in the world can be said truly to be low, emptied of self, mean in his own
eyes, to trust in the Lord with all his heart, and in all his ways, to
acknowledge him, to leave leaning to his own understanding, to stand in Gods
Counsel (which woe to him who does not, Isa. 38.1.) to learn of God, and depend
on him alone for teaching, to hear his voice, etc. (though he scrape with the
Scribes daily in the Scriptures themselves, Job. 5.35, 36. till he betake
himself to attendance to that, which God says and shows in him by the measure
of that Light wherewith God shines into his conscience: Woe therefore unto these
men that call Gods counsel man's conceit, they are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight, though, in the sight of God and his Saints, not yet
weaned from their foolishness, as they are also of that Generation that are
pure in their own eyes, though not yet washed, nor believing that while they
live here, they can perfectly be washed from their filthiness.

The 22. is no other then the same with the 21. though alluding to two other
Texts from which they fetch them; viz. Judge. 17.6. Psalm. 106.39. In those days
there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own
eyes, and they went a whoring with their own inventions, where they make doing
after men's own thoughts, conceits, inventions, and looking to, or following the
Light within us Synonimous, and this last a sign of wicked men, and going a
whoring from God, and departing from God, unsafe, and such like; concluding
thus, viz. The truth is, God forbid; the following of our own supposed light,
as the greatest impiety, which the Quakers place all their godliness in.

Rep. This is naught but another impudent lie against the Quakers, as well as a
most evidently foolish extravagancy from the Question, which is not about our
own supposed Light, but some measure of that undoubted Light of God, (which
(though ignorantly by you styled natural) yet is not denied to be true Light,
and that from God, and not our own, supposed only so to be. The Quak. place
none of their godliness in such mere supposed light, as ye do, who suppose the
ignis fatius of your dark and silly s^nses and suppositions on the Letter, as
sufficient light for all people to live by, their faith stands not in man's
wisdom, nor in that Science of you opposite Schoolmen, which is falsely so
called and supposed, but in that real infallible Light within, which is the
W^sdome and Power of God; and as for All departure, and going a whoring from
God, and his Light within, after man's own inventions and thoughts in things of
God, which is that impiety of the Priests, that God forbids and abominates, we
deny and abhor it also.

The 23. which is from the first of the two last Texts, and the 24th, which is
from Pro. 14.12. are both also besides the business, and urged in disproof of
that sufficiency of supposed light, and the way that seems right only in man's
eyes, and is not so; this we have nothing to do with, For it is impossible but
that what shows drunkenness to be evil, must needs show sobriety to be good.
but deny it against the Priests, who unawares to themselves, are walking
therein, as the way to death; but that we plead for is the true Light, John
1.9. which lightens every man, and is the only true way that leads to life.

And whereas the consequence of their 23. seems to be to this effect; If every
man had a light in him sufficient to guide him in right and good ways, then
Kings and Rulers should not punish men for walking in the wrong and evil ways
that seem good and right in their own eyes.

Rep. I contrariwise conclude, that if men had not such a light in them, as is
sufficient to guide them in good ways, then Kings and Rulers should not punish
them for going into evil ways; for as 'twere an unjust thing to require (not
of him, that seeing will not see, as those, Math. 13.) of such a blind man as
never could see, to see the right way which was never showed him, and to punish
him for not walking therein; so were it in Rulers to punish men for following
filthy ways, and evil things, if they did not (videre meliora) i. e. see and
know how to do better, for to him who knows good, and does it not, evil and
declines it not, both which are known by the light that is in the world, i. e.
in men (though some for want of heed, say the light in the conscience shows the
evil, but not the good) to him only it is sin to condemnation.

The 25. from Prove. 22.6.15. concludes, That if each man have some such true
light in him, then there is no need of training up children, in whose hearts
foolishness is bound up, in the way they should go, by the rod and teaching;
for what need of the rod (say they) then to drive fully out.

Rep. I reply; to drive it out, and bring them into the way of wisdom, which is
in them, and seen by them (but not much heeded till they smart far it) as well
as the way of Folly: This Argument holds as much against Gods correcting such
whom ye confess to know his will, and do it not, as against our correcting
children, whom we correct for not doing what we know they know they should do;
for no father but he that is foolish will whip his child for any thing as a
fault, but that which his child knew to be so: So fools come to be plagued,
says the Spirit, because of offenses they fly out into, that (if they be not
incorrigible) they with the wife may look well to, and ponder their goings. Our
Doctrine concerning All men's knowing in some measure, by his Light within
themselves, the good will of God, destroys not, but establishes the whip for
the Horse, the Bridle for the Afs, and the Rod for the back of such fools, as
turn aside from the truth that is told them into folly; nor does this any more
conclude against teaching children then m^t, with both which it is consistent,
for the end of our teachings of both, are to turn them to attend to the Light
and Truth it self within them, that does teach them; yea, even children, as
they come to a few years of Discretion: I remember well that before I could
read the Scripture (which I could read when very young) I knew by that of God
in me, and not from my Parents only, whose witness without could not have been
credited therein by me, had not the Witness of God, which is the greater,
testified the same within my self, that I should not lie, and was judged with
fears of wrath, if ever I made a lie, as children are apt to do, to escape a
whipping for a lesser fault.

If then it be ask't why we teach men and children: I answer, to bring and turn
them (as Paul was sent to do) from the darkness, in which they walk beside it,
into the Light, Which whether they walk in it or no, is yet in them; and
because they are not come to it (as all true men do) but hate and decline it
with the evil ones, whose condemnation it therefore is, because though they
come not into it, it is already come into them, John 3.19.20.21.

And with this short self-same Answer, now its brought into my spirit, I shall
here wipe out of the way a whole parcel of pedling Queries of R. Baxter, about
the the Light, as they lie together in his Epistle to the Reader, before I. Ts.
book, into the pit of darkness, from whence they were exerted.

R. B. Q. I. I would fain (quoth he) be resolved in these few Questions: How
comes it to pass that all Nations that never beard the Gospel, are utterly void
of Faith in Christ, when the Nations that have the Gospel do generally know him
more or less?

Aus. To say nothing, how little true knowledge of God is in these Nations,
that he grants have the Gospel, meaning in an outward Ministry, for else I know
no Nation that has not some of that Light which is Gods Gospel in them, any
more then Paul did, who said, The Gospel is preached in every creature under
Heaven, 1 Col. 23. and Romans 10. Have they not all heard? ( i. e. the Gospel)
yes verily, etc. The reason why all the Nations have so little as they all
have, is, Because they come not to the Light which is come into them.

R. B. Q. 2. Why did not the world believe in Christ even generally before his
coming, if Reason was then a sufficient light?

Ans. How far forth right reason taken (not for the bare natural faculty which
a fool may have) but for that supernatural gift of God whereby to guide men out
of all brutish ways, and his light we restiffe to, which is not against, but
according to right reason, are Synonimous, it matters not to be meddled with in
this place; but to the Query I reply the same still, viz. Because men came not
to that light of God which was in them.

R. B. Q. 3. Why did Christ preach himself while he was on earth, if the people
had sufficient light before?

Ans. Christ speaking then audibly to the outward ear, through that voice he
then used, preached himself indeed, that he was the Light of the World, the
Wo^d ^f God, and the Life and Light of men from the beginning, and not from
that time only of that his outward appearance unto a few, John 1.1.2. and to
this end did he preach himself as a light in men (for the Word was made flesh,
and dwelt in us, says John, Ioh. 1.12.) bidding them believe in the light,
i.e. his light in them, and so in himself who is the light, that they might be
the children of it, and walk in the light while they had it, and come to the
light, and such like; because the men to whom he preached thus, were not come
to that light of his, which was come into them.

R. B. Q 4. Why did he send his Apostles to preach through the world, if the
people had sufficient light before?

Ans. To the same end for which he sent John, 1 Ep. 1.1.4.5.6. that they might
walk with God in the light, and not in the darkness, as they did, though the
light was in them; and for which he sent Paul to the Na^ions, Act. 26. to turn
them from the darkne^s to the light, from the power of Satan unto God; and
because men wanted to be instructed which way to look for the Life of God which
they had lost; and because they ye not yet come into that Light of God that
only leads to it, which was come into them.

R. B. Q. 5. Why did he set Pastors and Teachers in his Church, if all have a
sufficient light within them?

Ans. That his Church, which is in God, being turned from the world, and the
darkness of it to the light, might by their memorandums of the things they
knew, 2 Pet. 1. be kept steadfast in their watch to the light, unmovable and
abundant, always in that work of the Lord, believing in the light (which work
the world are not yet come to) and to abide in Christ the Light (as branches in
the Vine) and in the teachings of the Anointing, which is the truth, and no
lie, that it might teach them by degrees all things, and lead them into all
truth, as it had into some already, that the Saints might as branches grow up
in all things into him, even the express Image and likeness of him, who is the
one head over All to the body, and the express Image of the Fathers being, in
whom is no guile, for the perfecting of the Saints (a thing ye seeming Saints
deny to be attainable in ^he body) for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body, till all that are begotten into the nature, may come into
the unity of the faith, and knowledge of Gods Son, even unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. Joh. 15. 1 John 2. Finally, because
men come to the light (if not exhorted to continue in their faith in it) may
again go out from that light of God, which (unless it take occasion by their
wilful departings from it, to depart at last from them) is come unto them, and
continually in them.

R. B. Q. 6. Why do the Quakers go up and down teaching men their own
doctrines, if all men have sufficient light already?

Ans. Not their own doctrines, but the doctrines of Christ, and to call men
into it, and to counsel such as are come into it, as Ioh. Ep. 2. to abide in
Christ's own doctrine or teaching, that they (as who does not so has neither)
may have both Son and the Father; and because m^n generally are not come into
that Light of God, which is already come into them.

R. B. Q. 7. Why do they cry out against us, as being in darkness, when all men
have sufficient light in them?

Ans. Were there no other thing but this one vain thought of yours, that
there is no difference between men's being in the light, and the light's being in
them, its enough of it self, without any more ado, to proclaim you to be in
darkness, for if ye were in the light of common reason that is in you, 't would
tell you, as well as the Scripture, that the light shines in the darkness,
though it comprehends not the light, that it shows the way to them that walk
beside it, though they walk not in it, because they hate it, but in the
darkness which they love more then it, being fallen in love with its evil
deeds, Ioh. 1. Ioh. 3. and so to the Query, we say ye are in darkness, because
ye among other men are not yet come into that sufficient light, which if ye
would once but singly look to, ye should feel is already come into you.

R. B. Q. 8. Will they pray for more Light and Grace, or not, if not, they are
impiously proud; if yea then it seems they have not yet light and grace
sufficient?

Ans. We do pray for more Light and Grace, and God gives more and more to the
bumble, as I have showed above; but if ye were not with all the climbers up
another way, Job. 10.1. either too proud to stoop to come into the knowledge of
the truth by the door, the light, or so blind as to groap f^r the wall, like
them that have no eyes, ye could not but see that their praying for more, and
Gods giving more grace unto the humble, is so far from evincing that they have
none, as that it evidently evinces they have some already; for if men had no
grace, and should pray for it, they might be said to pray for some; but no man
can be properly said to pray for more light and grace, but such as (at least)
have some already.

R. B. Q. 9. Whereas they say the Light within is sufficient, if obeyed, our
Question is, Whether it be sufficient to make men obey it? etc. that is the
Grace we are speaking of, that causes men to hearken, believe, and obey, for
faith is not of your selves, but it is the gift of God, and men's hearts must be
opened as Lydia's was, Act. 16. to hear abd receive the truth revealed. Now to
say that the Light or Grace which is given to cause us to believe and obey, is
sufficient if we will believe and obey, is ridiculous; as if Christ should have
said to Lazarus, I will raise thee, if thou will raise thyself.

Ans. Here R. B. sits besides the cushion, as much as he that queries beside
the Question, for that is not the Grace we are speaking of, that is sufficient
to cause men to obey, but that which is sufficient if obeyed, that is the
testimony the Qua. bear to the Light of God, it is saving to such as walk in
it; and if it be not sufficient Grace from God to R. Baxter, that he has given
him a Light that will lead him to life, if he will follow it, but he lacks
more, even to be caused to walk in that light, or else he quarrels with it as
not enough, and with that Grace of Gods as no Grace, because he is not
compelled by force to accept of it, he may fret himself till he fry in the fire
of his own peevish spirit, before he shall find such a Grace from God to his
Salvation, while himself lives in the neglect of that he has, like the
unprofitable servant, that charges God foolishly as a hard Master, though he
has given him a talent to trade with, unless (while he sits still) God force
him to trade with it whether he will or no.

As for us called Quakers, we judge God has done well for us, in working in us
to will and to do, i.e. the Power, and has (though not in R.Bs., compulsive
way caused us) put us into a capacity to work it out, and left us (as he looks
all men should do when he has done the other, Phil. 2.12. 13.) to work out our
own Salvation with fear and trembling, and that he does by a Ministry without,
and a measure of his spirit within counselling us, open our hearts, as he did
Lydia's, to attend to what himself and his servants say, and if ever we believe
in his Light to our life, that Faith is his gift, though our act, as it is his
gift that we may, or have power either to sit or stan^, and, of his Grace, our
act, when we chu^e either to stand or sit; nor we count it ridiculous (as R. B.
does) to say, That Gods Light and Grace is sufficient to bring us to life, if
we attend it, though God leave us to choose, when he has given it us, whether
we will improve it, or turn from it; nor was it ridiculous in Christ to say to
Lazarus, I will raise thee, if thou will raise by self; for Christ having done
in his part in quickening, left Lazarus to his part in rising, and in effect
said the same, which R. B. counts ridiculous, viz. Lazarus, come forth, which
if Lazarus had not done, he might have perished in that Sepulcher, for all
Christ had quickened him so as to gi^e him the power to come forth, for Christ
would not have pull^d him out by force, if he had refu^ed to come forth when he
called him, nor any more then 'twas in God to say, Hear ye deaf, and look ye
blind, that ye may see.

But as for this man R. B. and his fellows, it is not grace enough, nor count
sie s^fficient (it seems) if a man invite poor folks to dinner, and prepares
meat enough for all comers, and bids his Guests Welcome when they are come, and
compels them by all earnest persuasion to sit down, and bids them, as God does,
Eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abudantly, O beloved, when they are ^ate,
unless, when they refuse, he open their mouths in some forcible manner, and
cause them to eat all that is set before them, such troublesome guests as
these, of which sort are R. B. and the rest that look for such a compulsive
causing, when the grace of a sufficient Feast is vouch fast unto them, are not
fit to sit at great men's tables, much le^s at Gods, and by my consent he that
(unless he be forcibly fed) refuses to feed when the meats before him (whether
it be at a feast of sat things of man's making, or of Gods) shall (while others
hearken, and let their souls delight themselves in fatness) have his choice to
sit still, and (as the Proverb is) may fast and welcome. I conclude then as to
Query, that God puts men into capacity to come to the Light, if they will not
choose darkness before it, that Light is sufficient to save, if obeyed, yet all
men, who all have some of it, are not saved by it, and the reason is, because
they will not come to that Light of G^d, which in Gods good will toward them,
in come into them.

R. B. Q. 10. But how can Light be sufficient (were a man never so obedient) to
reveal that which was never manifested by it, or by any Rev^lation that does
accompany it? No Light among the Heathens in America does tell them, that
Christ was Incarnate, died, rose, ascended, or intercedeth for us, or is the
King, Priest, or Teacher of his Church, or will raise the dead, and judge the
world; how then can this light be sufficient to bring them to the belief of
this?

Ans. Is the Light in America then any more insufficient to lead its followers
to God, then the Light in Europe, Asia, Africa, the other three parts of the
World? I have ever looked upon the Light in All men (since I began to look to it
in my self) as one and the self-same light in all where it is, in sort and
kind, though different in degree and measure, which varies not the nature of
any thing, and that (according to the measure of it, and in ^uch wi^e as its
attended to withal) it shows the same things in all men, as to the myst^^y,
substance, and spirituali^y of them, though the outward History of this in an
outward Letter, some may be better skilled the ein then some.

I wot how Cornelius came to be accepted in his Prayers and Alms, as a man
truly fearing God, before by an outward Ministry he ever heard of Christ
Inca^nate dying, rising, ascending, interceding, etc. (after all the^e things
were outwardly and actually transfacted also) since all you agree, and we with
you, that out of the knowledge of Christ, the Light, there is no acceptance at
all with God, nor in any other name, either Justification or Salvation: Was it
not in his obedience to the Light he had, which came from Christ, the Light,
though as yet he knew him not after the flesh? And by what light did they who
wrote of Christ's Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, Ascensi^n, etc. See them,
before they wrote, as some did, viz. Ab^aham, who saw his day, before any
History, or Letter of your Scripture at all was w^itt^n?

Was it not by that (as they walk on with God in it, from Abel, Enoch, Noah,
and downward) some measure of which (but that they minded it not, as some few
did, but were ever alienated from it, walking in their own ways) was in all
Nations as well as some, and not more (save only in measure) in the Prophets,
then in other men? And did not this light without and before the Letter help
some (even such still as walked after it) to the belief of this, and that God
would raise the dead, and judge the world, which they wrote in the Light and
Spirit in which they saw it, and in that wisdom which in all Ages, Wisd. 7.
entering into holy souls that heed it, makes them friends of God and Prophets?
Were these things then, as R. B. thinks in his Query, never manifested by the
Light without the Letter, nor by any Revelation that does accompany the Light,
were men never so obedient to it? What darkness is this of R. B. in his ten
Queries, who yet to pin the basket at the end of this tenth Query, to add
weight to the lightness, and light to the darkness of it, adds one more of his
own thoughts and odd conceits, in these words:

R. R. I think its past controversy, that no man has sufficient Grace to his
Salvation, till his last breath: For if God add not more for his preservation,
all will be lost.

Ans. By which hasty speech the man proclaims his being in the darkness, and
besides the light that is in him, so loud, and exalts its f^lly, and sets it so
on high, that All may see it, save such as are with him in the dark where he
is; for besides the absurdity (above spoken to) of his arguing from Gods adding
more, and men's not having so much yet as they may have, that therefore they
have none at all of that Grace which is sufficient; he turns from the true
terms of his Question, taking the word suffien^ here in quite another sense
then it has been taken in along, viz. for the highest d^g^^^ only of that
Grace of God, when as the question is about the sufficiency of it to save from
that sin it shows, such as keep to it, in the very least degree; and lastly,
expressly contradicts the Scripture which speaks of the suffi^^ency of God Grace
to keep men that keep to it, in such degrees of it as are attainable in this
life, witness that of God to Paul, full fourteen years behind the time wherein
he spoke it, and many more before the time of his last breath, 2 Cor. 12. My
grace is sufficient f^r thee. I conclude then (all R. Bs. Queries
notwithstanding) that though all are not saved by it, yet all have some of that
Light and Grace which is ^aving, and that all are not saved, as some are, it is
because they come not into that Light and Grace ^f God which is come into, and
unto them.

And now I return to R.B. and I.Ts. Arguments against this, whose 26th from
John 6.44. 45. 65. is thus, There Is need of a further drawing, or gift of the
Father, that a man may come to Christ, as there would not b^ if his own light,
without other help, would make known Christ to him; therefore each man's own
light is not sufficient, etc.

Rep. Here R. B. lays on hard again upon the Anvil, beside the Iron, in
di^proving the sufficiency of man's own light, by which he means man's thoughts,
wisd^m^, etc. (which we count da^kness and foolishness much more then himself
does) when the Question is about the Light of G^d in the heart, of which we
say, that, though none can come to Christ without G^d draw him, yet by that G^d
d^aws all me^, though a^l m^n come not after hi^: And so the reason why they
perish still, is not because God does not d^aw them to life by a light
sufficient to lead to it, but because they resist, hang back, and will nto
follow it; therefore says God, I drew them with the co^ds of my love, with the
bands of a man, yet shall they go into captivity, because they refused to
return.

The 27. from 1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.21. Mat. 4.24. Believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits, etc. Prove all things take heed what ye hear, is thus; If
each persons light within him were a safe guide of it self to God, then no men
need to try other men's spirits, nor to prove all things, left he be deceived,
since if he follow his own light he is fallible, etc. But these things are
absurd, and contra^y to the warinest Christ prescribes; therefore the light
within each person is not a sufficient guide to God.

I shall (instead of ( his own light) placing (the Light of God) about which
only the Dispute is) syllogize these men's silly Syll^gisme back upon them thus:
If the Light of God within each person were not a sufficient and safe guid^ to
lead him to God, then no man need ( to trouble himself s^ much as) to try other
men's spirits, or prove all things, left he be deceived, for that is but labor
in vain, since if he have not a measure of Gods Infallible Light and Spirit in
^im whereby to judge of things, even of that Light of which the Letter says,
That all things that are to be reproved, Ephesians. 5. are manif^st^d by it, and no
truth is infa^liby manifested but by it, which only leads into all truth; he is
not infallib^y guided, nor undoubtedly sure of his hand, let him look, search,
prove, and try as much as he will, any more then a man can infallibly di^cern,
and distinguish of colors in a dismal dark night, or dark place, where not one
beam of the Sun shines so as to discover them: But these things are absurd and
contrary to the wariness that Christ prescribes, who does not bid men try all
things by that Light and Spirit of God which only makes all truth, and all that
is knowable of God; and all things of God manifest in men, Romans 1.19. and yet
not vouch^afe them one beam of that only sufficient Light to try any thing by;
yea, 'twere no less then as mere mockage, as to bid a man read for his life in
a dark Dungeon, without sufficient light either of Sun or candle, or take heed
to himself by that Light that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. when there is
no true light there at all, and contrary also to all common s^nse and reason;
therefore there is in every man some of that Light of God, which as its heede^,
according to the measure of it, is able to guide him infallibly to judge of the
matters, truths, ways, d^ctrines, spirits, he is bid to try, on peril of being
deceived to damnation, and a sufficient safe guide to lead him unto God.

I wonder what Light, Spirit, Rule, and Tou^hstone all Truth and all Spirits
are to be tried by, if not by that measure of the Spirit of Truth it self,
which convinces the world of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, and leads its
followers into all Truth.

Ob. If any say it cannot be that Spirit of God, nor his Light in men the Qua.
call to, for that is one of the things to be tried, try the spirits whether of
God or no, and that which is to be tried, cannot be the rule of Trial.

Ans. I answer, why not? Did you Schoolmen never learn that Lesson your selves,
which ye teach to others, viz. that Regula, which is always quid Rectum, is
m^nsura sui and obliqui: The strait Rule must ever be the Rul^ or measure of it
self, as well as of that which is crooked and faulty? Does not the light
manifest it self to be true light, as well as the darkness to be truly
darkness? and does not the Sun as well shows it self to a man to be the Sun, as
it shows a dark Cloud or smoke not to be it? and why may not the inward light,
which is truly and inde^d is only it fallible, be truly said to be ( Autopiste)
believed for it self sake, and to be the Rule of Trial that must try all
spirits and sayings but its own, yea, its own also, as I. O. falsely says, nor
more nor less, but the self-same of the outward fallible, because ( flexible)
Letter, which flows forth from it?

I say it is true, we are to try all spirits and things, but as what man knows
the things of a man, but the spirit of a man within himself, even so the things
of G^d knows no man but the Spirit of God, and that Spirit in which that Spirit
of God reveals them, 1 Gor. 2?

What shall we try Light and Da^kness by, but by the Light? I know our Divines
say try all spirits by the Scripture, all l^ghts (so called, whether they be
true or pretended) by the Letter: But herein they discover their own dancings
of the Rounds still in the night of their own thoughts, and in the midst of the
mist of darkness, foramuch as (no otherwise then as when we ask them, what is
the Rule they go by in their Analogical Faith? they say the Scriptures; and
when we ask them what is the Rule they go by in their interpreting ^f that Rule
of their Faith, i.e. the Scriptures? they tell us the Analogy of their Faith,
even so) when we ask them what are ye to try the Scriptures by, whether they
are of God or no? they say by the Spirit; yea, though other things may be
accessory, yet the testimony of the Spirit is necessa^y, and only
all-sufficient to this pu^pose; so says not only B^ll in his Ca^echize, but
also all the Builders of Babel, and Worsh^ppers of Baal, in what form soever
(excepring Popish Priests, who are in a worse extreme, and deny (as no Rule)
for their own Traditions sake, both Scriptures and Spirit altogether) but when
we ask them, but how shall we try that Spirit of God whether of God or no? for
we are not believe every spirit (to go round again) they tell us by the
Scriptures; and thus the poor Clergy are cozened; and how those they Lord it
over should escape d^lusion, and creep out of their Babylonish confusion, I know
not, till they come to that (and some such thing there is, or else there is no
infall^ble knowledge of any thing) which is of a certainty past all
demonst^ation; s^, that as to a blind man it cannot be proved, so to a seeling
man in need not, and that is the Light of God in the Con^cience, which (as
heeded) and according to the measure of it, shows both it se^f and darkness,
truth and deceit, good and evil, what God would have each man do for his own
particular, and what to decline ( de Iure) what sins he lives in that he should
forgo, what sins he does or does not forgo, de facto; e.g. lying, cozening,
cheating, drunkenness, adultery, murder, doing that ill to others, be would not
have done to himself, and such like; final^y, what manner of man he is, upright
or wicked, a true man, or an hypocrite, etc. And all this (though internally
and spiritually, yet) as truly and inf^llibly, as with his bodily eyes by the
Light of the Sun, or but a candle he sees himself, and, with his natural animal
understanding, he perceives himself to be a man, and not a Beast.

Their 28. from Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me, and
know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting; is thus: If David had a Light within him of it self a
sufficient and safe guide to God, he should no need G^d to search, know, and
try him, he might have led himself; but it is otherwise with David, therefore he
knew he had not a Light within him. And to this tune also I. O. belying the
Qua. represents them as saying, they need not any teaching, having a Light
within them, for a much as themselves are Autodidactoi, taught of themselves,
Ex. 3. S. 20. Opus non habent vel Doctrina, etc. cum ipsi sunt Autodidactoi, si
iis fidem adhibere (...) sit.

Rep. Oh most absurd and abominable! how do evil men and seducers war worse and
worse, dec^iving, and being deceived? 'Twas darkness, gross enough, to gainsay
the being of a sufficient light to guide to God in All m^n; but this is
grosser, yea, no le^s then groapabl^ to deny it to be in a^y men; for if it be
in any men, it is surely in the Saints, and if in them, then in Dav^d, whom
they own as one, yet behold the M. As. and B. Ds. of our times tell us now,
that David himself, who says, Thy word have I hid in me, that I might not sin
against thee, P^a. 119. which word ^he calls a Lamp to his feet, and a Light to
his paths, had not a Light within him, as a sufficient safe guide to lead in
the way everlasting, and consequently the Saints, to whom ( nemine obstante)
Paul says according to M^ses, the word is nigh thee, in thy heart, the word ^f
Faith, which we preach, had none of it in them as well as sinners. But that
they may not, insanire sine ratio^e, they give a reason for it, such as it is,
viz. If David had a Light of God within him sufficient, etc. he need not G^d to
search, know, try, and lead him, he might have led himself, not heeding that
all the Saints that are taught by the Light, and in that learn in silence in
all subjection, are not Autodidactoi, as these men suppose, but as Paul says,
all Saints are Theodidactoi, learning of Christ, and taught of God, 1 T^es.
41.9. That the Qua. deny all Teaching but that of God, or men moved by the same
Li^ht and Spirit by which God teaches; yea, I acknowledge freely, that he that
teaches himself, and learns not of God, but leans to his own understanding, as
the Clergy does, has but a fool to his Master; yet so far as David needed God
to know and try his heart and thoughts, so far he needed Gods Light within him,
there being no way whereby God ( who searches the heart, and tryes the reins,
to give to everyman according to his ways) both searches, sees, and al^o shows
unto man his thoughts, and leads him in the way everlasting, but by his own
Spirit, Light, and Word within man, which alone is to that end quick and
powerful, sharper then any two edged sword, piercing and dividing asunder
between the marrow and reins, soul and joints, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, so that not any thing is bid from the sight
thereof, but all things are naked and bare before him, with whom we have to do
so far, as with that Word and Light which is Gods own Witness within man,
whereof the Letter, which is man's witness for God without man testifies, which
leads to the Light, while that Light and Truth it points at, leads only to the
life and way everlasting, of which says the Psalmist, O send out thy Light and
Truth, that they may lead, and that they may guide and conduct me unto thy Holy
Hill, and to thy Tabernacle.

Their 29th from Deuteronomy. 4.8. Psalm. 147.19.20. Romans 3.1.2. is thus: What
advantage then has the Ierk, and what pr^fit is there in Circumcision, if
(each Gentile had a Light within him, as a sufficient guide in the things of
God, as the Qua. teach) then they had known Gods Statutes and Judgments Gods
Oracles had been committed to them as well as to the Jews, they had had, as
righteous Statutes, and been as wise a Nation as they: But these consequents
are false, and contrary to the Texts.

Rep. The advantage the Jew, or Circumcision outward, according to the flesh
and Letter, not Spirit, over the Gentile or uncircumcision outward, in the
flesh and Letter, was much every way, and yet not so much as is inconsistent
with each Gentiles having some measure of Gods Light within; and the profit
that the Circumcision had (which ye repeat your selves, yet are so blind that
ye cannot see it) was in that chiefly (mark) to them were committed the Oracles
of God, which term ( chiefly) be tokens, that in some man^er and measure the
Oracles of God were committed to the uncircumcision also, which term could not
be properly used, if the other had them not at all: If one should say the
Angel, or Ecclesiastical Leaders of the La^dicean Church of England, are
chiefly first or principally blinded, that would intimate that the people are
in some measure blind, though not so much as their Clergy in things of God. So
this advantage the Jew had in that, preaching the Covenants, and Prom^ses, and
tenders of Gods Grace, was chiefly or first (for the word is Proton, Romans 3.2.)
made unto them; as Act. 3.46. to you chiefly or first (Proton) God having
raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless y^u, in turning away every one
of you from his iniquities. So Act. 13. 'Twas meet the Word of this Salvation
should (Proton) first or chiefly be preached to you; so says Christ, Luke
24.47. That Repentance and Remission of sins should b^ preached among a^l
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

Again, they had the Tables of the Covenant, and the outward Letter, and the
types and shadows of the good things, and the earthly Canaan, Kingdom, City
Jerusalem, Dominion, Dignity and Glory, that were the figures of the true,
besides a measure of the inner light that led to the substance, and that the
Eternal Life lay in, which the Gentile had some of, together with them; so the
Jew still had the p^eheminence and p^^^rity (had they had the consideration to
have improved it) but the chi^f price being put into their hands, and they
(like fools) not using it, nor looking through all this to the end of the
things now abolished, nor to the Light and Power of the endless life, but to
the Letter and Law only of a carnal Commandment, which they boasted of, and yet
brake it, they lost that pre-eminence, and let the Gentiles outstrip them, and
be chief as to the Justification, and they themselves became chiefly condemned,
Romans 2.26.27. Shall not the uncircumcision, which is by nature, if it fulfill
the Law, judge thee, who by the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the
Law? And verse 8.9.10. Indignation, wrath, tribulation, anguish, upon every
soul of man that works ^vil to the Jew first, or chiefly (Proton) and also to
the Gentile: So 2 Esd^as 1.37. Though they have not seen me with bodily eyes,
yet in spirit they believe that thing that I say; but if we speak of the true
Circumcision which is that of the heart and spirit, not of the Letter, and of
the true Jew inwardly, his advantage over the Jew outward, and the outward
Gentile, his advantage is indeed over all, for his praise is not of men, but of
God himself: And this is that Israel of God, and that Jew (and not the
Synagogue of Satan, that say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie, Rev. 2.)
whose the Salvation and Kingdom, Glory and Covenants, and lively Oracles, and
All is, for Salvtion is of the Jews, Luke 18. of Abraham's Seed, which are
Christ's, and Heirs according to the Gospel promise, heirs of the world,, and
blessed with faithful Abraham, as they are of his Faith, and his children,
doing his works, who did not kill Christ, as the Clergy does, John 8. Romans 4.
Gal. 3. before the feet of which Jew, the Lord will make the pretended Jew,
whether natural Jews, or mere nominal Christians, to fall down and worship, and
to know that he has loved them; and these are those Jews, that Israel and
Jacob (but that the blind cannot look through the vail into the end of the Type
which is abolished) of whom its said, Psalm. 147.19.20. He shows his Word unto
Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt s^ with
a^y Nation, and as for his Statutes and Iudg^ments they have not known them;
for howbeit it the natural Jew outward knows much that his Le^ter tells him,
and by the outward hearing of the ear the outward Statutes and Iudg^ments of
God, and also the outward Gentile (though nominally Christian) by his light
within (as well as that natural Jew by that and his Letter too) knows the
Judgments of God, Romans 1. that those that d^ such things as they do, are
worthy of death; yet the Jew in spirit, or Christian by nature (not name only)
having within himself, as Paul and they, 2 Co^. 5. known the terror of the
Lord, and felt the weight of his hand for sin, and seen h^w fearful a thing it
is to fall into the hands of the living God, and known the power of his wrath
(while his Judgments, which begin at his own house, past upon him in his own
Conscience) which who (. e. but they) knows, says the Psalmist they can
persuade others from what they have seen, felt, and handled of Gods Word, and
his Judgments, which are a great deep, yet to the rest that live alienated
from the Light, and by them have been purged from their filth, and warned from
the wickedness of their way, and of simple been made wise, of which precious
u^e Gods Judgments are to all that thus witness and know them; as Psa. 19.
Yea, these are that Nation of Israel (and not that which is now become a curse
and perished) out of what ever outwa^d Nation or People they are gathered into
the one Light and Spirit, of whom its said, Who is like unto thee, O Is^ael ^ a
people saved by the Lord, who rides on the H^avens for thy help? And in that
of these men's quoting, Deuter. 4.8. What Nation is there so great, that has
Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law, which is set before them
(in the light) their keeping and doing of which shall be their wisdom and
understanding in the sight ^f those Nations, which though now they count them
fools, shall at last see themselves to have been infatuaated, and say of Gods
now dispersed and desp^sed Seed of Israel after the Spirit, Surely this great
Nation is a wise and understanding people.

And as for others, though (as R. B, I. T. T. D. and ye all say) God has not
dealth so richly with any as he does with them that receive the riches of his
Grace, and they have not known his Judgments in such a measure as these know
them, yet all, as they heed the Light, in that may know them, as in some degree
the Heathen, heeding the Light, are said to do, Romans 1. and degrees never vary
the nature of a case, neither follows it, that because some know not so much as
some, therefore many neither do nor (for want of Light) can know nothing of the
Gospel, or Saving Truth of God at all.

The 30th from Romans 7.7. is thus: The Light within neither did to Paul, nor
does, nor can discover sin, even the sin of Lust, without the Law; therefore
the Light within each person is not a sufficient guide of it self to lead to
God, and to warrant men's actions, without the written Word, i. e. Scripture
with them.

Rep. Why not as well as before the Law was written in an outward Letter at
all? (if by the Law ye will needs understand nothing but outward Scripture) for
some sure knew lust before Moses wrote the Law.

But in very deed (how deeply soever ye dream in this, as ye do in most things)
this Law, without which the Lust is not well known, is no other then the Light
it self within; for the Letter says lust is a sin, but it is the Light that
shows thy lust to filth, envy, or any evil, to be thy sin within thy self; and
that Law, by which the knowledge of sin comes, is that Law and Commandment
which Prove. 6.23, is said to be the Light and the Lamp, even the w^rd that
David hid of him, that he might see the way of covetou^ness that was (e^sewise)
hid in his heart, and so not sin against G^d, by which only the young man, in
whom lust is strong, taking heed thereunto, shall come to cleanse his way,
which is never clean, while he hangs only on the lips of Letter-stealers, and
mere Letter-lauders, who lauding the holy life they li^e not in, are at best
but liars, when they preach the Truth: But this being elsewhere handled, I
shall need to say the less of it here.

So having done with these two men's thirty Arguments, a few words more to their
ten w^a^ Reas^ns against the true Light in all men, and then I have done with
them, as to that.

Reason 1. Because what each man conceives according to his Light within him,
cannot be right and ^rue, for one man's conceits do sometimes contradict
another: Nor are the Quak. all of one mind when they follow the Light within
them.

Rep. This is one of your own cro^ked odd conceits indeed, but far from truth
and good consequence, that the Light or Rule it self cannot be true or right,
or a safe rule, because men's conceits of things to be, or not be according to
it, may be contradictory one to another, and so not both true: It Is true,
contradicto^y conceivings ab^ut one Rule, cann^t be both true; but he
contradicts a^l truth and common reas^n, who conceives the Rule or Light it
self to be ere the worse, or ere the less a true Rule or Light, because of
that: Two men may have contradict^ry th^ughts and conceits (whereof one must
needs be false) about a piece of Cloths agreeing, or nor agreeing with the ya^d
or measure; but it follows nor therefore from any thing but these faithless
men's false and foolish fancies, that the Ta^d is not a Yard, or no good rule or
measure; and if this were good consequence R. B. and I. T. (but that they are
blind still) might see it conclude more strongly against their Letters being
(as they plead it to be) the only true Light or Rul^, then against the Light,
since there is as many silly senses, misty meanings, and contradictory conceits
in the minds of them that are Ministers of it, almost as they are Ministers of
it: For whereas they tell us of two Qua. contradicting one another, I have told
these four men I.O. T.D. R.B. I.T. of contradicting one another many times over
in their books against us, and shall do yet a little more before this book I
here write be at an end; yea, ^n truth (as I have showed already before, and
shall do more behind) there is little else then confusion and contradiction to
themselves by our men called Clergy, well nigh in all the Doctrines they have
to do with; besides, this reason rendered by them is not at all against the
Light of God, but against men's mere conceits, which we are more against then
any men whatever, calling men out of their own conceivings, into Gods own
Counsel the Light; So quid hoc ad rem?

Reas. 2. Because that which unvariable and alterable, cannot be a persons
Rule, for its the property of a Rule to be invariable, and the same at all
times: Rules, Measures, Weights, Dials, Squares, and what other things are
made, if they be varied, c^ase be Rules; Rules should be fixed and certain, but
nothing more variable then men's light in them.

Rep. Igrant that is no rule which is variable and alterable, and therefore have
above from hence concluded, and do here again, from your own premises, conclude
the Letter (the Rule ye talk for, more then walk by) not to be that only Rule
of Faith and Life, as ye would have it, but Gods Light in the heart, which the
Letter came from; since as I. O. teaches us in his Epistle (though he will not
learn the same lesson himself, but teaches in his book as much against it as he
does for it) that the Letter in the very Original copies of it, which yet ye
count an unalterable Rule, is variable, alterable, flexible, at Critics wills,
by the changing of some one point or Hebrew Letter (alike in sound or shape) no
less then eight several ways in that one very word [(...)] and some of those
as countradictory each to other, as Life to Death (as is showed more at large
above) besides all various Lections that are risen (by I. Os. confession) from
the actual mistakes of them it Transcribers. But the Light (however men run out
into various conceits and imaginations about this or that, which and what is or
is not agreeable to it) is inviolably the same for ever, the Council and
foundation of God, which is Christ's Light in the heart, the Rock of ages,
stands sure, let the drunkards of Ephraim rock and reel too and fro, or ramble
about, and run out whether they will after their own counsels and inventions.

Reas. The 3 and 4 are both of one unlearned leven and coincident with what is
urged above, viz. if the light within men were a safe guide and ride, then
'twere unnecessary, unsafe, and foolish, for men to seek council of others,
each might be guided by his light^; also then the meetings of Quakers to
consult about and (...) in Commu^^on to Teach each other, or to Communicate,
revelations is needless and vain, since each may guide himself: That Is done in
va^^ by more which may be done by (...), etc.

Rep. Frustra sit per p^ara quod porest fleri ( t^m been) per pauciora, that is
done in vain by more, that may be done (as well) by less. Is true, but what
may be done better by more then fewer, is not in vain, and therefore as vis
unita fortior is true among Scholars, so in the multitude of counselors
there is in many cases so much the more safety is as true among Christians; yet
it proves not but that there is also security to assurance enough, wheee every
one attends to that of God within himself: Therefore it is neither unsafe nor
foolish (as ye fool^shly affirm) but may be both safe and profitable (for so
the Apostles and Elders did of old, Act. 15. Who yet in all were guided by the
Spirit) to meet together in council, but its in no wise so absolutely
necessary (as ye make it) to seek for other Teachings, then that of the Light
and Spirit of God within, in order to each man's holy living, much less such as
is given out in your Synods, where ye teach Gods worship, and fear after your
own thoughts and traditions; yea to such as are turned to the Spirits teaching,
it is said ye need not that any man teach you save as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, which is truth and no lie; and if we do hear men
speak that are moved by the Spirit, its not in vain, it being all one whether
that holy Spirit speak in me, or in another to me, we still own no other
teaching but that of the anointing, and so the Apostles (though met in
council, yet) concluded no other things to be imposed on men, then what seemed
good to them and the holy Spirit, which taught them, and imposed (not as ye do)
what seems good to your selves, who deny also the guidance of that infallible
Spirit to be present in the world at this day.

Reas. 5. Then its in vain to desire and expect revelations and discoveries
which they had not before, since they have the light within of themselves:
Therefore when they compose themselves to their quaking fits, that they may
have some word of the Lord to speak to people, what is this but an hypocritical
devise, blasphemous, false and unrighteous, or else needless: Since they have a
light within them sufficient to guide them without other revelation?

Rep. This is nothing but an addition to these men's many lies (for which they
must know part in the la^^) and blasphem^us reproach^s of the Qua. Who own no
such thing as a light in men that is of themselves, but that only, which is
(though in them) yet of God: As for composing of themselves to quaking fits,
Hypocritical devices, and pretenses of new revelations, and much more such
like Riff-raff, as is reckoned to them in this 5th Reason, the Qua. deny them,
who expect no other then true revelations of that old true Gospel in that way
of waiting on God in that true old Light, R. B. and I. Ts. Title Page pretends
to exalt, but their book ignorantly and impiously depresses, as new light and
darkness, in which true old light ^f God in the heart it was ever revealed
from faith to faith to the Just, who lived by faith in that light before the
letter was.

Reas. 6. By asc^ibing so much to the light within them, Satan has advantage
to draw men to ho^^id acts, since what ever he can imprint on them as their
light, they must receive it without any examination, and obey it.

Rep. What silly stuff is this? As if because Satan may transform himself as
an Angel of Light in men's hearts to decieve them, if they look not well to the
true light of God that shines therein, and receive not the truth told by it in
the love thereof: Therefore there is no true light there shining: As if because
there is much error and many lies, that the Father of lies and Ruler of the
darkness seeks to beguile by, and does beguile unstable souls by: Therefore
there is no truth to be beguiled from, and to be s^aid upon: Scilicet, sic
aiunt, praedic^nt, clamitant, non probant.

Reas. 7. Then he that is counted unlearned and foolish, if he follow his own
light, does as well as he that is never so wise and learned, whereas Solomon
tells, Eccl. 2.13, 14. That wisdom excells folly as far as light excells
darkness.

Rep. Why not? He that is counted unlearned and foolish by the wise men of this
world, who follow the foolishness of their own fleshly fancies, whose wisdom
is foolishness with God, if he follow the light of God, does not only as well,
but a thousand-sold better then such wise and learned as abovesaid, and the
wisdom of these that are fools with you, excels your seeming wisdom, in
which ye are acting real folly, as far as light excels darkness; by all
which wisdom of your own ye cannot discern so much as your own Scipture, which
tells you of a way which is called the way of holiness, in which the unclean
cannot walk, though never so worldly wise, yet the wayfaring man that walks in
it, though a fool, shall not err therein, Isa. 35.8.

Reas. 8. Then the Philosophers Light was sufficient to guide them, for surely
they had as much Light without the Scripture as any, and did improve it to the
utmost; and the Jewish Rabbis, besides the natural light in them, did by the
study of the Law, and Traditions of Elders, endeavor to attain the knowledge
of God, to whom yet Christ was foolishness; and Paul uses this expr^bation,
Where Is the wise? where the Disputer of this world?

Rep. The Philosophers, and the Jewish Rabbis, whereof the one had the Light
within (which ye call natural, but is indeed Gods Law, which is spiritual) and
not the Scripture without, and the other both that Light within, which is the
Law, and the Letter without also, did neither of them improve it to the utmost
(as ye falsely assert) nor follow that Light, but one their own thoughts,
inventions, and imaginations only of things (as ye do yours) the other their
own senses, meanings, and traditionary interpretations of the Letter, and so
ran both out mostly into a Philosophy and Science (falsely so called) and into
mere v^in deceit, as your selves do, who are the same Generation of Disputers
of this world, whose wisdom God is making foolish, and by that foolishness of
preaching (as ye count that of the Qua.) saving such as believe in that Light
they call to: If the Jewish Rabbis, who were as well skilled in Scripture as
your selves, did get so little saving knowledge of God by their study of the
Law or Letter, and Tradition of Elders, because not looking to the Law or Light
in the heart, which the Letter sends to, ye may ^ee the reason why ye are so
succesless in your seeking God, as to know so little of him as ye do, who are
yet seeking him in no other way then they, Ioh. 5.39. And as much as ye despise
the Heathen Philosophers as Ethnicks, some even of them that did according to
the Law or Light they had, will as much judge many of you nominal Christians (as
they did the Jews) who with the Jews make boast of the Letter of the Law, yet
through breaking thereof dishonor God, and cause the name Christian to be a
stink among the Gentiles.

Reas. 9. If every man's Light within him were a safe guide to him in Religion
and Morality, then do all Lawmakers ill, etc. and judges ill, in passing
sentence of condemnation on men, then a^ m^^^ill to reprove, etc. Parents,
Tutors, Schoolmasters, ill to teach men otherwise, then is all Government and
Magistracy unprofitabl^, Rulers are not Ministers of God to us for good, but
only to molest and oppress us; then they that set their children to School do
foolishly, Universities and Schools of Arts to breed up in liberature and good
manners are vain, and all these are to be abolished, which were the way to lay
all waste, etc. to level people in manners and knowledge, etc. to reduce to
Barbarism, to make the Nation a Wilderness; in fine, to drive Gods Spirit from
us, and introduce unclean spirits to repossess our Land, to expel all that is
excellent, and may better us, and to fill the Nation with a Generation of
fools, in whom God has no pleasure, Eccl. 5.4. and by consequence to condemn
all the man of worth in the world, since the C^^ation, of folly and blindness.

Rep. The former part of this Rantipole Reason is refell'd before, in former
parts of this book of mine, where the very contrary rather is abundantly
showed, viz. that 'twere ill in Judges, Rulers, Magistrates, Parents (whose
correction of ill doers, for whom the Law only is, 1 Timothy 1.9. we own) to
reprove, condemn, and punish any for doing contrary to the pu^e Religion, and
undefiled before God (which is morality or good manners, and to keep a man's
self unspotted of the ill manners, and pollutions of the world) if the persons
so reproved, condemned, punished and corrected, had not a Light in them
sufficient to teach them that true Religion, for all just condemnation must
arise from man's having Light, and not loving to live by it, and the Light only
is the worlds condemnation, Ioh. 3.19. And as for the last clauses about Tutors
and Schoolmasters, Universities, and Schools of Arts, to breed up in literature
and good manners, as they pretend to do, they had more need then any other
places and people in this Nation to be taught themselves what true Religion and
good manners are; yea, the very principles thereof, if that Light in every man's
conscience that teaches them to live honestly, righteously, and soberly (as in
truth it is) and to keep a man's self unspotted of the world, be that pure
Religion ^hat's undefiled before God (as the Scripture says it is) and not
that of those who are pure and religious in their own eyes, and yet never mean
to be washed from their filthiness: I have spoken much above, how vain they are
of all places throughout this Nation, and add thus in brief, that (unless they
come to be better reformed then ever they have been since I knew them) they are
at this day (not for want of a Light within, but of attending to that Light
that is in their hearts that teaches them better) so full of va^ity, prid^,
luxury, filth, enmity, hatred, malice against truth, insolent scoffing at good
men, abusive carriages toward the Qua. in their Meetings, (...), ^eastliness,
rudeness, ignoranc^, violence (as that of the Horse and Mule, whose mouths,
lest they do mischief, must be held in with bit and bridle (as the Scholars
have not been of late so much as they should be, by either May^rs or
ViceChanc^llors without in our two Universities, nor by the Light in
themselves) which (how ere they bear the names of Nurseri^s of Religion, and
have some seeming shows thereof) shows all their Religion to be in vain, Iam.
1.26. That the abode of them in the Nations in this deformed state wherein they
stand, as Nurseries of naughtiness, more then honesty, is rather (as it
hitherto has been) a way to lay wast all common civility, and corrupt all good
manners, and bring men to barbarism, and make the Nation a Wilde^^^ss, yea, an
Acheldama, or field of blood, if people every where should be as bloody as the
Scholars have been at Oxford and Camb^idge against the Saints (witness what is
above declared, and the late pranks at Cambridge since that was written) and in
sine, to drive away the Spirit of God from among us, introduce unclean spirits
to repossess us, and our Lord, to expel all that is, and all them also that are
excellent, and may better us (as the Qua. do, who seek to bring all men to
innocence and honesty, a little of which shall (...)-weigh all Scholastical
sibtilis, and (...) Piety, in the day that are coming on) and in a word, to
fill the Nation still (which has been too full of such for many Ages and
Generations upwards) with that Generation of Locusts and Caterpillars, that
have eat up every green thing in it, and that whole FFFraternity of Fools, in
whom God has no pleasure, who are more ready to offer their (Cains)
Sacrifices. then to hear and obey what God himself says in them, Eccles. 5.4.
And lastly, to condemn all the sincere hearted Saints, and honest hearts since
the Creation, which are men of such worth in the world, that (what ere the
worthless wise men thereof say falsely to the contrary) the world is not worthy
of them, of that fully and blindness, which is found more among the foresaid
FFFraternity, then among any other whomsoever: So that I will not say
(according as they may be ordered) how useful such Tutors and Universities may
be, but as so disorderly as they have been, they may not only to every sober
eye seem altogether vain and worthless, but worse then naught it self, and
Cages of every unclean and hateful bird; neither have the many frovolous chaffy
formalities that Lawyers literature has led out into, proved more destructive
to the substance, equity, and very end of the Law, which at first was good,
then that fleshly wisdom, and loose kind of literature that is learned at
Universities, that has led men out into fullness of all filthiness, open
profaness, infinite fopperies, under a (...) of Piety, or form of godliness,
been destructive hitherto to the very Practice and Power of it, and to the
purity of Religion, and the Gospel: And though iniquity abounds most openly
among ^uch as are under their Tuition, yet 'twere better then it mostly has
been, if Teachers and Tutors of all ^orts, whom ye so ta^k for, were not of
those Ts. by whom Vniversiti^s are debaunched, and Truth turned upside, both
there and in all Countr^es, as well as by Tyth^-monge^s and Turn-c^ats.

Reas. 10. If every man have a Light within him sufficient to guide him, then
(quoth I. T. who ^s back (...) by R. B.) I suppose they will grant I have such
a light within me; and if every man is to follow this light, then I am to
follow my light within me: Now my light within me shows me, that the Qua.
Opinion about the light in them is an error, that they pervert Souls, by
bidding men follow it, etc. And this is not only my light, but the light of
millions besides me, yea, I think all sober men have found their own darkness
and ignorance, and groaned under it, bewailing it to God, and applying
themselves to the use of such means as might bring light into their Souls. I
conclude, that this Opinion of the Quakers, which I have refuted, is the most
s^ttish Opinion that ever was hatched, instilled into them by the Prince of
darkness, not by the Spirit of G^d, and tends to the dissolution both of
Religions Discipline, and Civil Government; yet they say, or rather brawl
somewhat for their Opinion.

Rep. I know well enough that thy own light I.T. and thine own R. B. (which is
da^kne^s) does dictate to you, that the Qua. testimony to the Light of God in
men, is an error, and a perverting of Souls, because it converts so many to
God, and turns them aside from attending any more to them that teach for hire:
But we say not, what ere ye ^uppo^e, that ye are at all to follow that: But
what we also testify to, and bid you follow, is the Light of God.

Rep. The (...) and thou R. B. either have, or have had (if not now lost it)
such a Light within you from God, as is a sufficient safe guide to God, and
that (though its evident ye have not done it) you should have followed, and if
you had, you should have known us (as now you do not) it would have showed you
that the Qua. Doctrine of the Light within is no error, and that they do not
pervert, but convert souls to God, by bidding men follow it; and if ye have
found by experience your own darkness and ignorance (as ye say all sober men
have, among which you surely count your selves) bewail that your darkness unto
God, and yet apply your selves to the use of such means as may bring the Light
to shine out into your souls, which is to come more soberly then ever yet to
the Light within you, which shows you your own darkness, without terming it
(disparingly) error, delusion, conceit, and (as I.O. does jeeringly) figment,
the Infallible Doctor, I know not what God, etc. the Imagined Christ of the
Qua. some spiritual every thing, truly nothing, etc. lest at last indeed (not
walking in it while you have it) your light go out in obscure da^kness, lest it
be totally taken from you, and you cast into the utter darkness, never to see
the Light of God (in whose Light the Qua. see light) any more; the best light
in you then being but merae tenebrae and caecitas, blindness and darkness it
self: But if it be so that the best Light in all, or any of you four, I have
mostly more or less had to do with throughout this book, in answer to your
selves, and all men that are of your dark minds about the Light, be already
become darkness: Oh how great is that darkness! the Gospel is then hid indeed
to them that are lost, though I wish you well, yet I cannot help it any more
then you; yet just it is upon you for your flying out in such fiery twittle
twattles, and fierce fightings against his Light, and God is righteous in
taking vengeance, yet I will hope better things of you, till I see the worst,
and desire that ye may yet know the things that make for your peace, before
they be hid for ever from your eyes: Howbeit, for the truths sake, as well as
in love to your souls, I shall not spare the same sharpness toward you, as you
are found in against the Light and it. I conclude (against you in your own
kind) that this Opinion of yours, and m^st Divines, concerning Christ's not
enlightening all men in any wise with saving Light, in contradiction to that
undeniable truth in this point the Qua. testify to, is the most sottish
Opinion that ever was hatched, instilled into you and others by the Prince of
darkness, not by the Spirit of God, and tends to the dissolution both of all
Religion (for what Religion can all men be called to, if all men be not by
Christ enlightened to do what he would have them) and all civil Government also,
yet the blind Guides of the blind, whom they draw with them into the ditch, who
will say something against every thing, rather then own truth as it is in
Jesus, do say, or rather brawl somewhat for that their Opinion, which is
sufficiently already above refuted.

CHAP. VI.
HAving done with the Doctrine concerning the universality of the true Lights
being in some measure in all men, which leads such as are led by it unto life,
and with the rest, which the Priests generally oppose the Qua. in, as at first
propounded. I shall now fall upon some brief Animadversion of their piteous
Arguments against it, and poor Answers to our plain Arguments for it, wherewith
the Priests resist and withstand the Truth, as its testified to by the Qua.-so
called, as to that point of perfection, as to the possibility of Purgation, and
real Remission of sin, and full freedom from any more Commission of it,
whether actually or assentatively in this life.

As for R. B. and I. T. As after a long unquiet quarrel with the Qua. (who call
men to no other at all) about the Light and Spirit of Christ, as such foolish
fires as will lead men into nothing but Bogs and Praecipices, page 84. and much
more of that sort, themselves fall a calling and commending all men to the
same, in many good words of exhortation, specially in the last Sermon of their
book, which consists of Exhortations to the Light, Doctrine or Teaching of
Christ within (excepting here and there (as the manner of most Parish Ministers
is) a Perenthesis or interpositition of now and then some dirty dashes and
filthy flerts against it, to sense men off from ever coming too near it, lest
it make them wiser then their Teachers and Leaders, and so lead and take them
off from taking much more heed to the wind of their whiffling words and
tangling talk of Truth for Tith) So they are principled against the foresaid
perfections atainbleness in this life, as is evident in other of Baxter's, and
Ts his works: Yet in this Book of theirs that I have at present to do with I
mind not at present where they contradict it, but are found in sundry
expressions much rather confirming and preaching it unawares, and ministering
Mediums in proof of it E.G. p. 12. where they tell us thus:

R.B. J.T. Christ leads always in the right way, so that whosoever follows him.

Rep. And some do surely, these men are not so ignorant sure as to deny that.

R.B. J.T. Shall be directed aright in his way, be guided into the way of peace.

Rep. That must needs be out of all sin, for every sin or transgression is the
wrong way, the way of wickedness, and there is no peace says God unto the
wicked. And p. 13. where they tell us thus:

R.B. J.T. Christ's words have such precepts and revelations as make a man
Spiritual, Heavenly, Wise, like unto God.

Rep. Which if any sinner be and be not rather Carnal, Earthly, Foolish unlike
God, and lke the Devil, then I am yet to seek (and if these sinners and
pleaders for men's necessity of sinning while they live, and yet call themselves
Saints, can tell me otherwise, let them tell me) what a Saint, and what a
sinner is and p. 1.4. Where they tell us thus.

R.B. I.T. All that Christ spoke.

Rep. Whose Speeches were and are successful to accomplish their end among
some at least assuredly, or else let these men speak it out, if they dare, that
Christ never obtains his end in speaking to any at all to whom he speaks.

R.B. I.T. It was to ease the burden.

Rep. And such the least in is, where ere it is, whether it be felt or no.

R.B. I.T. to direct to God.

Rep. Whom no sinner in his sins can come to.

R.B. I.T. to reform the evils in Gods worship.

Rep. Whom no evil doer or sinner in his sins can worship any more accceptably
then Cain whose sacrifice was shut out while his sin lay at the door, or then
David himself, whose prayer would not be heard, if he regarded iniquity in his
heart, and every one does so more or less, while, in the least, he commits it,
or else surely he would not commit it, no man doing that he has no regard at
all unto, but he who remains yet under the Devils power taken captive by him
at his will, having not yet attained to that liberty wherewith Christ (even
here) makes many free, and ( even here) is by him attainable, if men with Paul,
who throw the warfare at last attained it, be sincere in the same way of
pressing after it.

R. B. I.T. To take men off from Covetousness, Hypocrisy, and such evils as
are Pernic^^us.

Rep. And if the least motion to sin (if assented to, not else) be any
otherwise then so, and not in some measure pernicious (though some great ones
may be more greatly pernicious then other some) let that of God in the
conscience of these men judge, when Paul says the motions of sins which warred
in his members (while he was yet under the Law, and not in the Liberty of
Christ, and but in the Combat, and short of the Conquest) brought forth fruit
in him unto death: and James c. 1. That if lust, be but perrmitted to conceive
(as it does in such a degree as any one is led away after it) it brings forth
sin, and sin when its finished, or brought forth. e. into its being (as it is
when lust is but assented to and the mind genders to gether with it) it
brings forth death.

R.B. J.T. With what ever else might bring nigh to God.

Rep. Whom all sin, even the least in some mea^ure, though (some more then
some) separates the soul from.

R.B. J.T. And Alienate men from this present evil world.

Rep. Which every man is nigh to more or less till he be totally taken off and
alienated utterly from the corruptions that are in it through lust.

R.B. J.T. And accordingly so were and are the effects, regeneration or new
birth; Mortification of the deeds of the Body; the Salvation of Man

Rep. And if these were and are (as ye say they were and are) not only the
ends, but also the effects of what Christ spoke or speaks, then by such as
continue to hear his voice and follow him, and not such strangers to him as ye
are (and so some did, and now do, yea ever all his own sh^^p) all these things
in time, even here, both were and are attainable and attained also, that ye
speak which are ipsissima, the very things we plead against you; for in the
point of perfect freedom from sin wherein ye oppose us, viz. Mortification of
the deeds of the body, which is never effected till every sin be destroyed or
subdued, so as not to be so much as assented to, much less acted, the very
least being a deed or member of the body of it, and mortification (effected) no
less, but somewhat more, if more can be, then a common killing in our common
English acceptance of it, even a mangling the dead body of it all to pieces:
Regeneration, which however taken by our dimm Divines for the first act of
conversion only, or beginning to face about from sin toward God, is a real
new birh, or being begotten back into that divine nature, which man in sin is
degeneraled from, and not only so, but also (as taken in its right latitude
and consummation, not initiation only, for the thing or end effected (and so ye
speak) and not prosecuted only, the growth up in that image of Christ's divine
nature, in whom was no sin, to the very measure of the fullness of his stature
Ephesians. 4. and salvation of man, which is not in, but from the sin first, before
ever there be any right rejoicing in God, or any true salvation from the
sorrows that are entailed to it, by him who came to save his people from their
sins: Who in this sense mainly is sent forth as a light to enlighten us, and
raised up as an horn of salvation in us his people, that we being delivered
from all our Enemies (among which sin, even in our selves is the chiefest) and
from the hands of all that hate us (as all sinners do such as preach to them
that unpleasing doctrine of perfect purging from the sins they love) might
serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life.

For as much therefore as in this book of R.B. and T.D. I find them (at
present) uttering so much as that above and perhaps more (but that I hasten)
that makes for it, and yield us Arguments out of that their own Armory in proof
of that perfect freedom from sin here which we plead for, but nothing directly
against it, though they are against it, I shall therefore (having made use of
that little of theirs above that is very much to our purpose against them) quit
these 2. R.B. and I.T. And address more directly to I.O. and T.D's. Deliveries
of themselves, as against that Doctrine.

And as for I.O. I have so much the less to say to him by how much it is but
little that he meddles in that matter throughout that whole book of his I have
herein had to do with, but for as much as that little in bulk is as stark
naught as it is nothing to his purpose he must excuse me if, for truths sake, I
be as blunt with him, as he is keen and bloody against the Teachers of it, and
as plain in opening his contradiction to him, as it is plain that he contradicts
himself in what he says against it in the very sight and open view of all men.

I confess he dilates not so largely against it, as T.D. does; but barely and
nakedly nibbles about the business: Yet he puts forth such a Paw as whereby we
may guess how rudely and unreasonably Rampant he would be in his repulses of
us in that point, if we that hold it were not as much out of his reach, as it is
out of the reach of the best wisdom he has to render one solid Reason at all
against it.

One thing that I.O. says, whereby we may clearly conclude him to be one who
as cloudily concludes there is no attainment to a perfect purging from sin in
this Life, is this viz. Having in proof of its perfection from its efficacy to
effect its own end spoken above of the immediate end of the Scripture to be Ex.
3. S. 24. Directionem nostram in cognitione Dei, obedientia ei praestanda ita
ut tandem voluntatem ejus facientes, salutem eternam ac ipsius fruitionem
assequamur, hunc finem immediatum datioScripturarum atque. adeo ipsarum
Scripturarum esse contendimus: Cum vero disciplinae cujusvis perfectio
consistat in relatione ad finem, caque perfecta habenda sit qua sufficiens est
respectu finis sui proximi, ea vero imperfecta quae finem propositum assequi
potis non est, perfectio scripturarum in nulla alia re consistere potest quam
in sufficientia sua respectu finis sui proprii, qui est instructio hominum etc.
Vt salutem aeternam assequantur: hoc sensu eam perfectissimamasserimus: Ex. 3.
S. 39. Cessabit scripturae usus praesenti stat ui accomodatus.

Ex. 3. S. 39. Falsissimum est sacram scripturam, dum in hoc mundo haeremus
respectu nostri totum sinem suum obtinere aut obtinere posse.


direction in our knowledge of God, and that obedience that is due to him, that
doing his will (as none when he sins does) we may attain salvation (which is
from sin sure, or from nothing) and the enjoyment of himself and told us that
the perfection of all discipline consists in its efficacy to effect its own
end, so that that only is to be held perfect which is sufficient to effect its
end, and that imperfect which is not of force to effect it, and how in this
very respect the Scripture is a most perfect rule, as it accomplishes its
foresaid end: and telling us also that the use of the Scripture by which this
end is effected, is only in this present world, since the Scripture ceases, as
to all its uses ends and purposes, in that to come, and consequently must
either effect that its end, even our perfect salvation from sin here, or not at
all, and so prove it self to be contrary to what I.O. says of it, viz. no
perfect Rule, he tells us withal to the utter contradiction of his assertion
as to the Scridtures perfection (being it semes principled against the Qua. as
to the point of perfecting holiness so as to cleansing from all sin, and left
he run upon that dangerous rock of running out of all lust while he lives here)
that its a most false thing to affirm that the holy Scripture does or can,
while we are in this world, obtain all its own end, in respect of us, which end
he had said before is our obeying God, and doing his will (which is not to sin,
1 John 2.1.) and our salvation, which is from sin: Thus Incidit in Scyllam,
etc. The man of sin to avoid one extreme, which he is extremely against, viz.
being ruined against the rock of perfection, he runs down extremely into
another, viz. the gulf of self contradiction and confusion. Verbum sat
sapienti, I need do no more to the opening of this round to wisemen, then to
set it down before them thus (for this is the sum of I. Os. sayings) nothing is
perfect, but what effects its end, the end of the scripture is making men
perfect, this end the Scripture cannot effect in this Life, for here is no
perfection, nor can the scripture effect this end in the life to come, for
there it ceases to work, and effects nothing at all; yet the Scripture, the
perfection of which can consist in no other thing then its effecting its end,
which end it never effects, is for a^l that most perfect.

What more I.O. says in short, is this, That the J.O. Ex. 3. S. 39. Fanaticos
non esse perfectos nobis Testimonio sunt illorum mendacia, frauds, scelera,
hypocrisis; iis vero, qui immunes se esse ab his omnibus aliisque peccatis vel
levissimis impudenter gloriantur, punitiones and incarcerationes esse debeant.
Fanatics (so he is pleased still to style the Qua. a seed among whom some at
least are the most sincere Saints that are at this day upon the earth) are not
perfect, t^ei^lyes, deceits, bainour wickednesses, and hypocrisies, do testify
to us; but in very deed, punishments and imprisonments ought to be inflicted
upon them that impudently glory, that they are free from all these, and other
sins, even the least.

Rep. I.O. it seems, and the rest of his Gang of Ghostly Fathers, and godly
Gameliels, are sentenced already by himself, as worthy to be persecuted in such
wise (as the Qua. have been at Oxford by his means) and punished, and
imprisoned, as Impudent Boasters, if ever they shall pretend (whilst here on
earth) to be free from lying, and fraud, and wickedness, and hypocrisy, and
other sins (specially if from the least, or from all uncleanness of flesh and
spirit, all ungodliness and worldly lusts, which yet they will tell men sometimes
(in a sound of stolen words) from those Texts of Paul, 2 Cor. 7.1. 8 Tit. 11.12.
13. they must cleanse themselves from, deny, and have nothing to do with in
this present world, because else there is no purging in the world to come: So
that we see what fruits we are to expect from that Fraternity of false
Prophets, and what little likelihood of peoples being much profited by these
stealers and sellers of the Apostles good words, when they believe it even
impossible that the things they impose in the Name of God, themselves, or any
people here, where they say it must be done if ever should be empowered to
perform.

2. I query, Whether if Paul had come to Oxford in the time of I.Os.
Vice-Chancellorship there, and made the same modest confession to the praise of
God (no other then which the best of the Qua. ever made) which he made, that he
was once (in his own conceit) alive without the Law (or till he and the Law, i.
e. the Light, came to face each other) but when that came, then he saw sin was
alive in him, and he dead, and that he was (then while beginning to war with
it) sold under it, and captivated by it, and wretched by reason of it, Romans 7.
but that now (when he wrote this) the Law of the Spirit of Life (or Light in
his mind) which was by Christ, had made him free from that Law of sin and death
(which warred in his members, and often enslaved him) I say, when Paul made this,
and many other modest acknowledgements of Gods Grace and Power toward him, in
delivering him, and how now he walked not after the flesh, but the Spirit, and
how holily, and justly, and unblameably he and other Apostles behaved
themselves, 1 These. 2.1. 2. 3. etc. and should have said (as to the same effect
he did) that they were no liars, nor deceivers, nor wicked ones, nor
hypocrites, and 2 Cor. 13.8. could do nothing against the truth (as every sin
is) but for the truth, and such like; Whether I.O. would have punished him as an
Impudent Boaster, yea or no, and have put him in B^cardo, where besides
whippings, and other punishments and abu^es, some of the Qua. have been put? if
yea, see what kind of provision the poor Flock of Christ must expect from out
of the silken Snapsacks of these University Shepherds and Overseers, if they
had the oversight of all Corrective, as much as they have it Directive over
Magistrates and all: And what a Generation of Godly Ministers (as they have
been called) have grown up under pretense of Reformation of late, even in old
England, which has been so long renewing [as well as in New England, which is
now growing old again, where they punish the same seed to death^ where however
they idolize Christ's holy Apostles now they are dead, would no less then
persecute them were they now alive; if nay, I would know Quo Iure? some Reason,
if that these Rabbis can render a right one, why the Saints that walk and live
in, and after the same holy Spirit now, that leads into all truth, and no
transgression, and witness the same freedom from the Law of sin thereby,
should for making the same confession to the glory of Gods Grace be so ill used
(as I.O. would have them) as Impudent Boasters, any more then them of old?

What ever the Qua. do and are, who by the Grace of God being what they are,
glory in nothing of their own, knowing they have nothing but what they have
received. I shall here clear many Clergy men more then any men (unless some
Lawyers be as clear as them) from that so punishable crime of glorying and
boasting in being free from the least sin, or from those forenamed grosser
evils either; for as if they should be found glorying in freed^me from either,
they would be found liars one way more then now they are, so in truth both
those kinds of wicked, hypocritical, deceitful liars, I mean in plain terms,
many Priests, and some Lawyers, who can neither of them live on poor men's
labors [as many of them do in all lands, any longer then while men lie dead in
their trespasses and sins, are [for ought I find] so far from glorying in their
immunity from those and all other iniquities, that like those old Christian
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. 19. whose end is destruction, whose
God is their belly, who mind earthly things, and whose glory is in their shame,
they glory yet in that immunity and freedom they can get from the powers that
are intoxicated with the wine of the wrath of their fornications, to commit all
evil, and so continue in those lies, deceits, frauds, cheats, hypocrisies,
bloody persecutions, spoilings of men's goods, devouring Widows houses for
Tithes, and for a pretense making long prayers, and much more wickedness and
profaneness, which, from these Law and Gospel spoilers, is long since gone
forth into all lands.

By that little Cloud then which appears dropping from I.Os. pen, though no
bigger then a man's hand, we can see his complexion, and what muddy stuff was
working, what bloody storms of persecution were brewing in I.Os. mind against
that more tender, and true Tenet of perfect purging from sin in this life, and
the innocent Asserters of it; and so I shall take him, till he either takes in
again that terrible tale of his, or at least till he tells the world, that it
repents him that ere he told it for a joint Antagonist to the Qu^. together
with T.D. in that point. Nevertheless T.D. being the only man that mannages
that matter, more at large, on behalf of himself and many others, I shall
without more ado let this short Return stand as to I.Os. brief opposition of us
in this point of perfection, and the rather, since I believe it will be long
enough ere it return from him to us again with any solid or satisfactory
answer, and address my self to deal more down-rightly, yet no otherwise then
uprightly neither with T.Ds. writing, with whom I, together with R. H. G. W.
and A.P. also once have had to do about it by word of mouth.

The second Quest. between him and the Qua. as himself relates both it, and
what little he thought fit, which is scarce one word to his ten, in such manner
also as might best serve his turn, to set down of our Discourse with him about
it, 1 Pamp. was this; Whether in this life the Saints attain to a state of
perfection, or freedom from sin? Which we (as to the possibility thereof, viz.
that they may, and also as to the necessity that they must be purged from sin
in this life, or no where, there being no Purgatory in the world to come)
holding in the affirmative, T.D. brings in himself, replying thus; T.D. Your
Doctrine of perfection is against the tenor of the Scripture, let us hear what
you can say for the proof of it: And to R. H. urging 1 Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is
born of God, does not commit sin. T.D. replies thus, viz.

T.D. That cannot be meant of freedom from sin, but either there is an
Emphasis in the word (sin) intending under that general ^e^m one kind or sort
of sin, which is spoken of, 1 John 5.16. There is a sin unto death: Or if not
in the Substantive, on the Verb Poiei, which notes to make a trade of business
of sin, as it is explained, ver. 8. where he uses the same Verb, for the Devil
sins from the beginning: He has never ceased to sin since he began, thus
indeed the Saints sin not, but a course of sin is broken off, and there is not
such a free trade between the Soul and sin, as in the state of unregeneracy,
whereof this is given for one character, that cannot cease to sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.

Rep. 1. Here thou art in thy old wonted way of scruing the Scripture besides
the proper import, and ordinary literal sense of the words, and true mind of
the Spirit in them, into thy own perverse mind and meaning, why cannot that be
meant of freedom from sin, but that men who are not fully willing to be freed
from it, and are in love with it, and being loath to leave it, are loath to see
it? Its more hard not to see, then it is to see that it is meant of freedom
from sin: What should, or can it be meant of else? Are not freed me from sin,
and not committing of sin, made synominous as committing sin, and not being
freed from it, are made by Christ himself opposites to each other, Ioh. 8.32.
33. 34. 35. 36. The Jews thought they had the fullest freedom that men could
have in this world, because they were the visible Church, Abraham's Seed, and
such like externals as they then trusted in, as ye now do, though not yet freed
from that thing called sinning, to serve the Lord alone, whose service the very
Common Prayer Book it self was wont to call perfect freedom: But Christ learns
them another Lesson, viz. that they had none of that true Gospel freedom that
the saving knowledge of the truth gives, and which he makes such as continue in
his words, and so are his Disciples indeed, and not in word only, as ye are,
free withal, which is a full freedom in deed and truth, and not half a one,
or by the halves, such as that is ye talk of, who upon the account of some
private Patent, alias particular personal Election thereto from everlasting,
prattle to your selves of freedom from guilt, while ye remain in your filth,
and of a general Justification an^ pardon for all sins past, present, and to
come in this world, expecting your purging or Justification, as to
Sanctification from sin and ^ncle^^ness, not in this world, but that to come:
But verily, verily, I say unto you (quoth he) he that commits sin, is yet
the servant of sin, and must know, for all his boasting, he has not long to
abide in the House and Church of God, wherein Ishmael-like he scoffs at the
right Heir Isaac, as if himself alone, who is but a Bastard, born of
fornication, should inherit all, and will prove an outcast himself at last
before the Son, who is born of God, and free indeed, and the only true Heir of
all things; full freedom from sin, and committing of it, are opposed to each
other by Christ; therefore freedom from it, and not committing it, are the
same.

To wind out of this, T.D. would seem to say somewhat, but of two things he
cannot tell which, but one of the two must be it, rather then the Truth: Either
there is (quoth he) an Emphasis in the word sin, intending under that general
term one kind of sin, viz. sin unto death; or if not in the Substantive, on the
Verb Poiei, which notes to make a trade, or business of sin, as the Devil does,
who sins from the beginning, and never ceased from sin since he began: Thus
indeed the Saints sin not, etc.

Rep. As to they Emphases, they are the foolish empty conceits of thy own, and
other men's brains, there is no such Emphasis either in the Substantive or Verb,
as ye all prate, whereby the Spirit should be understood as speaking otherwise
then he truly means, or meaning otherwise then he plainly says, whose words
are plain to the honest heart, though not to Idol Shepherd, who by the Sword of
the Lord has his right eye utterly darkened, because he has darkened the Lords
Counsel by his own words without knowledge: And if the eyes of the Seers were
not shut up from seeing the very Letter they prate about, as well the mysteries
of the Spirit, which the animal man can never know by all his searchings (they
being revealed only by the Spirit) they might see that the Text it self makes
no difference between sinning, and committing sin, and that the one is no more
Emphatical then the other: And if T.D. who in the same page 9. where he
mentions the words, were not so busy in his mind about the meaning, and did
not make such a warbling noise (as shallow waters ever do more then those that
are deepest) with harping at this, that, and to other silly sense, he might in
coolness have considered, that in the same ninth verse, as well as the eigth,
and others about it, the Spirit makes no difference between Amartian Poiein,
and Amortanein, to commit sin, and to sin, but uses them promiscuously. Ouk
Amartanei, every one that abides in him sins not.

So ver. 8. He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil Amartanei
sins from the beginning: And because T.D. seems to put an Emphasis upon the
word [ sinneth] as well as [ commits sin] making the word [ sinneth] (as
here used) to amount to somewhat more then an ordinary sort of sinning, as here
it intends some high or desperate degree of sin, even that which 1 Ioh. 5.16.
is called Kat' Exoken, a sin unto death without remedy, or forgiveness for
ever, because never to be repented of, as in opposition to all other sins that
men do commit, which (when this alone, being ever joy^'d with impenitency, is
impardonable) are all, upon that true repentance they are yet in possibility
of, who commit them, pard^nable, or possible to be forgiven; for this is T. Ds.
emphasis on the Substantive [ Sin] (for I shall not wrong him so much as to
take him meaning, as the Papists do, who put such difference between peccatum
veniale, and mortale; as if some sins only without repentance were mortal, or
to death, and some venial, or not to death, though not repented of at all, your
Church of England opposing them in this, and holding every sin, yea, the least
(unrepented of) unto death, though T. D. would have suspected me to be a
Jesuit for a less matter) This concludes him that is born of God to be (even
qua sic, as born of God) as easily liable to, and excludes him no more then it
does the very wicked themselves, from the committing of any sin, that the
wickedest can commit (except that ye call the sin against the Holy Ghost it
self) which is so gross an absurdity, that he can be no spiritually wise man
that does not feel him to be spiritually infatuated that so imagines: For still
though the Devil sins, and he that is of the Devil does nothing else (but
Nicodemus, though a Master in Israel cannot read this Birth of God (which is
Anothen, from above of water and the Spirit, John 1.12 John 3. which blows
where it lists, and the Priests hear an outward sound thereof, but know not
whence it comes, nor whether it goes, nor how he is that is born of the Spirit)
as plain as it is in the Text, which they read more then that truth tells of)
yet, as he that sins is of the Devil, and he that is of the Devil sins
altogether, so he that sins not, but does righteousness only, is of God; and
he that is born of God, and the Spirit, which is Spirit, and not flesh, sins
not at all, but overcomes the world, and keeps himself, that the wicked one
so much as touches him not, 1 John 5.18. neither can he sin, even eatenus,
because born of God, whose own Seed, or incorruptible word, 1 Pet. 1.23. which
condemns all, and consents to no sin, remains in him.

Yet lest it hold not this way, T.D. puts another string to his Devils Bow, and
shoots out another sense, as emphatically as he can, with all his might, by
which notwithstanding (as he did in the other three Questions above spoken to)
he has utterly lost the Game, and given the whole Cause, and this Question
contended for, so clearly (if there should be no more shooting about it) that
by all his scrambling shifts, whereby he scrabbles and scraffies to gather it
up again, he will, never recover of the wound that he has unawares given to
himself; for mark how his own emphasis on the Verb Poiei undoes him: It notes
(quoth he) to make a trade or business of sin as the Devil does, who never
ceased to sin: Thus indeed the Saints sin not, but a course of sin is broken
off, and there is not such a free trade between the Soul and sin, as in the
state of unregeneracy, whereof this is given for one Character that cannot
cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.18.

Rep. To say nothing here, how that Parish Priests do make a Trade and business
of sin, of preaching for hire, persecuting for Tithe, promoting the Popes Pay,
and Parish posture, since they were sworn to endeavor the extirpation of all
Popery, looking every one for his gain from his quarter, which un-Saints
themselves, and states them still in unregeueracy, if T.Ds. words be true (as
its sure enough they are) when he says thus, Indeed the Saints do not sin,
this is in the state of unregeneracy, whereof this is one character, they
cannot cease from sin; for howbeit, they have long since well nigh left off to
do good, yet these and many more evils they abhor not, nor have so much as
ceased from to this day.

But to let pass that, observe Secondly, How T.D. distinguishes the Saints from
the Devil, and the unregenerate ones that are yet born of him, by this
Character (which is the true one) of ceasing, and not ceasing from sin: The
Devil (quoth he) and the unregenerate, they make a free trade and business of
sin, and never cease to sin (true enough) but thus the Saints sin not, but the
course of sin, which the other keep, is broken off, so that there is not this
free trade between sin and their Souls, as is among others, who do hoc agere,
sin, and cease not from it, but the Saints they cease from it.

Rep. Caiphas-like, more truth then T.D. was well aware of when he told it,
even so much, and no less (and no more do we need from him) then whereby he has
as fully yielded us our Question, as I have showed he has done all the rest we
had to do with him about, excepting that of the infallibility of the Gospel
Ministry affirmed by us, which yet he has also yielded so far to toward the
truth of, as will force him to give us all that too at last, since he has
confessed the mere fallibility of their own, the ignorance of which I do not
much marvel that he confesses, since he charges Christ himself with such
ignorance and fallibility, as whereby ( unawares to himself, and not knowing
that he was such a one) he ^^ose a Devil to be his Minister. See page 45. 1
Pamp. which Devil yet (say we) to wit Judas, though he proved so at last by
transgression, falling back from that true Apostleship he once obtained, Act.
1. was not known to be so, because (saving T. Ds. groapable darkness) he was
not so from the beginning, nor when Christ chose him, but one of the Twelve
that had the Spirit, as the other eleven had, Matthew. 10.20. and when he fell
into the deceit, and so became Diabolos, alias, one that acts by deceit, and
abode not in the Truth, before ever there was any appearance of it to the
Disciples, Christ was not so ignorant of it, but that he knew it as well as
Judas did himself.

But as to the Questiou again, which is, Whether in this life the Saints may
attain to such a state of freedom from sin, as not to sin, but to cease from
it, and live without it? T.D. says nay, we say yea: Who shall be judge? What
Witness have we to our Assertion? let that of God in all Consciences judge, and
let T.Ds. Witness be taken for us against himself; yea, what need we further
Witness? ye your selves, all people that can read, may read it under his own
hand in his Answer to us; viz. That whereas the Devil and his Children sin, and
whilst his cease not from it any more then their Father who begets them to it;
the Saints do not sin thus; but by this character are to be known from the
sinners, who cease not from it, viz. in that the Saints cease from sin, which
is indeed the very thing required to be ceased from, and therefore possible to
be done by all them that have that sam^ mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. Phil. 2.5.
1 Pet. 4.1. even by the ^ame Power whereby it was done in himself, for as much
as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, a^m your selves likewise with the
same mind, for he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from s^n. Thus
T.D. suo se ingul^vit gla^^^, has laid his cause a bleeding, and wounded it to
death with his own wea

Yet least T.D. should begin to pick up his crumbs and fight us again wit^ such
foolish fragments as these, viz. that though the Saints do sometimes cease from
sin, are not always sinning yet they may sin, again and fall into soul
enormities, (which, what ere they are, our Sinner like Saints use to call but
infirmities, when a Professor commits them) as David did through weakness, etc.

Rep. 1. This is not to the Question, which (as T.D. undertakes it against us)
is not whether those men called Saints cannot sin any more, or not, after once
they come upon a true account under that domination of Saints; but whether such
a state, as to cease from sinning be attainable in this life yea or nay? as to
the other, we know well enough what to say of it, as occasion is, but as for
this about which sub judice lis est, T.D. has consented to us in it, and we
shall take him at his word.

And for as much as T.D. here so plainly asserts it that the Saints do at least
sometimes cease from sin, are not always sinning, but have the course of it,
which the wicked keep on in, broken off, this minds me of another contradiction
and cross whet which he gives to himself out hf his Cross Bow; for how is
this consistent with his Reply to G. W. p. 6.7. of his 2. Pamp. where to T. Ds.
absurd positions viz. that a believers person with his works are accepted with
God, though his works be not perfect, G. W. Answering thus, viz. here he would
have believers like the Priests, who sin in the best of their performances (as
they confess) but I say the believers works are wrought in God, and these
works of God are perfect, As for our confession (quoth T. D.) it is agreeable to
Scripture: There Is not a man on earth that does good, and sins not, Eccles.
7.20. i.e. That sins not in doing good, inquity of holy things is spoken of,
Exodus 28.38. Duties which are holy for the matter are iniqui^y, for the manner
of performance.

Rep. By which it seems T.D. judges, there is such a continual course of
sinning in the Saints, as that they cannot cease from it at all, for if while
they are doing good, and performing duty they are sinning and doing iniquity,
then how much more while they are doing material evil and iniquity it self,
and so consequently cease not from it at all;: Which if they do not, then how
do they cease as T.D. says they do? here is another stabb with his own Dagge^,
which T.D. gives himself, whose words are such Swords to himself, and agree ^o
well together by the ears among themselves that a man need but bring them out
upon the open Stage, where such as are minded to behold the battle may see
them, falling out, and fencing against each other, and killing both their
Master and one another.

And now I have that passage upon this occasion under hand, one word more to it
a^o^e it pass (for it is not worth returning to it again) if a believers works,
which (as G. W. truly said) are wrought in God, and (say I) by God in them, and
T. D. himself from Isa. 26.12. dares not deny it, any more then I do deny
that, all ma^s ^on righteousness wrought of himself, before and out of faith
in the light are dung, unclean things and filthy rags from Isa. 64.6. Phil.
3.8. If I say a believers wo^k^ be not perfect, and his doing good be sin, and
his duties iniquity, let me ask thee T.D. does God, who works the believers
works in them, work works that are not perfect, but imperfect? and if thou say,
what he works at first in believers is but in part of what he will do, from 1
Cor. 13. Now we know in part, etc.

Rep. Remember what I told thee above; that in part is one thing, and imperfect
is another, grace, holiness, etc. in part is a perfect gift, ev^ry dram of it,
as well as the highest degree of it, though it is not so much in measure, as
every spark of fire is perfect fire, though not so great a fire as the flame it
comes from.

But what do I talking of not p^rf^ct? thou countest the best performances of
the best Saints evil, sin, iniquity: does God then, who works all his Saints
works in and for them ( absit blasphemia) work evil, sin and ini quity?

2 Thou say though a believers works are not perfect, but the best of them
sin and iniquity, yet God accepts both believers and their works: has iniquity
then acceptance with God? it is more then I can yet receive for truth, unless
thou scratch and scrape out of the Scripture such texts as tell us he has no
pleasure in it: I know he takes pleasure in his Saints, Psalm 149. but that
shows that such as you, who take pleasure in pleading for ini^u^^y are none of
the Saints (what ere ye call your selves) that he take, pleasure in.

Ye use to say to God in your prayers. O Lord thou art of purer eyes then to
behold the least iniquity without abho^ring it, and the subjects of it, and
such like, yet (to go round again) behold T.D. says believers works are sin
iniquity, and yet God takes pleasure in, or accepts b^th the believer and his
works.

Finally I know so much of such Saints as your selves are Isa. 1.10 to 20. that
it is iniquity even your sol^mn meetings, and appointed fasts and feasts, but
God takes no pleasure in them, yea his s^ul hates, loathes and detests them.

But he has a people and a sort of Saints ye know not, whose solemn meetings
and sac^ifices are as incense before him, who are not sinners (as ye confess
ye are) in all they do, nor are their duties and doings of good, by his power,
sin, evil, and iniquity: and these and their services (while ye and all yours
are a smoke, and stink in his nose) are a sweet smelling savor to ^im, in all
the good they do.

3. As to a man's falling into sin again, after he has once ceased from it, I
know no necessity of that; which is the matter ye have to prove or else ye
prove nothing at all to your own purpose, who hold that men must needs sin,
while they are in the body and cannot possibly do otherwise; but I know a
necessity (let men sin as often and as long as they will) of ceasing to si^,
and of leaving it off, before they leave the body, otherwise if they die not to
it, but but live in it till they die, and die in it (as Christ threatened the
Pharisees they should do) 'twere good for them had they never been born; there
being no place for repentance from or purgation from it after death and
notwithstanding your pretended necessity of a^l men's sinning while they breath
bodily here on earth, yet I know not only A necessity, as aforesaid, unless
they mean (the Tree lying as it falls (as ye use to preach) and the eternal
Judgment finding all men as death leaves them) to be remedilessly miserable
for ever; but a possibility also by the grace vouchsafed (if themselves be not
wanting in its improvement) of ceasing finally from sinning, while in the body;
nor (since T. D. confesses the Saints do cease from sin, and its continued
course is broken off in them) can any man tell me why the^e should be less
possibility of ceasing from sin, or more necessity of sinning to morrow then to
day, or next day then to morrow, and from that time of a man's first abstaining
from what evil the Light in his conscience convinces him of, and condemns him
for, and so successively onward to his lives end? the same power that kept him
to day, being as all-sufficiently able (as he keeps to it) though the
Temptation daily comes, to keep him from the transgression to morrow, and the
next day, and even for ever: And who can tell me, why he that withstood one
temptation to any transgression by the Light and Power of God, may not as well
(if in his will he turn not from the same Power, which is always nigh, and
ready to keep him) withstand another, and ^o another, and so all, so as to
escape the transgression? And why he that was not drunk, nor lewd, nor proud,
nor injuri^us, nor wicked, nor unrighteous, nor deceitful, nor abominable, nor
disorderly to day, must needs be so another time? his being subject to
passions, pollutions, extravagancies, vanities, inordinancies of mind, is but
an argument to evince how much the more need he has at all times to stand upon
his guard, and to put on the Armor of the Light, and keep the stricter watch
to it, which who so does shall find the Power of it in him prevailing more and
more in the warfare, to the perfect overcoming, and the bringing f^rth of
Judgment in him unto victory at the last, but who so does not, while he
stands, take heed to his way by it (as young men are bid, in order to the
cleansing of their way, Psa. 119.9) There is not I confess more necessity nor
possibility of the others standing, then there is of this man's falling into
mischief.

Howbeit, which way soever the man in medio is swayed, whether by the lustings
of the flesh to covetousness, pride, envy, hatred, deceit, unrighteousness,
lasciviousness, revenge, etc. to mind and walk after the flesh, or by the
lustings of the Spirit, to love, peace, purity, meekness, temperance, patience,
etc. or which way soever that man is born and begotten, whether by the Spirit
of God from above, or the Spirit of the Devil from beneath, which in him
lusts unto evil, etc. I^m. 4.5. and consequently whose child soever he is at
any time of the twain, which is according to the prevalency, and predominancy,
and perminency of this or that Seed in him, viz. the Seed or Word of God, or
that lying Word or Seed of the Serpent, for his he is still to whom ^e obeyes,
yet this is sure enough, as I said before, that he that abides in that which is
of God sins not, 1 Ioh. 3.6. and he that sins is gone from that, and born
and begotten by the Devil another way, even after his Image, and he that is so,
is of the Devil, and a man of sin, and sins uncessantly as his Father does,
who has begot him into his likeness, and he that does true righteousness is
born of God to it, and he that is born of God, and bears his Image, which longer
then any man does, he is not of God, sins not, overcome^ the world, keeps
himself that the wicked one touches him not, neither can he sin, while so,
because he is born of God, and the Seed of God remains, is head, permanent,
prevalent, and preheminent in him; and so which of these two sorts men are,
matters not much to the point, sinners (as such) are sinners ever, and not
Saints, and Saints are Saints ever (as such) and not Sinners, and each has his
reward from God as his work is, and he that is holy is hely, and he that is
righteous is righteous, and he that is unjust unjust still, and he that is wicked
is wicked still, and he that is good is good, and not evil, and he that is evil
is evil, and not good, and the godly are they that are godly, and none else,
and the ungodly are ungodly, and nothing else that is opposite to it, for
contraries cannot be denominated both of the same subject at the same time, and
each of these as they are (reapse) in very deed, so are they in Gods account,
who accounts all men and things truly what they are, and not as man (who
wearies the Lord with his words, saying, Every one that do h evil is good in
the sight of the Lord, and God delights in him, and who is abuniration with
the Lord for s^d^ing, Pr^v. 17.15. Mal. 2.17.) calling good evil, evil good,
nor justifying the wicked, or condemning the righteous, but in his righteous
Judgment (which evil men understand not, Pro. 28.5.) as it is revealed in the
Light, which is the day thereof, rendering to all according to their deeds,
secret as well as open, by Christ Jesus, according to the Gospel Paul preached,
to the patient continues in well doing Eternal Life, to the contentious ones
against the Truth, that obey not it, but unrighteousness, indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, and this to every soul of man that does evil,
Jew or Gentile, Romans 2. And so ^he only that does righteousness is righteous,
and is of God, and accepted with him, and he that does not righteousness, is
not of God, nor he that hates his Brother, and has no Eternal life from God
abiding in him, and be that sins is of the Devil, and hereby the Children of
God are manifested, and the children of the Devil, and each has his own
Fathers portion, as he bears his image, nature, and proportion; and as no
righteous one is rejected or reprobated, so no unrighteous one is elected or
accepted, but without respect of persons in every Nation, he that fears God,
and works righteousness in Christ, the Light, is accepted with him.

And howbeit, the righteous turning from his righteousness to iniquity, may
die, as the wicked turning from his wickedness to that which is lawful and
right, may live; and the same person may turn, and return, and turn again, and
be in possibilities of life or death, according as he chooses, when both are ^et
a^ore him, yet the ways of God are equal, and his Judgments according to
truth, and each man ha^h from him for ever as he does; and though the man that
is now a Sinner, may become a Saint like David, and a sinner again, and by true
repentance and purging with hysop a Saint again yet the Saint has no part with
the Sinner in his Lake, nor the Sinner any share in the inheritance of the
Saints, which is in Light, but each has his own peculiar and proper reward,
and the heart of the one knows his own heaviness, and the stranger intermeddles
not with the others joy.

And howbeit men may of unbelievers become believers, and believers in the
Light may by an evil heart of unbelief draw back to perdition, and depart from
the living God, yet whether they believe or not, God abides faithful, and
cannot deny himself; the believers portion that believes is the Life, and the
unbelievers part is the Lake,: And though he that is now an unbeliever
(m^diante side) may become a believer, and be saved, and he that now believes
making shipwreck of his Faith and good Conscience (as Judas, and others did)
may come to be damned, yet no believer is ever damned, nor is any unbeliever
ever saved; but the Foundation of the Lord, who knows his own evermore, stands
ever sure, let men go which way they will, who owns none that name the name of
Christ, and depart not from iniquity, and owns all who ere they be that do,
according to his everlasting and unchangeable Decree, that stands thus steadfast
without variation for ever, viz. that he that believes only shall be saved, and
he that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16.16.

So then every Saint ceases from sin (as T.D. also saves) and he that ceases
not from it is no Saint, or holy one, but a Sinner, and the sinner cannot but
sin, and do as his Father the Devil who begets him does, and he that is a Saint
is born of God, and (...) that is ban of God does not s^n, neither can, because
so: And though there be among the Sons of God degrees of growth in Grace and
Faith, as to the measure of it (as I said) degrees among believers, for which
T. D. sillily supposed I meant, that some of these have a mixture of sin with
their grace, page 18. 1 Pamp. Yet I deny any mixture of sin and grace together,
which they are no more capable of then water and oil; but every Believer and
Babe (as so) that is truly born of God, is perfect after Christ's own Image, and
in the Divine Nature, though not yet grown up into the measure and fullness of
Christ's stature, and stands justified and accepted in the sight of God, and out
of the condemnation, while out of the transgression; and every unbeliever in
the Light is out of God and Christ, who are Light, and is in the darkness, and
of the Devil the Prince of darkness, and is in the condemnation, because in the
transgression, and one with that Seed which is in the Reprobation, and each
Seed, and the Son that respectively is born of it, has its own proper portion
divided out unto it, and that which is of the Spirit has life together with
it, and who is of the Serpent and the flesh sows to it, and (if not parted from
it) must perish together with it, and accordingly reap nothing but corruption.

And as to all the rest of T. Ds. R^plyes to our Reasons, rendered as to this
point at the Dispute at Sandwich, which Replies of his having no more force of
reason in them, then there is strength in a rush, as to their reaching to hurt
the truth, though I need not take any notice of them, in order to the consuting
of T.D. he having so fairly consured himself already, as is above showed, yet
for the sakes of such as are honest hearted, and willing to see the truth I may
run over to the rest, in such wise as follows.

Next then in answer to G. W. who told him truly how he wrested the Scriptures
to his own destruction (for so by his Emphases he does indeed) T.D. says no^
^^r (quoth he) the New Birth agrees to all the Saints, and if it excludes the
being of sin (here he goes off from the terms, for he should have said the
sinning, acting, or assenting to sin) in some, it must in all, for the Seed
remains in all as well as any.

Rep. I say so too; and therefore (for the reason is sufficiently rendered
above) it is that no Saint that is born of God (as so) does sin or can (while
such) if he do he is no Saint, it is the sinner, and not the Saint that sins,
which is begotten back by the Devil, from that of God, into his own Image,
Likeness, and Nature, and by the Serpent beguiled again, as Paul was jealous
the Corinthians would be, and as the Galatians were bewitched form the
obedience of the truth.

But now [quoth T. D.] least ye should be so mad as to assert all Saints to be
free from sin [from sinning still he should say for sin may be dead in a man
who sins not, nor lives in it] pray read, Joh: 1:1:8: If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves and this is spoken of such persons as of whom it is
denied that they commit sin, persons that had fellowship with the Father and
his Son Jesus Christ, v:3.

Rep. Here he has brought more fuel for that fire that is already burning his
drossy divinations: The foolish Woman can do no other in the day that's
approaching; but pull down her own House with her own hands: And so does folly
befool the divine doers against the truth in these days into an utter undoing
of themselves. T^is is spoken of such (quoth he) of whom its said they commit
not sin, so say I and of such of whom its said they sin not. Therefore T.D. may
be sure he can fetch nothing hence in proof of it, that they do sin. Its said
of such (quoth he) as had fellowship with the Father and Son, so say I, which
proves them not now to be sinners, but must necessarily prove them (and so
indeed it does) to be free from sin, and the deeds of darkness, not sinning,
not walking in the darkess, or any deeds of it, but in the Light, now at least,
what ere the had done, in which light who walks (as it leads him,) cannot sin
any more then he can, that walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
and is led not by the flesh, but by the Spirit, which Light and Spirit never
led any yet into sin: So the very Text and his own reason T. D. brings to
conclude them Sinners, excludes them utterly from being Sinners now, for had
they been so, they could not have had that fellowship with God, and Christ,
which T. D. said they now had: For God is light, in him is no darkness at all,
if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness we ly and do not
the truth; but if we walk in the Light as he is in the light, then have we
fellowship, and the blood of Christ cleanses us from All Sin: If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us; But if we
confess our sins he faithful and just, to forgive us our Sins, and cleanse us
from All unrighteousness; if we say we have not sinned we make him a liar, etc.

Who but such night Owls, as can see better by night then they can by day, can
pick out such a thing as this from any one of these verses, viz. that John and
the Saints he here writes to, even of the least growth and lowest measure,
however they had been so, did sin and were sinners at this present when he
wrote it?

That they all had sin once and had sinned, its evident enough as I told T. D.
then, for if we say we have not sinned (says he) we make God a liar: Yea, had
they never sinned they had needed neither that pardon nor purging and perfect
cleansing from all sin all unrighteousness he there affirms (they confessing
their sins) God was faithful to give them, as well as to forgive all what they
had committed, and which they then witnessed ( in praesenti) but that at this
time they were sinning and sinners not one title in all that Text does Testify.

T. D. But yea must not think to ^ut us off^s^, (quoth T. D. v. 8. It Is
Amartian Ouk Echomen and the other is Ouk Emartekamen, suppose the latter verse
to be understood of the sins which praeceded the new birth, yet the former is
expressly (de presenti) that we have (not have had) no sin.

Rep. Who doubts of this but that E^h m^n, is the present tense? we know John
saves if we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves.

But what then my friend? because he says it ( in presenti) will it follow
that they were Sinners (in presenti?) cu^us contrarium, etc. For as its most
evident that the 10. v. is explanatory and expositive of the 8. to him that
well heeds the 9. v. that comes between them; So if he had not in one of them,
given out his own mind and meaning (not thine) about the other; yet, all that is
spoken [ in presenti] is not [as thou judgest] spoken, [ de praesenti] but not
a little of the same nature with this is by the Penmen uttered [ in praesenti]
in the present Time and Ten^e, that relates not [ ad praesens] but [ ad
praete^itum] to the time past only, as uttered concerning that: Iam. 3.8, 9.
he says of the tongue its an unruly evil, full of deadly poison, and [in
praesenti] therewith bless we God, therewith curse we men, made after Gods
Image, alias Saints: will any man be so simple as to conclude from hence that
James and the Saints were now, at this time c^^sers of men or of Saints that
bare Gods Image, or that he wrote this of himself and them [ de praesenti] as
concerning this present time, wherein he writes it? and not rather understand
him as speaking of man as he is in the fall, unrenewed, in statu corrupto,
immorigero, inconverso, of men yet unconverted to the truth? which teaches
better fruits then such bitter f^i^s, as these, which yet [for all your
blessing God with the same mouth] ye national Ministers are found bringing
forth at this day; does he not speak it of men as they ly dead in trespasses
and sins, and so consequently of himself, and the Saints as [ de praeterito]
concerning the time past, who in times past had their conversation among such
as Paul says, Ephesians: 2: 2: 3: Tit: 3: 2?

So Rom: ^: 14: Paul says [ in praesenti] I am carnal, s^ld under sin, I find
a Law in my members, carrying me captive into the Law of sin, and much more
then that in the present tense through that Chapter: is any man but he, whose
own wisdom is all foolishness for want of heeding the measure of the light,
and Gods wisdom^ in his own heart, so foolish at to interpret Paul as speaking
of himself and his present state in those words, and so as to conclude that
Paul while he in the Spirit of God wrote that Epistle to the Romans was
carnal, s^ld under sin, enslaved to it, carried captive by it, led at the will
of Sin and Satan, as he had once been before the Light or Law in the Spirit and
he came together? at which time began the war, before which war, as he was in
his contracted corrupt nature [howere he thought not so till the Light showed
it him] Sin was alive in him and he dead in it, and a servant to it; under
which war also [if he kept not to his watch] he might loose ground sometimes,
and gain it again, [as he recovered to his watch to the light and stood arrayed
with the Armor thereof] in which continuing steadfast at last he obtained the
victory, of which he speaks in the same place chapter 8.2, 3, 4. so that at
praesent he witnessed the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, the light, which
warred in his mind against the Law of his members, had now made him free from
that Law of Sin and Death which once he was so pestered with that he cried out
of himselfe' as wretched by reason of it, and witnessed also the Son of God
condemning Sin so perfectly in his fl^sts by Christ's power in him, that the
righteousness of the Law was now fulfilled in himself, and other Saints, and
himself walking not after the flesh but after the Spirit.

I say can any think Paul such a one, but such as sell themselves to Folly? not
considering that Paul speaks of three states he had experienced, one before the
Law or Light, when he lay dead in sin, a 2 under it while he warred against it,
a 3 in Christ, wherein he stood freed from and in full dominion over it, (but
one of which 3 he could possibly be in at once and at this time, and that was
the 3d, having passed the other two (as is evident, chapter 8.2. has made me free)
can any but benighted ones, that being sold under sin themselves, measure
others by themselves, Judge Paul to be (the premises considered) under the power
of sin and unfreed from it at this present and that he wrote of himself as
wretched de presenti, because he wrote it in praesenti, thus and thus I am? had
he not then subjected himself below the Saints he writes to, of whom he says
chap. 6. that even they were made free from sin? as well he, who were once the
servants of it, and yielded their members up to obey it as he was and did; of
which persons yet T. D. in the name of T. Rumsey simply says p. 47.1. Pamp. It
cannot be meant simply that they were freed from sin, because Paul, c. 14.10.
says (not so much by way of condemnation (say I) as by way of caution to them)
that they should not judge and set a^ naught one another: for why do thou,
there may be by way of memorandum and warning as well Christ's, how will thou?
and why beholdest thou, thou hypocrite? to his own Disciples Math. 7.2, 3. and
as Paul's other why d^st thou? 1 Cor. 4.^. which was not by way of downright
charge and censure, but by way of prevention of such things as should not be:
and hint how it ought to be among them; but undoubtedly Paul. Rom 7. speaks as
concerning how it was with him in times past when he lay under sin, and while
he passed throw his warfare against it: being at present in the state of
victory over it, which state of victory the Scripture every where speaks of, as
that the Saints come to here, even to the overcoming of the world and the lust
of it while they live in it, 1 Ioh. 5.4, 5. Rev. 2. Rev. 21.7. which our
Priests put far from themselves and their people, as a state attainable only in
the world to come.

Yea Oh the blindness that 7. of the Romans for want of heeding the 8. together
with it, is made the common place of our blind guides and night-nursing
Fathers, from whence, upon the account of Paul's outcry, O wretched man that I
am! to nourish up their sinning Saints from fainting under the burden of their
necessary infirmityes, and from whence to conclude Paul to have lived and dyed
also without full freedom and perfect purging from his sins, and themselves
much more to be under a necessity of sinning and living casually while they
live.

Which yet follows no more then it did from that of James above, from both
which it will follow, as fully, as from that of John I am yet in hand with, and
that is indeed not one jot at all: If we say we have no sin, etc. Who that has
sinned can say he has no sin? for the sin he has once committed, he has, and
the sins by which John and they had sinned of old, were theirs (or else they
needed no Savior nor purging) as cursing men possibly might be sins of which
James, and them he writes to, could not say we have no such, for such and such
were some of you, says Paul to the Saints, 1 Cor. 6. But now ye are washed,
sanctified, justified by the Spirit, etc. So that if we confess he is
faithful and just to forgive, and that's not all (though the Priest stops
there) but to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, yea the blood of Jesus his
Son does (in praesenti) cleanse us from All sin: If then there be any filth
remaining there is not a cleansing from all, but if (as the Text says it was to
some) it be from all, then there is none at all remaining so as to be committed
or acted to defilement; though the Saints may be said to have it in and about
them so as to be tempted to it, while it is fully under them, yet temptation to
it is not transgression: And the same may be said of 2 Cor. 7.1. let us cleanse
[though Paul himself was cleansed] from all uncleanness of flesh and Spirit
(then which I know no more) p^rfecting holiness in the fear of God, who (say
I) commands not impossibilities to the visible Churches, in which sundry were,
who were not clean (as Christ's Saints and true Disciples are through the word
he speaks to them) nor cleansing but some waxing worse and worse, Ioh. 13.10,
11, 16, 3. Phil. 3.18, 19. much less does Christ command, no to his true
Ministers (as fast as false ones hasten to that fruitless work, if there own
doctrine were true) in his Name to command what is impossible; yet even to the
little children in the Church does John write that they sin not, 1 Ioh. 2.1. as
well as of the young men in commendation, that they are strong and have
overcome the wicked one, and yet there are Fathers beyond all these.

Next to G. W. mentioning Phil. 3.15. as many as be perfect etc. in proof of
perfection here, T. D. Replies well-nigh a whole page full of worth nothing,
which is scarce worth noting on any other account then to show how it is worse
then nothing to his own purpose: 1.He tells us, that is spoken of grown
Christians that were perfect in comparison of Babes. Rep. That every Babe in
Christ is perfect, as to the divine nature, which assents to no sin, much less
acts it. I have showed above, but if all that are born of God were not perfect,
yet that some are T. D. there confesses, and if but one it proves the
possibility of it, which we plead against him and he pleads against.

2 He tells us that [ perfect] in Scripture is put for [ upright] and these are
made Synonimous, and of the same import.


Rep. True, Perfect and upright are one, and both import no less then a man
that sins not, Eccles. 7.29. Adam in innocence was perfect, it is said God made
man upright: For while any are upright they are answerable to the Law or Light
lent them to live by, which sin is the transgression of, and so no
transgressors, and while they transgress that Law they are not perfect, nor
upright but crooked and so accounted. Whether it be Job himself, whom T. D. so
much instances in and insists on, p. 10. 1. Pamp. and p. 6. 2. Pamp. or David
himself, or any other: Therefore while David stood in integrity and
uprightness (as mostly he did) it preserved him, and God so accounted him and
justified him, as an upright man, as he did Job. 1.1. in the same case: but
where he turned aside into the deceit and defilement, God held him not upright,
but hypocritical, false, filthy and sinful: much less did he therein hold
him guiltless and justify, him (as most ignorantly T. D. delivers it that he
did p. 38. 1. Pamp.) even when he was guilty of adultery and murder; in which
juncture nevertheless T.D. says he was not in a condemned state, but in a
justified estate: The Scripture exempts him from justification, so far, that it
vouchsafes him not that denomination of an upright man in that matter of Vriab,
but brands him with the name of a pittylesse, blood guilty man, a secret evil
doer in the sight of the Lord, a despiser of him, and his commandment, and a
causer of Gods enemies to blaspheme his Name, Psalm. 51. 2 Samuel 12.6, 9, 10, 12,
14. Howbeit this one thing by the way is worth noting concerning T. D. (not for
any good that is in it or in T. D. as touching his demeanor in it) that when
he speaks of the Saints good and duty that they do, he says that is not perfect,
but an unclean thing, dung and filthy rags: yea, that he calls sin and iniquity
p. 7. 2. Pamp. They sin (quoth he) in doing good: duties holy for the matter
are iniquity for the manner ^f performance: but when the Saints (as in David's
ca^e) commit Adultery and Murder, he pronounces them blessed, as having no
guile nor guilt in their Spirit, but sincere (which is the same with upright or
perfect) see p. 11. 1. Pamp. David (quoth he) Psalm. 32.2. Pronounces the man
blessed, which has no guile in his Spirit or sincere, which himself was at
that time, though under the guilt of a great sin v. 5. which is by interpreters
supposed to be the same sins for which psalm. 51. was composed.

Rep. Here Is Doctrine of Divinity with a witness; when the Saints do the best
good, they sin, their holy things are all as an unclean thing, their
righteousness is dung, filthy rags (though T. D. holds also that Paul had no
righteousness which was not Christ's p. 22. 1. Pamp. nor any righteousness, but
what from Christ he received) their performing duty at least is no less then
iniquity, but when they are under the guilt of such great sins as Adultery and
Murder, oh blessed men they at that time have no guile in their Spirits, are in
sincerity or (to speakin the diminutive Phrase by which sometimes he lessens
the foul faults and great sins of the Saints) at the worst but under infirmity:
But be it this or be it that, greater or less, better or ^^^se, infirmity or
iniquity, good or evil, duty or dung, righteousness or rags, holy or unclean,
the upshot of all is this, the men are blessed men, what ere they do, they are
never in a condemned, but ever in a justified estate; and let their works be as
they will, perfect or not perfect, good or duty, which they call unclean, dung,
iniquity or filthy rags, their persons [though thus sinning] are ever Saints,
and believers, which together with their works, are accepted with God, who yet
(say I) never accepted any such works, as are iniquity and sin, nor any
Persons, while they are the workers of them.

And as to the remnant of T. D's, talk in answer to ^.^. which is to this
purpose, viz. that Paul Phil. 3.12. Denies any such perfection, as is exclusive
of sin till that last and bodily resurrection from the dead, which he looks not
for in this life, which answer he is so in love with, that he has it in his
1st pamp. p. 10. and also ore again in his 2d Pamp. p. 6.

Rep. I shall answer that no other wise then out of T. D's. own mouth, who (as
I am, as to my self, credibly enough informed by A. P.) in a meeting among many
at Sandwich, since those public disputes we had since the edition of both his
books, being (...) the precise time wherein perfect purging is, answered when
the Soul, being passed out of the body, is in its passage between here and
heaven. (or to that purpose) which, is but so, and no somer, must then be
before the resurrection he talks of: and if he will not be convinced by his own
words, that sin is excluded before the resurrection, much less is it likely he
should believe any of mine. Adding this however, viz. That if ye lie down in
your graves with your bones full of sin, ye shall rise with them full of
sorrow, was wont to be the Priests argument to the people, to persuade them to
a purging from all sin before they dye, because no purging to be looked after
death, much less so long of after, as at the resurrection. Verbum sat sapienti.

The next answer of T.D. is to the Argument urged from Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3. which
he, who renders all we said as weakly, lamely and decrepidly as he possi^ly can
for his own ends, repeats not half so much as by the halves, for I wished him
him to heed all the 3. verses which were then peraphras'd to him, and argued
f^^m in such wise as follows, viz. they that are undefiled in the way, are
not defiled in the way; they that walk in the Law of the Lord, do not
transgress it; they that keep his Testimonies, do not break them; they that
seek him with their whole heart, serve him not by the halves, not him and sin,
but him alone and wholly; they that done iniquity, do not sin; they that walk
in his way, do not walk besides it; but there were some (or else they could not
be pronounced blessed, for the Spirit blesses not such men as are not) and such
now may be (for quod fieri potuir potest, what was then, is possible to be now)
who are undefiled in the way, walk in the Law of the Lord, that keep his
Testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart, who do no iniquity, and walk
in his way: Therefore it is possible that the Saints may be freed from sinning
in this life:

The sum of what T. D. Replies to all this is that the Phrases are
hyperbolicall: which is a little better at least, but how much I list not here
to tell, then if T.D. had said, they are hypocritical, or (as his wonted
replies are, when he can find no better, as I have showed above) the meaning of
the words cannot be as the letter of them does import, the Spirit means not as
he says, the Spirits meaning may be mistaken, when his words are taken in the
most ordinary liter all sense, and so it would be, if undefiled and doing no
iniquity, should be meant truly of being undefiled and doing none iniquity
indeed p. 11. 1. Pamp. Its meant of having respect to all Gods Commandments in
respect of design and endeavor though falling short in accomplishment, v. 6.
being explanatory of the other.

Rep. Oh the impudency of this man? what have we (for all this he says against
the plain literal sense of the Spirits words) whereby to assure us that the
Spirit means not as his own words import, but only in that shambling sense
which T. D. shuffles them into? whose words must be taken? T. D's. or David's,
and the Spirits? the very literal sense of which is exclusive of all sin and
defilement, and strictly expressive of doing no iniquity at all? who that is
born of God does not see T. D. to be a strict pleader for looseness, and
endeavourer to uphold the D^vills Kingdom? the Spirit pronounces them blessed,
and no more, in whose whose Spirit there is no guilt, that do no iniquity, walk
in in Gods way, and keep his Testimonies or Commandments, T. D. will bring in
a bastard brood into this blessedness, that fa^l short in the accomplishment
of this, that must be supposed at least to be ever respecting, designing, and
endeavoring to do that business, which yet, notwithstanding all their
respects, designs and endeavors, they are to believe they must never do, it
being not possible to be done: they must always dwell at the sign of the
Labor in Vain, and be striving to wash the Blak-More white and always roling
Sysiphus's Stone; ever purifying never pure, ever mortifying their earthly
members, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection to the world, evil
concupiscence, covetousness, Idolatry, Anger, Wrath, Lying, Filthy
Communication, but never while they live obtain to witness these so mortifyed,
as to be no more committed, least such an absurdity as this should follow, that
the Scripture [which I confess is found contradicting these meaning-makers on
it] be found contradictory to it self: for [quoth T. D. p. 59. 2 Pamp. all the
Scriptures, which require repentance and mortification during this life, do
deny the possibility of perfection: For they and it are incompatible. We are
bid [quoth he] to mortify our earthly members, inordinate desires, motions and
actions of corrupt Memorandum that to A. P. T.D. said it is corrupt nature by
which the heathen Romans 2. are said to do the things contained in the Law: and
here he takes the actions of corrupt natures for some of the things that are to
be mortified: it should seem then the heathen [ if it be an action of corrupt
nature to do the things of the Law must mortify their deeds done in obedience
to the Law, thus it must be according to T. D's. principles.
^nature, that is, constantly endeavor to repress and subdue them. And there is
no reason but that Gods Commands should run in that old style though we are not
able to fulfill them:

Rep. Of all the pieces of proof against the possibility of perfection, that
ever I heard, made by T. D. himself or any other, This is the most monstrously
rediculous: draw this rude and crude matter into its own form and the force of
it runs ihus.

That, which God requires and commands us to be always doing, and constantly
endeavoring to do during this life, can never possibly be done or effected
during this life: for if it be once fully done, effected and accomplished, then
we cannot be always doing it, and so not obey what God requires. But God
requires we should be always mortifying, constantly endeavoring to repress
and subdue the actions of corrupt nature during this life: Therefore its
impossible [ unless we be left incapable of doing what God requires] that we
should in this life perfectly mortify and subdue them.

In short, that, which must be ever in fieri while we live, cannot be in facto
esse till we die, but we are (in fieri) to be always purifying our selves while
we live: Therefore [ least there be no more work of that kind for us to do] we
may not lawfully or cannot possibly be pure till we ay,

Rep. This is even as hand^ome a shift, as if a Debtor promising to owe and
endeavor to pay his Creditor 20l. should never pay it him, upon the pretense
of an impossibility to perform his promise, if he do once pay the money, I must
ever owe him the mon^y, and stand engaged to endeavor to pay it, therefore
[unlesse I make my self incapable of performing my promise, which I am always
mindful of performing] I must never actually pay it.

But now as to T. D's. place, who would it seems willingly be always in Gods
debt during his life, but never come out of it till after death, ever owing so
much love as fulfills the Law, but never practicing it, so as to fulfill the
Law* I must arrest him (for all his shift) and deny the minor of his Argument:
We are not required to be always doing or endeavoring to suppre is and mortify
sin so as never to bring the work to accomplishment in th ss life; but once to
effect it before we dye; for As they are blamed that are over learning and
never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth; So are they as little
accepted, that are always seeking to God daily in pretense, as a Nation that
had a mind to do Righteousness, asking of him the Ordinances of Justice,
seeming to take delight in approaching to God, that they might know his ways,
always (when the appointed time comes) Fasting and Praying, humbling and
afflicting their Souls for a day, and hanging down their heads as a Bullrush,
thinking that to be a Fast of the Lords choosing, and the acceptable day of the
Lord, yet never loosing the bands of wickedness, nor undoing the heavy burden,
nor breaking every yoke, nor letting the oppressed Seed of God in their own
hearts, nor without neither, go free, ever and anon fasting for sin, never from
it, ever reforming never reformed, ever running, never obtaining, always
making a show of mortifying sin, never making any true effectual mortification
of it, ever warring, never overcoming, nor quenching the fiery darts of the
wicked, nor dislodging the vain thoughts that are in them, nor coming to the
end of the Commandment, which is love from a pure heart, good conscience, and
faith unfamed, always beating the air but never keeping under the body, nor
bringing it into subjection to the power of Truth, ever owing that love, which
works no ill but fulfills the Law, never performing any thing but that hatred
which breaks the law, debtors always to the Spirit, but living after the
flesh, and never by the Spirit mortifying the deeds of the body that they may
live to God, such sluggardly wishers and wouldens, and seekers and respecters,
and pretenders, and striuers and runners, fighters, reformers, and mortifiers
will be cast away at length for all their constant endeavors; since they do not
so much as look to overtake what they run after, nor reach the high prize they
profess to press to in this life, which if they do not, themselves say also
it is to late to effect and obtain it after death. But Qui cupit optatam cursu
contingere metam
Multa, tulit, fecitque puer, sintavit and alsit.


It Is good for a man to bear Christ's Yoke in his youth, since the Soul of the
sluggard desires and has nothing, but the Soul of the diligent shall be made
far.

As for the residue of T. Ds. reply to the argument above, as some of it has
bin touched on before, so what was not is scarce worth mentioning.

He tells us v. 6. which talks of respect to all Gods Commands, explaines all
the other.

Rep. T. D. says so but where is his proof? beside if it be so, a true, real
respect (though such a slender one as he rests in does not) stands in a due and
true observation of them; is he worthy to be respected as a true respecter of
Gods Commandments that breaks them?

T.D. David excludes himself from the blessed Estate, if undefiled and doing no
iniquity be meant strictly here, since his wish, v. 5. and other passages show
he was not free from sin, which surely David did not intend, because, Psalm.
32.2.5. he pronounces blessedness to the man in whose Spirit is no guile, who
is sincere, as himself was at that time, though then under the guilt (as is
supposed by interpreters) of his great sin of murder and adultery, for which
Psalm. 51. was composed.

Rep. 1st. some of this dirty stuff I spoke to but a little before, the
falsehood of which is evident, for whereas the Scripture says, David was not
upright in the matter of Uriah, T.D. says, yea he was sincere and had no guile
in his Spirit when under the guilt of those great sins. 2d. as to the rest,
what if David did exclude himself? If he were under those great evils, he
might well exclude himself from the blessedness of sincere ones, till he came
into the sense of Gods Love again and to repentance; while he pronounced the
undefiled ones blessed that did no such iniquity, he had reason to take the
curse as his own portion to himself, and to cry out of himself, Talaiporos
Anthroyos O wretched man that I am, more deservedly then Paul, who (though (in
zeal of God) shedding blood) yet was, it is like, never such a deep Adulterer,
and deliberate Murderer as David was in Vriahs case: and as God said to Israel
Hos: 9.1: so might David say to himself, rejoice not thou as other (honest)
people, for thou a^t gone a who ^ing from thy God: and if that were his case
(as thou intimatest it was) wherein he was so desperately defiled with filth
and blind, he might well exclude himself from it, having no reason to take to
himself the blessing of the undefiled: or whether he excluded himself or no
from it, this I am sure (for all thy foolish dreams about David's good
Condition, Justification, Blessedness and Vprightness, whilst under the guilt
of those sordid Iniquities, that the Scripture excludes him in that case so far
from blessedness, that it concludes him neither upright (as thou simply do)
not so much as a respecter of Gods Commands, which at least thou dorest, he
was, even when he called that all abomination (whiles thou Judge him (as Indeed
thou do) to have respect to Gods commandments, that despises both God and
him, for 2 Samuel 12. as much as thou smoothest over those abominable businesses
the better to sooth thy self and some sinful Saints like thy self, in your
lusts and iniquities, as no more then Saints infirmities, who have respect to
all Gods Commandemets in respect of design and endeavor, though falling short
in accomplishing: yet when Nathan came to him well-nigh a year after he had
lain, in that dirty pickle in impenitency under the guilt of those gross
impieties, he is so far from sowing pillows and daubing with such untempered
mortar, as thou do, and from including him in the lists of sincerity, and
owning him as one that had respect to all Gods Commands, that he convinces him
of his wicked hypocrisies and condemns him, as one that had despised both God
himself and his Commandments.

Next T. D. as he relates p. 11. 1 pamp. asking me whether I could produce one
single example of a perfect Saint in our sense, I told him yea, instancing in
Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6. who were both Righteous before God (not
before man only) but before God, walking in all the Commandments of God (not
in some few or many, but all) and Ordinances of God blameless.

To this (accounting for more then that he then said though it is one to as
little purpose as the other) first (quoth he) how appears it that righteous
before God is meant of a perfect inherent Righteousness? seeing a believers
person with his works are accepted with God, though his works be not perfect:
And in proof of this imperfect and crooked conceit of his own, he coats, Heb.
11. 4. By faith Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain, by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous, etc. and then adds that ( blameless) is
meant but comparatively, as Phil. 2.15. that ye may be blameless and harmless,
the Sons of God without rebuke, etc. in which same sense he says, Luke 4.
understands the Phrase, to which he adds Phil. 3.6. where Paul while a Pharisee
says he was blameles as touching the righteousness of the Law, which he was
only externally conformable to and how Zachariah was at the same time blamed,
and also punished for his unbelief.

Rep. in which piece of Reply of his, 1st. something is true but nothing to T.
D's. turn, but rather such as serves the truths turn against his, but 2d.
something most abominable confused, false and fained, viz. That a believers
person with his works are accepted with God, though his works be not perfect.
For how ere T. D's. calls and counts men (as he does dain'd) Saints and
Believers, etc. while their works are not perfect, and not only not perfect but
abominable also, wicked, sinful, filthy, hypocritical, deceitful, gross
iniquity, Adultery, Murder, and despite to the Commands of God (as David's
acting in Vriahs matter are called, Psalm. 5.1. 2 Samuel 13.) guiltless, etc. yet,
no such imperfect, evil workers (while so) are any more deemed upright by God,
then David was, who was not vouchsafed the name of upright in that case. 2d.
much less are such as are not perfect but evil works, such as are at best but
unclean, dung, iniquity and filthy rags (yet such and no better does T. D. call
the duties, and, as to the manner, the best performances of himself, and his
sort of Saints) of any acceptance at all (as I have showed well nigh newly
above) but rather an abhorrency in the sight of God, by what person soever
acted: nor was David's adultery with Bathsheba, and murder of Vriah, nor
himself, as acting it, nor any service he did, or Sacrifice he offered while
under the filth and blood-guiltnesse, and unrighteousness of it (till he had
thoroughly repented of it, was was not from it, and recovered out of it) any more
accepted as a sweet smelling savor with God, then the adultery of another man,
then Cains murder of Righteous Abel, and the persons and performances of all
such unrighteous livers, whose very Sacrifices, (while they are such) God has
no more respect to then he had to that of Cain, whose seed they are, whose
Image and nature (while they are doing so wickedly) they all bear, and are
found in ( David himself (as so doing) not excepted) which Sacrifice of Cain,
though else perhaps as costly as his brothers, had, together with his person,
no such acceptance as Righteous Abel and his had, because at that time he was
an evil doer, and then 'twas the evil doer that did the good, Sin lay at the
door, and kept the Sacrifice from acceptance, as it ever does where ere it
lies: for where and while there is a turning away, the care from the law there is
the wicked one, there the person and the performance are both a stink before
the Lord, yea the very prayers of the wicked are abominable. And in bringing
Abel for an instance of a believers person and his works being accepted with
God, though his works be not perfect, He quite cuts the throat of his own
cause; for both Abel and his works were true and perfect, and righteous before
God; and so they are both called, Mat. 23. 35. Heb. 11. 4. 1 John 3. 12. while
Cain and his works are both called evil and of the Devil: and therefore had
Abel and his works acceptance, when Cain and his had none, because he was
righteous, not so esteemed of God while he was not so indeed (as T. D. deems)
who because he so does, deems that God (as himself) deems those and theirs to
be good and righteous, which in themselves ( inhaesive) are nothing less, but
(saving that contrary account T. D. supposes God to have thereof) really rather
evil and unrighteous: For had Cain bin righteous and done well in other
matters he had done well in offering, and bin accepted; if thou do well shall
thou not be accepted? but because he did Bonum and not Been, being an evil doer
and a sinner, when Abel being righteous did both, and was accepted, yet he was
not accepted in his material doing that, which (else) was good: in which case
Isreal's most solemn assemblies were Iniquity (as those of Saints and believers
are not, notwithstanding T. Ds. say so) because their hands were defiled with
blood, and their fingers with moral iniquity: So by faith, which purified Abels
heart and wrought by love and overcame the world in him, and the lust thereof,
and which was both made and proved to be true and perfect by his works, did
Abel, and so all true Saints and believers also do, come to offer a more
excellent and acceptable Sacrifice then that of Cain, and his wicked Race, by
which they obtain (not man's but) Gods own testimony that they are righteous, as
Zachariah, and Elizabeth both did, in the place and case now in hand: which
Testimony of God, who counts no things to be other wise then they really and
truly are, is true, and will stand against all T.D's. tattl^ to the contrary,
and will be believed before his, by every true believer, though many such
nominal believers as himself is, will believe no more of what God himself
declares plainly, by such holy ones as wrote the Scripture, then what they
list, and that is little or nothing at all of that, that leaves them no license
at all to please the lust: and therefore, the Righteousness, blamelesness,
Innocence, harmlesness of the Sons of God themselves, Phil. 2. 14. that are
found in all good conscience toward both, and without rebuke before both God
and men, whose blameless and righteous works, which are from God himself, and
not of themselves, Isa. 26. 12. 54. 17. deeper dye then that of Paul's own Exact
Pharisaical; Traditional, External Conformity to the mere outward Letter, or
Law of a Carnal Commandment in matter of external Ordinance (which yet to the
full was as good as any of that Religion or Righteousness of our morally
unrighteous, Pharisaical Christians, now gloryed in by our literallists and
legallists) must be made no other then parralel'd with that of man, Phil. 3. 6.
which had no more also then the Testimony of man, as to that denomination of
blamlesness and Righteousness, yet was in truth (because lying in outward
observation of fleshly ceremony, more than inward Righteousness and morality)
no more worth than mere dung with God, and as to justification of any one in
his sight that doted on it.

As to that of Zachariah's being guilty of acting sin at that very time in
which be as said to be Righteous, for which he was punished with dumnes,
whereupon I told him then that in Elizabeth their was no fault found however,
and so one instance might stop his mouth, who called for an instance of one
single person only, but [quoth he] she might be no more free from sin, then
he, though there is no mention of any sin of hers.

Rep. I proved her to be blameless and righteous from the Text it self, it lies
in him to assign some sin of hers, if she had any, but that he cannot do, but
confesses there is no mention of any: So that instance stands ore his head
still: and whereas, at the Tail of his double Tale about his and her sins he
tells another to make them three, viz. that my mouth was stopped, and I was
silenced and had nothing to Reply, (because I thought fit to be silent when
enough was said) T. D. does but mistake himself, for 'twas his own mouth that
was then stopped, insomuch that I saw and heard some of those that stood about
him take notice of him as merely cavelling in that matter: but he that chooses
to Outword them he cavills with, though to little purpose, must choose to have
the last word if he can.

But whereas T. D. says thus, but in a word to put it out of doubt, Zachariah
was at that time found guilty of the sin of unbelief, and was punished for it, I
say its more then he will ever prove while he lives that he was so at all, much
less in the very time of which its said that he was Righteous. For 1st. that
time was before the time of his not-believing, of which its said, that in it he
was Righteous. But 2d. in a word to put it out of doubt, and bring both
instances clear ore his head again, there is no such thing mentioned in the least
of Zachariahs sinning, much less of being punished for his sin, for howbeit he
did not so fully at first, as he did after, believe the Angels news of his
having a Son (it being very unlikely since his wife and he both were very old)
and thereupon desired honestly a sign by which he might the more assuredly know
and give credit to it, as others [without sin] desired in like cases the like
before him, Witness Gideon twice together before he could believe Isarel should
be delivered from Median by his hand for which the Lord was not angry with Him,
Judge. 8.6.36.

And Ahar also, with whom the Lord was angry because he would not ask a sign
when God bad him, Isa. 7.10.11.12.13.14.


yet is he neither blamed, nor threatened, nor less puisht (as T. D. dreams)
with dumbness for not believing till he had a sign, as for a Sin: but his
dumbness was given as an answer of his desire of a sign, and as a sign of the
certainty of the thing, that he might the more undoubtedly believe it, Eccle.
1.18.19.20. whereby shall I know this glad Tidings (quoth Zachariah) for we are
old. Behold [quoth the Angel] thou shall be dumb till the day that these things
shall be performed since thou believe not my words, which shall be fulfilled
in their season.

There remains one Scripture more that T. D. urged against perfection, which he
desired my answer to, at the propounding of which he says, I was silenced, and
yet brings me in himself as answering to it in the very next words that I spoke
at all, whereby men may see how he makes a matter of nothing of it, to utter
lies and to prove them to be lies as soon as he has done.

The Text is Eccles. 7.20. there is not a just man upon earth that does good
and sins not, the sum of my answer, which T. D. renders as raggedly as he
can, so that men may not tell what to make of it, was this, viz. There are no
dwellers upon earth that sin not, but there are some that have a bodily abode
upon earth, whose dwelling is not on earth, but in Heaven, whose conversation
or (Politeuma) or habitation, Mil. 3.20. chief business, being, abode and
dwelling is in Heaven, whom all the inhabitants of the earth or earthly minded
men, on all whom the day of the Lord comes as a snare, Luke 21. viz. the Beast
and his worshippers, who are said to dwell on earth, Rev. 11.10. do Blaspheme,
Rev. 13, 6. and these people of God in Heaven, who also are Heaven, where God
himself dwells, Isa. 57. Isa 66. Rev. 18.20.19.1. Sin not, as all they do (woe
to them therefore) that are inhabitants of the earth, for the Devil is cast out
of Heaven, and has no place there, and is come down to the other in great
wrath: But they that are in Heaven are on Mount-Sion, with the Lamb redeemed
from the earth, and in their mouth is found no guile, for as the Lamb himself,
who is their Savior, is unspotted, doing no evil, so are they without fault
before the Throne of God, Rev. 14.1.3.5. which answer of mine which was also
G.Ws. and is mine here again to T.D. so far was I then from using it as a mere
evasion, as T. D. says he verily believes I then did in mine own Judgment and
intention: But T. D. not well knowing what to reply to it, replies nothing at
all to it in his Rejoinder; but p. 7.2. pamp. calls it absurd and not worth a
further reply then what he gives, p: 13. 1 pamp. which is so jejune that I can
find nothing in it but skin and bone: he tells us the Just man being in Heaven
in our sense, excludes not his local being here on earth.

Rep. Nor do we say it does, though he there thinks we do think so; but what of
this? we deny, not his bodily and local abode here on earth, and T.D. who can
do no other then give us all our questions, cannot, and therefore does nor deny
but confess it, that he has a present being also in Heaven, and that's as much
as we need wish him to yield to, as in order to the yiedling us our cause; and
if he should deny a true real being of the Sons of God in Heaven, while they
are locally and bodily here on earth, we should force him to confess it from
John 3.13. where its said of the Son of man (mark) in praesenti, that he is in
Heaven, while yet he stood bodily on the earth: He tells us we run very low in
this answer, but alas it is too high for him, who is on earth, with all his
reason to reach any sound Reply to; as ( in us) seems to be ( without us) and (
inward) to be ( outward) to him who lives not in Heaven within, but on earth
without; so, to him that stands (as T.D. does) on his head, with his heals
upwards, and his head down toward the Earth, where his feet and heels only
should be, as downward seems to be upward, so does upward to be downward: But
so it seems to the great Whore that rides the Beast, or that Woman that's
clothed in Scarlet, and for a time tramples the Holy City under feet, Rev.
17.4.11.2. yet things seem no otherwise then they are to the Woman clothed
with the Sun, who has her head Crowned with the Stars, and all fading
sublunary Glory, and the Moon it self under her feet, Rev. 12.1.

As to T. Ds. trifling reply to what R: H. urged from Heb, 12:23. where Paul
says, the Saints were come to mount Sion the City of the living God, the New
Jerusalem (into which let T.D. esolve himself, whether any uncleanness or
defilement can enter, from Rev 21.7.) and to Myriards of Angels, and to the
general Assembly and Church of the 1st being, whose Names are written in
Heaven. And to God, and to Jesus, and to the Spirits of Just men perfected
Where the participle [ perfected] is construed with the word [Just men] not
[Spirits] Pneumasi Dikaion Teteleiomenon:
(with all whom let T. D. who says that place imparts not the perfection of
any man on earth, Resolve himself whether one dram of darkness or uncleanness
can enter into Communion, if 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16.17.18. and 1 John 1.3.4.5.6.7.
be true, much more so as to make one body with them, as T.D. Divines it does)
as to, that I say, so far as it is fit to be replied to, G.W. has done it,
whose reply stands unshaken by that feminine tempest or stood of impertinent
words, wherewith T.D. who says much to as little purpose, would seem to patch
up a return, and what G: W: said in short the body of Christ is perfect, may be
ventured among wise men to stand as it does, against T: D's little less then
Blasphemous Counter-position, that the body of Christ is not perfect: for his
particle ( yet) whereby he mends that matter, saying, not (yet) perfect,
because some that belong to it are yet unborn; this helps him not a tittle, who
holds with I: O. the Scripture to have bin of old from Moses a perfect Rule,
and Canon (I speak ad h^minem their own sense not mine) whilst many books of it
were yet not written, and so I shall vouchsafe it no more then so, and the
rather because that reply of T:D: to G:W: was replied to some months since, but
that it was neglected to be printed by such as were entrusted to see it done,
and whether it yet may or may not be printed before this of mine be out I
cannot say. Unspeakably much more might be said both in disproof of such Toys
as our D^vines talk against it, by and in proof of that possibility of a
perfect living without sin before death, then I shall here take notice of; yet
3. or 4, things that are upon me I am free to give some small bint of: T:D:
tells us, God will have us excercis'd in that work of mortifying sin while we
live, and therefore, lest we should have no more work to do nor worlds to
conquer, there must be no full conquest over the world, nor perfect
mortification of the lust of it till we be dead, so some tell us, Gods Children
would be proud, if he should not keep them down, corruption as well as
affliction being a most effectual means to make ashamed, God will leave (as he
did once Caananites to excerise the Israelites, and he as Thorns in their
sides) some sins in his Saints unsubdued as long as they love, to humble and
prove them and show them what is in their hearts, and such like.

Rep. But I trow where would pride it self be, which is none of the least sins
if the Saints come by the Blood and Power of Christ's Light and Grace, which
only humbles, to be fully freed and cleansed from all sin and uncleanness of
flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God? will not pride it
self then be brought down, as well as other sins, and Humility alone be Exalted?

Some tells us from 1 Kings 1:48. The man lives not that sins not.

Rep: We say that there is no man that lives, who has not sinned, and as John
says, he is a liar that says otherwise of himself, but because men have
sinned and have sin must they never be purged? is there a necessity that they
who now have it, and now sin must needs have it, and must needs sin till they
dye? and if they may cease from sinning (as our Divines also, but that they
forget themselves, tell us they may, yea must or dye for ever, every tree lying
for ever as it falls, and there being no Purgatory after death) I say if they
may and must before they dye, is it then unpossible that they should? and if
they may never so little before they dye, (suppose a day, a week, a year) leave
sinning, may they not by the same power and light live without it, 2:3: or many
years before? but that, as the plain truth is) they are in love with it, and
loath to part with it till it parts with them, and to take heed to that light
and grace that is given of the Lord to lead them out of it, to repentance from
it, and to learn them to deny it, and to live without it, Godly, Righteously,
and soberly in this present world, in which neglect the hands of the evil doer
are strengthened by our dirty dawbers, who tell them they must leave sin, all
sin, little sins, and yet ( to go round again) that they cannot possible leave
all while they live; So strengthening the hands of the wicked that he cannot
return from his wickedness, by such pleasing sing-songs and lullabies as these,
not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not, and the Saints have
their infirmityes, and David himself was overtaken with Adultery and Murder,
and yet stood accepted with God, and was, even when under the guilt of those
gross sins, not in a condemned, but in a justified estate, and Prove: 29. who
can say I have made my heart clean? and such like: Not heeding that though none
can (nor do we assert any such thing that we have any sufficiency of our selves
to good) yet alsufficiency is in God and his grace is sufficient, so that God
can, if men look to him in his light, make clean the heart, and man a young man
in whom youthful lusts are strong, by the Power of God and, taking heed to his
way by his word in his heart, may cleanse his way, and so some do, though they
are but few, nor does ( Who can say I am clean from mine iniquity? not one)
Exclude all from cleanness, implying only (as often such interogations do) no
otherwise then thus viz: that few can, for though an interogation affirmative
of this sort (for the most part) concludes negatively, yet not always
universally so, but some are included in the affirmative both according to the
Poets and the Prophets: Quis legit haec? Per: so Isa. 53: who believes our
Report? vel duo vel neme, few or none:

Add to this these considerations in proof thereof: If sin be Christ's Enemy in
his Saints, which none denies, then must it be, destroyed in them before, not
after death, for the last enemy that is to be destroyed is death. But the 1 st.
is true, therefore this latter.

Again the perfecting of the Saints is the very end of Christ's Ministry to the
Church-ward Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. which end it must accomplish in this life or not
at all, for it ceases in that to come, as Scripture and prophecy and all such
mediums do (as I.O. confesses) being accommodated presenti huic statui, to this
present world only Ex. 3. S. 39. and if it be not here attainable, and freedom
from sin not possible to be accomplished, then ye make Christ's Ministry as
imperfect as your own ( absit blasphemia) the perfection of every thing
consisting in nulla alia re [quoth I.O. Ex. 3. S. 24.] no other thing then in
its sufficiency to attain its end: And in every discipline that (quoth he) is
to be counted imperfect, which sinem propositum suum assequi potis non est, is
not of force to effect its propounded end.

Yea not only the 1 act of regeneration, which is all ye count as attainable
here, but also the 2. Act or Consummation and perfection of it is attainable,
and is the very end of the true spiritual Ministry of Christ, which is his
gift and infallible, for the Text runs so concerning that Ministryes
continuance here, which ceases after death, till we all come into the unity of
the Faith and Knowledge of the Son of God i. e. to know him all alike, and to
one perfect man, even to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ:
So that all that are truly born from above of water and the Spirit (not
Bastards, born of flesh into a talk of the new birth that yet know it not,)
into the divine nature of Christ, may come up into the measure of his stature,
to be as he is, in whom is no sin, to walk as he walked in this world, 1 Ioh.
2. 6. 1 Ioh. 4.17. or else the end of the Ministry is frustrated: And to say
that God appoints a means to an end, no way attainable. I.O. Himself detests
that (as his principles are) and so do all that hold that undeniable maxim,
that Deus nil facit frustra.

Again it is the end of the Scripture (quoth I. O) persicere omniae, to perfect
All things pertaining to our salvation: Therefore perfect salvation from sin is
here attainable, otherwise the Scripture is not perfect (as I. O. says it is)
to its own end, since it ceases in the world to come (as he confesses also)
therefore though he contradict himself so as to say the Scripture obtains not
its end here, yet if his saying that it does obtain its end, and its end is
saving the soul, be true this ( ad hominem) is an Argument out of his own mouth
sufficient to evince, to the stoppoing of it, a possibility of being saved from
sin in this life.

Again, they, that walk not after the flesh, and fulfill not the lusts of it,
sin not, for sin is the fruit and effect of the lust, which must conceive, be
consented and yielded to, before sin can be brought forth Iam. 1.14.15. a man
must be led away of his own lust before he sins.

But there be some that walk not after the flesh, that fulfill not the lust of
it.

Yea they that are in Christ Jesus to whom is no condemnation (which
condemnation by the Law is where ever sin is, which is the transgression of the
Law:) Romans 8.1. yea more expressly they that are in Christ, are new creatures,
the old things, the old man and his deeds, 2 Cor. 5. Romans 6. Ephesians. 4. Which is
renewed after the Image of him, who created him in righteousness and holiness
of truth, not a mere imputed one, a mere computed one, an imaginary one, a
sound of words, a talk, not a shadowy one, not a show of holiness where it is
not substantially, inherently indeed, and in truth, but a sinning under the
name of Saints: Yea more expressly yet, from Romans 8. If Christ be in in you
the body is dead because of sin, and Romans 6. how shall we that are dead to sin,
live any longer therein, such there are in whom Christ is, and these are dead
to sin, and those that are dead to it, live not in it, it is mortified in such
in facto esse, not in fieri only i.e. mortifying ever as long as we live, yet
never dead till they be dead, as our dead Divines deliver: Ye most expressly
of all Gal. 5. they that are Christ's (and some are his though the pleaders for
sin and the Devils dwelling in them till they die are none of his) have (in
praeterito) crucified the flesh, not with the actions of it only, but also
with the affections and lusts thereof: And though there is a time of daily
dying (I dyday^y says Paul, 1 Cor. 15. (in the light, which is the cross of
Christ to the ca^nailm^nd) to the world and the lust of it, which passes away
before him that does the will of God, and abides eve^: Yet there is a time of
being crucified to the world with Christ and the world unto such, which Paul,
witnessed 2 Cor. 12. And howbeit 14. years before that, Paul have a Thorn in
the flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, least through many Revelations
he should be exalted above measure, whence the Ministers of the night and
darkness argue ( a ma^^i ad m^nus) that Paul sinned while he lived, much more
must others, not heeding that his Thorn was but a Temptation to prevent his
transgression and therefore no^ a transgression of itself (for Christ was
tempted, yet never sinned) and beside though it lay haunting and attempting
him, and was not soon removed, yet on his prayer that grace was given, which
was sufficient to support him under it. so that he fell not by it, yet if it
had proved a transgression, 'twould not have proved him that sine'd 14. years
ago to have been a sinner now, much less to have sinned so long as he lived,
and so to have been [ an as for example] for all seeming Saints to argue from,
that they may safely and must unavoidably continue sinning to their dying day.
Therefore salvation from sin is attainable in this life: Yea this very
conclusion here inferred, is in plain terms asserted by Peter of the Saints, 1
Pet. 1. of whom he says, that they received the end of their faith, the
salvation of their souls, which salvation (I say till) is from the sin (which
slayes and separates it from God) or else from nothing.

Moreover such as walk after the Spirit, and in the light, and are led
thereby, these sin not, nor do the deeds of darkness, which are sin For the
light and Spirit lead none into sin: But there be such as walk in the light, in
the day, in which if a man walk, says John, he stumbles not, 1 Ioh. Much less
falls^: There be some that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, and
are led by the Spirit, and those that are led by it are not under the Law [the
lash of which they would be under, as all sinners are, if they transgressed it]
but under grace. And these are the Sons of God, those that are born of God,
whom the world knows not 1 Ioh. 1, 2, 3. for they are his hidden ones, Psalm.
83. against whom they take crafty council, as against an impure generation,
though they purify themselves even as Christ himself is pure, whilst such as
know neither the Sons of God, nor whose Sons themselves are while they sin, are
that generation that is pure in their own eyes, though not yet washed from their
filthiness, nor meaning to be so here.

Who ever walks after the Spirit, and no more after the flesh and lusts of it
[at it seems by that very Text Romans 8. some do, to whom alone there is no
condemnation because no sin, for they are in Christ and so out of the
transgression, in the light, out of the darkness, in but one of which a man
can be at one time] such sin not, who ever they be, unless T.D. I.O. and the
whole Gang of blind guides, who tell people that none but that person that
Christ appeared in a Jerusalem, ever were, shall or can be fu^ly freed from
sinning in this world, will [being ^ore shoes, in that sink of sottishness]
run ore boots too, so as to say the Light and Spirit leads such, as follow and
walk after it, into lust and sin Therefore there are some that live without
sinning.

And this is one infallible Argument from the very letter it self (if it were
not become now as a Book sealed to the learned lookers into it that freedom
from sin was attainable by the power of Christ's light, and the grace of God
(which alone even we say is sufficient to that end) and was attained by Paul
and others then, and therefore may be now, even in this life, in that Pan^
declares concerning Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus (the
head from whence, as the holy ointment, it runs down to the Skirts of the
Garment, and as the unction 1 Ioh. 2. abides in his body teaching all things,)
it had made him free from the law of sin and death, of which Law of sin and
death he relates in that 7. Chapter that he was once wretched by reason of its
carrying him captive to it self, of its motions of sin working in him, and
bringing forth fruit in him unto death, of its warring in his members against
the Light or Law of God in his mind, by which he had the knowledge of sin in
the very lust of it, as that he should not covet nor lust to envy, anger,
uncleanness, etc. Which the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 5. and Paul himself
(while a Pharisee) looking into the l^tter without only [as he did from a
child] knew not till he turned to the light within and came to the Law in the
Spirit, till he and it came to look each other in the face; from which time,
and not from his looking into the letter he saw the Law in the spirituality,
holiness, righteousness and goodness (...), and [for all his former formality
and strict pretense to unrighteousness and profession of a letter ad extra] his
own mere naughtiness and carnality, as that of one that was still sold under
sin and a committer of it, in the sight of God from whose wrath that old
drosty, dunghilly righteousness of his own Phil. 3. which was not Christ's [as
T. D. blasphemously belyes it to be, p. 22. 1. Pamp.] could not deliver him,
till he witnessed himself clothed with another, even that righteousness which
is of God by faith in Christ, not imputed only, but imparted also to the true
sanctification, as well as justification of every one that believes, which
passages nevertheless of that 7th chap. to the Romans and that 12. of his 2d.
Ep. to the Corinthians: our senseless Seers have made, among others, one of
their main common places from whence to prove the very contrary, even that
there is no such freedom from sin, while in the body; but that of necessity, it
must be acted by the Saints themselves, while they breath upon this outward
earth: For [say they] if Paul complained of a body of sin and death while he
lived, and how he was sold under sin, and carried captive to the Law of it, and
of the Law of sin wa^ring in his members against the Law in his mind, so that
he could not do the good he should, but when he would do good, evil was
present with him, and also of a Thorn in his flesh, a Messenger of Satan to
buffet him [as he does 2 Cor. 1, 2, 3. etc.] and all this after his conversion
to his dying day: Then much less can any other Saints expect to be set so free
from sin, by what power soever in this life, as to live and not sin, and such
like! But Paul did so, therefore what man can do otherwise? Who can ever live
and not sin?

Thus they argue against Qua. as a damnable sort of Heretics, that deliver a
doctrine of Devils, because they hold out, as attainable, that hellish thing,
as they count it, called holiness, and such freedom from sin in this life, so
as not to commit iniquity any more; not considering all this while that Paul in
those terms speaks what he once was, [yea even after his conversion to the
light] till sin was wholly subdued, by the light condemning it in his flesh and
bringing forth in him judgment over it into victory, and not of what he was at
the writing thereof, in which time he says the Law of the Spirit had made him
free from that Law of sin: Not yet heeding at all that the Thorn in the flesh
was not a transgression, but a temptation, with which God exercised him, that
he might show the sufficiency of his own grace to support and keep him from
transgression, even from that sin of being exalted above measure, and that no
less then 14. years before he wrote this, and not just then when, or while he
wrote it, much less a transgression that remained unmortified in him till his
dying day.

One argument more I shall urge from I: O's: own book thus viz: If perfect
Salvation from sin be the proper end of the Scripture, and it be perfect to
that its end, and does perfect it, and yet does what it does in this present
world [or nowhere] to which it is accomodated only, and ceases to do ought into
the world to come, then that perfect Salvation must be wrought out by it, or
here, or no where at all: But all the former are asserted abundantly ore and
ore again as truth, by I: O: himself, Ex: 3: 5: 28: 22: Therefore the
conclusion is consequently true that its either here or no where: Again they
all say in opposition to the Pope, there is no Purgatory in the world to come,
therefore it must be here or no where, unless they know any other world
between this present world and that which is to come, which middle world though
I have heard some talk of a world in the Moon, I am not yet acquainted with.

There be some therefore that sin not, in whom the Law is not transgrest, but
sin condemned and judged in their flesh, so that the Righteousness of the Law by
Christ's Power is fulfild in them, and they walk not after the the flesh but
after the Spirit, which is the end of Gods sending his Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and of his sending out his light into men's hearts, even that Law
of the Spirit of Life which is in himself, viz: to make men free from that law
of sin and death, which sometimes they obeyed to condemnation, and to condemn
sin in the flesh, and out of it also by his Judgment brought forth into victory
over it, that his Righteousness might be Revealed, and the Righteousness of the
Law, which he fulfilled in himself, might be [by him] fulfilled [in us] also:

Many more passages truly there are in T: D's: and I: O's: books [besides these
many that have bin spoken to] some of which are worth no more [being but
confusion] then confutation, and some of which also are not worth so much, and
therefore I shall draw to an end [making many books and much writing being
wearisom] but by these men maybe admonished what a mere Fallible kind of
guidance they must expect from their University Admired leaders, while they
hate the Light of God in their own hearts, and hang only on their lying lips
for their learning the plainSoul-saving Truth of Christ,

FINIS.
AN ADDITIONALL APPENDIX To the Book Entitled Rusticus ad Academicos; OR, The
Country correcting the Clergy.

WHEREIN In somewhat a smaller Compass, and closer Circumference then that of
the Volume it alludes to, some few of those Rabbinical Riddles, which yet are
obvious enough in the other, to any observant Reader, are rendered more
conspicuous to the observation of all; To the end that all that have Eyes may
see, and a Heart may understand, How the Scribes and Schoolmen are unskild in
the Scriptures, How the Sun is set upon the Seers, How it is night to the
Diviners that they cannot divine; How the Vision of all is become unto them as
a Book sealed; How blindness has befallen the BabelBuilders; How the Race of
the (once Reverenced and Renowned) Rabbis is wrapped up in Rounds, in their (so
much respected) writings against the Light; How the Doctors are doting on a
Divinity of their own; The Teachers and Text-men tangled in their own talkings
about their Text, and the Priests pulled down by themselves in their own Prate
pretensively for i.e. Pro Scripturis but in very deed against both the very
Text, and the very Truth it talks on; How among the Gameliels in general, but
more particularly among those four choice ones T. Danson, I. Owen, R. Baxter,
I. Tombs, (who, as Representatives of the rest, whose sense they speak, and in
whose behalf they reason, are reckoned with in the bigger Book abovesaid) (
Ishmael-like Every man's hand is against every man, and each man's hand against
himself, R.B.I.T. sometimes confuting I.O and T.D. and these four sometimes
confounding and contradicting each man himself; and in a word dancing the
Rounds together in the dark, tracing too and fro, crossing and capering up and
down, in and out, and sometimes round about, in the Wood of their own wonted
wisdom, in the clouds of their self-created confusion about sundry Doctrines,
they concur in together ( by the ears) against the Quakers.

Contradictionibus scatet Spiritus Enthusiasticus;

Vnusquisque asslatum habet, ita faede et aperte inter se aspiritu immundo
committuntur ut vix duo eorum in eadem doctrina conveniant; sed mire
digladiantes adversas et contrarias sententias quotidie venditant, etiam in
Nomine Dei se aliquoties mutuo devovent et execrantur, Itaque; Nihil Certi ab
i^ expectare licet.

The Enthusiastical spirit flows with Contradictions; So fowlly and apparently
are they whifled by the evil spirit among themselves, that scarce two of them
can agree in one Doctrine, but clashing wonderfully, they daily vent opposite
and contrary opinions, and often they even curse one another in the name of
God, therefore there is nothing certain to be expected from them; Quoth John
Owen, Exer:3. Sect:34.

Quid rides (O sacerdos? de te fabula narratur.
In Homine Domini, ac in Nomine Domini
(says the Proverb) Incipit Omne malum.By S. Fisher.
London, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1660.

AN ADDITIONALL APPENDIX, etc-
THat flood of Follies and Absurdities, that ( loud of Confusions and self-
Contradictions, which diffuses and shatters it self up and down by plats in
sundry showers thorowout the sun dry Pages of these four men's Books, Every eye
that reads them (as they lie at a distance in theirs, and in mine, by which
theirs is more largely answered) may possibly not set sight on them easily:
Therefore I shall cull some few of them only out (for the whole number passes
my skill to cast account of) and clap them a little closer together; Not so
much to shame them as to honor the Truth, which they would shame; That they
may be the more ready to be read, and apparent to the view of every ordinary
Reader; That any (save such as seeing will not see) may see the Sword of the
Lord already laid on the Arm and Righteye of the Idol-Shepheard; To the drying
up of the one and the darkning of the other; For perverting the right way of
the Lord, so that he not only sees not the Sun of Righteousness, which he
loves not that it should shine (as Elimas of old did not, for his seeking to
turn away the Governor from hearing the Faith, Acts 13.10, 11, 13.) nor yet the
Moon of so much as common sense and reason, but groaps about with him in the
mist of his own muddy mind, so as to need some to lead him by the hand, and to
show him (in answer to his Question (...)) whereabouts he is, and what a
shaking, sandy ground he stands on.

Self-Contradictions, Confusions, and Rounds about Justification.

1. As to the Doctrine of Justification by Christ and his Righteousness within
us. 1. They tell us one while, that the 3. Question debated on at Sandwich, and
held in the affirmative by the Quakers, was stated in these terms. Whether [
Our] Good works are the meritorious cause of Our Justification? which is a Lie
with a witness, witness T.D. who tells it, P. 14. of his first Pamphlet.

Otherwhiles (to go round again) leaving out the Term [ Our] which quite alters
the state of the Question, and makes it altogether another, This Truth is told
us; viz: That the Terms of the 3. Question were, Whether Good works be the
meritorious cause of our Justification? which was expressly affirmed by the
Qua: Witness Hen: Oxenden John Boys Esquires; Mr. Nath: Barry, Mr. Thomas
Seyliard, Mr. Char; Nicolls Ministers, a few (of very many) Witnesses (quoth
T.D. in his Epist: to the Reader) of the Terms of the Questions agreed to by
the Qua: who will free me (and how well they free him let all the world judge)
from the suspicion of a partial Relator; Witness also T.D. himself, who (if it
be the same T.D. (as no doubt it is) who wrote both that Book and the Epistle,
and Narrative thereto annexed) in p. 58. of the self-same Book to the
Contradicting and Confounding of himself in the former Tale, together with
those his own Witnesses, tells all that Truth that is last related.

2. They tell us one while (that is, when we not only assert it, but evince it
from the Rule of contraries) that its rank Popery to say, Good works deserve
Justification.

Otherwhiles (that is, when to the contradiction of themselves, they assert and
evince the same from the same Rule) then ( to go round again) it is no Popery;
Witness T.D. who in p. 14. of his 1. Pamphlet, says S.F. shows himself a rank
Papist indeed, in so arguing, yet p. 15. (in proof of himself to be a good
Protestant, and no Papist) allows himself so to argue; viz: Evil works, which
are the violation of the Law, deserve damnation; Ergo Good works which are the
fulfilling of the Law, deserve salvation [adding] That he knows no good works
such* but Christ's; To which I answer, Nor do I know any good works such, but
Christ's; [and I adde] I own all Good works such, that are Christ's, and there
T.D. dissents, in not owning all Christ's own Good works such, but some only
(namely such as he did at Jerusalem) and some, even of Christ's own Good works
(as namely, all such as he works in his Saints, who works all their good works
in them Isa; 26.12.) as no better then dung, loss, and filthy rags; Witness
his blind blending of these two distinct businesses into one and the same; viz:
The righteousness wrought by men without Christ; and the righteousness
wrought in men by Christ; or Our good works, alias Man's own righteousness,
wrought only by men in their own wills, wisdom strength, according to their
thoughts, imaginations, conceits, traditions, etc. without Christ's Light and
Spirit (which is that only the Spirit calls Ours, that is as an unclean thing,
as filthy rags, Isa: 64.4. which God (speaking to Israel, that being ignorant
of Gods righteousness, went about to establish their own, Rom: 10.3.) calls
Thy righteousness thy works, which cannot profit nor deliver; Isa: 57.12, 13.
And which Paul, Phil. 3.9. styles his own righteousness which was of the Law,
as in opposition to that of God and Christ) And those good works of Christ in
our persons, in performing whereof, the righteousness of the Law is said
(though by Christ's Power only) to be fulfilled in us, Rom: 8.4. Or that
righteousness which is, though in the Saints, yet of God alone through their
faith in Christ Jesus the Light, Phil: 3.9. For these two Righteousnesses, the
one whereof who is not blind may see to be only man's own, which is worse then
naught, and avails not, The other only Christ's own, which must be of infinite
worth, and desert to justify (as T.D. also to the further confounding of
himself, truly confesses; p. 15.1. Pam:) from the dignity of the person or
subject (i.e. Christ in us) by whom it is performed, T.D. confounds together,
both into one and the self same, and consequently concludes himself unavoidably
to be ( respectively) both a Self Contradictor, and (which is worse) a most
abominable Blasphemer; For if the Righteousness and Obedience that is by
Christ's Power performed in his Saints Persons, be both Christ's own, and yet
man's own also. Yet T.D. most strenuously stands to it, that so it is P. 22.1
Pam. saying the Apostle by his own Righteousness understands his personal
conformity to the Law; Do you think that the righteousness Paul calls his own
was not Christ's? Had he any righteousness which he had not received? That
righteousness which was in the Apostle was wrought in him by Christ, as an
efficient cause.
Then (being one and the same individual righteousness) it must have a mutual
participation of the same Properties and Denominations, respectively, so that
if Christ's own righteousness may be said to be of worth and desert to
Salvation (as it truly is by T. D. himself then ^ man's, Paul's, the Saints own
righteousness (which T.D. says was Christ's, received from Christ, wrought by
Christ) must be consequently meritorius also, and that is a piece of rank
Popery, and wretched Foppery of T.Ds. own broaching (who yet would Father it
upon the Qua:) which the Qua: (who own all man's own righteousness to be (as
the Scripture says of it) unclean, dung, loss, and filthy rags, and utterly
unprofitable) do as utterly abhor, and so T.D. makes himself a Merit Monger,
with a witness, such as never yet was found among the Qua: That dying-Qua: at
Dover himself, whom T.D. belyes in that particular, not excepted.

And again, If Man's, Paul's, the Saints own righteousness, may be said (as it
truly is, Isa: 57.12, 13. (64.4. Phil. 3.8.) to be unprofitable, unclean, dung,
loss and filthy rags, then the self same which Paul and other Saints (their
own righteousness being no other then Christ's, then what they receive from
him, and he works in them (as T.D. says) for their Sanctification some of
Christ's own righteousness, Yea even that too which serves for the Saints
sanctification, and to make the Saints meet for that possession, where ^no
unclean thing must enter, For are there not two righteousnesses [of Christ?]
quoth he p. 22.) and they serve for two different ends; The one for our
justification (meaning that which was inhaerent in that single person of old at
Jerusalem) This gives us a right to the inheritance of the Saints in Light; The
other for our sanctification (meaning that he works in his Saints) th^^ though
filthyrags) [mark] makes us meet for the possession.
must be unprofitable, unclean, dung, loss and filthy rags, which is no less
then point blank blasphemy: yea in express terms, p. 23. I deny our
justification by Christ in us quoth he) by that righteousness in us whereof
Christ is the Author; as if that Christ in us, and that righteousness of his
in us, which is the same with that without us, deserved nothing.

3. Moreover in saying there are two Righteousnesses of Christ, when as the
Righteousness of Christ (whether in himself, or in his Saints) is but one, he
crowds confusion upon confusion, in the eye of every clear considerer of his
inconsiderable stuff; which cannot but see that what God joins together as one,
this he separates and puts asunder; what is truly one; and undivided as Christ
and his Righteousness is) this he divides, and distinguishes into two
righteousnesses; 2 Things meant by that one name of Christ, his Person and his
Operations in us; The latter whereof he denis for righteousness to
justification: But what things are truly and distinctly two, and ought
accordingly to be, and by the Lord are divided, separated and put asunder as
Man's, Paul's the Jews own righteousness, and that righteousness which is of
God by faith in Christ, received from, and wrought by Christ in his Saints,
which the Scripture Rom: 10 Phil. 3. opposes and speaks of as in
contradistinction each to other) These two T.D. and his Brother Builders whose
work it is to build Babel or confusion, as their reward is the division of
their tongues confound and jumble both together into one.

They tell us one while that truth Christ tells his Disciples, Matthew. 5. That
except our righteousness exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, (whose
lives yet ( ad extra) as to all outward appearance, were as exact, as they were
strict in many Religious observations we shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom. Whereby they intimate we must live, walk, and obey Gods Holy Truth and
will, though by Christ's assistance, yet personally and more spiritually then
they; Yea, they tell us what the Gospel requires from us (though it is to be
done by Christ in and for us) is a more total abstinence from evil, and even
lusting to it then the Law, and so the Gospel to call for more full
self-denial then the Law, if ere we live; The one saying Thou shall not commit
adultery; the other, Thou shall not lust; the one, Thou shall not steak the
other, Thou shall not covet; the one, Forswear not thy self, the other, swear
not all; the one, thou shall not kill, the other, Thou shall not be angry
without cause.

Otherwhiles ( to go round again) They make the Law require more full and exact
obedience to God, then the Gospel; The Law gives not life without perfect
obedience (quoth T.D.) The Gospel gives life upon imperfect obedience.

4. Again, They tell us one while (that is, when they preach to their people
and see no Quakers among them) the same truths the Scriptures tell us
concerning God, that He is of purer eyes then to behold the least iniquity,
that God, John 9.31. Accepts not, owns not, hears not sinners, says to such as
work it, and depart not from iniquity; Depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity, I know not whence ye are, Matt: 7.22. Luke 13.27. And though
forgiving iniquity to the penitent, when they confess and forsake sin, yet by
no means clearing the guilty, while they lie in impaenitency under sin, Exodus
34.7. That if the heart condemn, God in greater then it, and knows all, and
what the Light in the conscience speaks in way of that self-judgment, that is
placed in us, and seconds it to justification or condemnation, accusation or
execusation, there needs no witness to convince a man (quoth I.O. p: 43.45.
that it speaks it from God, it discovers it is Author from whom it is, and in
whose name it speaks; So that if that (as it does every sinner holds guilty,
God, whose mind it speaks holds not guiltless; Yea, That he who justifies the
wicked, and condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord, as
Pro: 17.15. and much more of that sort; i:e: when the Qua: tell the same truths
to turn men from all sin, which is transgression or iniquity [for not the least
sin is equity that I know of] then, in opposition to the Qua: they wheel about,
And

Otherwhiles, As if God were another manner of God; Who, because its impossible
by the power of his own grace to be fully freed, and perfectly purged from all
sin here, will give indulgency to his sinning Saints (to go round again) They
tell us other tales of him, whereby (if Pro: 17.15. be true) they represent him
as doing that, in the doing of which, he must be an abomination to himself;
viz: 1. That he condemns the just, witness T.D. who tells us, that here the
best works, and personal performances of Believers and Saints themselves are
imperfect, sin, iniquity, dung, loss, unclean filthy rags (though done by
Christ in them) And yet to go round again) That God accepts, alias, is
wellpleased, delights, and takes pleasure in both these Believers and their
wicked works; Witness the Supralapsarian. Predestination Preachers, who
represent God as loving of few only as Jacob, hating most men personally with
Esau qua sic) as men, the creatures of his own Creation, to show his wrath,
power, sovereignty over them, as the Potter over the Clay of the same lump (the
Mystery of which matters of Jacob and Esau, their mere man's wisdom sees no more
into, then a Moles eye into a Millstone) not only before they had done either,
but without reference to either good or evil foreseen to be done in time by
either Adam (their supposed Representative) or themselves; and the
Sublapsarians also, who represent God as (by Praeterition at least) rejecting
most on the Account merely of Adams single act, without a respect to any
personal actions of their own; The least and best of which two do
(doctrinally) make God a Condemner for ever of Millions of just innocents; yea,
very infants (as they blush not to infer) for one fault of their Father Adam,
for whose only eating the sour Grapes, all the childrens teeth must be set on
edge, contrary to what God says now, who will have that Proverb used no more,
but says as the soul that sins shall dye for his own, so every man only for
his own iniquity, and not the son for the fathers, any more then the father for
the sons.

2. That he condemns not, but clears the very guilty and justifies the very
wicked and ungodly, and that not from for the Qua: know that he justifies many
ungodly Ones from their ungodliness, they repenting, not resisting his Spirit
by which he would purg them, but giving up to become the Godly whom only he
has chosen Ps. 4.) but even in the most wicked and ungodly Actions, and even
whilst under the guilt of most abominable Transgressions, so wearying the
Lord, whom they speak well of sometimes as a God of True-judgment, with their
evil words of him at other times, when they say, with the wicked Priests of
whom God by Malachi complains ch: 2.17. of such as do evil that they are good
in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them, or where is the God of
judgment? as if he who changes not and said of old Shall I count them pure,
etc. Mic: 6.11. did change and become another kind of God at one time, then he
is at another viz: to count men righteous, even while such treasures of
wickedness are in the house of their hearts, as render them no less then
wicked, scanty, and abominable, and to count men as I know not that ever he
did) pure, with their wicked balances, and with their bag of deceitful
weights, while they are full of violence, and speak lies, and their tongue is
deceitful in their mouths; Witness not only all other his fellow Pillow-sowers
under their arms, and Soothers up of sinners in their sins, and Daubers of
Evill-doers with the smooth untempered Mortar of their Peace, peace, when there
is no peace (says my God) unto the wicked; but T.D. himself above all the
rest, who p. 38. Pam: 1. not only says, but still stands to it, and owns it
over and over again, as gross as it is, and Iustifies it for truth, in his
Reply to R. H. who charges it on him [Justly] as a gross absurdity, which I
have above also more at large replied to that David, even when he was guilty
(mark that) of adultery and murder (such sins as for which the Scripture, when
he lay impenitent under them, denotes and excepts him as a man not upright, a
despiser of God and his Commandemenes, A doer of evil in his sight, 2 Samuel: 12.
whom God also had not mercy on, but did both condemn and severely judge with no
less then Hellish horrors for his filth and bloodguiltinesse, till he had
repented for it, and was throwly purged from it, Psalm 51.) was not in a
condemned, but in a justified estate. So that the sum of T.D. and those Doctors
Doctrine that side with him therein, is this; viz: (to begin the dance right)
David while he committed adultery and murder, not repenting, was guilty before
God, and consequently not just, nor justified, but condemned, for whom God
holds not guiltless, but guilty, they are not justified, accepted, acquitted,
absolved, approved; but, which is all one, accused, reproved, condemned in his
sight; Yet [ to go round again] David while he committed adultery and murder,
[not yet repenting] was not guilty before God, but held guiltless, not
condemned, nor reprobated, or reproved, but cleared, acquitted, absolved,
excused, approved; For between the two slates of guilty and not guilty, non
datur medium.

Contradictions, Confusions, and Rounds about Liberty of Conscience. II. As to
the Doctrine for Liberty of Conscience, and against persecution for cause of
Conscience in matters of Religion. One while they tell the world the doctrine
and practice of rigid imposing upon any sub pena, or persecuting any tender
Consciences for believing, and living according to their conviction, or denying
to believe or live contrary thereunto, is a Bloody Tenet, a way to make more
hypocrites, that for fear will conform to what they believe not to be truth,
then true Christians, an evident note of a false Church, and Antichristian
Ministry that is degenerate and apostatized from the true pure Primitive Church
of Christ, which never did compel any by force and violence to be Christians,
but rather suffered all sorts of sorrows, and bare all manner of abuses from
the whole world of false Worshippers, whether Heathens or Nominal Christians,
barely for confessing to the truth of Christ, and testifying against the evil
lives of all Christ's enemies, whether such as hated the very outward name of
Christ, or such as named his Name, and yet departed not from iniquity; and were
every where cursed, yet blessed the cursers of them, prayed for such as
persecuted them, entreated those that desamed and ill-intreated them, and were
patient and silent, when reviled and buffeted, beaten, banished as Vagabonds
(because for truths sake they often left their own Homes and had no certain
dwelling place) as seditious, tumultuous, disturbers of the peace because they
peaceably went into Synagogues to reason and preach the Gospel of peace) as
turners of the world upside down, because they sought to change men from their
evil manners, foolish customs, vain inventions, and wicked ways, that were
abominable to God, and to bring them to repentance from their dead works and
worships, in which their souls could never live, to worship the living God, who
is a Spirit, and not tied to places, in Spirit and in truth in the inner parts,
and to turn all men from the darkness wherein they lived in the world without,
to the Light of Christ within themselves, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Sometimes I say) our great Gamaliels not only grant these things, but also give
them out for truth to the Civil Powers of the Earth, most especially then and
that with no small greediness, when the Clergy of one kind feel themselves
begin to be griped under the greedy clutches of the Clergy of another color,
when they are likely to be imposed upon by others, and to be clapped down under
hatches by the Clerical cruelties of each other respectively; As for example,
where ever the Papal, or Roman, or else the Presbiterian Primacy keeps the
Keys, and spreads their Black Eagles clams over all others, and has the power
of permitting or poenal imposing, there the Prelatick Pastoralty pleads his
privilege to have the liberty of his Liturgy (he behaving himself no
otherwise then peaceably) among them. Where the Episcopal Priesthood holds his
Hierarchy, and is Supreme there, as the Papal would willingly have his liberty
(and I blame none, neither Jews, Turks, nor Heathens for desiring the like, to
walk every one in the Name of his God, Mich; 4.) Soth that Right-rigid Scottish
Presbiterian Race, and that Mongrill seed of loose IndependentPresbiters, are
more loud for liberty then any other sort of Sectaries (so called) whatsoever,
who do all no less rationally then they [they demeaning themselves peaceably
(as the very Principle of the Quakers binds them to do to all men) require each
the peaceable enjoyment of his Religion, Church-Ministry, fellowship, faith and
way of Worship under them; When the Rabbis are ready to be Ridden one by
another (witness the Outcries once of New England against Old, when under the
heat of far less Persecution from the Bishops, then they have acted since
themselves. Old England it self was too hot to hold them, also the present
pleadings, not only for their Directorian Liberties, but ( Turpe et miserabile)
their very Livings, Tithes, Preferments, and their Places, now the Common
Prayer Book Priesthood, whom they unhorsed, has his foot in the Stirrup again,
and may not unlikely push the Presbiter besides the Saddle) then, Oh then, what
Hue and Cry against the bloody Tenet of Persecution, and grievous groans for
this desire of all Nations and People, Liberty of Conscience, Liberty of
Conscience, do we daily hear from Smectimnuus his own, as well as others
mouths.

Otherwhiles again, yea ever when the Clergy of any one color, has by either
craft or conquest caught the Keys of the Kingdom, and achieved the Holy
chair, they straightway clap their cruel claws upon them, to the keeping
down by force of Arms more then Arguments all Liberty for any consciences but
their own. Then (to go round again) come let us sing a new Song, Behold cry the
Counselors of Egypt, the People of the children of Israel are more etc. Exodus
1.9, 10, 11. As Pharaoh said unto his people, Behold, the people of the
children of Israel are more and mightier then we. Come on, let us deal wisely
with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that when there falls out
any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them
up out of the Land. Therefore they did set over them Taskmasters to afflict
them with their burdens, and they built for Pharaoh Treasure cities, Pithom and
Raamses. Then they set Taskmasters. Then say the Sanballats and Tobiasses, the
Ammonites and Ashdodite, as they Neh. 4.1, 2, 7, 8, 11. But it came to pass
that when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall, he was wroth and took great
indignation, and mocked the Jews. And he spoke before his brethren, and the
army of Samaria, and said, What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify
themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they
revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish which are burnt? But it came to
pass that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and
the Ashdodites heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, and that the
breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth, And conspired all of
them together, to come, and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it. And
our adversaries said, they shall not know, neither see, till we come in the
midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. Then call they
out for the help of Prisons, and punishments, cruel mockings and scourgings,
Pillorings, gaggings, draggings before Rulers, accusations to Magistrates,
condemnings at Iudgement-seats, cutting off ears, slitting noses, fines,
confiscations, stockings, and stonings, beatings, buffetings, brandings,
Borings, Banishings, Hangings, Burnings, as men no more fit to live among men
nor on the earth, of such as conform not to their conceits, as fall not down
before what ever Golden Image they set up; then the Priests and Prophets like
those Mic. 3. that cried Peace, Peace, begin to bite with their Teeth, and to
prepare War against all whose consciences cannot own them as their own and
Christ's Ministers, so as to put into their Mouths, then away with all such
fellows from their Families to Courts and Consistoryes, holes and dungeons,
hail them from their houses, tear them and theirs to pieces for our Tithes,
spoil and make havoc of their Goods, let their Relations perish and beg their
bread, let their children be fatherless and their wives widows; This and the
like Divinity is divined out from among the Divines, to the contradicting of
themselves as to that doctrine of liberty of conscience, they were most devoted
to, while they remain sufferers under one another; Witness (as I said) the sad
sufferings of several of Truths truest friends, not only to bloody whippings,
beatings, banishments, and bonds, but also to the Death of their bodies by
hanging in New England of late, who had, not long since, fled out of
Old-England for their conscience sake, and for fear (comparatively to their own
fearful fleaings of Christ's flock) of but a few Flea-bitings by the Bishops,
witness also what I. O. himself, an HighPriest who soon forgot that ere he was
Clark, not only did in his Vicechancellorship, but also would have had done,
had he had his own will, who when by his loudness for it, he had got not only
a liberty for his conscience, to very looseness and licentiousness, but also
a large livelihood for his own carcass, not only many other ways abused the
Qua: who disturbed nothing but that in every one that will be destroyed; but
also in the place aforesaid, Exer: 3. S. 39. bespeaks the whole world on
behalf of that innocent people, for nothing but teaching that innocent
doctrine of freedom from all sin, and perfecting holiness in this life (which
T.D. and T. Rumsy also wish as well to, as to any doctrine of dev^ls. by which
name they also call it) to this tune, Fanaticos non esse perfectos testimonio
sunt illorum menda^ia, frauds, scelera, hypocrisis; iis vero qui immunes se
esse ab his omnibus aliisque pe^catis vel levissimis impudenter gloriantur,
punitiones et incarcerationes, quas Akatastasia sua sibi ultro accersunt, esse
debeant; That the Qua: are not perfect their lies, frauds, heinous crimes and
hypocrisies do testify to us, but to them who impudently glory (so indeed the
Qua: do not but assert that freedom attainable) that they are free from all
these and other sins, even the least the more purity it seemsmen come to the
more to be punished with him punishments and Prisons, which by their
tumultuousnesse (such as that of Paul and other Apostles, 2 Cor. 7. were proved
to be Christ's Ministers by) they voluntarily pull on themselves (as the Saints
and Christ ever did by exposing themselves to their malice for men's souls sakes
ought to be; for which wickedness of working and wishing that evil to others,
which they would not, when they were under others willingly have done to
theselves, has the Lord who avengeth the cause of his poor people, who had
rather suffer persecution ever, then either act it themselves, or wish that any
for mere conscience ( though blinded) should suffer by it; yea God, who judges
all truly according to their own false judgment of others, justly meteth out
to that hypocritical generation, that with Capernaum clim'b up to Heaven in
Forms and fair words, and fine shows, but are now brought down to Hell, the
same measure they meted to his people, and will I doubt not in due time (except
they yet repent) do the like to those holy hypocrites of New England: And let
those Priests, who have now the pre-eminence, take heed of pushing too hard
against the pricks, is my desire to them for their own souls, who are every way
concerned to be wary of that wonted way of wearing out, wearying and worrying
of Christ's little flock for not feeding and clothing, with their Fleeces, such
Shepherds, as do not feed them: And that the King and all the Powers that
subordinately act under Him, may so far know in this their day what makes for
their external, internal, and eternal peace, as not to be found fighters
against God, nor to touch those anointed ones, for whose sakes God has of old,
and will again rebuke great Kings and Nations, whose true intent is not to use
any carnal weapons against any, but to let his Prophets, Lambs, and Little ones
alone to live a peaceable and quiet life under them in all godliness and
honesty, As it is the best good I can, so it is the worst hurt I do wish to him
and them: For of a truth the Lord himself is risen up for the help of his own
seed, against all that slayes it, and if they hearken to the hasty hue and cry
of such Priests, as cry out to them for help against his Saints, when the Lord
arises once more against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of
them that work iniquity, and stretches out his hand again (as undoubtedly he
will do to deliver his ransomed ones that are found in innocence toward the
King and all men, both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall
fall, and they shall all fail together of their expected ends, and aim to root
out the seed of Israel, for the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, Isa.
31.2, 3.

Be wise now therefore O King, be instructed O ye Judges of this English
Nation, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him (in this day wherein
he has lifted up your heads) with trembling; Oppose him not by your
interpositions and impositions in his own Court, which is the Conscience, for
let Heathenish people rage and imagine what they will, let earthly Kings set
themselves, and Rulers take counsel together as they will, its in vain if
against the Lord, and his anointed Christ Jesus his Son in his Saints, whom he
will set as his King in the Conscience, and in his holy hill of Sion: But
rather kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish for ever from the way of
your own peace, for if his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all
they only that trust and hope in him, Psalm. 2.

Contradictions and Rounds about the modern infallible teachings of Gods
infallible Spirit.
III. As to our doctrine of the present guidance of Christ's Church and Ministry
by his own infallible spirit; They tell us sometimes, or at least yield to us
when we tell them, that at this day they only, that are led by the Spirit of
God, are the Sons of God, that if any have not Christ's Spirit, and the guidance
thereof, which is an infallible Spirit and guidance (for we know no fallible
Spirit that he has, nor fallible guidance that that Spirit has) which leads
undoubtedly all men and Ministers that follow it, and not the lustings of the
flesh against it, into no sin, out of all error, into all truth, being truth
it self and no lie, and that some there are now, that are led of that Spirit,
and walk after it, and not after the flesh, as then there were, Rom: 8. Gal: 5.

By and by (they finding themselves erring and contradicting one another, and
no betier guided in things of God then by their own thoughts, uncertain
conjectures, crooked conceits, whereby they cross one another in their several
senses and meanings, about the one mind of Christ, in that one writing, which
they call their Rule) because they follow their own flashy fancies, and not the
Spirit, and measuring all others by themselves ( To go round again) they tell
us another thing, and make it no less then a matter of mere pretense and high
presumption, not so much as safely to be supposed that a man should be now
Theopnuestos, divinely inspired, or infallibly guided by Gods Spirit in these
days, as it that Spirit did not continue his infallible, but afforded only
some kind of fallible guidance to his Church and Ministry now, and led them, as
R.B.I.T. also say the Light within did the Heathen p. 68. in somethings well,
in most into crooked and dangerous ways, and that makes these men sometimes
bid men Attend and sake heed to it, sometimes again ( cane pejus et angue)
reject, detest, and take heed of it, as I shall show more by and by; Witness
I.O. in the places above talked with, where he talks down all Divine inspiration
and guidance now a days by the infallible spirit, as matters but falsely
pretended to, p. 5, 6. 63. 167. etc. And T.D. who denis his own Ministry to be
infallible and thereby proclaming those to be but fools who follow it, accuses
the Qua: of falsehood with a witness, for once offering to affirm this truth
that theirs (which yet is truly Christ's Ministry) is infallible: As (quoth he)
to the infallibillity of their Ministry, 3 Jurates of Sandwich will testify
that they did affirm their Ministry to be infallible: Which if it were not (say
I) I would yield our selves to be as very fools who suffer for it, as those
would be who also suffer for attending to it.

Contradictions, Confusions and Rounds concerning the large love and rich mercy
of God to all mankind.
IV. As to the doctrine of Gods great grace, universal love, and rich mercy to
all men, they extol it in their Proclamations of it one while as an infinite,
boundless, bottomless Bounty, matchless Mercy, endless Large love,
exceeding rich grace, lifting up their voices among all people to this, or the
like tune; O the rich, infinite, unexpressible, unconceiveable,
incomprehensible love of God in Christ Jesus to all mankind, to the whole
world, so has he loved the world (a sic without a sicut) that he gave his only
begotten son that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have
everlasting life: God sent not be Son into the world to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved, he is not willing any one of you
should perish, but that all should come to repentance, and be saved in the
acknowledgement of his truth. Therefore Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to
the waters, come and buy Wine and Milk, but without money, without price; God
is free of what he has (only the Priests (that have freely received, and
should as freely give) give them their Fees, let them have Money, and Price,
and Pay, and Augmentations, and Maintenance enough) God looks for nothing. Come
unto Christ all ye that labor and are heavy laden, here is rest for all your
souls: The Spirit and the Bride say come, and who ever will, let him come and
take of the water of life freely: Obje: Oh but we are sinners, will God own us?
Answ: Art thou a sinner? then who ere thou art, thou art one of those Christ
came to save become to save that which was lost, to take away the sins of the
world.

Obj: Oh but we are great sinners, wicked wretches, such as never were the
like, multiplying sins, transgressions, is there any hope for us?

Answ: If we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive them,
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin, Christ has received gifts for the
rebellious, he tasted death for every man, he is a propitiation not for some
only, but also for the sins of the whole world; He opens the door of salvation
to all, His tender mercies are over all his works, he delights to magnify his
mercy above all; it rejoices against judgment; Come all and welcome, none
shall be cast off in any wise that come to him, he would have all to come, he
is not willing that any should perish: Behold I bring you glad tidings of great
joy to all people, a Savior is borne unto them, from God, there is peace
proclaimed, good (...) toward men; Though they are enemies to him by wicked
works, yet God is in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing
trespasses to any that will be reconciled unto him: He swears that he has no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, but had much rather that the wicked
should turn from his wickedness and live, and therefore he has sent his Son a
Light to the Nations, and so to be his Salvation, even to the ends of the
earth, and this he also declares to men as his good will to them all, and
calling to all to look to him and be saved, universally, freely, truly (without
mockage) tendering peace to all, offering salvation to all men, intending no
otherwise then he says, that every individual that turns to him shall have
it, and has wrought in them to will and to do, and now would have them will
and do, has given every one a Talent, in which Trading he shall enter into the
joy, but being unfaithful with, and not improving, thereupon only they are shut
out; and abundance more of the like, which is all precious, and the plain truth
of the Scripture, which they call the revealed will of God, according to which
only we must judge of Gods mind to man-ward.

Otherwhiles again, that is, when the Qua: come to question them before their
people whether it be so in very deed or no, as they say, that God is so much
more prone to mercy then severity, and is so truly loving to all mankind, to
all sinner (and so consequently to all men, for all are but sinners) provided
they accept his grace given, and improve it, and be not wanting to themselves,
and come to him, and whether he would honestly and heartily (as he says) that
all should come and would come, and would not have them, ponere obitem, hinder
their Salvation, and put it away from them, and that God as truly intends their
good, as they extend the news of it, if men refuse not the offer and would
indeed have them accept of the offer and not slight it?

Then O come let us sing a new song ( To go round again) The divine doctrine of
Gods universal love is drawn in again, as damnable heresy, and his grace
niggarded up into a Corner, and his mighty mercy diminisht into a mite, and a
Tale told us that this is but a general outside profer, he intends not truly
that all shall come to him by repentance, and have benefit by the death of his
Son, he dyed not for all, but though its said All, every man, by all he means
but a few, and he has not put all so much as into a capacity, or common
possibility of life by his Son, nor into so much as an ability to come to him,
the most cannot choose life that they may live, they may choose death that they
may dye, and must choose that, being before of old ordained to condemnation, and
so though mercy and misery, blessing and cursing be set before them, and they
bid to choose, yet their wills must of necessity choose the curse, having it not
wrought in them (as a few have) so much as to will and to do any good, and so
though they have good and evil to choose, which they will of the two, yet when
all is done, as the case is, they must ( Hobsons choice) cleave to the evil, and
choose whether they will have that or none, having not only no arbitrium
liberum, but not so much as liberatum, they are yet locked up to a Post by Adams
fall 6000 years before they were born, and were never unloosed to this day, nor
ever must be, so as to be at liberty to come when they are called, and yet must
be condemned too for not coming. they have enough given them to leave them
without excuse and damn them, but Christen sub nulla considerationem, quoth
I.O. Exer: 4. Christ in no case has given a saving light to all, nor God grace
sufficient to save them, unto them all: Christ, Comfort, that's the childrens
bread, it belongs not to the dogs, Christ dyed and is given only for the world
of the elect that believe, but the most not only do not, but cannot believe;
And besides there is no Savior for the most to believe in (as theirs being sent
in Gods love but to a few, so that if the most, if all should believe him to be
theirs, the most must believe a lie, for it is not so, yet ( To go round again)
this withal they must know that they must be condemned for not believing a lie
for not believing that, which if they should all believe, the most must believe
a lie; For he that believes not is condemned, because he believes not in the
only begotten Son of God, and this and no other thing is their condemnation,
but because Christ is come a light into the world, and they come not to it,
believe not in it, but love the darkness more then it otherwise Christ came
not into the world to condemn the very world (which is condemned) but to this
intent that the world throw him might be saved. And ( to go round again) though
they are sent to make such fair proffers, promises, and large Proclamations of
Gods love, yet this is but his revealed will, he does but do this to make men
believe he is so loving to them, as to give his own Son for them, that if they
believe it not as he knows they cannot, faith being his gift, and that which he
will give but to few, and leave the most unable to believe) he may come the
more in wrath against a hundred to one of mankind, and take vengeance on them
for their not believing that false Testimony, which in his revealed will he
gives by us of his Son, but he has a secret will, hidden from us, wherein he
far otherwise peremptorily decrees, that b^^ few only shall be saved, and this
(though hidden from us) we declare to be of the twain the very truth indeed.

Cum multis aliis ejusdem furfuris, quae nunc prae scribere longum est.
Just as if, a thousand men fast fettered up in Prison, standing all condemned
to be hanged, a messenger should be sent from a King, in whose power it is to
save or slay them All on what Terms he pleases, to proclaim the good-Newes, and
the Glad-Tidings of pardon and life to them All, and the wonderful mercy of
the King to them All, as one more prone by far to mercy then wrath, in such
wise and to such a purpose as follows:

O ye poor undon lost men, ye lie now at the mercy of the King, dead men All,
but behold I am come from him to bring glad tidings of great joy to you All,
lift up your heads, cheer up your hearts, the King that he may show he delights
more in saving then destroying, in mercy then wrath, though for displeasing
him, not personally, but paternally, in your fathers loins, he has advantage to
cut you All off, yet he is resolved to save one of you and hang but 999, and he
would every man of, you believe it for himself that its he in particular he
comes to, and not to the rest; And yet to go round again) Conditionally that
every man of you believe it for himself, it is to every such individual indeed,
and consequently both to one and all the rest, and if ye all unloose your
selves out of the Chains and come away (but that ye cannot do, and it is not his
will ye should, and none must give you the keys) ye shall all be spared, and I
know not which that elect one is for my part, nor which of you All it is he in
tends absolutely to spare, that lies in his secret will, but I am sent with his
revealed will to tell you that he that can believe it, its he that is to be
favored; he is the man who ere it is, and though (I am sure his love) is to
but one, and 999 are peremptorily, personally, possitively ordained to dye; Yet
( to go round again) If ye all believe his love to you, ye shall All live, if
any dye it is his own fault, because he believes not the Kings love to him, and
comes not away out of his Fetters, and nothing else, and though he cannot come
out of his Fetters, yet let him know its but just that I should leave him there
because his father offended the King before he was born, its enough for them
that he is so rich in mercy to the whole thousand, as to save one, and proclaim
salvation to All, with no intent of pardon, that he may take the more advantage
on the rest by their refusal to come, when they cannot, to do execution on them
with ten fold more wrath, rigor and severity, then if the pardon never had
been proclaimed to them at all.

In much what such a rambling, confused, self-contradictory manner do our
Nationall-Messengers and Ministers of Gods grace (Consideratis consider^ndis)
hold out their Gospel to All men as Ambassadors from God to them All. One
while extolling, and extending it over all Gods works to All men, and
otherwhiles, when they have carried it about long in a vast circuit and
circumference of Commendatory conference ( To go round again) in their
niggardly News-books they wind it about, and wrap it all up within the narrow
corner of their conceited wheel, within a wheel, or little world of a few Elect
ones only, extenuating it till they almost quite extinguish it in their talk,
and preach it welnigh into nothing: Witness I.O. (as is showed more at large
in the book aforesaid) and T.D. also telling us indeed that God offers
Salvation to All men, but intends it only to a few.

Contradictions, Confusions, and Rounds about the doctrine of perfect freedom
from sin attainable in this life.
V. As to Salvation from sin in this life, which Christ gives to all that
follow him in his light. One while they teach it to us themselves as attainable
here by the grace of God, as the Qua: do, in these or the like deliveryes of
themselves in their preachings and writings according to the Scriptures; People
ye must deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live Godly, righteously,
and soberly (mark) in this present world; The grace of God that brings
salvatioe to such as take heed to it, and receive it not in vain, appears to
All men, and teaches them so to live, but that they turn from it and turn it
into wantonness, and if we walk in the Light as God is in the Light, we then
have fellowship with him (who has none with sin and sinners) and not only so,
but also the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from All sin, and
though we cannot say we have no sin, since we and all men have sinned, yet if
we confess our sins God is faithful not only to forgive us our sins past, but
(which is a further matter) to cleanse us from All unrighteousnesle: Having
therefore such promises let us cleanse our selves from (mark) All filthiness of
flesh and spirit (who knows any more then all) perfecting holiness in Gods
fear; The blessed men, Psalm. 119.3. are the Saints or Holy Ones that do no
iniquity but walk in Gods way and though ye think well of your selves because
your sins are little, yet no sin is so little, but if lived and died in, its
damning, therefore take heed of the least iniquityes, and while ye have time
and space given you to repent from them in, leave, forsake, foregoe them, live
according to the Scripture, which allows of no sin, which is written that men
might not sin, which is able through faith to make a man of God perfect and
wife to salvation from sin, which is perfect to its own end, which is
Salvation, which end it attains not hereafter* for its of no use then, and
therefore must do it here, or no where, so that if you dye in the least of your
sins (unrepented from) better ye had never been born, for there is no Purgatory
in the world to come as the Pope sains, but as the Tree falls it lies, as death
leaves you, judgment finds you, if ye lie down in your Graves in your sins,
you will rise out of them full of sorrows: Listen unto Christ's Ministers, who
are given for the work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints, the
edifying of the body, till we all come to a Perfect man, to the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ himself, so as to be as he is in this
world, and whoever says he abides in him ought so to walk as himself walked
in whom was no sin: and who has true hope in him purifieth himself as he also
is pure; and a multitude more sayings of like sort we may hear them utter.

Otherwhiles (that is when the Qua: call men to the same living without sin,
telling them these things are possible to be done by Gods grace, who of his
good pleasure has wrought in men to will and to do, so that by the power and
sufficiency of that they may now work out their own salvation, if they neglect
not this day of Gods long suffering and salvation, wherein God would succor
them if they will, and that God requires not by either his Ministers or their
Scriptures, Impossibilities from his creatures under such paenalty as eternal
damnation if not performed) then ( to go round again) they tell us other
matters, which (as contradictory as they are to those abovesaid) we must
notwithstanding (or else be held for Heretics) believe from them to be the
truth, viz. That it is most false to affirm that the Scripture (the perfection
whereof they plead to lie, in nulla alia re, in no other thing then its
sufficiency to its end, which it cannot attain hereafter (if not here) since
there it ceases as to all its uses) either does or can obtain its end (which
end they say also is salvation from the sin that destroys the soul) dum in hoc
mundo haremus (so says I. O. Ex. 3.) while we have a being in this World. Then
they make as if the Ministry of them who wrote the Scriptures, were such as
their own is, viz. a mere Antic mockage of men, a conclave of contradictions,
confusions, absurdities and Rounds, a Ministry of flat falsities (not to say
fooleries) a mad-message of impossibilities, wherein they stand all their days
calling upon all men for money (as Homines Domini) in Nomine Domini in the name
of God on pain of his eternal displeasure and their demnation, to do what they
are to believe to as an Article of their Faith on pain of the Heretics
condemnation, All men can never possibly do, God empowering but very few by
true grace to do ought at all of what he requires; nay not empowering any one
at all to do all that, viz. to cease from all sinning against him in the time
of this life, wherein he requires it to be done by them; as being never
possible to be done in that to come if neglected here: Yea then the Doctrine of
full freedom from sin here is contrary to the Tenor of the Scripture, (quoth
T. D.) yea in short no better nor worse then a very doctrine of Devils (quoth
T. D. and T. Rumsey both in their Book, which is so largely answered already in
mine above said.)

So then we have the Ministers mind in this point tripliciter or rather
quadrupliciter at least about the time of the Saints perfect purgation from all
sin. First, It is somewhere that they all confess at first. Secondly, It Is not
here in this World, (cry they) that comes too near the Copyhold of the Qua: and
we would not be ensnared with their beguiling Doctrine. Thirdly, It Is not in
that to come (cry they) this puts us point blank into the Purgatory of the
Pope: We must beware of that, lest fleeing too far from the Qua: snare we
fall into the Papists pit. Fourthly, it is not in any World between this and
that to come, for there is no such middle World that we know of; therefore
Fifthly, (to go quite round to where we were before we began, for Incidit in
Seyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim) It Is somewhere (as we said at first) but we
know not where; which ( to go round again) is as much as to say (for ought we
know) just nowhere at all.

Howbeit some are not so well aware yet of the Traps they talk themselves into
thereby, but that they will be taking on them precisely to determine where it
is when we closely urge them; but their Testimony hangs as handsomely, and is
as well tangled together as the links of a pair of Pothangers, where of every
one draws a different way from another, for some if asked when the full purging
is; it is (say they) while the soul is passing between here and heaven after
its departed from the body; This as A. P. informs me was T. Ds. answer to L.H.
when asked at Sandwich in an assembly of many the precise time and period of the
perfect purging; so making a purgatory after death notwithstanding, which it
seems is in the air, and therein only different from the Popes, which is
seigned to be under the earth: Others that I have put the Question to, say it is
a little before the soul departs out of the body, to whom when I have redoubled
my Query thus; if a little before the soul depart why not a little sooner, since
before is but before let it be a longer or a lesser while? and if a minute, why
not an how? if an hour, why not a day? and so ( caeteris paribus, the same
means attended to) why not a month, a year, and years, many as well as few? I
have received no answer and good reason why, because there is none to give; and
so we take it for granted from them that it is before death, however as we say
(if at all) though these contradict T.D. who says, with the Pope, it is after
death: Others not knowing which to say, seeing according to our Argument, which
is thus, viz. perfect purging, if at all, must be in this World as the Qua;
say, or in that to come as the Pope says, who seigns a Purgatory there for the
remnant of sins that remain unpurged away here, or else in another World,
betwixt this and that to come, which Chimara who ere heard of? being now
somewhat wary left if they say before the soul go out, which is in this World,
they yield to the Qua: and if after it is gone out which is the World to come,
they appear too near a kin to the Pope in his point of Purgatory, affirm it
to be in the very (...) or moment or instant of the souls departure, which is
not in tempore it seems, not in any time at all, but in instanti, and so since
Instans non est Tempus, but as it were punctum temporis, the instant being but
a point of time and not properly Time it self; it seems that Accidit in puncto
quod non speratur in aevo.


That happens in a point of time, which could never be so much as hoped to he
attained in all the life time before.

Thus the Divines dance between this world and that to come, not knowing yet
where Purgatory is, nor daring to say distinctly one thing nor other, whether
here or hereafter, in this World or that, hovering like Caesar at Rubicon with
one foot over the door sell to other on this side, one in, the other out* one in
that World, the other in this World, saying with him yet I may go on, and when
afraid, yet I may go back; So it is Sometimes one way, then another,
Sometimes both ways, the and the other;
Sometimes one, of the two, take either,
Sometimes 'twixt both worlds, in neither;
Some say 't' si'th' air, some say 't's in the earth;
Of knowledge where it is there is a dearth.
Some say 't's here, there some, some ( O Riddle)
Nor here, nor there, but just in the middle.


Contradictions, and various self-confutations, absurdities, riddles and rounds
about their Rule of Scriptures.
V. As to their Doctrine about the Scripture or Letters, and not the spirit and
lights being the Word of God, the fixed, firm foundation, stable standard,
truest touchstone or trial of all truth, only sure, inalterable, invariable,
infallible Rule of holy life, They tell us one while not the light within, but
the Hebrew and Greek Texts and Transcripts only. and those at least (though no
Translations, but as agreeing therewith) are all those things abovesaid, that
one only Lydius lapis, unchangeable measure for all doctrines, spirits, faiths,
truths, and things of God, and sayings to be measured by, yea both it self, and
its own sayings also; the Word of God properly, the foundation, rule,
inalterable and unaltered in so much as points, tittles, iota's, or loss of
one letter or syllable, and what not? Quarrelling with the Qua: as siders with
Papists in denying it only to be all this, and for calling it a nose of wax
that is flexible, and may be twined and wrested by mistakes and
mistranscriptions (as themselves confess it may by many mistranslations and
for calling it (as I.O. himself calls that most ancient Translation of it, the
Septuagint (therefore see what an infallible rule and Word of God poor people
have that know not Heb. and Greek) a Lesbian Rule, etc. Witness I. O. whose
business in all his Book above mentioned is to prosecute the proof of the
Scripture in those and the like particulars, and T. D. in his Books, where he
disputes the Scripture to be the Word of God, and only Rule of faith, and life,
and that there is no other standing Rule but the Scriptures, p. 25, 26. 1 Pam.
p. 16.2. Pam.

Otherwhiles, yea no further off then in the self same Books wherein they
prosecute the proof thereof, yea and T.D. no further off then in one of the
self same pages, wherein he begins his discourse with me about it ( to go round
again) they plainly enough confess the Scripture to be neither the Word of God
nor the Rule, witness T. Ds. words, who, when told what the Scripture is, viz.
a (...) the letter, writing that holy men wrote, replies you cannot think us so
silly sure as to affirm the Scripture in that sense (which yet is the only
sense in which it can properly be called Scripture) to be the Word of God, but
we mean the matter contained in the Scripture (which is another matter then the
Scripture) whether that be the Rule of faith or no: witness also I. O. who Ex.
15.50. says Scriptura non verbum Dei vocatur formaliter quatenus scripta etc.
The Scripture formally considered (and if not so, not properly (say I) for
forms dat esse, et est id per quam resest id quod est, is that by which every
thing is what it is) is not called the Word of God. And yet (to go round again)
p. 140. If the Scripture be what it reveals and declares it self to be, it is
then unquestionably the Word of the living God, for that it professes of it
self from the beginning to the ending, and Exer.1. S. 32. Scripturam saepius eo
nomine a spiritu sancto indigitari cuivis eas vel leviter inspicienti fa^ile
apparebit; that the Scripture is very often specially pointed out by that name is
plain to him that but lightly looks into it. Exer. 1. S. 28. Scriptura verbum
Dei est, locis poene innumeris verbum Dei dicitur. The Scripture in well nigh
innumerable places is called the Word of God, Joh. 17.17. (a Text that vel
leviter inspicienti touches on no such matter) and yet ( to go round again) in
the self same Section, in the very next clause, for all those innumerable
places (if there were, as there are not, so many in the book as the Scotchman
said) ubi verbum Dei ennarratur promulgari, etc. where the word of God is said
to be preached, published, multiplied, received, that most holy truth it self,
which is in men's hearts, and is the matter of it, is, but the Scripture
(formaliter) formally considered in no wise is intended: And yet ( to go round
again) Exer. 1. S. 3. Fault is found with the Quakers by I. O. as mere seigners
from them of that verbum internum or inward word they talk of because they do
no more then I.O. does i.e. not own the Scriptures to be intended in those well
nigh innumerable places, but that holy matter, truth or Word the Scripture
speaks of as nigh in the heart (of which I.O. himself Ex. 1. S 40. says also
thus, verbum quod in nobis est, etc. The word in us is that word of faith the
Apostles preach) Which well nigh innumerable places also I. O. himself says
cannot be intended of Christ's person neither, quoniam autem millies fere mentio
facta est verbi Dei, etc. because there is well nigh a thousand times mention
made of the word of God, and its preaching publishing, receiving, in those
places which cannot possibly be meant of the person of Christ and the Qua; will
not acknowledge the Scripture as intended there neither, they carve from thence
and wrest from thence I know not what Internal Word, of which they are
possessors in chief and Haeredes ex Ass of such as held it shut up among
themselves of old: So showing himself to be none of those Disciples of Christ,
among whom his Testimony is bound, and his Law sealed up, and hasting in his
haughty mind to quarrel with the Qua: for that which is no fault (unless it
be his own also he proves himself to Haeves ex Asseitlorum quos tenebrae antea
inclusos tenuerunt, who were justly shut up in groapable darkness for
despising the true light, so as to groap for the Wall like the blind, as if he
had no eyes, to stumble at noon day as in the night, and, as one horrendo
percussus scotomate, to run round with other blind guides in his giddy mind
without sense or reason so as not to feel when he interferes and hacks one leg
against another, yea sometimes he confesses that the very Greek and Heb. copies
or Transcripts are not only (as well as Translations) by the fallibility of the
Scribes, and the Critical faculties of men, liable to be turned eight ways in
one word (...), some as contrary one to another as life to death, and what way
any Critic will, and that the very immediate Transcribers of the Original,
both might and also did err, fail, mistake, and that thereupon various
lections (when as I.O. at first said there was none at all, not in a Tittle)
are risen (witness I. Os. own confession) and so not fit to be a foundation or
a rule which ( to go round again) they say (witness R.B.I.T.) must not be
variable; and those (though nickt in at next word by I. O. into the less
offensive and formidable number of a few) yet at next word ( to go round again)
both clearly confessed and plainly cleared by I. Os. own self, to be many, among
which though I. O. at the next word nullifies them all under that diminutive
name of Apicular, inconsiderable accents not at all intren^hing on the sense,
or at all of any moment, of no importance) yet some ( to go round again) are
confessed to be of some importance, and those of importance (quoth he) are
considered by Glassius, and consisting not only in superfluity of words
unnecessary, but in deficiency of words necessary to the sense of the places,
and that some of them are of such moment as Textum sacrum et in literis et
sensu corrigere, that they do alter the Text both in its letters and its sense:
And though, to get from under that grievous gash which this grant of his own
gives to his grand assertion of no variation of the Text in Tittles, I. O.
glazes it over with this gloss, viz. That those that are inconsistent with the
sense in their stations, of more or less weight or moment are but private
obscure and novell not above two or three hundred years standing, in some late,
but no ancient copies, yet by and by ( to go round again) I. O. denies not but
that some are not only of such public and open observation as to be obvious to
the view of all, but also of long standing witness his words, p. 190. There
are (quoth he) in some Copies of the new Testament, and those some of them of
good Antiquity, diverse readings in things or words of less importance (and
those which are of importance (quoth he p. 193.) have been already considered
by others, specially Glassius, is acknowledged, the proof of it lies within the
reach of most in the Copies that we have, and I shall not solicit the
reputation of those who have afforded us others out of their own private
furniture, and page 27. of his Epist. he grants that there are Corruptions
(mark) and various lections in the Greek Copies of the Scripture, and our grant
(quoth I. O.) is founded on this experience, that we evidently find various
lections in the Greek Copies we enjoy, and so grant that which ocular
inspection evinces to be true: And though I.O. having yielded the Greek Text to
be corrupted which is enough to prove his foundation faulty and fallible, if
the Hebrew Text were to a tittle entire) fills up that gap again with this
fiddle-fadling defense (viz.) Tet there are none able to show out of any Copies
yet extant in the World, or that they can make appear ever to have have been
extent, that ever there were any such various lections in the Originalls of the
Old Testament: Nevertheless ( to go round again) notwithstanding what has
been spoken (quoth he, p. 178.) We grant that there are and have been various
lections in the Old Testament and the New; and so falls a showing in many pages
together many varieties in the Old Testament himself, to save his Antagonists
the labor of showing what he tells them they are not able to show, some of
which are not obscure and private (as I. O. says they are; but public and
open (as I.O. says) not (as I. O says they are) of no importance, but of
importance, and inconsistent with the sense (as I. O. says to go round again)
not novell, and of late only (as I. O. says they are) but (as I. O. says to
go round again) of longer standing, of some good Antiquity:

Thus I. O. all this while gives and takes grants and begs back again, abates
and exacts the whole again, allows and pulls in again, owns and denies, lets go
and commands home again his Assertion, till by a little and a little he has
let it go, and granted it all away, and then ( to go round again) fearing he
has let it go too far from serving his turn, does what in him lies (though hoe
a liquid nihil est) by a little and a little to fetch it all in again to his
first pretended purpose; he goes on granting from ore shoes to ore boots, till
in the quagmire, wherein he quavers too and fro in his quarrel for his
quick-sandy foundation, he sinks first up to the Ankles, then up to the Knees,
anon up to the Loins, by and by up to the neck:

And Lastly, fearing lest he has gone so far in granting to the weakening of
his own Assertion of the Texts integrity to a little, that he shall hardly ever
recover it to stand for truth in that ex sui site primitive posture, wherein he
at first exerted and propounded it, unless he utter somewhat more like a man,
and more to the purpose then all those childish pedling put offs, I.O. urges a
knocking Argument from the multitude of the Copies to the impossibility of the
Texts being corrupted; thus viz. p. 175. There was a multiplying of Copies to
such a number that it was impossible any should corrupt them all wilfully, or
by negligence, which has as much reason in it as his other confident
conclusions have, for ( Riddle me this, ye Rabbis) why might not the same fate
fall out to one Copy of Scripture in its transcribing as to another? and if the
fate and fault of falsity and mistake to some, why not to all? Yet if it were
never such a solid consequence we need not deny it; I. O. (who still saves us
the labor of confuting I. O.) knocks it down and confounds it himself, while
elsewhere he argues from the multitude of Copies to the impossibility of their
escaping corruptions; For ( To go round again) That so many Transcriptions
(quoth he) should be made without some variation (...) that is, impossible;
thus running out in have to recover his lost Assertion, he runs himself over
head and ears in the Gulf of most irrecon^ileable contradiction, and
irrecoverable confusion; yea, how many various Lections and various
contradictions to himself, are to be found (yet here is not all) in I. Os.
opposing of that one plain undeniable truth; viz. That there are various
Lections in the Copies of the very original Texts of the Scripture which they
call their Rule, which though they say truly (witness R. B. I. T: p. 43. and
51.) That a Rule and grid should be certain, which will not deceive, and that
which is variable and alterable cannot be a persons Rule, for it is the
property of a Rule to be invariable, and the same at all times; the Rules,
Measures, Weights, Dialls, Squares, and what other things are made, if they be
varyed they cease to be Rules, for Rules should be sized and certain, and
confess also with^us, that Error minimus in principio fit major in medio
maximus in fine, the least error in a foundation makes a thing not fit to be a
foundation, and so if the Scripture be not entire to a little, so but vel (...)
one jot or tittle fail, and every letter be not preserved by Gods providence
from being lost they must needs cry out (...) they have no footing nor
foundation for their faith, and see no means of being delivered from utter
uncertainty in and about all sacred truth, (Witness I.O. Ep: p. 25. and much
more of that sort in his book, as its more at large talked with, in the second
of my four Exercitations) and do confess also the Scripture is not only
flexible and liable to be changed easily at every Critics will, and the
Transcribers might and did fail and mistake, so that various Sections are
thence arisen, witness I. O. p. 167. and Epist. p. 21, 22, 23, 24. where he
tells how many ways its easy for a Critic to alter it; Yet ( To go round
again and face about half way at least) they plead the said ( confessedly)
variable and much varied Text, to be the only fixed, firm, foundation, sure
Basis, stable Standard, right Rule, true Touchstone, and such like; Yea (and to
go the whole round, and face quite about as they were) that it is neither so
varied nor variable, by reason of the loving care and aspect of God over the
Transcribers whom (yet for all tha^, he would not guide) infallibly, whose
promise and providence which cannot fail, are engaged to preserve the Hebrew
and Greek Texts in their integrity to a tittle, but that its most fit to be
owned as the most perfect and only steady Rule and foundation.

Moreover how entirely true soever the Transcriptions are, the Translations,
which is all the Rule the people have (unless the Priests prattle must be
their Rule) are confessed to be most various, and abominably, and woefully
corrupted; Witness I. O. who is scarce more busy to evince the entirenesse of
his Hebrew and Greek Text, then in evidencing the erroneousnesse of all
Translations, some of which that are most a client and of most account among
most Priests (as the Septuagint are gone off (quoth I. O.) from the Original in
a thousand places twice told. And yet ( To go round again) the only infallible
Rule and sure Word of God which they tell the poor people that they have, is
the Scripture Text, as it is thus Translated, for they to them either the
infallibility of their own Ministry, or of the Holy Chair, and any present
guidance of any by the Infallible Spirit also.

Thus they run the Rounds, trace to and fro, and dance up and down in their
dark minds about the transcriptions and translations of their Text, which they
take to be their Rule which transcriptions and translaions were they never so
certain and entire by answering to the first original copies, yet are not
capable to be (to all men) any other then a lesbian Rule or Nose of Wax, for as
much as even where men have them as half the world has not they are liable to
be wrested, and actually twisted twenty ways by interpretours, whose
expositions, senses and meanings, which are as many and various, as the
thoughts, and conceits, and inventions, of the men are who comment upon them,
must be the Rule to such as can read them neither in Hebrew, and Greek, nor in
their own Mother-Tongues neither: And whereas we ask them (who tell us that
Scripture rightly interpreted only is the right rule of the faith by what Rule
shall we know whether the Text be rightly interpreted yea or nay, and not
rather wrested, and what is the Rule according to which men are to interpret
that Rule of their faith, i.e. that Scripture ( to go round again) they tell us
the Analogy of Faith: And when we query how it may be known that that Faith is
right according to which the Scripture is (if rightly) to be interpreted (To go
round again) they tell us the Scripture rightly interpreted; And when we ask
them how it may be known assuredly, uncontroleably, infallibly, that the
Scripture is at all of God, and not a cunningly devised fable and invention of
men? they tell us by the Testimony of the Spirit, which (say they is necessary
and only allsufficient to that purpose, [see the Articles of the Clergy of
England about the Scripture, And when we ask them but by what shall we try and
find assuredly] infallibly that that Spirit is of God, and not a false one that
tells us the Scripture is of God; ( To go round again) they tell us by the
Scripture.

Moreover as when others deny his asserted Authority, purity and integrity of
the Text, I. O. pleads it to the least tittle, and yet ( to go round again)
falls flatly to affirm the N^n-integrity of it himself, so when he dreams those
poor deluded Fanatical souls (as he calls them called Qua: who yet own it as
useful, helpful, profitable, perfect to its own end through faith in the
Light to the man of God) do deny the perfection of the Scripture to its proper
end, then I.O. strikes up in such strict strains of proving the living power,
efficacy, perfection of the said Scripture to its own proper end, which (he
says) is the effecting and perfecting of men's eternal salvation without any
help of the Spirit and Light within, stretching it out into such a singular
absoluteness this way, as that which by it self alone is Regula perfectissima,
Ex: 3. S. 26. ita perfecta, etc. omnibus numeru absoluta, ut nihil opus sit
ulla alia revelatione per spiritum out lum^n internum, etc. as revelatio omni
respectu perfecta, Ex: 3. S. 28. Potens servare animas, restituens onimam,
potent a Dei ad salutem, so that inania mutilia sunt alia omnia principia, etc.
S. 29. which all is more fully inculcated at large in Greek and English, p. 83,
84, 85, 86, 87. where he says its absolutely called the power of God, and that
to its proper end, the Rod of his power without other helps and advantages,
that has efficacy and power in it to save souls, living, effectual, sharper
then any two edged sword, etc. as Heb. 4.12. and much more to that tune,
adoring and extolling the external Text with the honor and veneration that's
due to God, Christ and his Spirit, Light, and living word in the heart alone.

But when I.O. comes to quarrel with those poor deluded souls, the Jews, for
the self same adoring and glorying in their enjoyment of the naked letter, and
seeking for life and salvation in the Scriptures without the Light and Spirit
within, which he and his Fellow-Scribes are found in, and condemned by the Qua:
for at this day, as they were by Christ of old, and when he comes to quarrel
with the Qua: for asserting that doctrine of Devils (as they call it) viz:
attainablenesse of perfect freedom and salvation of the soul from sin in this
life; then I. O. runs and rambles round about and about again with as great an
Ardency as he danced the other way before, saying Ex: 3. S. 39. Falsissimum est
sacram Scripturam, dum in hoc mundo Haeremus, respectu nostri totum suum finem
obtinere aut obtinere posse; It Is most false to say the Scripture or does, or
can obtain its whole end in respect of us while we live here; and if we ask
where then does it do it in the world to come? no neither, then cess^bit
Scripturae usu, etc. its use will then cease, its accimmodated to our present
state only, and if we ask does it do it at all? yes (quoth he or else it cant't
be perfect, as I assert it to be, for Ex: 3. S. 24. Disciplinae cujusvis
perfectio, etc. In English thus The perfection of every discipline stands in
it is relation to its end, so as that is to be held perfect which can, and that
imperfect which potis non est, cannot effect its own end, and the perfection of
the Scripture, can consist in no other thing then its sufficiency to its own
proper end, which is the perfecting our eternal salvation, which salvation
though the Scripture be perfect, and does accomplish it, yet ( To go round
again) it can accomplish it neither in this world, nor that to come, and so not
at all; and ( To go round again) is imperfect; and further yet,

That its not so absolutely perfect nor effectually powerful to this end (of
saving souls so as to need no other revelation by the Spirit or Light within,
as he says it is, witness its inefficacy to the Jews, who are as busy in it to
no urpose, as I. O. himself, of whom I. O. (to go round again) says ^. 236.
thus The Jews enjoy the letter of the Scripture, yea they receive it sometimes
with the honor and veneration due to God alone; Their possession of it is not
accompanied with the manifestation of the Spirit, will out which as we see in
the instance of themselves, the Word is a dead letter, of no efficacy for the
good of souls, they have it for their further ruin, yea while they keep the
Scripture (quoth I. O. of the Jews, and I of I.O. and such literal Christians
as he is we shall never meant weapons out of their own Armory for their
destruction, like the Philisti^e, they carry the weapon that will serve to cut
off their own heads.

Thus, Though I. O. who says elsewhere, the Scripture is without need of other
helps or advantages, or revelation by the Spirit, or Light within (per se sola
sufficiens) living, absolute, full of power and efficacy to save souls, and yet
rides the Rounds so here, as to say that without the Spirit, the word (and
that is more then the Qua: dare say, howbeit he means thereby but the Scripture)
is a dead latter, of no efficacy to the good of souls, yet ( horrendo percussus
scotomate) he stays not here, but having said the letter is dead, rather then
the Qua: he so hates, shall be owned by him in saying the self-same that
himself says, he will ride round back again to his first stage, that he may not
seem to side with them, and therefore in Ex. 3. S. 40. where I.O. brings in the
Qua: arguing strongly against the Letters being the only most perfect rule,
thus, Scr^ptura est litera mortua, Spiritus vivisicat, quis litera mortua nis^
ipse sit mortuus, idhaerere, ve^it? The Scripture is a dead letter, the Spirit
quickens, who but he that's dead will adhere to a dead letter as his Rule? I. O.
brings in himself weakly answering thus, viz: ( To go round again, to the
confounding of all his own former sayings that the letter is dead) Falsissima
est ista assertio, Scriptura est verbum Dei quod vivum est et efficax neque
uspiam litera esse mortua dicitur; i.e. That Is a most false assertion, the
Scripture is that word of God which is living and efficacious, neither (quoth
he, Trapezuntius like who forgot his own name, forgetting its the name of I.Os.
own imposing in the same book) is the letter any where at all said to be dead.

I. Os. Rounds, and Contradictions to himself about the Hebrew punctation.

Moreover as to Hebrew Ponts I. O. capers about, quavers up and down, and runs
round like a blind Horse in a Mill; One while asserting them coavo'us with the
Consonants, of such necessity that without the owning of these to be of Divine
original men are left (which is as much as to say all the Jewish Church were so
left from Moses to Ezra, if the Points were added, but by Ezra and his
companions, and not by Moses at the first writing) unto great uncertainty in
all Translations and Expositions of the Scripture, p. 202. That who owns them
not as so, and are otherwise minded then those who maintain the Antiquity of
the Vowels and Accents, so as that the Hebrew Language was written with them
from the beginning, not only make doubtful the Authority of the Scriptures,
but even pluck it up by the Roots, since without the Vowels and Notes of
distinction, it has nothing firm and certain, p. 2.13. That he that reads it
without Points (as the Church did before Ezra, if Ezra was the first Author of
them) is as one that rides a Horse without a bridle, that may be carried he
knows not wither, whereupon relating the opinion of Radulph Cevall, to be that
the Hebrew Language was plainly written with them from the beginning; This man's
judgment (quoth I. O.) is also mine; yea p. 205, 207. He makes the foundation
of all Questionable upon the supposition of the Novelty of the Hebrew Points,
insinuating it as a just consequence which great and wise men suppose
naturally, and necessarily flows from the opinion of the Novelty of the Vowels,
and from the state of the Hebrew Language, and Bible unpointed.

Otherwhiles notwithstanding, not knowing whether he had best assert them to be
so ancient or no, he ( to go round again) at first faces halse about, and
leaves those, who held them up as high as Moses, to prove it, saying only, He
shall not oppose them that maintain the Points Coaevous with the letters, and
yet after a while does no less in effect then face quite Round about, and
oppose them in the same sentence, by this confident assertion; viz. I no ways
do^bt but, as we now enjoy them, we shall manifest that they were completed by
(...) The men of the great Synagogue, Ezra and his companions, p. 210, 211. and
p. 226. Pleading against such as hold them to be more Novel, and of no higher
invention, then from the Tiberian Missorites, on his own, and their behalf, who
affirm Ezra and his companions to have been the Authors of the Points, he says
their sayings, whom he opposes, cast a probability that Ezra laying aside the
old letters because of their difficulty, together with the new introduced the
Points, to facilitate their use; which, if so, then he leaves all ages of the
Jewish church before Ezra, even the true Saints, merely for want of the Hebrew
Vowels and Accents, as men riding Horses without Bridles, who were carried they
knew not whether, but so the Saints then were not, and though the generality of
the Jews were, yet 'twas not because they had no Vowels, Accents, and Points to
attend to as their guides (though I am of I. Os. mind, it is like they then, and
till Ezra's days had none) but because they refused to be led by the Light
within, and guided by the Holy Spirit, which, for all their attendance to the
letter, they (as Stephen said Acts 7.) had always resisted.

Thus I. O. to the contradiction of his first* self, is run round down the
hill from Moses as low as Esdras about his punctilio's and Hebrew Points, but
there he reckons to stand and keep his ground against all that come against
him, to bring him and his Ancient rich possession of Pins and Points any lower,
or at least so low as the Tiberian Missorites: and here he fights like a man in
a f^ight or frenzy, left all truth be for ever lost, if he cannot make it
uncontroleably manifest that the Points are better guides then may be expected
from such bad men, as the Tiberian Massorites; And first to make that good, to
the begetting of an infallible, and divine faith of the Points divine original,
and not such a humane one as they must have, if from the Massorites, that these
Charecters the Hebrew Points (mark, as we have them) are not to be ascribed to
the Massorites as their Authors, he does not more make several silly
consequences, then he does himself confound them even as fast as he makes them.

First (Not to meddle here with those many paedantick proofs and put offs,
which I have elsewhere (viz: in the 2 Exer: of my Book called The Country
correcting the University, sufficiently already disproved) he treats it out
throw a great part of his two Treatises with no other Tool then that Toy of
Tradition, or a taedious, vain, uncertain talking of some Learned Humanists,
Jews and Christians, in proof of the Points original before the Massorites,
against other some, full as well-studied as the other, and in an extravagant
way Argles against the Arguments urged by not only learned Jews, and Jesuits,
Elias Levita, Bellarminus, etc. but also confessedly learned Protestants,
Luther, Zwinglius, Prideaux, Capelli^s against his pretended antiquity of the
Points from Ezra, vagarying abroad unreasonably in the high Road of forgeries
and fables, then which as he says himself, p. 264.) in nothing more has the
world been cheated, answering conjecture with no more then conjecture, laying
about him like a Thatcher, thawcking Author upon Author story upon story,
tittle upon tattle, fancy upon fancy, humane fallible persuasion against humane
fallible persuasion, and yet in his conclusion not only shooting a thousand
years short of Moses, from whom he would at first have drawn them, but also not
adventuring to vent himself about their complete being and beginning from Ezra
at any certainty, or clearly, but thus cloudily only, viz: Let any man judge
whether from such a heap of uncertainties any thing can arise that may be
admitted to give testimony in the cause in hand, and so say I, either for or
against, on one side or 'tother; for quod utrobique incertum est, non est vel
hinc vel illinc certum, what is uncertain between two, concludes nothing either
way for certain and so he falls as short of making it evident that they were
first from Ezra, as they do who say they were at first from the Massorites or
Jewish Rabbis: But suppose his argument from the tradition of some men, had
been as it is not) from all men downwards ( Nemine contradicente, none to vye,
with the rest) if he go about thereby to manifest, as he does, the
undoubtednesse of his consequence and conclusion, yet he has confounded it
himself, if no other man had ever stirred against the business, whilst ( to
go romnd again) he tells us p. 105. The constant Tradition of more then a
thousand years, carried on by innumerable multitudes of men, great, wise, and
sober from one generation to another, does but set open the gates of Hell for
Mahumetans as well, to prove the goodness of their Alcoran, and p. 107, 108.
Because this Tradition is pretended with great confidence, as a sure bottom
and foundation for receiving of the Scriptures (and in effect so it is (say I by
I. O. for the receiving the Points from Ezra, not the Massorites, and that not
without the Tradition of as learned to vye with the Reporters) I shall (quoth
he) a little further inquire into it. Tradition, which is report of men, from
those who are gone before may be either of all men of the world, or only of
some of them, if of all, either their suffrages must be taken in some
convention, or gathered up from the individuals, as we are able and have
opportunity, if the first way of receiving them were possible, which is the
utmost improvement that imagination can give the authority inquired after, yet
every individual of men being a liar, the whole Convention must be of the same
complexion, and so not be able to yield a sufficient Basis to build a faith
upon, cui non potest subesse falsum, that is infallible, and cannot possibly be
deceived, much less is there any foundation for it in such a report, as is the
emergency of the Assertion of individuals.

Thus I. O. with the whirlwind of his own round about doctrine, lays all his
long Traditionary Tales for the Antiquity of his tittles on the ground again,
with his own talk of the invalidity of Tradition to beget such a divine,
infallible faith, and certainty, as men must have about the Scripture which he
makes the Rule, Basis and Foundation of all faith and certainty, in other
things; so Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata Rotundis.


Secondly I. O. treats out two more Arguments for the Antiquity and Divinity of
his tittles, whereof if no man should intermeddle to confute them) the one
confounds and utterly overturns the other.

The first, whereby ( Alas poor man he hampers himself (and to as little
effect) most horribly to evince the Points to be as high as Ezra at least
(which salves not his Assertion of the Texts integrity however, were it granted
him) and not so novel an invention as of the Tiberian Massorites, is an
extraordinary excentrick boundlesly bitter invective, as against the Jews in
general, in their rancor against Christ, wickedly attempting the restoration of
their Religion under Barchochab and Rabbi Judah, by the compiling of their
Talmuds, and much other inpertinent stuff, and story, of which I. O. himself
very truly confesses, p. 234 in t^tidem verba, that its all nothing to his own
purpose, so specially against the Tiberian Massorites in particular, the
supposed Authors of the Hebrew Pun ation for half a hundred pages together; not
caring how he vilifies them, so he may but bring men to believe so badly of
them, as not to own them as the Inventors of the Vowels and Accents, but Ezra
or some holy men guided therein at least by the infallible direction of the
Holy Spirit: His Argument, which he has from Dr. Lightfoot, drawn close up out
of p. 240, 241, 242, 246, 247. in form is on this wise, The pointing of the
Bible savours of the work of the Holy Spirit, not of wicked, blind, mad^mon,
but the Tiberian Massorites were wicked, blind, mad men, possessors of the
Letter without the Spirit, desperately engaged to oppose the truth, under Gods
curse, one of whose fundamentals was opposition to the Gospel, feeding
themselves with vain fables, True Characters all along of our present
Priesthood, and Schoolmen, and Universities, De quibus haec fabula were
narrator.
and mischievaus devices against the Gospel, laboring to set up a new Religion
under the name of the old, in despite of God, so striving to wrestle it out
with his curse to the utmost, men of a profound ignorance in all learning and
knowledge, but what concerns their own dunghill Traditions, and innumerable
fopperies, addicted to such monstrous fopperies as their Successors in after
ages are ashamed of, and seek to palliate what they are able, Idolaters,
crafty, raging, serious in nothing, childish about serious things, how much
deceitfulness, froth, venom, smoke, nothing in their disputations; Therefore,
considering the importance of the Hebrew Vowels and Accents to a Right
understanding of the Scripture, we need clear, yea undeniable, unquestionable
evidence and testimony [and so (say I) there is as clear, and unquestionable
given this way, as I O. who is concerned to give infallible proof his way,
gives to the contrary] to prove the Rise and Spring of the Points to be from
these men, that is, the Tiberian Massorites.

This is one of I. Os. Arguments, which how it lacks little confutation by any
thing, but its own apparent folly and evident weakness and blindness, a child
may see: It intimates as if wicked men could not possibly find out and affix
such a thing as the Figure of Accents, Vowels and Points, to facilitate to
themselves the reading of any Character whatsoever, as if it must be some more
then or^inary divine and Supernatural work to devise the shape of the Hebrew
Vowels, more then it is for the Greek, or English, or others to devise theirs;
whereas, if I. O. had not for have run himself out of the Remembrance of things
that are so obvious and ordinary that none but Ignoramus and Trapezuntius
himself could easily forget them, what more common and frequent then for men
that are ignorant and enmity against God to have the skill and faculty of
inventing not only tittles, accents, points and vowels, but also Letters,
Consonants, and Characters, Figures, and those of diverse sorts and shapes,
long and short hand to express themselves by in writing and printing in their
respective native Languages: I trow who invented (...), and our a e i o u,
(...), at oi eu ou, and the several kinds of figures for different sounds, and
what Nation has not some of that wit that England has so much of, as to find
out many sorts of Chirography and Brachography for their own conveniences? and
who invented first that so great, so skilful, so useful and eminent work of
Typography it self, and so many exact ways of cutting and setting, and
stamping so many different Characters of all Languages? might it not be done by
men who heeded not the inspirations of the Spirit? by men moved merely with
love of money, and hope of gain? in which way the Bible comes out liable to the
common fate of all other Books, as to matter of falsification by misprinting?
How many differing Characters and sorts and sizes of Letters, of Greek, Hebrew,
English are, and have our Bibles themselves been written and printed in? and
does not I. O. himself p. 227. tell us of an universal Character attempted by
diverse, and ready to be brought forth by his Dr. Wilkz Ward, whereby to
express all his Apert, Simple, and Double sounds, Vowels and Dipthongs, which
I. O. says, will doubtless give universal satisfaction to learned and prudent
men, when he shall communicate his thoughts on it? and yet I. O. denies Wilkins
Ward, or any man else in these days to be inspired or guided by the infallible
Spirit.

How worthless and frivolous then? what childishness, lightness? what froth,
smoke, nothing are the thoughts of I. O. and his Co-Conjecturor Dr. Lightfoot,
whom he there cites, p. 247. who can scarce believe it possible that the Points
should hominem sapere, proceed from such a School as the Tiberian University,
or savor of the work of any Humanists or wicked men, or of any other then the
Spirit of God? But if this Argument of I. O. had any such force in it as were
worth reselling (as indeed it has not) yet, if we should say nothing to it. I.
O. backs it with another so strongly, that he breaks the very back of this, so
that it can bear nothing of the burden he lays on it, nor be of the least
import, whilst after all his talk of the wickedness of these men, in proof of
their unfitness and unlikelinesse to be the Authors of such a business as the
Points, least this should fail ( To go round again still) he adds this as
another Argument thereof, viz: The likelinesse of it that there were never any
such men as these Massorites in the world at all.

So odd and Antic is I. Os. extreme eagerness in driving on his design
against them that talk of the Tiberians, as the Authors of his Superlatively
prized Points, that rather then any should imagine those men to have invented
them, he streins and stretches his twatling strings so far, as not to deny, but
own, and tell us 1. that there was an University and School of such Tiberians,
and so describes the men who and what they were, and when they lived ( viz:)
after the finishing of the last Talmud, p. 240 241, 242. Only that they were
men so, and so, and so ill mannered and qualified, Idolate^s, Magicians, etc.
and what not that is evil? as not likely to be Inventers of so rare a business
as Vowels and Accents. Secondly, Lest all this should not be of force enough,
next by a denial of it to fright souls into a faith and fancy that there were
never any such men in the world at all; to which purpose he uses such
suppositive, doubtful and negative expressions concerning it, as whereby to
cause it to become questionable and render it doubtful whether there ever were
any such, or nay, Men they were (quoth he) (if any such were) who were so and
so, ^. 240. and 243. Of all the Fables that are in the Talmud, I know no^e more
incredible than this story (quoth he) that men who cannot b^y any story [Mark,
he says, it appears not by any story there were such, and yet in the very line
above says it is a story in the Talmud; Was there ever any man found so self-
confounding in a Treatise as^ I. O. and so ready in this work of running the
Rounds?] or other record be made to appear that they ever were in rerum natura,
not observed, not taken notice of by any learned man, Jew or Christian, should
find out so great, so excellent a work.

To which (say I) That though of all the Contradictions that I. O. gives to
himself, this is not the first, nor greatest, nor clearest, to say as he does
p. 246. and 247. that learned Dr. Lightfoot observes and takes notice of the
University and School at Tiberias, and of the great Doctors among the Tiberians
by name out of the Talmud (viz:) R. Judah, R. Chamina, R. Chsija Barba, R.
Iochannan, R. Jonathan and the rest of the R^bbins, Gemarists, and M^ssorites,
of whom I. O. says the Jews generally believe not only that there were such
men, but also that the Points had a reviving by them according to the
observation and notice of R. Azarias, and yet p. 243. to say, as he does, that
it cannot be made to appear by any story or other Record, that ever there were
such, and that they are unobserved, and not taken notice of by any learned man,
Jew or Christian; yet of all the ridiculous passages that are in the Talmudical
Treatise of I. O. this is not the least not to say the most incredible) that
men of whom it cannot by any story or other record be made to appear that they
ever were in rerum natura, should according to, or by I. Os. strange story of
them, be made to appear to any reasonable man to be Idolaters, Magicians,
wicked, blind and mad men, etc. Surely they must first appear and be observed
to be in rerum natura, before they can to or by any (save such blind Seers as
can see nothing at all better then they can see things as they are) appear and
be observed, much more described by name to be in natura hominum improboru^,
and if any man believe with I. O. that those men can appear to him to be wicked
men, etc. In esse cognoscibili, who cannot be made to appear at all that they
ever were at all in essereali; I Will give them leave to upraid me with [ O thou
of little faith, wherefore do thou doubt it?] for my beleevable faculty is
indeed too narrow to entertain, or contain that self gainsaying story for a
truth: Credat Apella: he that can believe it let him, I am an Infidel as to
that foolish figment, and if these two contrary Tales can be both true, my
reason cannot reach the reason of these Rabbinical-riddles.

But among the numerous odd passages that pass from I. O. in this Point about
the proof of the Points antiquity, that which is yet more observable, as to my
present purpose is, that I. O, when he has roled Sysiphus his stone a great
while, pervenire ad summum, to get up to the top, to prove the pedigree of his
Punctation as high as Moses if it might be, if not, from Ezra at least, seeing
he could not hold it up in the utmost hight, nor carry it clearly into a
coaevousnesse with the Scripture, according to the strictness of his position,
condescends to come down by the Rounds of his Ladder half way, first to the
days of Ezra, and in the prosecution of his undertaking to manifest it (as at
first he makes no doubt to do) that they were completed by Ezra and his
Companions, finding himself incapable to carry the matter, against such as
derive their descent from the Iudaical Rabbis, or Tiberian Maslorites, clearly
up so high as Ezra, but only cloudily by foisting, flinging, and casting out at
least but forgery against forgery, fable against fable, and a heap of
uncertainties against the heap of uncertainties of others, for so he will needs
call the most cogent and more then probable evidences of all his confessedly
learned Antagonists, Elias, Capellus, Luther, Prideaux, etc. p. 218.264.267.
Though his own pleas, considerations, repulses and replies, are in the eyes of
all impartial ones (suppose I should say (but as) 'twere enough, ad hominem, to
impeach his position of utter falsehood, though I might say more) uncertain, at
last he sinks down by the Rounds as low as the Massorites days, and so per
force by little and little yields up as far as is demanded from him, assenting
with Azarias p. 247. That the Jews generally believe these Points to have been
from Moses, at least from Ezra, not denying that the use and knowledge of them,
received a great reviving by the Gemarists and Massorites, when they had been
much dissused, and p. 271. with the same Azarias ascribing them as to their
virtue and force, to Moses, or God on Mount-Sinai, as to their Figure and
Character, to Ezra, as to the Restoration of their use, unto the Massorites,
in which he has come quite Round with much ado, and granted enough to
prejudice his own position, to the utter overthrow of the truth thereof, for as
to the virtue and force, none can deny them to be coaevous with the Hebrew
Language it self, but it is the Figure and Character only the question is
about, and that is yielded to be but from Ezra, and since Ezra to have been
much dissused, but to have received their great Reviving and Restoration to the
use they now stand in (which is the thing pleaded for against I. O. from the
Massorites, and so howbeit I. O. makes no doubt, p. 211. but to manifest it
that they were (as we now enjoy them) completed by Ezra and his companions,
yet instead thereof he has confessed in effect that (as we now enjoy them,
since last dissused) they were revived, restored, and completed by the
Massorites, whom he disclaims as having any hand in them. There remain sundry
more ^ontradictions and Rounds I. O. runs in about the Points, of which for a
taste take one more here (though touched on elsewhere) and then ( sar aquod
suffocat) as more then enough from I. O. so enough from me, as to that point of
the Hebrew Punctation, P. 217. I shall manifest (quoth I. O.) that its fit
they, i.e. the Points, should be all taken out of the w^y, if they have the
Original assigned to them by the Prolegomena, i.e. from the Massorites; Yet p.
221. Grant (quoth I. O.) the Points to have the Original pretended; yet (to go
round again) they deserve all regard and are of singular use for the right
understanding of the Scripture, so that its not lawful to depart from them
without urgent necessity, etc. Yet p. 244. (to go round again, and face quite
about as ye were I profess (quoth I. O.) if I could be throwly convinced that
the present Hebrew Punctation were the figment and invention of those men, i.e.
the Massorites, I should labor to the utmost, to have it utterly taken away
out of the Bible, nor should I in its present station make use of it any more,
to have it placed in the Bible as so great a part of the Word of God is not
tolerable.

Contradictions and Rounds of I. O. about the manner of the first giving out of
the Scripture.
P. 10.153. The Word, the Scriptures (quoth I. O.) come forth (mark) unto us
from God, without the least mixture or interveniency of any medium obnoxious to
fallibillity (as is the wisdom, truth, integrity, knowledge, memory of the
best of all men (or capable of giving change, or alteration to the least Iota
or Syllable:

Yet. p. 30. (to go round again) We live (quoth I. O.) many years from the
last person who received any part of the Scripture from God, and have not
received it immediately from God.

So p. 5, speaking of the first Pen men of the Scripture, Their tongue (quoth
I.O.) in what they spoke, or their hand in what they wrote, was no more at
their own disposal, then the pen is in the hand of an expert writer. Yet p. 6.
(to go round again) their mind (quoth I. O.) and understanding was used in the
choice of words, for they did use (...) words of choice. Yet Ex. 1. S. 29.
Verba disposita sunt per spiritum sanctum, neqt, ad exprimendum sensum quem
ipsi de mente et voluntate Den conceperunt ingenio ac arbitrio ipsorum
scriptorum sunt permissa aut relicta (To go round about as ye were) The words
were at the disposal of the holy Spirit, neither to express the sense they
conceived of the mind and will of God, were they left to the dispose,
arbitriment, will, or choice of the Writers themselves:

Finally, as I. O. so abundantly (as is above showed) contradicts and confounds
himself in many matters about the Scriptures, or outward Text, so about the
sense and meaning of one Text of the Scripture, wherein they all 4 disagree
with the Qua: I. O^hand, like Ishmaels, is against all his fellows hands and
every of his 3 fellow fighters hands (whom I have here to do with, who from the
same Text sense against the Quakers) is against him to the confounding of him:
which Text is Ioh. 1.9. Where the true light is said to enlighten every man
coming into the World; for howbeit I. O. cloudily concludes with all the other
three, viz. T.D. R.B. I.T. in concluding and crouding that most universal
Term (...), every man, within the little compass and narrow corner of his
wheel in a wheel, i. e. The Elect men only, saying Synagogically with the rest,
Hoc est Syncategorema istud omnis, non absolute sed relate ad Electos dicitur,
This is the Consignification of that Term [All] its meant not absolutely, but
relatively to the Elect; yet when he says Non dicitur Christum illuminare
omnem hominent venientem in mundum, sed quod ipse veniens in mundum omnem
hominem illuminat, Christ is not said to enlighten every man that comes into
the World, but that becoming into the world lighteneth every man, and that this
is the sense of those words (the falsenesse and silliness of which sense, and
the insufficiency and nothingness of it also to serve his turn against the Qua:
(if granted him) I have showed in the book it self, to which this is but an
Appendix) Here not only each of his three friends forsake him (for T.D. himself
among all his many meanings meddles not with this) but two of them viz. I.T.
and R.B. who backs I.Ts. Book, make bold to fight against him for it as well as
the Qua. do; Witness their words, p. 1, 2. There is a doubt whether it should
be read thus, that was the true light coming into the World, which inlightneth
every man, by a trajection, or (as ours read it as the words are placed) That
was the true light which inlightneth every men which comes into the World.
Grotius after Cyrill, and Austin and some others (see how the Divines are
divided, and the Founders confounded among themselves) likes the former as
best; but first such trajection disordering the words, 2. The phrase being as
fitly interpreted of birth as of appearing as a Teacher, I rather choose the
reading of our Translators, And p. 24. They tell us over again how, coming into
the World here is related to every man coming, and not to Christ's coming into
it, and how they before gave reasons against I. Os. sense.

So having been walking the Rounds with these men to give the World a Review of
the Riddles they are wrapped in, and the manifold Contradictions they are by the
network of their own hands snared, caught and tangled in about their letter,
till I am come with them to that main Text at which they leave me, because it
talks so plainly of the true light which they love not, and I leave them to
dance about still in the darkness of their own divinations; I proceed (in the
light in which I see them, though they, being out of it, see not themselves) to
open briefly to all people, who love not to live with them rather in their
darkness, then in Christ's light, the mist of darknesss, wherein they mope
about, and dance the Rounds in their discourses about the Light, in their fiery
fluttering against which, the wicked now is as he ever was, snared in the work
of his own hands, Psalm. 9:16. Higgaion, Selah, consider and note it.

Contradictions, Absurdities, and Rounds concerning the Light in the
Conscience, which the Qua: testify to.
As concerning the True Light or gift of Gods grace in every man, the four men
aforesaid do (as all their fellows do uno ore) babble somewhat about it, and
bear witness either for or against it, but each man's witness agrees no better
together within it self, then that they give about the other matters abovesaid.

Sometimes they call it Light, truly really, naturally and properly so, and not
metaphorically, nor by way of allusion to what is so: Witness I. O. p. 74. It
is spiritual, moral, intellectual light that has the pre-eminence as to a
participation of the nature and properties of Light. Otherwhiles the same who
excluded it from the name of Metaphorical, by that of natural and proper ( to
go round again) do conclude it to be metaphorical, as in opposition and
contradistinction to both natural and proper; Witness I. O. who confounds his
own foresaid saying, p. 74. with another division Ex. 3. S. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
Where under that same term of metaphorical he distinguishes that Light he
calls moral, spiritual, intellectual (as respecting and exercising men's minds
whether in matters moral, civil or spiritual) from that which respects
bodily sight, which he called natural and proper.

Sometimes they call this very light, whereby duties and divine things are
discerned, universal and common to all (as the Qua; do i. e. in some measure,
though not to all in the same) but when so, then no other but natural, as in
opposition to supernatural and spiritual; Witness T.D. p. 1.1 pamp. Natural
and supernatural light are two, an I though all have the one, yet few the
other, and I. O. Ex. 4 S. 17. Lumen internum omnibus commune natural est, etc.
The light within common to all is natural, and to be called so, S. 18. If this
light that is common be not natural, the very Intellect is not natural. So S.
25. Concessimus reliquias primavae lucis esse in omnibus, sed eas esse
spirituales id pernegamus, some relics of the primitive light we grant to be
in all, but deny these to be spiritual: Nihil non natural, nihil spirituale
communicatum etc. Nothing but what is natural, nothing that's spiritual is
common or communicated to all: So also R. Bax. I. Tom. A natural light from
Christ is yielded to be in every man, etc. page 33.

Otherwhiles this very universal light in all which before was said to be not
supernatural or spiritual, but merely natural ( to go round again) is by
these men yielded to be at least more then natural, and so no less (according
to T. Ds. division of light into two) then supernatural and spiritual:
Witness (against themselves) R.B. I.T. p. 37. It can hardly be avouched that
that knowledge in morality and divinity which they (i. e. People that never had
the Law nor Gospel made known to them as the Jews and Christians have had)
attained to, was by mere light of Nature, and in Baxters Epistle, p. 7. he
tells us of a Common supernatural light given to the unsanctified. I might
also call in John Horn, and the two Thomas Moors that push with him against
the truth, as Witnesses of the same confusion that is among all the Priests in
this matter, who in their book styled, A fuller Discovery, etc. p. 61. affirm
the light wherewith Christ lights every man is both natural and spiritual;
but as my business lies mainly with the other four men; So George Whitehead
has sufficienly thrust down the vain thoughts already of those three, in his
Book styled The He goats Horn broken: So I let them pass. Witness also T. D.
who, though he (together with I.O. p. 77. Nor does it in the least impair this
self evidencing efficacy of the Scripture that it is a moral and spiritual
not a natural light) owns the Scripture, specially the light in the Scripture,
or holy matter contained in the Scripture to be a moral, spiritual,
supernatural, and not a natural Rule or Light, yet affirms it to be common or
universal, i. e. in some measure in the hearts of all, even the very Heathen,
p. 16.2. pamp. The matter contained in the Scripture (quoth he) is a Rule to
all men (so far as it is revealed to them) and was so before 'twas put into
writing, and so much of it as is written upon the hearts of the Heathens is a
Rule to them, Romans 2.12. Thus T. D. who before made the one light to be Two,
viz. Natural and supernatural, here ( to go round again) makes that light
which is in the Scriptures and in the Heathens hearts, Romans 2.12. truly One and
the same, and no less then supernatural and spiritual: Witness also I. O.
who calls the light often natural, yet ( to go round again) Ex. 4. S. 9.
Splits this one light, which they all sometimes falsely call no more then
natural, into a Light which is both natural, civil, supernatural and
spiritual, as it were all at once: This Light (quoth he) or faculty of
understanding (so he foolishly calls it) splits it self into merely natural,
Lux autem haec seu intelligendi facultas, in eam quae maere naturalis est,
earnque quae circa res civiles versatur, atque illam quae res spirituales
omniaque alia in ordine ad sinem supernaturalem, spiritualem et ultimum
discernit, disposcitur: lumen autem hoc intermum spirituale, seu facultas
intelligendi (...), varium etc.
and civil, and supernatural, i. e. spiritual which discerns spiritual
matters, and all things in order to the last end, and this inward spiritual
light (quoth he) or faculty of understanding spiritual things spiritually is
various, etc. Where note how I. O. (falsely) calls the light no other then the
faculty of understanding which he calls elsewhere (truly enough) but natural
and yet ( to go round again) calls the very faculty of understanding which is
common to all men, as men, by the Title of this inward spiritual light which
discerns spirituell things and that spiritually, in order to the supernatural
and ultimate end, i. e. Salvation. And this inward spiritual light common to
all that discerns spiritual things spiritually in order to that ultimate end,
I. O. says is various too, and very well he may (if it may be divided again
into those two several sorts into which I.O. sub-splits it) for whereas here
he calls this Light in the Conscience which the Qua. call to) lumen internum
spirituale etc. An inward spiritual light, which discerns spiritual things
spiritually in order to the supernatural, spiritual and ultimate end: yet a
little lower, viz. S. 17. ( to go round again) he calls it mere darkness it
self, by which no divine saving thing can be seen; witness his words, Lumen
hoc internum omnibus commune, utcunque ei attendatur, non est ullo respectu
salutare, sed in rebus omnibus divinis, sinem ultimum quod attinet, merae
tenebrae et caecitas.
This Light within common to all, however attended to, is (quoth he) in no
respect saving, but in all divine matters, so far as to the ultimate end, mere
darkness and blindness:

One while again they deny this light to be the visive (i.e. Intellective)
faculty or eye of the soul, or to be given for any such end, as so much as to
remove the defect of the visive faculty: Witness I.O p. 77. Light will not
remove the defect of the visive faculty: Light is not eyes.

Otherwhiles (to go round again) It is the very visive faculty as Ex. 4. S. 9.
This light or faculty of understanding, which is merely natural, etc. This
inward spiritual light or faculty of understanding spiritual things
spiritually, etc. So S. 8. 18. Lux quae proprie mentem respicit seu facultas
illa intelligendi est (...), (...), (...); oculus, acies mentis, The light
which properly respects the mind, or the faculty of the understanding, is the
sight, the visive force, the very eye of the mind.

One while they tell us that its true among the Gentile Philosophers there was
light that guided well, and that in the Law there was light, and that no light
that is truly such (though dimene and imperfect, as (say they) that of the
Philosophers and the Law was) is to be rejected, Witness R.B. I.T. p. 68.

Otherwhiles some light, yea even the Philosophers light, which led them well
(as they say asore) in some, did in most things lead men into crooked and
dangerous ways: therefore, unless men love, and it be best to be led into
crooked and dangerous ways (to go round again to be rejected: Witness against
themselves, R.B. and I.T in the self same page, the next line but one after the
other, witness also I.O. against them both, who Ex 3. S. 28. says of the
spirit and light within the Qua: calls to (among other things that he calls
incerta, periculosa, inutilia minime necessaria, rejicienda, atque detestanda)
that they are to be both rejected and detested. Thus when they begin of their
own accord among their own supposed friends sometimes, these men commend and
extol, and call men to heed this light in the Conscience, which the Qua: call
to, so eminently that the Qua: scarce need more words to recommend it to men
in, as to its excellency, divinity, usefullnesse, profitablenesse,
needfullnesse, and necessity to be heeded and obeyed, then the same which our
Divines themselves, who hate it, do seem to set it out in.

Otherwhiles, that is, when any Qua; begin to call men to it, to commend and
extol it among their Parish people (though in their own forms of speech about
it) and when the Qua: desire them, as they will prove themselves true Ministers
of Christ, with Paul to labor to turn all men to the light within themselves;
then ( to go round again) either they will be silent, or (if they sing anything at
all concerning it) sing out no more so loudly as before to the praise and glory
of it, but rathe (what they are able, they sing their old new song, to the
Turncoats Tune of Truth turned out of Doors) in way of dispraise and
disparagement and utter detestation of it to the utmost, as if twere the vilest
kind of Canting in the whole world to utter one word in order to the begetting
of any people into so much as any measure of any good opinion at all of a light
within, so that I may truly say of these Seers as the Poet once of one of
Caesar's Singers: Omnibus hoc vitium est cantoribus inter amicos,
Vt nunquam inducunt animum cantare rogati,
Injussi nunquam desistunt, etc.


To show the World how Sepharically these Ministers sing out the high praises
of the light of Christ, the light of the World, the light in the Conscience,
when they please to begin of themselves* and ( to go round again) how
symphonically they set it at their heels, in opposition to the Qua: rather then
the Qua: shall prevail with them to say any thing of it that is any better then
naught, I shall hereunder show both their voluntary calls to, and commendations
of, and their unjustly occasioned cautions about and condemnations of this
light of Christ in the Conscience of men, when the Qua: commend and call to it,
and set the one of these immediately under the other, only premising this, that
whether they speak of the light which themselves call Christ, which the letter
holds sorth and testifies to, or the light wherewith God shines and shows his
will and mind in some measure in the hearts and minds of all men, even Heathen
Philosophers or others, which we call Christ's light, though they do not we mean
(however they divide these) no other but that one Law of God which the Letter
is the Copy of, which is spiritual, holy, just and good, which T. D. confesses
to be the Heathens Rule so far as is written in their hearts. Christ the Light
of the World, and his light in the heart, which the Scripture testifies of
abundantly, and not any such thing as man's own thoughts, wisdom, imaginations,
inventions, etc. Which the Heathen became vain in, Rom, 1. which the Qua: call
all men out of, and the Divines, that lead men by no other are themselves yet
led by more then any, steering by nothing but their own many minds and meanings
on the Scripture, etc.

Some few calls to, and Commendations of the light, with Cautions to take heed
to it, collected out of many more that are in R. B. and I. T. his Book.

P. 68. It concerns us, (say they) to take heed how we dote on our own reason,
or the most exact writers of morality, and neglect the light which Christ has
brought into the World: Let us be wise so to use Candles as not to burn
daylight, that we so make use of all the reason and humane wisdom and virtue
we have our selves, or discern in others writings or examples that yet we
chiefly eye and follow the grand light, the Sun of righteousness, the Lord
Jesus, learning him by studying the great Counsel of God, which he revealed
and denying our selves take up our Cross and follow him as his Disciples;
Christ is to be chosen and followed as our Light: An Exhortation to use Christ
as our Light, that was the true Light which lights every man that comes into
the World; be induced to embrace and follow the Lord Christ as the great Light
of the World, besides the evidence out of Scripture to prove him to be sent
from God a light into the World etc. His sayings and doings do amply confirm
it. And p. 88. 89 they go on thus; Though the Jews contradicted and
blasphemed, the Roman Emperor raged, Lucian jeered, Libanism wrangled, Julian
calumniated, Papists, corrupt Gnostics, Heretics, Fanatics, Quakers, [ here
they abominably belly the truth, for the Quakers call all and only to the light
of Christ] adulterate and cloud the truth of Christ, they do but piss against
the Sun, the light of Christ's Doctrine, the truth of the Gospel does and will
shine forth, nor can all the cavills ( say they) of modern Atheists, or the
dust raised by new Phantasticks, take away the brightness of Christ's light, or
hinder its enlightening others then themselves, and shall we after all the
Arguments given of Christ's being the true light, follow after ignes fatuos, [
who these be but that fraternity, who would have men follow their fancies, and
not Christ's light in the Conscience, which is that the Quakers call to, I know
not] What real comfort or spiritual help to holiness or heavenly directions
do they give to lead men to God, better then Christ has done? May you not
discern a vain glorious spirit, a self-seeking, proud, carnal spirit in them,
what do their censures of others show, but a mind to extol themselves? their
affected speech, looks, carriage, but a desire to hide their falsehood? what do
all the devices of Jesuits, Popes, and their Agents tend to but either by force
or subtlety to set up the monstrous powers of the man of sin, and their own
domineerlng over men's consciences underhim? [ ^aSenus recte quidem sed et etiam
de te fabula O Parochialis Sacerdos] What is in their conclave but policy? in
their counsel but deceit? in their Iesuists and Casuists but jugglihg? shall
we go after such Masters and leave Christ? Remember we that one is our Master,
even Christ; when any shall solicit us not to adhere to Christ as our Teacher,
reject them: Christ has warned you, [ say they, and so say I too as concerning
any that lead forth from his light within therefore, says he, go not forth
after them, nor follow them] If any say low here is Christ or there [ and so do
all Priests and Professors, and their Teachers in their sundry forms and
outward observations, in which they look for the Kingdom which comes not in
them] believe it not. We will not venture our lives upon Mountebanks, and will
we our souls upon deceivers? Shall we follow our own conceits, which often
prove foolish, and neglect Christ's Doctrine [ which say we still is his
teaching light and counsel in the Conscience] which always proves wise and
safe? no, no, let us answer as Peter, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life.

Alas, what can we expect but if we follow blind leaders, as all are that teach
the things of God otherwise then Christ and his Apostles did [ who, say I,
called all along to walk in the light within] we should fall with them into the
Ditch, into everlasting perdition? On the otherside there is so much plain and
clear light in Christ's doctrine as will guide our feet in the way of peace;
Away then with all such obtruded insinuating Teachers as endeavor to hide from
us the light of Christ shining in his Doctrine, recorded in Scripture; Let Us
say none but Christ, none but Christ, that Christ which preached, dyed at
Jerusalem, that word of his which is written in my Bible [ of which the Bible
testifies say I, that its near in the heart to hear and do it] shall be my
light: to the Testimony of Jesus [ which says tho Scripture is the spirit of
prophecy, the sure word of prophecy, that as a light shines in the dark place
of the heart, and is to be taken heed to] to his Everlasting Gospel I stick.

So Bixt. Ep. p. 7. ( speaking of the Qua:) Do they affirm that all men have
the light of reason? who denies it of any but Idiots and Infants? Do they
maintain that this light is from Jesus Christ, both as the Author and restorer
of nature? and by whom among us is this denied? Do they say that repaired or
reprived nature may be fitly called grace? about this also we have no mind to
quarrel with them, so they will not exclude supernatural grace thereby ( as
we do not, but hereby conclude it) Do they hold that common supernatural light
is given to many (at least) of the unsanctified, etc. and who contradicts
them in this? Do they hold that as the Sun is appointed in nature to be the
light of every man that comes into the World, though shutting our eyes may
exclude it; So Christ is by office the Sun in the world of grace, giving men
actually all the gracious light they have, being sufficient himself to
enlighten all, and giving them an illuminating word, which is sufficient in its
own kind to do its own part, though many are blind, and for their sin are
deprived of the communication of this light? why all this we maintain as well
as they: do they say that all this light (within us and without us) is to be
hearkened to and obeyed? why what man did they ever speak with that is a
Christian; [ no Christians indeed say I, but too many Antichristians] that
denies it?

[ See what a deal of the Quakers doctrine concerning learning only at Christ's
light is here uttered by these men R.B. I.T. who yet hate the self same
doctrine at their hearts when the Quakers teach it; also in many other places
they teach much more to the same purpose; putting men on to attendance to the
light, yea even the light within every man, as p. 40, 41.] This light useful
for two ends; First, To restrain men from excess of sin, etc. As he gave a Law
to the Jews because of transgression, to restrain them or abate punishments;
so to other people he gave a law in themselves to prevent the extirpation of
the Nations by bridling them in their lusts, through conscience of sin and fear
of punishment. Secondly, Besides this God has another end, that they might be
inexcusable who sinned against the light in them, and God justified in his
Sentence and judgment upon them. [ Observe how this light within is owned by
them as the Law of God, which T.D. affirming the work of the Law only to be
there, yet denies to be in the heathens hearts, to the contradiction of these
men and of himself also in that other plaee, p. 16.2. pamp. Where (to go round
again) he confesses much of the holy matter of the Scripture to be written upon
the hearts of the heathens, and that to be their Rule) I say as the Law of God
which is spiritual, holy, just and good, and to be obeyed, for else
transgression of it could not be sin deserving judgment, for sin is no other
then the transgression of the Law.]

So p. 82.83. they go on thus, If the light shine into thy soul from Christ so
as any convictions or discoveryes of truth from Christ get into thee, [ and
some convictions they confess all have by the light within] take heed thou
hold it not in unrighteousness, nor seek to quench it, Romans 1.18. Wrath to all
that hold truth in unrighteousness, when lust imprisons light, no entrance for
the light of Christ into that soul, there must be a love of the light: Its the
greatest sign of a man wilfully evil, when he hates the light; and its a good
sign of a man truly good, when he can delight in that light ( mork) which
discovers his own evils, [ What light is that which discovers a man's own
evils but the light within? the letter without does de jure only, the light
within does de facto discover men's own evill] Christ has determined this to be
the great condemnation, that men love darkness rather then light [ or else the
Heathen could not be condemned, say I, who have and yet hate the light within,
for they have no letter without] for that's the sign they side with the Prince
of darkness, and men that do truth come to the light that their deeds may be
manifest, etc. The more light is rejected, the more purely voluntary any sin
is, when men are willingly ignorant, they are incurably evil, etc. Each person
is to make their use of the light within him, so far as it is light and
useful. Certainly it concerns every man so far as to look to the light within
him, ( mark) that he do not, as it is said of some, Job 24.13. Rebel against the
Light, [ which Text in Job I. O. interprets of the letter, but I. T. to the
confutation of I. O. (truly with us) of the Common light within men] A men's
conscience is so far a law to him, that though it cannot of it self justify [
which is contrary to Romans 2. which says their inward thought as well excuses
the Heathen when they do well, as accuses when they do ill, and excusation and
justification, or to excuse, clear, justify are all one] yet it may condemn
him:

So p, 37. they go on thus, God has imprinted in all, even the most Barbarous
people, some relic of light, though in some it is so small [ that may be say
we, for all have not the same, but all some measure of Gods light, which these
men sometimes call darkness, delusive and dangerous, and degrees vary not the
nature of the case] that it can hardly be perceived whether there be any sense
of sin or wrath, of duty or reward, of God or Devil, Heaven or Hell. Secondly,
Some people that never had the Gospel nor the Law made known to them as the
Jews and Christians have had, yet have attained to so much knowledge and
practice of moral duties [ Mark, moral duties are the main things of the Law,
and required in the moral Law, viz. To do as we would be done by, which faith
Christ is the Law and Prophets, Math. 7. The sum, substance, and upshot of all,
and more then all offering and sacrifice, so that the Jews failing in these
weightiar matters, viz. Judgment, mercy, faith, etc. all outward oblations and
observations were abhorred] that in some acts of righteousness, temperance,
chastity, fidelity, and such virtues they have equallized at least in respect
of their outward demeanor toward men, if not exceeded not only Jews [ who had
the Scripture, as our Scribes have, and search, as much in it] but also [ the
more shame for the most of you filthy, fruitless, faithless Christians the
while, whom very heathens will therefore judge] the most Christians, Thirdly,
And in the knowledge of God, though therein they were most defective, yet they
attained to so much knowledge and right apprehension of him, as enabled them to
correct the Vulgar errors concerning God.

[ See how far beyond our vulgar Christians, and very Christian Clergy men,
that have the letter to boast, talk and trade on, the light within has led the
very Ethnicks that have heeded it, by these men's own confession; But they go on
yet further preaching up the light with the Qua: thus, p. 84. It will concern
those who own Christ as their light, to judge themselves and their ways by his
light: [ This act of self judgment is within faith I.O. Seconding that moral
instinct of good and evil, that is imprinted by God on the Conscience from the
innate light therein] It is the great benefit of the light that it does make
manifest, Ephesians. 5.13. Thus by the light of Christ the evil of our ways is
reproved, the ways of God approved: Now this is no small benefit to have the
light to discern our errors, which without light from Christ we should never
have understood, A wise Christian will be often judging himself by the light of
the Law, discovering his Transgressions [ That m^st needs be the Law in the
Conscience which, de facto, shows every man's own sins to himselfe] It will be
needful not only to use the light of Christ to judge our selves by, but also
to order our actions by. I am the light of the World, says Christ, he that
follows me shall not walk in darkness. There cannot be unsafe walking by
Christ's light, there is no danger when Christ our light goes before, walk in
the light says Christ, while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you:
how many millions are there of souls perplexed and tortured all their life with
fears and doubts for want of walking by the light of Christ in Scripture [
which, say I, is that in the conscience which the Scripture mainly calls to]
and choosing rather to walk by a light and sparks of their own kindling [ alias
their own wisdom, conceits, senses and meanings on the Scripture, traditions
in worship, and such like which they call light] which in the end either goes
quite out, or burns so dim as to leave them in darkness of spirit and horror
of conscience; and no marveile since such as neglect the word preached [ which
is that word of faith i.e. which men are to believe in unto life, which the
Scripture testifies, and the Apostles preached to be nigh in men's hearts to
heave and do it] should follow the mares of humane reason, the examples,
customs, and dictates of men, and in conclusion ly down in sorrow, Isa. 40.11.
Such foolish fires will lead to nothing but bogs and precipices, but Christ the
true light when his Gospel is followed ( which is the light in the heart, 2
Cor; 4.5, 6.) guides the feet of men into the way of peace: The light of Christ
is to be used as our weapons or Tools to defend ourselves, or to work with, let
us put off the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, the truth is
light, is the chiefest instrument for safety and work, if a man be without
light he can neither defend himself nor offend an enemy; he that would make use
of Christ's light must be armed with his doctrine; he that would improve the
light, must be a doing the business which the word of Christ directs him to,
and to that end it ( mark) must dwell richly in him. Make use of the light of
Christ for thy comfort and rejoicing; it is it which removes doubts, griefs,
fears, despair in life or death. Oh how sweetly might men live, how comfortably
might they dye, if they did make use of it: [ Thus highly do these two men R.B.
I.T. speak of the light of Christ within, which the Qua: preach: yea that in
the very Heathen, though they often call it natural, yet they recommend it as
that which told the truth to the heathen, which they holding in
unrighteousness were under wrath, and without excuse before God, because they
glorified him not as God, but were filled with unrighteousness, and did the
things which by that of God in them they knew judgment was due to, and that
they were worthy of wrath.] Ignorance of the Law being not to be pleaded by
them, ( say they) who sin against the innate light of their own spirits, for as
much as that fact must needs be voluntary which is done against the knowledge
and judgment of a man's own conscience; And yet sometimes (to go round again)
they tell us that when their Saints sin through infirmity only (as T. D. judges
David did when he was guilty of murder and adultery) which when they do they
act against the knowledge and judgment of their own consciences, their facts
are not voluntary, but altogether, yea utterly against their wills: Yea p. 41.
They seem to judge themselves much belyed by the Qua. for denying the light
within, and set themselves to vindicate themselves from that as a false
aspersion, as if they were men that do truly own the light within as much as
any, yea they there make a use of Application of their Doctrine about the Light
that enlightneth every man that comes into the World, to justify themselves
against the Qua: as owners and honourers of the light within, and to warn men
that they act not against their Light within, to this purpose] we may infer (
say they) a plea for our selves against the unjust accusations of the Qua: who
use to charge public preachers with denying the light within each man, whereas
such light is not at all denied by them; each person is to make use of the
light within, that he do not rebel against the light, a man's own conscience is
a Law to him, etc.

[ This and much more do these men, when they are pleased to begin of
themselves confess to the excellent usefullnesse and sing out to the praise of
the light of God within each man, but if the Qua: fall in with them in the same
work, and commend the same light (for it is no other but that of Christ the Qua:
cry up) in the same words with the Priests, then in enmity against the Qua,
they set themselves to cry it down with as much indignation and detestation, as
they cried it up with approbation and high commendation before: Then (to go
round again) they sing a new song in contempt of it, to the Time that hereunder
follows, inveighing most heavily and bitterly against the Quak: for this
business of warning men to take heed to the Light within, to that of God in
their consciences, calling both it and them no less then all to naught:
witness their clamours against the Qua: for this very thing in Baxt. Epist. p.
7.] Their i.e. the Qu^: great pretense, when they dishonor the Scripture and
the Ministry, is to lead men to a light within them, and this is their cry in
our Assemblies and our streets [ hearken to the light and word within you] and
the sufficiency of this they clamourously defend. So p. 6. They ( i.e. the
Quakers) assert that there is a light in every man sufficient to guide him to
God of it self, that it is a Rule to show duty and sin, that there is no need of
other teaching of man, that this is one in all, that it is the Gospel, this is
the main prop of the new Antichristian Religion, or frenzy of the Quak: and
leads them into pernicious courses.

So p. 41. A man's own light [ cry they, speaking of that of God in the
Conscience of all men, which sometimes themselves call no less then Gods Law in
them, which is in them, but not of them, nor natural, but spiritual, holy,
just and good] cannot warrant of it self without the Scripture a man's actions
to be lawful, which he does according to that light [ And yet T. D. says much
of the truth of the Scripture is written on the hearts of the Heathen, and that
so much of it as is there written is their Rule, so by consequence men's Rule
cannot of it self warrant men's actions to be right that are regulated by it: (Oh
the Rounds of these men) yea Tomb. and Baxter blush not in proof of that their
lie as boldly as blindly, to assert in the same page that Paul in his bloody
persecutions and sins followed the light within him, and counted it his great
sin that he had so done, though they confess (as before) that all light in all
men is from God and Christ, and that the light, some of which all men have from
God and Christ, though dim in regard of its small measure, gives them to
discern sins, duties, and divine Attributes, and leads them to much of God and
more morallity, fidellity, chastity, temperance, righteousness, which the
Letter says are the fruits of the Spirit, then most Christians have attained
to: Yea so blasphemously seem they to speak in the same page of the light
within which the Qua. follow and call to, which is no other then that of God in
men that convinces them of sin as to intimate that men may, as the Quakers say
they do, follow the light within them, and yet their practice be of the Devil
[ The Prince and Ruler only of the darkness in men] and not from Gods Spirit,
yea ( say they there) if following the dictates of a man's own Conscience (i.e.
the leadings of the light in it) could warrant his actions the most horrid acts
of Idolaters, Papists, Pagans, Mahometans, Fanatics, i. e. mad men should be
free from censure and control.

Thus to their own shame confusion, and self contradiction who one while speak
well of it, they speak abominably of the light within, as if all the
wickedness that is in the world came to pass by following the light within
the conscience, the going away from which into man's own vain imaginations and
vile inventions into the dark, for not taking heed to the ^ouncell of God, i.
e. his light in the heart, is the only cause of all abomination, without which
light shining, and men's loving the darkness and evil deeds, which it condemns
more then it, there could be neither sin, as christ says, nor condemnation,
John 3.19. Romans 8, 1.

As (to go round again) to their own confutation themselves intimate in the
very next words, p. 41, 42. which are thus. If a man do that which he thinks to
be evil, [ that is by the lights dictating it so to be in his own Conscience,
as they hinted just before] though it were good and lawful in it self, it
would be sin to him, yea that man that does good against his conscience is hut
an hypocrite in so doing, though the thing in if self be right and good: When a
man does evil, which his conscience tells him is so, he commits a sin of the
highest degree, as to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is
sin, Iam. 4.7. That is, sin in an high degree, hence great horror of spirit
has attended them that have omitted good, which their conscience told them
they should do, and much more horror in them that have done evil against
their conscience, as in the case of Judas, Spira and other instances might be
given [ Without which acting against conscience there is neither sin nor horror
say we with John and Christ, Ioh. 15.24. 1 Ioh. 3 20. but peace as themselves
hereunder confess, i.e. assurance of Gods acceptance, acquittance,
noncondemnation, justification.] And therefore ( say they) if the Qua: intended
no more then this, by bidding men look to the light within them [ And no more
then that do we intend, God knows, though the blind Guides, who cannot see Wood
for Trees, hating us, are minded to make men mistake us, as miserably as
themselves mistake us] that men should take heed that they omitted not the good
their own consciences told them they ought to do, and that they did not the
evil their consciences judged to be so, we should accept of their warning.
Surely it will concern you, as to look that your conscience be not erroneus [
As it ever is when, and never is, say I, but when it erres from the light of
God within it, for the heart is a dark place of it self, but as the true light
shines in it, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and heeds not that.] So, when your conscience is
rightly informed, to follow it, and when it goes wrong [ As it never does, say
I, but when it goes from its guide the light] yet to suspend the act which it
condemns [ Till by the light it come to approve of what it ignorantly
condemned] if you desire peace [ It seems then by these men, as well as the
Qua: doctrine, that peace is no where to be had but in walking according to the
light in the Conscience] there will ( say they) be no plea to acquit him before
God, or to quiet his own spirit, who proceeds to act according to the light in
his own conscience: And a sin against the light of nature [ So they style that
voice of God in the conscience still] is so much the more damnable in that it
is against the most irrefragable evidence [ Mark how they sometimes yield the
light in the conscience of all to be a far clearer evidence then that of the
letter it self, and more dangerous to resist, in reference to which they
sometimes (to go round again call the light within, but obscure, mere darkness
and blindness, and not so dangerous nor damnable to resist, but rather
dangerous, yea no less then damnable to follow] He that doubts ( say they
with Paul) is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith, for whatever is
"not of faith is sin ( Mark how themselves affirm with Paul and us, that
faith, without which nothing is pleasing to God, out of which all that is done
is damning, to be a faith in that light of Christ, which is in the conscience.
Woe be to him (cry they as we also do) who condemns himself in what he allows,
and contrariwise, say we and Paul, and consequently themselves, happy is he
(and he only) who is not condemned in himself (that is by the light in his own
conscience) in what he allows.

Thus absolutely do these Light-haters sometimes themselves bless, approve and
applaud the light, which otherwhiles they brawl and bark against, when its own
children the Qua: appear to justify it; Sometimes (to go round again) as
absurdly do they bolt out bitterness and blasphemies against that light which
(forgetting how unawares they confess the truth to the Qua:) otherwhiles they
so eminently applauded as good and of God, etc, making it sometimes pernicious,
dangerous, yea in the highest degree damnable to neglect it; at othertimes (to
go round again) pernicious, dangerous, and in the highest degree damnable to
attend to it: As p. 68.] Among the Gentile Philosophers there was light, but
dim, no light, truly such, is to be rejected; Philosopphers light guided men
well in some things; yet ( to go round again) in most did lead them into
crooked and dangerous ways [ Which position of these blind Guides is such an
Ignis fatuus, such a Will with a wish or whimsicall piece of guidance, as they
falsely render the light it self to be, which they call so; as if one and the
same light of God should be a safe and sure guide at one time, and such a
misleading, unsafe guide and foolish fire at another, as p. 84. will lead into
nothing but Bags and Praecipices, or as if the least measure of the light of
God could lead any man into the least measure of iniquity; Yea sometimes they
call this light of God in the Conscience, which is Gods own voice (in Nature at
least as I.O. says) his Law and most immediate Counsel to a man, no other
then man's own counsel, way, (...) that leads to cursing, Witness p. 45, 40.
Where they say thus] To leave a person to his own imagination, lust, to walk in
his own counsel, his own way (which is all one as to leave him to the light
within him) is the greatest curse and judgment to a man from God, for refusing
to hearken to Gods voice. Therefore the light within each person is of it self
no safe guide, and the Qua; prescribe that to men as their rule, which God
counts their curse [yet ( to go round again) p. 55.] the light within each
person is by creation and inward work of the Spirit [ So to be left to the
inward work of the Spirit is it seems with these men the greatest curse, yet
(to go round again) as before, p. 41.] The Qua: charge public preachers with
denying the light within each man, whereas such light is not at all denied by
them, but is acknowledged to be a great benefit to mankind, and p. 84. It
concerns those who own Christ as their light, to judge themselves and their
ways by his light, [ And the light within is his light, witness Baxt. Epist.
above cited, This light is from Christ both as the Author and Restorer of
nature, all this light (within us and without us) is to be hearkened to, and
obeyed] its the greatest benefit of light that it does make manifest, by the
light of Christ the evil of our ways is reproved, the ways of God approved,
we know the righteousness of God and our own unrighteousness, this is no small
benefit to have light to discern our own errors, which without light from
Christ [ and his light within say I, by which only every man knows, de facto,
what he is] we should never have understood, a wise Christian therefore will be
often judging himself ( And self judgment says I. O. is from the light
indelebly implanted by God within each man's conscience) by the light of the Law
[ Which law is light says the letter, Prove. 6. 23.] discovering his
transgressions [yet ( to go round again) p. 85. Oh that all that talk of the
light within them would follow the light about them! Light within you whatever
the Qua: tell you, will leave you in perplexity, when you shall have most need
of comfort; but ( to go round again) if you believe in the Light of Christ, as
its held out to you in the Gospel [ That is the letter with them, which letter
yet testifies the light of the Gospel of Christ to be shining from God within
men's hearts, 2 Cor. 4.] you shall see the light of life. Therefore ( to go
round again) be persuaded [ Cry they, and so they conclude their Book] to
disclaim the pretended new light within you, as your sufficient guide to God,
and choose the light of Christ from Heaven in his Gospel to walk by [ Which
Christ say I, speaks and shines from heaven to men, now no where immediately,
but in men's hearts and consciences, though men write and speak as from him here
on earth, whom speaking there by his spirit from heaven, it is more dangerous to
turn away from, then from them that speak but on earth] and it ( say they and
so say I) will guide and "comfort you surely and sweetly to eternal life.

So I have showed how these two children of the night and darkness R B. an I.
T. who were wont to bite and tear one another about the Tradition of Infant
Baptism do both concur in their divinity doings against the Qua; and the
light within, to bawl out something, uno ore, against both, far better then
their joint dis-joynted talk concurres together within it self; and so run the
Rounds and dance the Hay, up and down, in and out, and sometimes round about,
that the Reader of them can hardly discern or find whether they be fuller of
concessions to the Qua: by their confessions to, and commendations of the light
within, or of denyalls, contemnings and condemnations of it, for at several
times (sometimes more Expressly, sometimes more implicitly) they are found in
both in a most egregious manner; One while (as if parturirent montes) mightily
magnifying the light within for a great way together, as if we might
warrantably take them to be some trusty friends to it, Another while minifying,
vilifying, nullifying it into nothing but some blind lump of darkness; like
the Lizard making many good prints upon it with their fore-feet, in that sandy
way wherein they pass, and then dashing them all out again with a long bushy
Tail, or Tale of it to the contrary; like the blind night B^t flying and
fluttering up into the Air with a mighty humming noise of Encomiums about it,
and then dropping down into a piece of Cow dung: As the Devil served him who
is the Author of it, who, after he had set him upon the highest pinnacle of the
Temple, he would fain have thrown down thence to destruction; so deal these by
the inward light or Word of Gods speaking in the heart, which, after in words
they with I. O. have magnified over all Gods name, they thrust it down (as he
does) below every name yea and every thing almost that has any name at all;
and, as I. O. after in a sound of words, they have set it out as glorious, next
to God, as the Sun in its brightness, render it under many reviling,
opprobrious Titles, well nigh as odious, as Satan himself in his Princely, and
their own Priestly blindness: So that which side soever of those two sides and
sorts of sayings or double tongued talk of the light the Truth stands on, yet
(unless contradictories can) it is certain all cannot be true which they utter
of it: And if the worst should be true, as ( absit blasphemia, far be it from
any good man to believe their blasphemies of it are) then the best is false,
and that at best proves themselves no better then Self-confounders; but if the
best they say of it be true (as most true it is) then R. B. and I. T. till they
both repent in dust and ashes before the Lord for their sin in belying his
light, can expect no better from him, then what is due to all blind Truth
Blasphemers.

As for T. D. he says the least of all these four in contradiction to himself
about the light; howbeit, as is above showed, not so little, but that its seen,
that eodem cum illis haeret luto, he sticks in the same Quagmire together with
them: But as for I.O he is more over head and ears in it, as to this point,
then all the rest. I shall only take two or three more turns upon that wheel of
his, on which he is unwearied in running round, and so make an end with them
altogether at this time.

And first let us see what I. O, says by way of Concession to us, against
himself, about the light in all men's consciences. First, Tr, 1. c. 2. S. t1. he
writes thus (viz.) God declares his Sovereign power and Authority,
righteousness and holiness by the innate or ingrafted light of nature, and
principles of the Consciences of men. That indispensible moral obedience which
he requires of us as his creatures subject to his law, is in general thus made
known unto us; Then citing and writing out at large that Text, Romans 2.14, 15.
For the Gentiles, etc. he goes on thus: By the light which God has indelibly
implanted in the minds of men accompanied with a moral instinct of good and
evil, seconded by that self judgment which he has placed in us in reference
to his own over us, he does reveal himself unto the Sons of men [ And that we
may know and be ascertained that this thing is no deceivable pretense, but that
God does so indeed reveal himself thereby, he adds S. 13.] The voice of God in
nature is effectual; it declares it self to be from God by its own light and
Authority. There is no need to convince a man by substantial witnesses that
what his conscience speaks it speaks from God, whether it bear testimony to the
Being, Righteousness, Power, Omniscience or Holiness of God himself, or whether
it call for that moral obedience which is eternally and indispensably due to
him, and so shows forth the work of the Law in the heart, it so speaks and
declares it self that without further evidence or reasoning, without the
advantage of any considerations, but what are by it self supplied, [ And then
without an outward Ministry, letter, or writing surely, or if it did not, yet
the letter without, that came from the light within, is of the lights own
supplying] it discovers its Author from whom it is, and in whose name it
speaks: (...), those common notions and general presumptions of him and his
Authority, that are inlayed in the natures of rational creatures by the hand
of God to this end, that they might make a Revelation of him as to the purposes
mentioned, are able to plead their Divine Original without the least
contribution of strength or assistance from without [ Thus far I.O. writes the
truth of the light within, saving here and there the interposition of that
Epithet Naturall]

Thus far have I set down I. Os. words, that all may see how far he accords
with them in these words, in the same things about which he Quarrels with the
Qua^as not knowing what to make of their Inward word and Light they talk of:
which is indeed wholly (though himself fees it not) excepting in his often
undervaluing of the Light within by that name of natural, as in opposition to
the Qua: which otherwise, while he sees it serves his turn so to do against
another sort of his Antagonists, he magnifies in words, and makes as honorable
with all his might, as the Qua: do, and together with them: He grants that its
the voice of God, a means of the knowledge of God, and of his will, of Divine
Original and Authority, calls for that moral obedience (A higher matter then
he thinks for) which is eternally and indispensably due to God, speaks in the
name of God and from God so infallibly in the heart, that it needs no other
evidence, assistance, advantage, etc. (and then not the letter) to witness
that it speaks from God, is his law to which his creatures are to be subject,
is ascertained to be no deceivable pretense, but that indeed by which God does
reveal himself to the soul of man, that light which God has indelibly
implanted in the minds of men, is accompanied with a moral instinct of good
and evil, seconded with a self-judgment in us in reference to Gods own over
us, shows the work of the Law in the heart, so as they are left wholly
inexcusable, who will not learn and know God from thence: nevertheless ( to go
round again) he pinches it back at first (after he has done magnifying it)
with the diminitive terms of the Light of nature, low, dark, obscure, ^
winekling light, that scarcely peeps out of the most pernicious darkness,
enlightening mearly in moral matters, duties, moral good and evil,
sufficient to leave men without excuse, not save, nor bring them to the true
knowledge of God, only that which was given to man at first before he fell, the
state of the first man, and at last a thing altogether feigned, a deceivable
pretense, grossly imagined, every ones private light making as many Rules as
men. That inward light, the Revelation that comes from which is uncertain,
dangerous, unprofitable, no way necessary to the knowing of God and his will,
therefore to be rejected and detested. A means of the knowledge of God, and of
Communion with him, boasted of by the Fanatics, an addition to the written
word of God which is most heavily damned by the Spirit of God, among that of
confabulation with Angels and others, id genus furfuris, of the like bran:
that which we are sent to that we may get the knowledge of God, or any
direction in our duty to him at no time and no where at all by God; a principle
of Revelation most uncertain, fallacious, both as to it self, and what things
it reveals; a mere faculty of the understanding; I know not what light, of no
correspondency with the Scripture and word; I know not what divine soul of the
world mingled in all things, which is Every thing, and truly Nothing; a light
which, however attended to, is in all divine things, as to the utmost end,
merely darkness and blindness it self.

These and many more id genus furfuris etfarraginis are the depressive,
debasive denominations, whereby I. O. having first advanced the light within
and law of God in the heart into its proper place, prerogative, Titles, and
Authority, as Gods Vicar on earth (which Office the Pope and Clergy have long
usurped) as a faithful witness, right reverend Recorder, and subordinate
Judge for God, and between God and man in the Conscience, does after Thrust it
out again from its Throne, Rob it of its Recordership, detrude it from its true
Title, Divest it of all its Authority, Digrade it from its Vice-gerentship,
turn it down from the Bench to the Bar, and there, like a Justice of neither
Peace nor Truth, pass his scornful sentence on it, and damn it into utter
darkness, among a crew of Counterfeits, fanatical fancies mere Figments, and
imaginations, and the whole rabble of such like malefactors and deceivers, as
any may see, who having so much skill will be at so much pains as to consult
those pieces of his Latin piece, that are to that end here cited in the
margent. Fx. 1. S. 5, 6. Figmentum horrendum lumen internum omnibus commune,
etc. De fictitio isto sive lumine sive verbo interno et Christo imaginario etc.
Ex. 3. S. 11. Fanatici nostrales enthusiasmos nescio quos jactitantes luce^
interna^ atque infallibilitatem inde emergentem, etc. Et S. 22. Lu^en nescio
quod, cui nihil commune est cum scripturis, tanqua^ Doctorem infallibilem
sequi, et in omnibus obedire. S. 25. Lumen illud internu^ Res est omnino ficta
atque commentum crasse excogitatum. S. 28. Nihil opus est ulla revelatione per
Spiritum out lumen internum, Enthusiasmum, etc. incerta periculosa inutilia ea
omnia media ad cognoscendum Deum atque voluntatem ejus, ideoque rejicienda
atque detestanda esse quae simulant fanatici apparet. S. 30 Omnes istas vias et
modos cognitionis Dei, ac cum co communionis, quos jactitant Fanatici, rejici
ac damnari a spiritu sancto opparet, presertim Angelorum colloquia revelationes
alienas a verbo scripto, deinde Spiritum Fanaticoru^ internu^ omnibus commune.
S. 32. Ad lumen internum seu spiritum internum privatum nusquam nunquam a Deo
ablegamur. S. 34. Enthusiasmorum omne genus fallax, incertum, incertissimum,
etc. Ex. 4. S. 15. Lux nictans neque e tenebru perniciosissimis emergens: (...)
Deo quopiam melius. S. 21. Qualitas nescio quae divina, etc. (...), vere Nihil.


We see then that though these men agree all together to witness against the
Truth, yet their witness agrees not together within it self, their Assertions
assent not, but assault one the other about the self same subject, the light,
some saying, as they said of Christ, he is a good man, others nay but he
deceives the people: One while it is O divinae Originis lumen! O vox Dei
effectualis! non Hominem sonat, est Dea, aut a Deo certe; O Lux Dei seipsam
declarans, et ^uthoritatem suara, per quam Deus infallibiliter revelat seipsum
hominibus! quid verbis opus est cum Ipsa loquitur? quid testibus ad extra ad
convincedum? etc. O Lex Dei in cord (...) mentibus hominum insita! ibi
loquens, judicans in Nomine Domini, N^men Dei, p^r quod seipsum exhibet
cognoscendum, etc. Anon again, in hoc No^ine Domini incipit omne malum, Then
it is, O pestis! O Labes! O nequitia! ipsa nequitia nequior. So then Sua ipsorum
contra seipsos Pugna de Luce sic se habet: Ex hac part p^^^ et pudicitiaest,
illinc petulantia et stuprum: Hine fides est, illinc fraudati: hinc pietas,
illinc scelus; hinc constantia, illinc suror; hinc certitudo, illinc fail^^lis
pretextus; hinc honestas, illinc turpitudo; hinc justa, justitia (adeoque si
fieri possit) justitia justior; illinc ficta, fictitia, falsa, falsissima,
fallacia ipsa fallacior: hinc Dei quidam digitus, seu insculptio quaedam in
cordibus, non nisi per Dei quidem ipsius manus, illinc ( Ironice) Deus nescio
quis? seu forsan Deo quopiam quid melius, aut ipso Diabolo pejus; hinc pene
(...), illinc vere nihil, hinc Lux ipsa luce clarior, illinc mera Tenebrae and
caecita, adeoque obscuritate ipsa fere obscurior.

One more Iigge of I. O. about the Light of God we testify to, as one and the
same gift or grace of God in all, as to its nature, though different in
measure, is this, which is in part touched on above, and then I leave them all
to Dance in the dark all together if they will, till they are as weary, as I am
in tracing after them: He may well say (...) of it, yet vere nihil, for he
first makes it every thing, and at last just nothing, as any one may find
comparing his first Treatise with his last Tract of Theses: One while he calls
it metaphorical, not proper; Otherwhiles proper, not metaphorical; One while
natural, as opposite to civil, and not moral, spiritual, nor supernatural;
Otherwhiles and in other respects he makes it civil, moral, spiritual, and
in effect supernatural, as in opposition to natural; One while ( Ironically)
some certain divine soul of the world mixed with all things, yea all these
things abovesaid, yea all things also, (...), Otherwhile vere nihil, truly
nothing; One while common to all and universal, but then not saving;
Otherwhile sufficient and saving, but then particular only and peculiar to few,
not common nor universal: yea the Light is made little less then a Monster of
all shapes, a nescio quid? a certain natural, supernatural, civil, moral,
spiritual, real, metaphorical, sufficient, insufficient, efficacious,
ineffectuall, useful, useless, safe, dangerous, peculiar, common, special,
general, particular, universail, Every thing, which when all comes to all is
none knows what, but a mere just Nothing, So here is a Unity, thus parting it
self into a Plurality, divided first into a Duality, then turned into a
Trinity, then quartered into a Quaternity, then extended into an Universality
or certain Omniality, and then as some Nihil in Nil revertens, returning back
into a Particularity, and narrowed up nearer into a Neutrality, till it resolve
and annihilate it self at last into a very Nullity.

Thus the Priest's work, who talk for Self,
Is Tangling talk against it Self;
Against Truth a Prate, a piteous Preachment,
That cannot make good its own Impeachment.
As Dr: Owens Doctrine Does,
Who heeds not well which way he Goes,
Baxter's, Tomb's, Dansons dances Round,
And Round again in the self same Ground;
It staggers to and fro, and Reels,
Skips up and down, and runs on Wheels,
Starts aside like some broken Bow,
Crosses Christ like Cris X Cross in the Row,
Whosoever can feel in it may Feel
As 'twere a Wheel within a Wheel:
A Net, Gin, Trap a Snare's in It,
A Whirlpool, Gulf, Bottomless Pit,
Wind, Dust, Husk, Chasse, no stable Steeple,
A Tale, that takes unstable People,
A Toy, a Cloud, Mist, Smoke, a Fogg,
No Quakerisme, but some Quavering Bogg;
A Quick-sand, a Quagmire, that Sucks,
Who Is in 't his feet out hardly Plucks,
Himself who is In, gets seldom Out,
It self's more seldom In then Out;
It flutters like some blind night Bat,
Now here, now there, this way, now That,
Now it is One thing, then Another,
And now and then nor to One nor to Other.
Sometimes it is This, sometimes it is That,
Sometimes its This, and This, and That,
Sometimes it is either This, or That,
Sometimes it is neither This, nor That,
Now This, not the Other, a non its Either,
Then by and by both Both, and Neither.
One while it looks like So, not No,
Another while like No, not So,
One way it seems or So, or No,
Another way, nor No, nor So,
Some ways it shows both So and No,
So 't's a mere endless No, and So.
Sam: Fisher.

SIc O sic Quantas, pate^asque Quotas,
Quasque Tu, plenas Babilone Totas,
Haud Tibi, at Sancto cuicung; Notas,
Bestia Potas?
Scripta Scriptorum modo multa Notas,
Scripta Scripturae modo sacra Notas,
Huic tamen cae cos oculos, Remotas
Reddis et (...).
Puncta contendis, literaeque (...)
Esse movendas neque, nec Remotas,
Esse nec novas, sed babere Notas
Biblia (...):
Esse Scripturas been (...),
Aut per, aut propter licet (...).
Esle sed mentemque, manusque Lotas
Non been Notas.
Si quis seu Quaerit Quare? seu Queritur Quod hic loci non cura^tur vel
verbo^rum Qualitas, vel syllabo^rum Quantitas. Sciat dehinc nos Rusticos nec
magisnec minus cu^raturos vel Varietatem Verbo^rum, vel Quanti^tate^ nostro^rum
Sylla^bi^rum, Quam videmus vos Acade^mi^ros parum Cu^ra^re vel Veri^ta^tem
Verbo^rum, vel Quali^ta^tem vostro^rum Syllog smo^rum.
Diruis nunc quae oedisicas, (...)
Esse, vocales, literasque Votas
Normam, et has meras dein' esse (O Rotas)
Non ita Notas.
Perfici per has aliquando Votas
Posse vel cunctos, aliquando (O Rotas)
Neminem hic purum fieri Revotas
Posse: Ita Motas.
Ebriaris sic, titub^sque 'grotas,
Haud dubes nunc, nunc dubitas, (...),
(O Sacerdos) (...)? (...).
Qui sit (...).
Quod scis hoc nescis, quast in Orb Rotas,
Vertis Huc, Illuc, modo circa Rotas,
Fluctuas, curris, modo retro Rotas,
Undique Rotas:
Usque dum rotas, rotulasque, Rotas,
Nectis in Rotis. rota^timque Rotas,
Tota dum TENET, to^tatimque Totas
OPERA ROTAS.
ROTAS
OPERA
TENET
AREPO
SATOR
Dixi haud magis malus Piscator, ac Tu, ac
Tui (O Sacerdos) estis p^ssimi Pisces, qui, ni
Regeneremini, Rejiciemini in aeternum.
In Vi, Via, Vita, Virtute ac Veritate Domini (si Salvabimini) Salvetot^.
Sam: Fisher.

FINIS.
Christ's Light SPRINGING, Arising up, shining forth, and displaying it self
through the whole World, from under that Priestly Darkness; wherewith it has
been clouded and overcast, by the space of one Thousand two Hundred Sixty
years, in this our Antichristian-Christian World.
Sect. 1. OUr Testimony, and that Truth to which We bear Testimony, who by
those to whom Woe is, forasmuch as they Tremble not at the Word of God, are
scornfully styled Quakers, is no different thing, nor another, but plainly One,
and altogether the same, which all the Holy Men, and Prophets of God h^ve have
held forth, as also Christ himself, and all his Apostles and Ministers, as many
as have spoken (as they were moved of God) from the beginning of the world to
this very day.

2. For even as They (whose Testimony who? even few or none, either believed or
received) so We, who are of her children, of all and only whom Wisdom is
justified, give Testimony to Wisdom it self, not the wisdom of this world, nor
of the Princes of this world who come to naught, but to that hidden Wisdom,
which none of the Princes of this world knew ( for had they known; they would
not Crucify the Lord of Glory) the Wisdom of God is a Mystery, even the Light
of the Lord God, and Jesus Christ who are Light, and in whom is no darkness at
all, yea to that glorious Light that is now arising to enlighten that Holy
City, New Jerusalem, where now there is to be no more night, into which nothing
shall in any wise enter that defiles.

3. Concerning which Light, Christ himself said to Paul, being now truly
converted to it, which he persecuted before, throw the blindness of his mind, I
now send thee to the Nations to open their eyes, and to turn them from the
darkness to the Light, from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
Remission of sins, and an inheritance among those that are sanctified by faith,
that is in me Act. 26.17, 18


4. Neither was this the business and Ministry, which Paul only received of
God, that he might fulfill it: but John al^o testines that this was the Message,
which he together with the rest of Christ Ministers, had received from Christ
himself to declare, which was also from the beginning, not any new thing,
(however it might seem new, as being clouded till the darkness was past, and
the true Light shined again out of the darkness that sometime clouded it) but
the old thing which was from the beginning, namely that God is Light, and in
him is no darkness at all, and that If we say we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth, but if we walk in the Light, as
he is in the Light, we have mutual fellowship with him, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, 1. Ioh. 1.5.6.7.
moreover that who says he is in the light, and hates his brother is in
darkness even until now.

5. Concerning which Light of God, of which the Scripture every where speaks,
and from which inlightning the Penmen thereof the Scripture it self was given
forth, which also was, which also shined in the heart of man long befere the
Scriptures were, we together with the Scripture and the writers thereof do
testify this self same thing, namely that a certain measure certain beams were
of old, and now are given of God in the conscience of every of them to the sons
of men, who although God made them after his own Image, upright and blameless,
have yet sought out to themselves, both various and vain inventions, and
corrupted their ways and erred; and, as to any help they can have from
themselves, are in a manner wholly perished from the true God, and from the
true knowledge of him, whom truly to know is Life Eternal, and from all
Communion with him, to shine in their dark heart, as a Light in a dark place,
and to bring them back through the cond^mnation of their evil deeds, word;,
and thoughts, and of that whole Chaos of confusion and corruption that came in
by the fall, which condemnation this Light will bring on all that take good
heed to it, and through the mortification of that old man, and body, as well as
of death, as sin, with all its earthly members, and in a word of all whatever
in man is contrary to the Image and Will of God, and turn them back unto God,
unto that primitive state of purity, righteousness and innocence, from which
they departed to worship Images in their own imaginations, to know, and to
worship the true God, who is a Spirit, truly in Spirit and in Truth, with which
worship only the Lord is worshipped according to his will, and lastly to enjoy
such Spiritual Peace and Communion with him, as none are by any means possible
(as is aforesaid) capable of, while they are alienated from him, by the
darkness of iniquity, and while they remain in their Transgression
incorrigible, and unconverted.

6. Romans 3.6, 9. ad 19.
For both Jews and Gentiles, (as it is written) are concluded all under sin,
there is not one Righteous, no not one, there is none that under stands,
there is none that seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, they
are altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one;
their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit,
the poison of Asps is under their lips, their mouth is full of cursing, and
bitterness, their feet is swift to shed blood, wasting, and misery is in their
ways, and the way of peace they have not known, there is no fear of God before
their eyes, so that every mouth is stopped, and the whole world become guilty
before God, for all have sinned and f^ll short of the glory of God.

7. This is the state of all ma^k^nd separated by the fall from the Light into
the darkness, among whom even all of what oever Sex, Nation, Language Condition
or Age (at least that is capable to discern between good and evil) I say all
may say within themselves we are lost, we are gone down headlong into the
utmost darkness; into extreme damnation from God: Neither is their any other
way to life exhibited but by Jesus Christ the Light of the world, by some
measure of Light at least shining from himself, enlightening (as it is said)
every man that comes into the world, shining in darkness, in the dark
consciences of men, though the darkness comprehend it not holding by the hand
also; and as it were leading by the hand those, that being in nared in chains
of darkness, and thrust down into the Pit, do not wink with their eyes, to the
further blinding of them, but according to the council of Christ himself,
believe in the Light whilst they have it, that they may become children of the
Light: for I am the Light of the world (says Christ) He that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; also I am come a
Light into the world that whosoever believes in me, may not remain in
darkness; Ioh. 46.47.35.36, 8.12.12.
I came not to damn the world, but to save the world.

8. In this manner therefore is Christ the Salvation of the world, as he is the
Light of the world, destroying the works of the Devil, who has wrought in the
darkness to the setting up of a Principality, and a Kingdom to himself in the
hearts of men, and redeeming men from the power of the Prince of the darkness
of this world unto God, who is Light, and to see Light, even the Light of life
in his Light. Psa. 18.28, 34, 35, 36, 9.^


9. In like manner does the Prophet Isaiah affirm Christ to be given of God for
a Covenant to the people, for a light to the Nations to open the blind eyes,
and to bring out of Prison them that sit in darkness even the blind which have
eyes, and see not Esa. 42.6, 7.43.8.45.3.49.6. Acts 13.47.
and after him Paul testifies that Christ was set as a Light to the Nations
that he might be the Lords Salvation to the ends of the earth. Simeon also
speaking by the holy Spirit of the child Jesus calls him that Salvation of his,
which the Lord had prepared before the face of all people, to be a Light to
lighten the Nations and the glory of his people Israel. Luke 2.30, 31, 32.


10. In as much therefore as Christ is the light of the world, he is the
Savior of the world, and so far only are men saved by him as they believe in
him, who is the Light, and in that Light wherewith he does enlighten every man
in his own conscience, and set themselves to walk after it, which leads no man
into iniquity, and so far forth are all men liable to condemnation before God,
as they walk not in this, which is in them, howbeit not consenting to any, but
testifying against all iniquiry, even the least, and also reproving and
condemning it, even in them, who are not in it, but walking contrary to it, in
the darkness.

11. For although God in his great love gave his Son for a Light, not that he
might damn the world, but that the world through him might be saved, and be
that believes in him is not condemned, yet he that believes (...) is
condemned already, and this is the condemnation, that Light is come into the
world, into the inmost consciences of men, there manifesting good and evil;
but men love the darkness rather then the Light, because their deeds are evil;
for he that does evil harsth the Light, neither comes to the Light, ^ast his
deeds should be reproved, but who so does truth he comes to the Light, what
his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Ioh. 3.16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 12.


12. And al though all that obtain justification, are justified freely, by the
grace of the Lord through the Redemption that is made in Jesus Christ alone
(Yea, cursed be he, and cursed will he be that seeks for justification any
other way, for he who is the Light of the world, is also that Corner stone,
which (however it be set at naught by a thousand and thousand of the (...), is
yet made the head of the corner; neither is there salvation in any other, nor
is there any other name save that of Christ, the Light, under heaven given
among men whereby they must be saved) Acts 4.11, 12.
Nevertheless no further is any man accepted of God, or justified by Christ, or
the grace of God in Christ, then as he is directed by Christ the Light, and is
by the grace of God, by that, inward with (...) of God by the light of God and
Christ in his conscience, which is given of God for this very end, that it may
teach and lead, taught and led unto repentance from the unfruitful works of
darkness.

13. For this Light shows the riches of the goodness, and long suffering, and
forbearance of him who is long suffering to-us-ward, not will that any should
perish, but that all should come to us by repentance, and is that very grace of
God bringing Salvation that has appeared to all men, teaching all that will
learn what it teaches, that denying ungodlyness, and worldly lusts they should
live soberlys righteously and godly in this (...) world, which kind of life
will otherwise be to late to begin to live in the world to come, which grace
being received in vain, how much more being despised, by the hardness of the
heart refusing to repent, wrath is treasured up against the day of wrath, and
the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render unto every
one according to his works, to them, who by patient continuance in well doing,
seek for glory and immortality, eternal life, but unto them that are
contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousnes, indignation and
wrath: For Romans 2.
tribulation and anguish is to come upon every soul of man that works evil;
but glory honor and peace to every one that works good has to the Jew and
also to the Greek: for there is no respect of persons with God; but in every
Nation he that ^ea^eth him, and manketh righteousness, is accepted with him,
but the wicked and him that loves violence, his soul rateth.

14. And howsoever the world which is called Christian, together with the
manifold Sects, Professors, and merely nominal Christians and Ministers
thereof, may dream that they have Christ their Redeemer, very often calling
him, Lord, Jesus continuing in the mean time in all disobedience to his Light,
yet the foundation of the Lord stands sure having this Seal the Lord knows
who are his, and let every one that names the of Christ depart from iniquity.

15. For the day of the Lord draws nigh wherein both every man and his deeds
shall be made manifest, for the day which is the Light shall declare them, for
they shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's works of what
sort they are; and in that day all those D^eamers shall be awakened, and shall
know that as concerning the truth they have erred far from the mark, and that
not every one that says unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does what Christ says, and what the will is of his
Father which is in heaven, and though they have prophesied in his name, and
done great things, nevertheless for as much as they departed not from iniquity,
they shall be doomed from Christ with D^part from me, ye workers of iniquity, I
know you not.

16. Then shall the whole multitude of Transgressors of the Law i. e. of the
Light of God in the conscience by which all, even those that have not the Law
written in an outward letter, are a Law to themselves, having the work of the
Law written in their hearts, that the Lamb of God came not to tolerate, but to
take away the sin of the world, and that Jesus was sent, not to give liberty to
sin, but to set his people at liberty from their sins, and that in the greatest
liberty, wherewith Christ freeth his people, there is the least license, and
that the Father having raised up his Son has sent him to bless men, they
turning away every one of them from his iniquity:, and that those blessed
ones, to whom the the Lord imputes not sin, whose iniquities a^e forgiven, and
whose sin is covered, are such in whose Spirit there is no guile, and that
there is in no wise any remission of sins unto those, who still accustom
themselves to a daily commission of them. Romans 2.14, 15. Ioh. 1.20. Psalm. 32.1,
2. Act. 3.26. Romans 11.26.


17. Moreover the great and terrible day of the Lord now comes, wherein the
Light, which is risen in the con^ciences of men, shall daily, more and more
clearly shine forth, in which also the ^he book of conscience must be opened,
that ^ut of it all men may be judged according to all things that are written
therein, where, by the Light, which is Gods faithful witness, all sin is
written down in the sight of God, as with a Pen of Iron; in which day, by the
Light, God will come night to us to judgment; and then the righteousness,
grace and mercy of God shall be revealed toward all, who, standing still in
his Light, wait for him to come as a Redeemer to them from their impieries,
that they may be saved from the wrath, that is to come upon all the children of
disobedience, by which light the wrath of God shall be manifested from Heaven
in their own con^ciences against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men,
who retain the Truth in unrighteousness; in which day God will reign down upon
the wicked, Snares, Fire, Brunstone, and an horrible tempest, all which things
shall be the portion of their Cup.

18. Moreover in the hand of God there is now a cup and the Wine thereof is
Red, and it is full of mixture, and he pours one of the same, and Judgment is
begun at the House of God, and God has begun to bring evil upon the people,
upon whom his Name is written, and his Nature and Image is imprinted; and they,
whose portion it is not, in such a measure as they have drunk of the Cup of
abomination and fornication, have drunk also of the Cup of indignation and
wrath, before they could take the Cup of Salvation, and prai^e the name of the
Lord, in no wise therefore shall the wicked go unpunished, but the worshippers
of the Beast, and those that receive his image must drink also of this wine,
which is poured one of the mixture into the cup of his indignation, and shall
be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and
of the Lamb: yea, the very dregs hereof, the top whereof the Children of the
Light and of the Day have tasted, the Children of the Night and of the
Darkness, that is all the wicked ones of the earth shall drink and wring them
out.

19. Wherefore whilst in the long suffering of God opportunity is not wanting
unto you, whilst the day of your Visitation is near unto you from God, let my
council be accepted of you All; and turn your selves to the light of Christ in
your own consciences, and take council thereat for ever, which seriously and
sincerely minding, you shall be taught by Christ himself, whose Testimony to
you, from heaven, that is, to your both external, internal and eternal Peace
and Salvation, and shall be brought to Christ himself, and to see him, and his
Father from both whom it comes, to the saving knowledge of whom there can be no
coming any other way whatsoever; for as the Sun of this outward world is not
seen, but by that Light which flows from it self unto us, so neither is the Sun
of righteousness, but by that measure of Light (how little soever it be) that
shines from him in the heart.

20. For although the Scripture which speaks of the Light, and directs to the
Light makes mention of the Father and of the Son, so that there ye may read of
them, and speak of them also, according to what ye there read; yet this the
Scripture it self witnesses that none can know either the Father or the Son,
but he to whom the Father and the Son do mutually reveal each the other, whose
revelation also is made within Mat. 11.27. Gal. 1.16.
for that which may be known of God, sufficient to Salvation is manifest in men
(says Paul) for God does manifest it in them and the Gospel is preached in
every creature which is under heaven Romans 1.16. Col. 1.23.
by the Light of God in the conscience, so that they are left inexcusable
before God (who else would be excusable and blameless) forasmuch as though they
know God, yet they glorify him not as God, neither like to retain God in their
knowledge, but knowing the judgment of God, that they which do such things, as
they do, are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in
those that do them.

21. In the mean while we do not affirm Christ himself to be in all men, who
yet is known to be in all that are not Reprobates, as that hope of glory;
nevertheless all (for there is no difference, but what is made by different
degrees of light, which do not vary the nature of the thing) have some measure
or other of his Light at least one Talent committed to them, that they may
trade therewith to profit withal, which using well, and doubling they have
entrance into the joy of their Lord, but hiding of which and not gaining
therewith, they shall be thrust out at last from the light they have, into the
utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth: This Light
therefore shines in all even the heathen, in some measure, although not in all
in the same measure.

22. To the measure of which Light of Christ, which in you is, you will do well
to take heed while you have it, as unto a light shining in a dark place, to
give you the knowledge of your Salvation, and guide your feet in the way of
peace, and that you may find true rest to your burdened and wearied souls, and
lest darkness come upon you, for he that walks in darkness, knows not
whether he goes, nor at what he stumbles.

23. This Light is the Law of God (for the law is light says the wise man Pro.
6.23.
) written not with Luke, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables
of stone (as of old for a figure hereof, by the finger of God) but in fleshly
tables of the heart, in which may be read and understood not only (as in the
Scripture and the Law without) the right, that is, what you should do and
should be, but the fact also, that is, what you do, and what you are: For to
know Thy self, whom if thou know not, thou know not Christ, whom if thou
know not, its no profit to thee to know other things, this comes no other way
then by an inward beholding of thy self in that more inward looking-glass,
namely the light of Christ, by which, God shines in the conscience, which light
leads those that follow it to hear that true and living word of God, of which
the Scripture declares, Heb. 4.
that its powerful and mighty, and sharper then any two-edged Sword, piercing
even to the dividing of the Soul and Spirit, and of the marrow and reins,
discerning the thoughts and cogitations of the heart, before which, all things
are naked and bare; that it is as fire, and as an hammer, breaking the Rocks in
pieces, and causing all things to tremble at the hearing thereof; which was in
the beginning, before the Scripture was, which testifies of it, concerning
which, the Scripture both Old and New does truly testify, it is not far off, but
nigh in the heart and mouth, that thou may do it, even that very word of
Faith the Apostles Preached.

24. This light is that good and old way, Older than the Eldest among the Sects
of this age, whether of Jews or Christians, who (all in the mean time, namely,
both Catholics, and Lutherans, and Calvinists, and Baptists, etc. every one
professing themselves to be the Ancient est) have divided the Grand Tree of the
old Roman Church, into so many branches, lesser boughs, and little twigs, that
the whole Body thereof, will ere long be sick even unto death, and She who has
been so long the Mother of so many children, is almost now devoured of Her own
children. This light (I say) is that Ancient way, unto which, God by the
Prophet Jeremiah called back the Israelites, when degenerated from God into
their own traditions, saying, stand in the ways and see, and ask for the
Ancient paths, where i that good way, walk therein, and you shall find rest
unto your souls, but they said, We will not walk therein; hearken to the voice
of the Trumpet, but they said, We will not hearken. Jer. 6.16.


25. This Light is a Teacher that cannot deceive, for it is the Testimony of
God, which is greater than the Testimony of man; nor yet can it flatter, for it
reproves every one justly, not justifying the wicked, and condemning the
Innocent, but telling every one the Truth concerning himself directly as the
case is, and no otherwise, accusing, and excusing then God himself, from whom
it is, for if by that which is shining from God in thee thy own heart condemns
thee, there is no God without that holds thee guiltless; but when by that thy
heart condemns thee not, then may thou have boldness before God. 1 Ioh. 3.20,
21.


26. Finally this Light is that perfect law of Liberty, of which whosoever is a
hearer, and not a doer, he is like a man that beholds his natural face in a
glass, which so soon as ever he has beheld, and is gone away, he straitway
forgets what manner of man he was, but whosoever looks into it, and continues
therein, and is not a forgetful, and an idle bearer, but a doer of the work,
this man shall be blessed in his deed. Jam. 1.25.


Henceforth therefore, who ere thou art, who would know thy self, do not seek
thy self out of thy self, but behold thy self, within in that inward Light,
which inwardly gives the di^cerning, not only of the good and perfect mind, and
will of God concerning thee, but also of thy own mind, and of thy whole self,
and that so perfectly, that concerning these, and even all things pertaining to
the Salvation of the Soul, and the Kingdom of God, with the Righteousness
thereof, and what Haereditary right thou have therein, which is nigh which is
within (says Christ to the Pharisees, Luke 17.20, 21.
who never entered into it) there is no need that thou should go forth of thy
self, in order to a further evidence, and understanding of them: yea thou
know more than enough already, if of the good will of God thou know more
than thou live up to, for what good is only known, and not done, tends only
unto thy condemnation: In all openness and plainness, and not in knowing what
is to be done, but in doing what is already known stands the Salvation of the
Sons of men.

28. Moreover what hinders (unless they be delighted in the blinding of their
own eyes, the stopping of their ears, and the hardening of their hearts, and in
rejecting the council of God to their own perdition) but that the wicked may
come to the life of God, from which they stand estranged? for the way to that
life, howere it is narrower and straiter by reason of the Cross of Christ, which
is daily to be taken up by those that follow him, then that wide and broad way
that leads to destruction, for which cause it is that so many enter in by this,
and so few by the other, yet is, together with that which tends unto death, so
plainly made manifest by the Light that (unless it be to such as are willingly
ignorant) it cannot easily be hidden:

29. For the fruits of the Spirit or works of the Light which are
righteousness, love, goodness, faith, gentleness, sobriety, temperance, chastity,
which who so brings forth to God lives with God, and sees God, are manifest to
every one that does not wink against the Light in his own conscience; and the
works of darkness or of the flesh, such as are adultery, fornication,
uncleannes, lascivicusness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation,
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like, which whoeever does shall never enter into the Kingdom of God, are
manifest (says the Scripture, Gal. 5 19. ad 23.
) and that not so much by the Scripture, as by the Light to which the Scripture
testifies, and by which they were manifest in the consciences of men, before
the Scripture was and are made manifest at this day where the Scripture is not,
by which also they would have been made manifest if the Scripture had never
been: For all things that are reproved (says the Spirit, in the Scripture, are
made manifest by the Light, for whatsoever does make manifest is Light.

30. To this therefore all apply your minds, to this come, in this walk and
continually abide, even in the Spirit of God, which reproves the world, and
comfort the Saints called, redeemed, and chosen out of the world: Here stand
continually, that ye may both know your selves, and comprehend false Spirits
with the works and children of darkness, who are comprehended and discerned by
the Spirit, by the Light, although these comprehend neither it, nor its
children; and that grace, mercy and peace, may be multiplied to you from God
the Father, and from Jesus Christ, whose council in the conscience, whosoever
hearkens to shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from even the fear of evil:
For this is a Brazen wall to a man to be inwardly conscious to himself of no
evil, not to wax pale at the sense of any crime.

31. But who so turns aside from the Light, leaving the paths of
righteousness to walk in the ways of darkness, as he is inwardly condemned of
himself, so both Error and Terror do meet him at every turn, so that howbeit
he carries outwardly a show of laughter and mirth, yet he goes often grievously
griped, and within waxes pale at the sense of that, which the Wife of his own
bosom is ignorant of.

32. All these things abovesaid, which at first were written in Latin more
privately, for the sake and use of a singular, eminent Friend in Germany, are
now with no other alteration then the case requires, not without God himself
also moving thereunto, given forth more publicly, as well in English as in
Latin, in service to you (O Academians) and all others to whom we are ready
(according to Peter's council) to render a reason of the faith, which is in us,
with meekness and fear, having a good conscience; and to this end that both ye,
whose ears being turned away from the Truth are turned unto Fables, and ye,
who itching, and attending to no other business then telling, and hearing some
new thing, suppose we bring certain strange and new doctrines to your ears,
may know that we bring no new things, but all the old things, even the
self-fame, which by Gods Ministers were uttered from the very beginning; which
al o we know either to your Salvation, or greater Condemnation your selves
shall once acknowledge even for ever.

33. Of which yet we are not slack to warn, and by admonition to awaken you,
forasmuch as though to say the same things that were said before, its not
grievous to us, yet for you it is safe, who, by over much incogitancy, and
inadvertency (I may truly say) are ignorant of what ye know.

34. Which truly if in the same light, and with the same sincere Spirit, with
which they were written, they may be thoroughly peru^ed by any, it shall repent
neither me to have written, nor you to have read what is here written.

35. But if otherwise, and if this friendly wo^d of your salvation shall stir
up in you the Spirit of enmity and malignity, and receive from you rather an
ignominious repulse, then an healthful hearkening thereunto, it shall please
me enough that in this work I have pleased God, and am clear of the blood of
your souls, and ye at last shall remember at least (yet not without repentance,
though too late) that ye were warned from God.

By an English man, who is a Friend, and lover of your Souls. Sam. Fisher.

Lux Christi EMERGENS, Oriens, effulgens, ac seipsam expandens per universum
Terrarum Orbem e Tenebris Sacerdotalibus; quibuscum cooperra, nec non offusa
suerit, per mill ducentos sexaginta annos, in hoc Orb nostro
Antichristi-Christiano.
Sect. 1. TEstimonium nostrum, and Veritas cui Testamur Nos, qui ab iis, quibus
Vae est quia non tremunt ad verbum Domini, nominamur Ironice Quakers, non est
alierium quoddam, nec aliud, sed plane unum, ac omnino idem cum illo, quod
exhibuerunt omnes Sancti viri, ac Prophetae Dei; perinde ac Christus ipse, nec
non omnes ejus Apostoli, ac Ministri, quotquot (quemadmodum a Deo moti erant)
loquuti sunt a seculo in hunc usque diem.

2. Quemadmodum enim Ipsi (quorum Testimonium quis? Vel duo, vel nem^ credidit,
^ut recepit) ita and Nos, qui sumus ex filiis suis, a quibus omnibus, and solis
justificata est Sapientia, Sapientiae ipsi Testimonium damus; non seculi hujus,
nec Principum seculi hujus, qui abolendi, sunt, sed occultae illi, quam nemo
Principum seculi hu^us cognovit (si enim cognoovissent, Dominum gloriae
nequaquam Crucifigerent) Sapientiae Dei in mysterio, etiam luci Domini Dei, ac
Jesu Christi, qui Lux sunt and apud quos non dantur tenebrae, ^o luci illi
gloriosae jam orienti ad illustrandam Civitatem illam Sanctam, Jerosolimam
novam, ubi nunc non amplius erit nox, in quam nequaquam intrabit qui^quam quod
inquinat.

3. De qua luce dicit Jesus ipse Paulo ad hanc, quam olim praementis caecitate
persequebatur, jam vere converso; ad gentes te nunc mitto, ut aperias oculos
eorum, and convertas eos a tenebris ad lucem, and a potestare Satanae ad Deum,
ut remissionem peccatorum accipiant, and sortem inter Sanctificatos per fidem,
quae est in me. Act. 26.17, 18


4. Nec hoc fuit Pauli solius negotium, and Ministerium a Deo receptum ut
perageret, s^d and Johannes testatur hunc esse Nuncium ipsum, quem ipse cum
reliquis ex. Christi Ministris ab ipso ad renunt'andum accepisser, quod etiam
erat a Principio, non no vum quid ( quomodocunque novum videri po^uit, ut quod
obnubilibatu^ priusquam tenebrae preteriissent, and e tenebris vera lux
luxisset) verum vetus, quod erat a Principio, nempe Deum esse lucem, nec
tenebras in eo esse ullas, and si dixerimus nos Communionem habere cum eo in
tenebris ambulances, nos non sincere agere, sed mentiri; sin in luce
ambulantes, sicut ipse est in luce, Communionem nos habere cum eo mutuam, and
sanguinem Jesus Christi filii ejus mundare nos ob omni peccato; 1. Ioh. 1.5.6.7.
quinetiam qui dicit se esse in luce, and fratrem suum odit, in tenebris esse
usque adhuc.

5. De qua Luce Dei, de qua undequaque loquitur Scriptura, and a qua
illuminante Manuscriptores e^us Scriptura etiam ipsa fuit edita, quaeque fuit,
quaeque fulsit in cord hominis l^ge ante Scripturae errant, nos una cum
Scriptura, and Scriptoribus ejus hoc idem, hoc ipsum Testamur, nempe mensuram
quandam, radios quosdam hujus in uniuscujusque conscientia fuisse olim, and
nuns esse a Deo datos filiis hominum, qui omnes, etiamsi ad imaginem suam hos
rectos fecit Deus and inculpatos, quae siverunt sibi ipsis tam varias, quam
vanas inventiones, and corruperunt vias suas, and a vero Deo, and a vera ipsius
cognitone, quem vere cognoscere est vita eterna, and ab omni cum cum eo
Communione erraverunt, ac (quoad omne a seipsis auxilium) penitus perierunt, ad
lucendum in cordibus suis opacis, ut in obscuro loco lucerna and per
condemnationem suorum operum, verborum, ac cogitationum maarim, ac tot us
ipsius Chaos consusionis, and corruptionis per lapsum subreptae, quam
condemnationem lux haec adferet in omnibus eam been animadvertentibus, nec non
per mortificationem veteris illius hominis, ac tam mortis, ^uam peccati
corporis cum terrestribus ejus membris, ac revera omnis, quodcunque in
hominibus Dei imagini, ac voluntati est contrarium, ad reducendum, and
retrovertendum eos ad Deum, ad primitivum illum puritatis justitiae, ac
innocentiae statum, a quo ad colendas imagines per imaginationes suas
decesse^unt, ad cognoscendum, and colendum verum Deum, qui Spiritus est, vere
in Spiritu, and veritate, cujusmodi Adoratione sola ad beneplacitum suum
Adoratur Dominus, ac denique ad fruendum tali cum ipso tum Pace, tum Communione
spirituali, qualis nullo moda p^ssibili (ut praedictum est) capaces sunt
aliqui, dum al errantur ab^eo per tenebras iniquitatis, and dum sint in
transgressione manentes immorige^i, ac inconversi.

6. Tam Iudaei enim quam gentes (sicut Scriptum est) Romans 3.6, 9. ad 19.
conclusi sunt omnes sub peccato, non est justus, ne quidem unus, non est qui
intelligat, non est qui exquirat Deum; omnes deflexerunt simul inutiles
factisunt, non est qui faciat quod bonum est, non est usque ad unum: Sepulchrum
apertum guttur eorum, linguis suis ad dolum usi (...), venenum Aspidum ^ub
labiis eorum, os eorum diris and amarulentia plenum est, veloces sunt pedes
eorum ad effundendum sanguinem, divastatio, and mileria in viis eorum, and viam
pacis non cognoverunt, non est timor Dei coram oculis eorum, ita ut omne os
obstruitur, et totus mundus coram Deo in reatum incidit, omnes enim
peccaverunt, ac deficiuntur gloria Dei.

7. Hic est status totius Humani generis per deflectionem ex luce in tenebras a
Deo seperati, aqud quos omnes cujuscunque Sexus, Gentis, Linguae, Conditionis,
Aetatis (saltem ad di^t inguendum inter bonum and malum capacis) omnes (inquam)
Imus, Imus precipites sibi dicant in tenebras extimas, in extremam a Deo
Damnationen: (...) daturalia aliqua via ad salutem, nisi per Jesum Christum,
mundi Lucem, per mensuram aliqua^em lucis ab ipso effulgentem, illuminantem (ut
dic^ur) John 1.9.
unumquemque hominem venientem in mundum, in tenebris lucentem, in tenebrosis
hominum mentibus, licet tenebrae eam non comprehendunt, manu-tenentem etiam,
and manu-ducentem eos, qui catenis caliginis illaqueati, and in Tartarum
detrusi suis ips^rum oculis, ad ulteriorem eorum excaecationem, non connivent,
sed secundum Christi ipsius concilium, dum lucem habent credunt in lucem, ut
Filli lucis frant: Ego enim sum Lux illa mundi ( inquit christus) qui sequitur
me^non ambulavit in tenebris, sed habebit lucem vitae: Itidem ego Lux in mundum
veni, ut quisquis credit in me in tenebris, non maneat, Ioh. 46.47.35, 36,
8.12.12.
non veni ut damnem mundum, sed ut servem mundum.

8. Hoc modo itaque Christus est Salus mundi, ut est lux muudi destruens opera
Diaboli, qui in tenebris operatus est ad erigendum sibi regnum, and principatum
in cordibus hominum, and redimens a potentia Principis Tenebrarum hujus seculi
ad Deum, qui est Lux and ad videndum lucem, etiam lucem vitae in luce sua. Psa.
18.28, 34, 35, 36, 9.^


9. Eodem plane modo dicit Esaias Propheta Christum fuisse a Deo traditum in
faedus populi, in lucem gentium, ad aperiendum caecos oculos, ad extrahendum e
carcere sedentes in tenebris, etiam caecos, qui oculos habent, sed non vident,
Esa. 42.6, 7.43.8.45.3.49.6. Acts 13.47.
Et post illum testatur Paulus Christum constitutum fuisse lucem gentibus, ut
sit saluti a Domino ad extremitates terrae, nec non Simeon, per Spiritum
sanctum de Jesu puerulo (...) epum salurem-illam suam, quam (...). Dominus in
oculis (...) putorum, ^umen deregendum gentibus, and gloria^h populi sui
Israelis. Luke 2.30, 31, 32.


10. (...) Christus est Lux mundr est mundir Salvator, do eatenus solum per
ipsum se^ventur homines, qua^enus in hunclipsum, ^qut^ est Lux, and in ipsam
Lucem, qua (...) in (...) illustrat, credunt, (...) neminem in nequitium ducit
ambulare seipfos sistunt; ac eo usque corams Deo condemnationi obnox^i sunt
omnes^ (...) usque in hac non ambulant, qua in illis est, non alacui
consentiens (...) contra omnem, vel minimam, (...) testans, eamque reda^guens,
and condemnans, is in illis ipsis, qui non in illa suut, sed contra eam in
tenebris ambulantes.

11. Quamvis (...) su^ de dito Deus (...) Lucem non ut damnet mundum (...)
mundus per eum servetur, and qui credit in cum non condemnatur, qui tamem non
credit vel jam condemnatus est^; and haec est condemnatio, quod (...) venit in
mundum (...) hominum conscientias, (...) and malum manifestans, sed deligunt
homines potius tenebras quam ^lucem, quia opera eorum sunt mala; quisquis enim
quae mala sunt agit, odit lucem, nec^venit ad ^lucem, me redarguantur opera
ipsius, qui vero veritatem (...) Aut manifesta fiant opera ipsus quod sunt in
Deo operata. Ioh. 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 12.


12. Quamvis etiam (...) obtinent, (...) gratia Domini, (...) Jesu Christo
(...) thema, sit, and Amathema^erit, qui^justificationem aliunde quaerit,
hio^enim, qui est Lux mundi, est etium Lapisille Angularis, quantumvis
pranibilo habitus a millies mill aedificantibus, qui factus est caput Anguli,
nec est in alio quoquam alus, nec aliud nomen est, praeterquam Christi, Lucis,
sub colodatum inter homines per quod oporteat eos fervati) Acts 4.11, 12.
verunt amen haud ultrevius quispiam a Deo accipitur, aut per Christum, seuper
gratiam Dei in Christo justificatur, quam per Christum lucem dirigitur, and per
gratiam Dei, per testem illum Dei internum pe^^^ ducem Dei, and Christi in
conscientia sua, vel imbancfinem a Deo dat^m, ut doceat, and ducat, docetur,
and ducitur ad resipiscentiam ab operibus tebrarum infrugiferis.

13. Haec lux enim oftendit divitias benignitatis, ac tolerantiae, ac
lenitatisejus, qui pat^enti est animo erga nos, non volens ullos perire, sed
omnes ventre ad resipiscentiam, and est ipsa Dei gratia, quae illuxit quibusvis
saluritera, and erudiens omnes, qui descent quod docet, ut, abnegata impietate,
and mundanis cupiditatibus, temperanter, and just, and pie vi (...) in
praesenti hoc seculo, cujusmodi vi^usera nimos cri^aliter in futuro; qua gratia
frustra recepta, quanto magis aspernata, per duritiem cordis recipi cere
repudientis, thesaurus (...) reconditu in diem irae, and revelationem justi
judicii Dei, qui reddet uniduique secundum opera ipsius, (...), qui, per
patientiam in bonis openibus, quaerunt gloriam and honorem and
incorruptibilitatem, vitam eternam; ixosis vero and veritatinon assen^ientibus,
obsequentibus, autem in justir (...): Romans 2.
(...) hominis perpetrantis malum; gloria vero, honor, and pax cuivis bonum
been facienti (...) etiam Graeco; non e (...) est personarum acceptio apud
Deum, fed on quavis igente, qui timet eum, and operam (...) justitiae acceptus
est ei, improbum vero, and amantem violentiam odit anima sua.

14. Et quantumcunque sommi at mundus, qui dicitur Christianus, cum multifariis
ejus Sectis, professoribus, ac (nomine tenus) Christianis, ac Ministris, se
Christum habere Redemptorem suum, non rare eum vocantibus. Dominum, Iesum,
manentibus interim in omni luct suae in bedienta, fundamentum tamen Domini stat
solidum, habens Sigillum hoc, novit Dominus qui sui sunt, and quis quis nominat
nomen Christi abscedat ab iniquitate.

15. Dies enim Domini appropinquat in quo tum quisque, tum cujus que opera
manifesta fient, Dies enim qui Lux est, declarabit, nam per ignem revelabuntur,
and cujusque opera qualia sunt ignis probabit, and in Dio illo expergesacti
suerint omnes isti somno Sopiti, and agnoscent se circa veritatem aberrasse a
scopo, and quod non quisquis dicit Christo, Domine, Domine introibit regnum
caelorum, sed qui sacit quod dicit Christus, quod vult Pater ejus, qui in
caelis est; and etiamsi in nomine ejus propheta runt, and magna egerunt,
nihilominus siquidem non decesserunt ab iniquitate, expulsi erunt a Christo cum
Di^cedite a me, non novi vos qui transgressionem operamini.

16. Tunc certo sciet tota cobor^ transgressorum legis, i. e. lucis Dei in
conscientia, per quam omnes, vel ipsi, qui non habent legem externe
conscripram, fibi ipsis sunti lex, thabentes opus legis Scriptum in cordibus,
venisse Agnum Dei, non ad tolerandum, sed ad tollendum peccatum mundi, and
missum suisse I^sum, non ad libertatem dandum p^ccato, sed ad liberandum
populum suum ex peccatis, and in maxima liberate, quacum Christus suos
l^berat, esse minimam licentiam, and patrem misisse su ciratum filium suum ad
benedicendum hominibus, unoquoque avertente a parvitatibus suis, and beatos
illos, quibus Deus non imputat peccatum, quorum remissae sunt iniquitates,
quorum obtecta sunt peccata, esse tales in quorum spiritu dolus non, est, and
nequaquan esse remissionem pecca^orum illis, qui ad quoridianum eorum
commissionem seipsos assuefaciunt. Romans 2.14, 15. Ioh. 1.20. Psalm. 32.1, 2.
Act. 3.26. Romans 11.26.


17. Qu^netiam Magnusille and tertibilis Dies Domini jam advenit, in quo lux,
quae orta est in conscientiis hominum, magis ac magis quotidie elucescet, in
quo liber etiam conscientiae aperiendus est, ut ex illo judicentur omnes
secundum omnia, quae ibi Scripta sunt, ubi per lucem, quae est testis Dei
fidelis, peccatum omne inscribitur in conspectu Dei tanquam cum penna ferrea,
in quo per lucem prope nobis veniet Deus ad judicium, and revelabitur justilia,
gratia, and miserecordia Dei in omnes, qu^, in luce sua sistentes, expectant
eum venturum liberatorem eis ab impietatibus, ut salvi fiant ab ira illa
ventura in omnes inobedientiae filios, per quam patebit ira Deie Caelo, in
ipsorum conscientiis, adversus omnem impietatem, and injustitiam hominum,
quiveritatem injuste detineant: In quo die pluet Deus in improbos laqueos,
ignem, sulphur, and horribilem procellam, hujusmodi omnia erunt portio eorum
poculi.

18. Quinimo, in manu Dei nunc est poculum, and vinum ejus est rubrum, and meri
plenum est, and ex eodem effundit, and incepit judicium apud Domum Dei, and
incepit Deus malum in^ligere in populum, cui inscribitur nomen suum, and
imprimitur sua Natura, and Imago, and ipsi, quorum portio nequaquam est, in
quantum biberunt ex poculo abominationis, and fornicationis, biberunt tantum ex
poculo indignationis, and excandescentiae, prius quam accipere possent poculum
salutis, and laudare nomen Dei; nequaquam itaque impuniti abibunt improbi,
verum Adorators Bestiae, and imaginem ejus Accipientes bibent quoque ex hoc
vmo, ex mero insuso in poculum excandescentiae ipsius, and torquebuntur
sulphur, and igne in conspectu Angelorum, Sanctorum and Agni; Imo foeces
hujus, de cujus summitatibus gustaverunt Filii Lucis and Diei, Filii Noctis and
Tenebrarum, hoc est, omnes improbi terrae, and bibent, and extroquebunt.

19. Quamobrem dum in longanimitate Dei non deest vobis opportunitas, dum a Deo
adest vobis dies Visitationis vestrae, concilium hoc nostrum capiatis Omnes,
and dehinc convertatis vos-met ipsos ad Lucem Christi in vestris ipsorum
conscientiis, and exinde consilium capiatis in eternum, quam se io and sincere
animadvertentes a Christo ipso, cujus Testimonium vobis de Coelo haec est, ad
pacem, and salutem vestram tum Externam, tum Internam, tum Eternam
dedocibimini, and ad Christum ipsum, and ad videndum eum, and Patrem ejus, a
quibus d^venit, deducemini, ad quorum cognitionem salutarem quocunque alio modo
perveniri non potest: Sicut enim non cernitur Sol hujus mundi, nisi per Lumen
quod ab ipso profluit ad nos; ita nec Sol justitiae nisi per mensuram illam
lucis (quantumvis parvam) quae ab eo fulget in cord.

20. Etiamsi enim Scriptura, quae de Luce loquitur, and ad Lucem dirigit, de
Patre, ac de Filio verba facit, ita ut de his possitis legere, ac loqui quod
ibi legitis, hoc tamen ipsa testatur Scriptura nemin^m pos^e cognoscere vel
Patrem, vel Filium, nisi cui Pater and Filius seips^s invice^n revelabunt,
quorum Revelatio etiam est introsum, Mat. 11.27. Gal. 1.16.
quod enim de Deo cognosci potest, sufficienter ad salutem, manifestatur in
hominibus ( inquit Paulus) Romans 1.16. C^l. 1.23.
nam Deus in ipsis manifestum fecit, and praedicatum est Evange^ium in omni
creatura, quae sub Caelo est, p^r Lucem Dei in conscientia, adeo ut
inexcusabiles coram Deo relicti sunt (qui aliter excusabiles essent, and
inculpati) siquidem cum Deum norint, non tamen ut Deum glorificant, nec visum
est illis Deum in notitia retinere, sed Dei jure agnito, nempe eos, qui talia
faciuut, qua^ia and ipsi, dignos esse morte, non solum ea faciunt, sed and
facientibus ultro consentiunt.

21. Interea tamen non dicimus Christum ipsum esse in omnibus, qui in omnibus
esse notus est qui non sunt Reprobi, ut Spes illa gloriae; veruntamen omnes
(nam non est distinctio, nisi per varios gradus lucis, qui non variant Rei
naturam) mensuram lucis suae aliqualem, and unum saltem Talentum habent sibi
commissum, ut negotiati sint cum eo ad utilitatem, quo been utentes, and
duplicantes ingressum habent in Gaudium Domini sui, quod vero occultantes, et
non lucrantes cum eo detrusi sunt tandem a luce quam habuerunt, in tenebras
illas exteriores, ubi est fletus, et stridor dentium: Aliqualiter itaque in
omnibus (etiam Ethnicis) lux haec Lucet, licet non Aequaliter in omnibus.

22. Ad cu^us Christi Lucis mensuram, quae est in vobis est, benefacietis si
attendatis, dum habeatis, velut ad lucernam splendentem in obscuro loco, ad
dandum vobis cognitionem salutis vestrae, and ad dirigendum pedes vestros ad
viam pacis, ut and animabus vestris oneratis, and fatigatis veram requiem
inveniatis, ne vos tenebrae deprehendant, nam qui ambulat in tenebris nescit
quo vadat, nec ad quod impingetur.

23. Haec Lux est Lex Dei (nam lex est lux inquit sapiens Pro. 6.23.
) inscripta non atramento, sed Spiritu Dei Vivi, non in tabulis lapideis (ut
olim in figuram hujus per Dei digitum) sed in carneis tabulis cordis; in qua
non solum legatur, and intelligatur, ut in Scriptura, and lege ad extra, de
jure quid ageres, and quid esses, sed de facto etiam quid agis, and quid es:
Nam Noscere Teipsum, quem si ignoraveris, Christum haudquaquam noveris, quem si
nescis, nihil est si caetera noscis, hoc non aliunde venit, nisi per internum
tui ipsius intuitum in intimiori hoc speculo, nempe Luce Christi, per quam
splendet Deus in conscientia, quae lux ducit sequentes eam ad audiendum verbum
illud verum, and vivum Dei, de qua Scriptura loquitur Heb. 4.
quod est potens, and efficax, ac penetrantius quovis gladio aucipiti,
pertingens usque ad divisionem animae simul ac spiritus, compagumque, and
medullarum, dijudicans cogitationes, and conceptus cordis, cui omnia sunt
manifesta, and nuda, quod ut ignis est, and malleus confringens rupes, and
causans ut ad audiotionem ejus tremebunda redduntur omnia, quod in initio fuit
priusquam Scriptura fuit, quae de eo testatur, de quo Scriptura tum vetus, tum
nova veraciter testatur quod non procul, sed prope est in cord, and in ore ut
faciatis, etiam hoc ipsum verbum fidei, quod Apostoli praedicabant.

24. Haec Lux est bona illa via, and Antiqua, Antiquior quam Antiquisima inter
Sectas hujus seculi vel Jusdaeorum, vel Christianorum, qui (omnibus interim,
viz. tum Catholicis, tum Lutheranis, tum Calvinistis, tum Bapristis, se esse
antiquissimos profitentibus) in tot Ramos, Ramulos, and Ramusculos veteris
Ecclesiae Romanae truncum diviserunt, ut totum corpus ejus ad mortem brevi
aegrotabit, and quae tot tam diu fuerit filiorum Matter pene devorata jam est a
filiis suis: Haec lux (inquam) est antiqua illa via, ad quam per Jeremiam
revocavit Deus Israelitas in suas ipsorum traditiones a Deo degeneratos,
dicens, sistire, and cernite, ac quaerite pro antiquis semitis, ubi est bona
ilia via, and ambuletis in illa, and invenietis requiem animabus vestris, sed
dixerunt non ambulabimus in illa, auscultate voci Tubae, sed dixerunt non
auscultabimus. Jer. 6.16.


25. Haec Lux est Doctor, qui non potest decipere, nam est Testimonium Dei,
quod Testimonio hominum majus est, nec potest adula^i, nam unumquemque
redarguit just, non justificans improbum, nec condemnans justum, sed unicuique
verum dicens de seipso, prout res ipsa est, and non aliter accusans, aut
defendens quam Deus ipse, a qu^ est; Si enim per hanc, quae est a Deo in te
lucens, cor tuum te condemnat, non datur Deus ad extra te pro justo habens; Vbi
vero per hanc cor tuum te non condemnat, securitatem coram Deo habeas. 1 Ioh.
3.20, 21.


26. Denique haec Lux est perfecta illa libertatis Lex, cujus qui est Auditor,
and non Effector, is similis est viro consideranti faciem suam nativam in
speculo, qui simulatque consideravit seipsum abit, and statim oblitus est
qualis esset, in quam vero si quis introspexerit, and permanserit in illa, nec
est Auditor obliviosus, nec otiosus, sed Actor operis, hic beatuserit in opere
suo Jam. 1.25.


27. Dehinc itaque, quicunque teipsum nosceres, ne te quaesiveris extra, sed
reipsum introrsum intuearis in luce illa interna, quae non modo mentem ac
voluntatem Dei de te bonam, and perfectam, sed and tuam ipsius mentem, ac
totaliter teipsum tibi discernendum intus tam perfect exhibet, ut de hisce,
aeque ac de omnibus ad animae falutem, ad Regnum Dei pertinentibus cum justitia
ejus, and quale tibi jus est haereditarium in illo, quod prope est, quod intus
est ( inquit Christus Pharisaeis, Luke 17.20, 21.
qui tamen nunquam ingressi sunt in illud) non opus est ut egrediavis for as in
ordine ad ulteriorem evidentiam and intelligentiam; imo-plus fatis jamjam
intelligis, si de beneplacito Dei agnoveris plus quam agis: cedit enim tibi in
condemnationem tantum, quodcunque bonum Agnitum est and non Actum: In aperto
and facili, nec in Cognoscendo quid Agendum est, sed in Agendo quod Notum est
salus filtorum hominum.

28. Quinimo quid impedit ( nisi in excacatione oculorum, obturatione aurium,
and obduratione cordium suorum, and rejectione consilii Dei in perditionem suam
delectentur) quominus ad vitam Dei, a qua alieni sunt, perveniant improbi? Via
enim ad hanc quantumcunque angustior, and strictior est prae cruce Christi,
quae indies tollenda est ab iis, qui eum sequuntur, quam lata and spatiosa
illa, quae ducit in exitium, qua de re tam multi per hanc, tam pauci per illam
introeunt, per Lucem tamen, una cum ea, quae ad mortem tendit, fit tam plane
manifesta, us (nisi sponte ignorantibus) non potest facile occultari.

29. Fructus enim Spiritus, ceu o*pera Lucis, qualia sunt justitia, charitas,
bonitas, fides, lenitas, sobrietas; temperantia, continentia, quos qui Deo
profert cum Deo vivit, Deumque videt, cuiquam contra lumen in conscientia sua
non conniventi sunt manifesta; and opera Tenebrarum, ceu Carnis, cu^usmodi sunt
adulterium, scortatio, impuritas, lascivia, Idololatria, veneficium,
inimicitia, lites, a mulationes, excandescentia, rixae, dissidia, haereses,
invidia, caedes, ebrietas, commessationes, and his similia, qualia quicunque
agunt Regni Dei haeredes non erunt, manifesta sunt (inquit Scriptura Gal. 5.19.
ad 23.
) idque non tam per Scripturam, quam per lucem cui testatur Scriptura, and per
quam manifesta fuerint in conscientiis hominum antequam Scriptura fuit, and
hodie manifesta fiunt ubi Scriptura non est, per quam etiam manifesta forent fi
Scriptura nunquam fuisset. Omnia enim quae redarguantur ( inquit Spiritus in
Scriptura) Ephesians. 5.13.
per lucem manifesta sunt, lux enim est illud, quod omnia manifesta facit.

30. Ad hanc itaque animos vestros adhibeatis omnes, ad hanc veniatis, in hac
ambuletis, and perpetuo mane atis, etiam in Spiritu Dei, qui redarguit mundum,
and consolatur sanctos ex mundo vocatos, redemptos, and electos: Hic horatim
sistatis, ut and vosmet ipsos sciatis, and comprehendatis malos Spiritus, qui
per lucem comprehenduntur, ac dijudicantur, licet hi nec eam, nec filios ejus
comprehendunt; ut and gratia, and miserecordia, and pax multiplicetur vobis a
Deo Patre, and a Jesu Christo, cujus consilio in conscientia quicunque
auscultaverit, habitaverit secure, and quietus erit etiam a metu mali: Hic enim
est mutus Ahaenus homini interne. Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallesere culpata.

31. Qui vero a Luce deflexerit, relinquens semitas sinceritatis ambu lare in
Tenebrarum viis, is ut suopic judicio fit introrsum condemnatus, ita hunc tum
Error, tum Terror semper obviam habituri sunt, ita ut dum speciem risus, and
laetitia praese ferat, saepe tamen valde torquetur, and int us Pallet is
infaelix, quod proxima nesciat uxor.

32. Haec omnia supradicta, quae primo privatim magis, in Amici singularis, and
insignis cujusdam Germanici gratiam, and usum, Latin fuerunt conscripta, nunc,
cum non ulteriori alteratione, quam hujusmodi rei ratio requirit, nec non Deo
ipso ad opus hoc movente, public magis, idque tam Anglice, quam Latin
rescripta sunt, and exhibita in usum vestrum (O Academici) ac aliorum omnium,
quibus petentibus a nobis parati sumus ( secundum Petri consilium, 1 Pet.
3.15.) ad reddendum rationem fidei, quae in nobis est, cum mansuetudine, and
timore, conscientiam bonam habentes; in hunc finem vero, ut tam Vos, qui aures
a veritate avertentes ad fabulas divertitis, quam Vos, qui prurientes, and
nulli alii rei vacantes, nisi ad dicendum, and audiendum aliquid novi, putatis
nos peregrina, ac novella quaedam infer auribus vestris, sciatis nos
nequaquam Nova aliqua attulisse, sed, Antiqua omnia, etiam eadem ipsamet, quae
per Dei Ministros ab initio fuerunt edita, quaeque scimus vel in Salvationem
vestram, vel Damnationem graviorem, vos agnituros in eternum.

33. De quibus tamen non negligimus vos commonefacere, and per submonitionem
expergefacere, siquidem nil dicere, quod non dictum prius, tiamsi nos haud
piget, attamen tutum est vobis qui, prae nimia incogitatione, ac
inanimadvertentia, vel id ipsum quod notitis ( vere dicam) ignoratis.

34. Quae quidem si in eadem luce ac eod^m spiritu sinceritatis, quocum scripta
fuerint, ab aliquibus pelegantur, vel me scripsisse, vel vos legisse nequaquam
paenitebit.

35. Sin minus, ac si malignitatis and inimicitiae spiritum amicus hic Sermo
salutis vestrae in vobis exstimularit, ita ut ignominiosam ( potius quam
salutiferam auscultationem) a vobis repulsam patietur, satis mihi placebit in
hoc opere me Deo placuisse, ac purum esse sanguinis animarum vestrarum, ac vos
tandem memineritis (etiam si sera nimis, non absque poenitentia tamen.) Vos
fuisse a Deo monitos.

Per Animarum vestrarum Amicum, Anglicanum, Sam. Fisher.

Non amo ( Piscator) nec possum dicere Quare?
Hoc tantum possum dicere non amo te.
Si nescis cur non? dicam tibi Quare? ( Sacerdos)
In promptu causa e.t; Et quia vere amo te.
Exeo, cum multis aliis, ex. Orb, ut in Orb
Piscator Ictus, Laesus, Amicusei,
Piscilegens quoscunque bonos in vasa, at in ipsum
Infernum abjiciens triste, malum que malos.
Tupetis Exitium, Tibimet petis ipse Ruinam,
Ventosus ventis verba, utivela, dedis:
Interdico tibi, rapiens te exigne, ut Amicus,
Sum tibi Veridicus, Tuque Inimicus eris.
Piscator verus vere est nam Piscis Amator,
Sed Piscatorem Piscis amare queat?
Per Samuelem Piscatorem, Per Pisc-amatorem Laesum.

( Fisher) I love Thee not, yet know not Why?
Love Thee I cannot, were I therefore to Die:
Know Thou not why (O Priest) Thou love not Me?
The case is clear, it is because I love Thee:
Out of the World into it, with more, I Am Sent,
A Fisher (wronged) of men, to cry Repent;
Gathering in vessels all Good Fish, but Bad
Casting forth into the Pit, that Lake so Sad;
Thou seek'st thine own perdition puff't in Mind,
Yield'st up thy whiffling words, like Sayl's to the Wind,
In love I seek to save Thee from that Fire,
Tell Thee the Truth, for this You Are filled with Ire;
Fishers that catch men Thus (though Friends to the Fish)
From them, they wish well, cannot have one good Wish.
SAM FISHER WELLWISHER to all men.

FINIS.

