(...) THE BISHOP BUSIED BESIDE THE BUSINESS: OR That Eminent OVERSEER, Dr.
John Gauden, Bishop of Exeter so Eminently OVERSEEN, as to wound his Own Cause
well nigh to Death with his Own Weapon, in his late so
Super-eminently-applauded Appearance

For the Liberty of Tender Consciences.

For the Legitimacy of Solemn Swearings.

Entitled, A Discourse concerning Public Oaths, and the Lawfulness of
Swearing in Judicial Proceedings, in order to answer the Scruples of the
QUAKERS. Which singularly double Discourse is, in the Two Parts of this
following Animadversion of it, both seriously, and singly Discoursed with, and
Discovered to be Not more ( Pretendedly) AGAINST Persecution for Conscience,
Than ( Really) FOR it; Nor more ( Intentionally) FOR Solemn Swearing among
Christians, Than ( Effectually) AGAINST it.

By Samuel Fisher, Prisoner in Newgate, for the Truth of Jesus.

Quis non Ridet? Qui non Videt. Suo Se Iugulavit Gladio. Evangelica Veritas non
recipit Iuramentum. Hieron. Non Oportet ut Vir, qui Evangelice Vivit, Iuret
Omnino. Chrisost. Printed in the Month, called August, in the Year, 1662.

TO THE READER.
READER,
TO say nothing here how far the Bishop's Book (which this relates to as an
Answer) falls short of that Beauty and Strength of true Religion, spiritual
Sense, and sound Reason it pretends to, which it scarcely seems in some parts
of it to have so much as the ordinary Lineaments, and Symmetry of; at least in
our Apprehensions, who are wholly strangers (save that we see it in sundry of
those Polemical Pieces, that by the Parochial P. P. Priest's of all the three
Postures; viz. Papal, Prelatical, and Presbyterial, have been put forth against
us, and that Eternal Truth of God still testified to by us) to any such
Self-subverting Sermons, and unsaid Sayings, as the said Book consists of; Had
we discerned in it any considerable weight of Argument, or Sufficient Evidence
to Evince the main point undertaken (i. e. the Lawfulness of Swearing) to the
Conviction of our Consciences, we should very likely either in Print have
signified our Subscription to it, or else have sat down in silence, and
thereby at least signified our Satisfaction.

And (even as nothing as it is to its propounded Purpose) we could (but that we
must say for Truths sake, with him of old, who of a Priest, was made a
Prophetical Reprover of the Priests, Ierem. 15. 10. Woe is me my Mother, fon
thou have born me a man of Strife and Contention to the whole Earth,) be very
well contented to be silent, rather than to be found ore and ore again
contending with every new Opposer of those Old Truths, the Old Encounterers,
and their most Critical Encounters of which have been profligated by us long
ago.

Moreover (to let pass those other disadvantages we adventure upon, of [
Caeteris imparibus] our present Low, Streitned, Imprisoned, and in a manner
Condemned Con^ition, by reason whereof, as Damnati Lingua vocem habet, vim non
habet, so we may expect our Words, how true soever, should gain but small
Credit against the Bishops) we have so much the smaller Encouragement to reply
at this time, since, by so doing we expose our selves to the Lash and Severity
of a sharp Law, some of the Executioners of which are (in their blind Zeal and
malicious Minds) far more Rigid, Sharp, and Severe in their Hyperbolical
Though Iuditium paenale [de jure] nunquam excedit casum.
Prosecution of it, then we are yet apt to believe the most Supreme Enactors of
it ^ere, at their Enacting it, in their Intentions.

All which notwithstanding, for as much as the Internal, Eternal Truth of our
God, which we have known, received and belived, is very precious, honorable
and of great esteem with us, yea, far more than either Life, Liberty, Estate,
or any External Treasure, or Enjoyment whatsoever, and considering how it lies
at stake so in this Case, that our Total Silence might not unlikely be mistaken
for consent, and how apt some are to deem all their Aspersions of us,
Assertions and Arguments against us to be owned and assented to by us, if they
be not answered (though else it might have been more Prudential, as to the
expedience of our Liberties, and Estates, to have forborne in such a Juncture)
we could do n^ less (in order to the clearing of our selves from the c^lumnies,
which continue to be oast upon us by both Priests and People of different
Principles and Persuasions, and the clearing of that Truth we hold forth both
more generally (as concerning the Light) and more particularly (as to the Case
of Oaths, about which we are so angrily contested with) than enter our dissent
in public in such wise, as in the Book ensuing.

Which Book in both the Parts thereof, into which it stands divided (
respectively to the two sorts of matter, which is handled in the Bishops (viz.)
that about Liberty, and compulsion of Conscience, and that of Swearing before
Courts of Judicature) is devoted ( Reader) to thy most serious, and impartial
Perusal, that thou may see how the Bishop in the self same Work wherein he
labors earnestly to bring all men to (be Conformitants to him, is found a most
egregious Non-couformitant to himself: For in his Epistle, and in the former
part of his Undertakings, which is more positive, this Bishop seems in very
many passages of it to be much what of the temper of his ( quondam) Predecessor
in the same See, Viz. Joseph Hall, once Bishop of Exeter, who allowed of
Variety in outward Forms of Worship, saying, in page 58. of his Susur^ium thus,

It is a great and i^solent wrong in those who shall think to reduce all
Dispositions, and Forms of Devotion and Usages into their own, since in all
these there may be much Variety, and all those different Fashions may receive a
gracious acceptance in Heaven. One thinks it best to hold himself to a set
Form of Invocation, another deems it far better to be (...) to his Arbitrary
and Un-premoditated Expressions, etc. and page 60. O God, let my main care be
to look to the Sincerity of my Soul; and to the sure Ground of warrant for my
Actions; for other circumstantial Appertenances, where thou art pleased to be
liberal, let not me be strait-handed.

And page 184. It is a true Word of the Apostle, God is greater than our
Conscience, and surely none but he, under that great God the Supreme Power on
Earth is the Conscience; every man is a little World within himself, and in
this little world there is a Court of Judicature erected, wherein next under
God the Conscience sits as the Supreme Judge, from whom there is no appeal,
that passes sentence upon all our Actions; upon all our Intentions, for our
Persons absolving one condemning another, for our Actions allowing one
forbidding another; if that condemn in vain, shall all the World besides acquic
us, if that clear us, the doom which the World passes upon us is frivoulous
and ineffectual. I grant this Judge is sometimes corrupted with the bribes of
hope, with the weak fears of loss, with an undue respect of Persons, with
powerful Importunities, with false Witnesses, with forged Evidences to pass a
wrong Sentence upon the Person, or cause for which he shall be answerable to
him that is higher than the Highest; but yet this doom (though reversible by
the Tribunal of heaven) is still obligatory here on Earth: So as it is my fault
that my Conscience is misled, but it is not my fault to follow my Conscience.


and Reasons much against the Inhumanity, Anti-christianity, Uneffectualness,
Unsafeness, Unlawfulness, Tyrannousness, Irreligiousness, Unrighteousness,
Unreasonableness of mere Plagiary Counsels, Punitive Courses, Sharp Penalties,
Flagellant Methods, the Cudgel, Sword, Prisons, Banishments, Plunderings,
Sequestrations and such like, as if he had indeed so much Native Candor, and
true Christian Charity, as did constrain him, after the Genius of Primitive
Christians, (who were never exercised in the Inflictions of any such (as
Carnal, as Cruel) censures on the outward Man, whereby to convince the
Conscience) he did utterly abhor and detest all such doing's upon the score of
Region only:

Nevertheless, considering not only various Passages intermingled among the
above said matter, standing as it were diametrically opposite thereunto,
wherein he pleads the Destructiveness and Injuriousness of lenity, and no less
than even a necessity of the use of such Severities more or less to the most
modest and moderate Dissenters, to the Peace, Safety and happiness of the
Community, but more especially considering his confessed consent to that
acknowledged unseasonable issuing out of that Act for the Non-toleration,
Coercion, Compulsion of the Quakers themselves, whom he deems to be the
Innocentest of modern Dissenters, together with such other concurrent
Circumstances, as are only thus hinted at here; seeing they are more largely
handled in the Book it self, to which the Reader is hereby referred; saving all
his fair and formal Shows of so much Favor and Facility to tender
Consciences, as he would fain seem to be found in, his charitable Endeavors
(as he calls them) do more truly tend (what ever they pretend to) to the
Re-establishing, than to the total Removing of that Antichristian Yoke of
Persecution for Conscience ( complained on and cried out against by the Bishops
themselves, as well as others, when they felt the weight of it) from off the
necks of Christ's truest Disciples; whom (for as much as their Possessors slay
them, and hold themselves not guilty, yea, count, and sell them all the day
long, as Sheep for the Slaughter, and then say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am
Rich, yea, their own Shepherds pity them not) Christ Jesus therefore, the
great Shepherd and Overseer of their Souls, to whom they are now returned, from
whom they once meant astray after the other, who fed them in the barren places
of the Forest, and drove them from Mountain to Hill in their dark and gloomy
Day, will most assuredly feed and gather, and destroy that Yoke from off their
Necks, and that heavy Burden from off their Shoulders by means of the
Anointing: And as to those Shepherds among whom the Poor of his Flock are as
the Flock of the Slaughter: I will eat the Flesh of the Fat (says the Lord)
and tear their Claws in Pieces, yea I will destroy the Fat and the Strong, and
feed them with Judgment so that that which dies let it die, and that which is
to be cut off, let it be cut off; yet those three S. S. Shepherds, whose Soul
has abhorred me says the Lord, and my Soul loatheth them, I will cut off in
one Month; They have been as a swift Dromadary traversing her way as a wild
Ass, used to the Wilderness, snuffing up the Wind, so that in her occasion none
can reverss her, yet in her month she shall be found; They have dealt
treacherously with the Lord, they have begotten strange Children, now shall a
month destroy them with their Portions, Ezekiel. 34. 16. Hos. 5. 7. Zach. 11. 8,
9, 16. Yea this we say in the Lord, their Feet, which stand on slipery places
in the Dark, shall slide in due time, and the things that come upon them make
haste; and by how much the more in their Subtilty, by giving goodly Words, they
deceive the hearts of the Simple, and seek to seem more fair and favorable
than in truth they are, to implead all Persecution whatever (even Doctrinally)
and yet practice it, by so much the sooner will Wrath and Ruin be upon them
suddenly from the Lord, and so much the sorer and Sharper will the Stroke be,
when the Lord once shall arise to smite them with the Rod of his mouth, and to
rebuke with Equity for all the meek of the Earth.

Indeed it cannot be denied, but many of their words are soft as Butter, and
smooth as Oil; yea Speciem Agninam, pellem Ovinam pre se ferunt, yet Intus and
in cute Mordent; Even while they cry peace, if men please them not so as to
conform to whatever constitutions, are according to their own coveteous
Conceptions, they bite with their teeth, and prepare War against them by
speaking out the proud things, that are in their hearts, proudly,
contemptuously, and disdainfully against the Righteous: thus, under a show of
serving them, secretly shooting at the sincere Servants of God; so as we may
say truly, they are for a toleration in all cases (excepting wherein they are
against it) and against all Persecution of tender Consciences (those cases
only excepted, wherein they are for it) In a word they bait us with now a bit,
and then a bite, kill us with a kind of cruel kindness, call d Christian
Charity; and as he of old, who in more spite then Real pity, with a Complement
commended Christ to Condemnation, so do they at this day, who under a feigned
face of friendship in the persons of his People betray him into the hands of
his open Adversaries with a Kiss: But such Linsey Wolsey webs as these, will
never become Garments wherewith to hide their inward Enmity against the Truth.

As for the last Part of the Doings of this Bishop, with whom we have here to
do, wherein he is more Argumentative for that Solemn Swearing now used in
Judicature, what little strength he is likely to appear in for it, who himself
says so much against it as Bishop Gauden does, let the Reader Judge by his
own, and other Authors sayings, by him cited and here recited to that purpose,
Viz. Evangelica veritas non recipit Juramentum. Hieron. The Gospel verity does
not admit of an Oath, Non Oportet, ut vir qui Evangelice Vivit, Juret Omnino,
Chrisost. It is not meet, that a man who lives according to the Gospel should
swear at all. Rarus apud veteres jurandi usus in Judiciis, sed crescen^e
perfidia Crevit Juris jurandi usus. In the better and simpler ages of the
World, Oaths were seldom used in Judicatures, but after that perfidy and lying
increased, the use of Oaths increased. Bishop Gauden out of Polibius. There
was no need of an Oath among Primitive Christians, it was security enough in
all cases to say Christianus sum, I am a Christian, Bishop Gaud. p. 4.
Christians (truly such) need no Oaths in public or private, Bishop Gaud. p.
23. Nor can credit be given any more then to a liar, to any man that swears
never so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a common swearer, and has no
Reverence of the Majesty of God, Bishop Gaud. p. 17. Certainly the affairs of
Christians, both public and private, would be no less to their honor and
ease, if there were in no case any need, or use of Oaths or swearing, but
only such an Authentic veracity and just credulity on all sides, as might
well spare even the most true, sincere and lawful Oaths, keeping on all sides
as great a distance from Lying, as from false swearing, Bish. Gaud. p. 22.

Quis legit Haec, etc? He that can read all this, need not go further then
Bishop Gauden to find matter wherewith to Answer Bishop Gauden concerning the
unlawfulness, at least the needlesnesse of any swearing.

To conclude then (for I am in an Epistle only here, and not in the Book it
self) as it is an ill Bird (as the Proverb speaks) that bewrayes his own nest,
so it is an ill Wind that blows no body no profit: and so though the whirlwind
of the Bishops Doctrine (wherein he whiffles to and fro, in and out, and
sometimes round about) cannot well serve his own ill turn against the Truth
testified to by the Quakers, yet it is one good turn at least, that it does very
well serve the Quakers wherewith to serve the Truths good turn against himself.

SAM. FISHER.

The First PART.
THere being a Book lately put forth, Entitled, A Discourse concerning public
Oaths, and the Lawfulness of Swearing in Judicial Proceedings, by Doctor
Gawden, Bishop of Exeter; Written (as he says) to answer the Scruples of the
Quakers; we having seriously perused the said Book with an upright Heart, and
impartial Eye, to the end that we might own what is good in it, and refute, or
at least refuse what is Evil; not being espoused to any Opinion or Judgment,
but what carries Demonstration of Truth with it unto and upon our Consciences
(it being our Principle to keep them always void of offense toward God and
toward Man) do here profess in the sight of God and all men, that,
notwithstanding what ever is therein written to the contrary, our belief is,
that Christ's and the Apostles words, Mat. 5. James 5. who say, Swear not at
all, by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor any other Oath, etc. are still to be
understood, as formerly upon occasion we have declared, and do now again
declare in this our return and reply to the Book aforesaid, not out of
Obstinacy and Wilfulness, but Duty and Conscience to God and his Truth, which
is dearer to us than all we have to loose for the sake of it; for as we had no
scruples in our selves before his Book came forth (as the Bishop supposes we
had) about Swearing, in order to the resolution of which he pretends to write,
being sufficiently clear in our Judgments against it: So we have met with
nothing in our serious perusal of this Bishops Book, but what has rather
contributed to the strengthening of us in our former belief and persuasion, than
in the least either to the shaking of our Confidence, or the convincing us of
Error in this our Way and Practice, of denying to Swear at all.

The Insufficiency of the Book aforesaid, and of the Matter therein contained
to convi^ce us, or any, that sincerely seek the truth in this particular,
appears to us, and may appear unto any, who are impartial, both by the sundry
Confusions, and Contradictions, that are to be found in it, to it self, in more
points than one, and also by the weakness of the Arguments thereof, to evince
the thing pretended to; both of which we have here with as much brevity and
plainness, as might well be, presented to public view, in such-wise as
hereafter follows.

I. Whereas the Bishop promises very many things in order (as he supposes) to
the better understanding of these two T^ts, after his way of (...), it may not
be amis^ for us to take some notice, and make some useful observations of
sundry of those precedent passages, both in his Book, and his Epistle to it;
which (for orders sake) we shall consider of, under those three general Heads,
into which he seem^ to have molded all that matter of his Book, which is
ante^dent to his Discourse concerning Swearing, viz.

First, his Christian Charity to -- the Quakers. Secondly, his Pity to -- the
Quakers. Thirdly, his Commendations of -- the Quakers.
In each of which, it is not uneasy both to discern and to discover him to be
more Pretended, then Real, yea, more Uncharitable, Abusive, Ironical, and
Condemnatory, than either truly Charitable, or Compassionate, or Commendatory
toward the Quakers: Yea, we cannot but see (unless we will close our Eyes) how
a vein of Scorn, Reproach, Defamation and Contempt, Persecution and Spoil, ^ns
along throughout both his Epistle, and all the forepart of his Book
notwithstanding the most fair and specious Pretenses of it to Pity,
Compassion, Mercy, Moderation, Commiseration and Commendation; and howbeit, it
guilds and plasters it self over in many places, with some seeming shows of
Love, Bowels to, and applauses of the Quakers, and those tender terms of
Lenity, Facility, Gentleness, Humanity, Cand^r, Christian Charity, etc.
superficially sprinkled up and down here and there (as a vail) upon the face of
it, yet it goes no^ so disguised, but that there are Eyes, which through all
those thin Tiffany Pretexts, see clearly such a frowni^g Face, and course
Complexion, such a sour visage of Severity, Rigor, yea, and Cruelty it self, as
in case of ( Immedicabile vulnus) the Quakers non-conviction of that for truth,
which they have tried the truthlesness of already, by a surer Touchstone than
that of the Bishops Traditional talk, or in ca^e of Non-submission (even
against Conviction, which himself confesses would not be pleasing to God) to
the Bishops bare Conceptions upon a Text or two (when once held forth to them
by him so, or so interpreted) as to some un^rring Cano^ ( por quem cuncta prius
tendand a) could heartily wish (notwithstanding the (...) voice of Jacob) that
the ^ough hands of Esa^ might be laid on to no less than very Amputation and
Abscision.

For first, as to that point of Liberty of Conscience, which in his Epistle,
and the first part of his Book also he treats much about, though he would be
thought to be in his Pity and Christian Charity, ^ pleader for it, at least on
the behalf of those Poor Silly Quakers (as he (...) terms them) as if he were
indeed some Compassionate Moderator of men's ^rathful and hasty Spirits toward
them, Yet considering how (like the Lizard, which what ever good prints he
makes with his Feet on the Sand, when he runs, dashes them all out again with
his bushie Tail that comes behind) this Charitable and Pitiful Bishop
interlines his Pity and Christian Charity, with so much Unchristian,
Antichristian Cruelty, so many Corrosives among his Cordialls, flings so many
Firebrands after his favorable Fomentations, and seconds his lenitives with so
many sharp and supercillious lancings, all he utters to the mollyfiing of men's
Minds and Manners toward us, amounts to as much, as if he had said just
nothing.

His Charity and his Pity also, for the expression of which, and his pains
therein, though he expect it not (as he says) because of out Ingratitude, yet
he seems to himself to have deserved thanks, was expressed (as the Bishop
himself intimates) in that his Intercession for us to the House of Lords (not
obliged, but unspoken to by the Quakers) before the Exhibition of the Edict
against us^, that it might be forborne, till some course might be taken for our
Information.

Secondly, In this present course of putting forth this his Book, in order to
such an Information of the Quakers, as aforesaid: Which first way of the
expression of his Charity, is by himself testified to, page 1, 2, 3. in these
Words.

Bish. Finding lately in the most honorable House of Peers, that a (...) was
likely to pass in order to punish with great Penalties those English Subjects,
who under the name of Quakers, shall refuse to take, as other legal Oaths, so
those which are usually required in Judicial Proceedings, etc. I was hereupon
bold thus far to intercede with that honorable House, in the behalf of those
poor People, who are likely to fall under the Penalties of the Law, that I
craved so far a respite for some time, as to the Execution of those Penalties
upon any of them as Offenders, until some such Rational and Religious Course
were taken, (...) might best inform those men of the Lawfulness, by God's as well
as Man's Law, of imposing and taking such public Oaths, that so answering
first their Scruples, and fairly removing their Difficulties, either they
might be brought to a cheerful Obedience in that particular, or else be left
without Excuse before God and man, while the Truth of the Law was justified
against their Errors, and the Severity of it only imputable to their own
Obstinacy.

I further recommended this previous Method of Christian Charity, or meekness
of Wisdom, as best becoming the Piety, Humanity, and Honor of that House.

Secondly, As most agreeable to the wonted. Clemency of his Majesty to all his
good Subjects.

Thirdly, As the aptest means to reclaim such as were gone astray from their
Duty, by the error of their Fancy.

Fourthly, to stop for the future the spreading of this and other dangerous
Opinions, which are usually known under the name of Quakerism, etc.

Fifthly, As very suitable to my Profession as a Minister of the Gospel, as the
special care of the Bishops and Fathers of the Church, Relations which carry in
them great Obligations to Humanity, Charity, Ministerial Duties, Episcopal
Vigilance and Paternal Compassion to any men, especially Christians, who are
weak or ignorant, erroneous in their Judgment, or dangerous in their Actions.

Lastly, I urged the Pattern of divine Justice, whose usual fore-runn^r is
Mercy; Vengeance rarely following, but where Patience has gone before,
instructing men of their Duty, warning them of the danger of their Sins,
bearing with their manners for a time, and calling them to Repentance before
^he Decree come forth to Execution: To this purpose I am sure I spoke, etc.

Answ. It is confessed the Bishop uses here many good Arguments, in which we
cannot but agree with him, that they are Cogent; not only so far as he makes
use of them ( viz.) for the procuring of Respite for a time only, but for the
putting of a stop also for ever to such an altogether Unchristian, and
Antichristian Course as it is; for Christians by outward Penalties to Persecute
any men, merely for their Consciences about Religion, specially Christians,
who, how they can be dangerous in their Actions (as he supposes they may) and
yet be truly Christians (since he who is owned by Christ to be so indeed, must
depart from all Iniquity) we are yet to learn: Yea undoubtedly, if we were in
any dangerous Opinions (which yet is more than all the Bishops, were they as
willing as they are averse to it; will ever be able to make proof of to our
faces) it had been an apter means to reclaim us from them, and to stop the
growth of what he in his wonted Emphatical way scorns at under the name of
Quakerism, and more suitable to the Profession of Gospel Ministers, Bishops and
Fathers of the Church, more answerable to Divine Justice, more becoming the
professed Piety, Humanity, and Honor of that House, and the other also, more
agreeable to the Kings wonted Clemency, if not to have quitted those more riged
Inflictions by Penalties altogether, yet at least to have used first those
Rational and Religious Courses, which the Bishop calls softer Applications, for
our Information of the lawfulness by God's, as well as Man's Law, of both those
things, which by the said Act, on pain of Spoil and Banishment, are strictly
imposed on us, which are not only that of Swearing, which the Bishop would fain
seem to have said something (though hoc aliquid nihil est) more then was ever
said before in proof of the lawfulness of, but also that Sin of forbearing to
meet together to Worship God publicly, according to our Consciences, and his
own Will concerning us.

Yea and lastly, to add one thing more, which (whether the Bishop forgot to
urge it or no, I know not, but sure I am) had as great weight of a reason in it
as any of the rest, to have biased and swa^ed both Houses another way,
whereupon the King himself in his Wisdom saw fit, as in reference to himself
and them, to urge it so often in his Speeches to them, as well as the Chancellor
in one of his, May the 8th, 1661. more evidently and eminently consistent with
that signal Credit and Affection, that high repute and honorable esteem in the
hearts of his truest Subjects, which the first making of such Promises, Crowned
the King withal, as well as with his Truth and Faithfulness in the performance
of all those Promises he has so fully and freely made, and so frequently
reiterated concerning such a continued Liberty, to the tender Consciences of
such as should not disturb the Kingdoms Peace (as on our parts we have not)
that no such should be disquieted, or so much questioned for their differences
of Opinions in matters of Religion; and that he should be ready to consent to
such an Act of Parliament, as upon mature deliberation should be offered to him
for the full granting of such Indulgence. Witness the Kings Letter from Breda,
sent to the House of P^eres; and read in the House, May the 1st* 1661. and
ordered to be printed for the service of the House, and satisfaction of the
Kingdom, and now to be seen in the 89. page of the Book of Collections of his
Speeches; whose Words are these, viz. We do declare a Liberty to tender
Consciences, that no Man shall be disquieted or called in question for
differences in ^pinions, or in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to Consent to such an Act of
Parliament, as upon ma^ine deliberation, shall be offered to us for the full
granting of that Indulgence.

Also in the Kings Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, dated
October the 20th. 1660. it is said thi^*

In a word, we do again renew what we have formerly said in our Declaration
from (...); for the Liberty of tender Consciences: No Man shall be disqui^red
or called in question for Differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which
do not distrub the Peace of the Kingdom: And if any have been disturbed in that
kind since our arrival here, it has not proceeded from any directions of ours.
And page 91. We do in the first place declare our purpose and resolution; is
and shall be, to promote the Power of Godliness, and to encourage the exercises
of Religion, both in public and private.

And page the 102. We do in the second Place take into Consideration; and our
present work is to gratify the private Consciences of those that are grieved
with the use of (...) Ceremonies, by indulging to, and di^pensing with their
omitting those Ceremonies.

And in the Kings Speech to both Houses, July the 8th. 166^. It is to put my
self in mind as well as you, that I so often (I think as often as I come to
you) mention to you my Declaration from Breda; and let me put you in mind of
another Declaration published by your selves about the same time, which I am
persuaded made mi^e the more effectual. An honest Generous and Christian
Declaration signed by the most Eminent Persons, who had been the most Eminent
Sufferers, in which you renounced all former Animosities, and memory of former
Unkindness: My Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no man's power to charge me or
you with breach of our Words or Promises, which can never be a good ingredient
to our future Security.

And in the Chancellors Speech to both Houses, May the 8th. 1661. page 17. He
told you but now, that he values himself much upon keeping his Words, and upon
performing all his Promises to his people.




We say the urging of all these Promises had been an Argument of as much force
in it self, and as much likely to have prevailed with the House, as any of the
rest, had it been in the mind of the Bishop to have made use of it (as it seems
it was not) for this is enough to render the Word of the King less Creditable
among all (save such as are yet unwilling to believe any otherwise of him, than
that he once truly intended what was then by him so solemnly Avouched) that
instead of an Act for the full granting of the Liberty so often promised, there
is an Act now out for the final taking away of the same.

Nevertheless, though the Bishop made no mention of these matters in his
speech, (whether for fear least in so doing his intercession should take more
effect then he truly desired it should, or no, God knows, I will not say so,
but by some other passages of the Bishops book, many a one may be apt to think
so for all that) yet his own Arguments might have moved (if not the House) yet
at least himself, not at all to have consented to so sudden a passing of that
Bill, the forbearance of which (for a far longer time then was allotted, to so
great a work as our Information) himself seemed so sincerely, and seriously to
plead for.

But behold, how, notwithstanding that favorable acceptance, which (he says)
his motion had in the House from many Lords Temporal, and some of his brethren
the Bishops also, yet, contrarily thereunto the Decree is both passed and come
forth against us, even before any of the aforesaid rational or religious
courses, which he judges ought to have been used, were at all used toward us
for our Conviction of our Error and mistake.

Insomuch that howbeit his Chartible Intercession, and his Pitiful motion in
the House, who (as he says of himself, page 3.) is thought to be no barren nor
diffident Speaker, is rather to be accepted of, and Commended, than either
Condemned, or despised (if it were indeed as he relates it, and also made in
the Integrity, and sincerity of his heart) albeit it has not accomplished its
pretended End, yet we appeal to his own Conscience whether he has not
manifested, not only some Pittilesness and want of Charity (saving all his fair
pretenses of so much love and Compassion) but also much falsness and
faithlesness to the Quakers, as well as unsutableness to his Episcopal Capacity,
and that in these three respects.

The first respect.
(1.) In not putting forth himself in that Interval of time between the Da^e of
the Bill, and the Publication of it, to use the means aforesaid for our
Information, which himself confesses had been suitable to their Profession, as
Ministers of the Gospel, and as Bishops and Fathers of the Church ( Relations,
which he also says carry in them great Obligations to Humanity, Charity,
Ministerial duty, Episcopal Vigliancy, and Paternal Comp^ssion to any men,
especially Christians, who are weak or ignorant, erroneous in their Judgment,
or dangerous in their actions) for ^o this very day we know of no such rational
and religious Courses taken by him, or his Brethren to inform us of the
lawfulness by Gods, as well as by man's Law, of imposing and taking of Public
Oaths; Yea himself confesses, page 4. he has never had so much as one hours
Conversation with any of that way: neither can the writing of this his Book
with a private and single hand, or any thing that is found written therein, be
truly said (as page 3. he deems it may) to make good such an undertaking, for
these three reasons. (1) Because if there had been any thing it of force to our
Conviction, yet it is born out of due time, for the Act Commencing (and that
not without his own Consent, if the Bishop will believe himself) from the 24th.
of March last past, was in i^s force against us, a long time before his Book
was Extant in order to our Instruction. (2) Because in his whole book he brings
no proof at all, to justify the Imposing of Oaths upon any, under Penalty:
All that he pretends to prove (any other way then by some few men's Examples,
which cannot be all men's Rule) being only the lawfulness of taking Oaths: And
no marvel why he meddles so little with the former, since in all the Law of
God, there is not so much as one Command or Example for the Imposing of any
Oath, under pains or Penalties to the refusers. (3) Because even in that part
of his Book, where he pretends to prove the lawfulness of taking Oaths, in
order to the taking away of our soruples (as he calls them) he has not meddled
with any of those Arguments Extant to the contrary, in sundry books heretofore
written by us, but only gives us his own thoughts on those Texts, which we
have disproved the lawfulness of Swearing from long ago, and would have us take
those thoughts of his for truth, more from the Authority (for ought we see) of
his Prelatical, Paternal Dignity, then any weight of right, or solid reason
that is found in them; Now until the said course be taken, and that respite the
Bishop has craved from all outward inflictions, till the said course has been
taken, be granted, we appeal to all wise men, whether the Bishop has by his
Practice, faithfully answered his own pretended desires to the House, and
whether (while he is altogether inexcusable therein himself) we remain not as
yet excusable in our sufferings? Since the very thing which the Bishop says,
must leave us without excuse, is the taking of the aforesaid course, until
which we are excusable by his own Intimation; and when the said course shall be
taken with the Quakers by the Bishops, who have never yet so much as given way
to discourses with them, then the men, who (as the Case now stands) are deeply
and doubly guilty in running violently upon them, will at least be more
excusable, and less guilty than now they are, in their proceedings with them
according to the rigor of the Act.

The Second respect.
In this respect (in which also the Bishop cannot but stand Condemned within
himself) viz. in that quite contrary to the Confessed Constitution of his own
Judgment and Conscience, by which he stood by so many Arguments convinced
clearly to the contrary; Even that the way which was beyond all controversy
the best way, at least to let the Quakers alone some time, as to the Execution
of those Penalties upon any of them, as offenders, till some rational and
Religious Courses were taken with them, he has condescended so far below the
Call of God in his Conscience, as (all Evidence and Counsel to the contrary
therein notwithstanding) to give his own Personal and Ep^scopal Consent to the
passing of the Bill, and consequently to the Execution of all those Penalties
upon them all as offenders (unless he will rather say he consents to have them
suffer that Imprisonment, Impoverishment, Banishment the Act inflicts, not at
all as offenders, but as Innocent, (as elsewhere in effect he does) and so
mends his matter as much, as one that makes it much worse then it was before)
before it was possible for such means to be used, as himself affirms ought to
be the first, and judges every way to be the best and fittest for Information;
Here the Bishop is far from teaching facienda faciendo, from Justifying the
Real Truth and soundness, which was in a great part of his Doctrine to the
House, by his own Example; no marvel then (though it found some acceptance
among many) that it was seconded with so little Success as it was among the
most, who acted contrary to it, whilst himself was found so easily drawn aside,
to side in such a Practice, as was utterly contrary to his own Professed
Principles: For what wise men will give heed to follow the wind of that man's
words and wisdom, in whom they see (while he yet speaks) so little stability,
he is ready to row one way whilst he looks another, and willingly to assent to
act against his own Opinion and assertions, for thus the Bishop does in the
Case in hand; he sets himself in at least a seeming Zeal of Moderation toward
the Quakers to stir up others to Compassion and Patience to them, yet is
himself so Incompassionate and Impatient, as to consent to the ruin of them in
all haste, before the means of his own prescribing, and that Previous Method of
Christian Charity, and Meekness of Wisdom (recommended by himself to be used
first, under so many weighty reasons and Considerations, and such as are of
force not with himself only, but many Lords Temporal, and some of his Brethren
also) were used to them; And here (we say) how ever he covers himself over with
the Figgleaves of many fair Forms of speech, about his Pity and Christian
Charity, he discovers in very deed, not only a Spirit of uncharibleness,
Cruelty, Malignity and Enmity, but also of deceit, falsehood and unfaithfulness
to God and Men; Since by his own Confession of his previous intimation thereof
to the House, we understand his consent was given to the passing of the Bill
against us: For ( says he) However I might consent to the passing of the Bill.
For if the Bishop had judged it either reasonable or seasonable for the Bill to
pass against us when it did, he might more excusably have acted according to
his Judgment, and forborne to have urged so much against it: But if it were
against the Conviction of his Conscience, that it should pass till such a
time, he has the more inexcusably before the time of using softer Courses, so
easily and earnestly consented against his Conscience to the passing of it, and
must go Condemned in himself of such unfaithfulness, as is a shame that it
should be found in one of his Profession; For as, Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera, aequumlicet statuerit hand Aequus fuerit, he must needs pass
sentence against himself, as unequal in his ways, who (though the thing
determined should be an equal thing) determines it before he has had a fair
and full hearing of all Parties, much more may such a one as assents to the
Acting of that severity against which, but just before himself very Eagerly
argued, say with shame enough of himself, Video meliora proboque, deteriora
sequor; I see the best way, but choose the worst; and whether this Bishop may
not say of himself the same (as to the Case in hand) we appeal to the Light of
God in his own and all men's Consciences, since he confesses, that for many
reasons we ought to have had respite for a time, as to the Execution of the
Penalties of the Act upon us, and yet confesses his consent to the Act for our
Suppression before we had it.

Object. But the Bishop says, page 2. He might consent to the passing of the
Bill, out of the Justice and Charity, which he owes to the Public Peace, to
which all private Parties, Interests, and Charities, must submit.

Ans. If that be Justice and Charity to the Public* Peace, for any to
suppress all Interests and Private Parties but their own, we are yet to learn
what Justice and Charity is; For the Justice and Charity, which we who are
called Quakers do even owe and exercise toward the Public Peace, is (as to
the point of Liberty of Conscience) to plead the Civil Interest of all Private
Parties (they behaving themselves Peaceably in their Respective Religions) in
the same Equality with our own; Though the Bishops we see (might they be their
own Carvers) would prove such Impropriators, as to Engross all Public
Countenance and Encouragements, by the Injunction and Protection of the Law,
all Favor of Princes, all Public Maintenance and Honor, and use of Public
Oratories, Public Offices, and Employments of Authority, foreign and
Domestique, yea all advantages of what sort soever (as their proper Honoraries)
appropriated to one Interest, that is their own: yea to it (and it only) as
Bishop Gauden expresses it, in page 5. of his Epistle; yet as ( Universalia
nec existant, nec apparent nisi in singularibus suis) he cannot appear to be a
well wisher to the Public Peace and welfare, who denies it to any Particular,
much more to all Particular Parties and Interests, but his own; so if all
Private Parties, Charities and Interests must submit to the Public Peace, and
welfare, we shall then believe the Bishops to have that Justice and Charity,
they owe to the Public Peace and welfare, when we see them submit theirs, so
at least as to let others live quietly in the Land besides them, but not
before: That being (whatever largeness of Love and Liberality it may pretend
to) a Private, Narrow, Selfish, Pinching, Churlish Spirit, and not that truly
Charitable, Public, Peaceable, Universal, Liberal Soul, that devises Liberal
things, and by Liberal things shall stand, that cannot bear all other
Professions of the same Religion with it self, to stand quietly, and live
Peaceably by it self in the same Land or Nation; Nor are they any more true
seekers of the Public Peace, who to preserve it, destroy the Private Peace of
those many thousands that seek it more seriously then themselves, and with no
small denial of their own, then those are true seekers of the Public safety of
the whole Ship; who would fain sink all other men's Cabbins, dreaming by so
doing, to save their own.

The third Respect.
In this respect, in that after the softer applications and Rational and
Religious Courses, used for our Information about Oaths, its taken for granted
by him, that it is no less then obstinancy in us, if we be not (Ipso facto)
brought into a Cheerful Obedience in that particular, and that we are left
without excuse before God and man, and both the Truth of the Law justified
against our Error, and the severity of it only imputable to our obstinancy; so
that after some small respite, in Case of non-conviction concerning the
Lawfulness of that Swearing they impose; or in Case of our non-submission, even
against Conviction (which Conviction is the Work of God, and not of man, and
never likely to be effected whilst the World stands, so clearly are many
thousands from God himself convinced to the contrary, by all that slender
Evidence this Bishop can for Swearing hold forth from Scripture) then the
Vengeance decreed, is to fall without Remedy, without Mercy, Pity or
Commiseration, with a heavier stroke upon the Quakers then before, not now as
offenders only, but as obstinate offenders, as wilful refusers and resecters
of the Truth, and of the Patience exercised and Mercy tendered, and all this
without any Color of excuse or ground of Plea for themselves, under all their
Tribulations in the sight of God, as well as men; Thus such as are not
unwilling to see it, may easily see, that though the Bishops book viewed only
by some running Reader, that eyes it not very wa^ily, may seem by some passages
of it to have the fair face of nothing else but Charity, and of nothing less
then such a thing as Cruelty; nevertheless being well viewed in other passages
of it, and in that most Ultimate End, which it most strenuously ayms at, which
is primus in intention, though ultimus in Executione, first in his intention,
though last in Execution; then it may appear very easily to any one that lat^t
anguis in herba, it carries the sting of Severity in the Tail of, it, at least
not so much Zeal, Charity, and Pity by far, as it pretends to. Though then the
Bishop would fain seem to be very slow and backward to have rigidity used
toward the poor, silly, harmless, unwary Quakers (as he calls them) whom he
much Puties as a People possibly of no Evil minds, and such like, yet his
desire of forbearance toward them mainly is, that they (for all the leaden
heels he moves on with) might at last be the more Cruelly handled with Iron
hands; let them alone for a while, let them be vo^chsafed, so much honor and
favor in order to their reducement, as to have some Rational and Religious
Course exercised to them, by those that are so high above them, as the Bishops
and Fathers of the Church, and then, for not seeing with their eyes, alias not
believing (as they do at Rome) as the Church believes, whose Spiritual Fathers
are the Representatives of it) be turned over to be destroyed, as wilfully and
obstinately rebellious against God: The sum then of this Bishops Christian
Charity, and pious Pity to the Quakers, amounts to as much, as If he should
have said, tolerate them yet a little, that they may be taken away totally at
the last; In altum tollantur, protempore tolerentur, ut laps^ craviore cadant.

But that which is more observable yet in the passage above spoken to, is the
Bishops contradiction herein to himself, and to what he himself holds forth for
truth in other passages; for howbeit here he condemns and objects it against us
as matter of obstinate offending, if after some respite given, as to execution
of Penalties, and rational Courses taken (though succeslesly) for our
Information, we be found (though unconvinced) not conforming cheerfully to what
is imposed; yet elsewhere (as namely, page 10, 11.) he commends and praises it
as good in the Quakers, in that they choose, where they remain unconvinced,
rather to Suffer, than Sin against their Consciences; which to do, he himself
says, were to Sin against God, whose holy Will (says he there) Shining on the
Soul in reason and religion, either seeming or real, is indeed the present rule
of Conscience: Nor may any Man (says he) Act contrary to these dictates, which
he judges to be God's, though he err as to the Truth of the Rule, yet his
Judgment binds so far as it represents (though in a false Glass) the supposed
Light of God's Will; for he that will venture to Act against Conscience, though
Erroneous, will also Act against it, though it be never so clear and
perspicuous; if Conscience Act according to its Error, it Sins materially
against the Truth of God; if it act contrary to its appearing Principles, it
Sins formally, and maliciously, as wilfully rebelling against the supposed Will
of God.

Mark well the Confusion of this Man, we do not deny, but that (to his own
great disadvantage, as well as the perpetual Shame of himself, and all such of
his Brethren as go about by outward Penalties to fright and force men to act
against their Consciences) in these last Words of his, he utters a most
undeniable Truth; but how grievously he interfeers and thwarts himself and his
own Sayings in the place above spoken to, he that is not s^ark blind cannot
choose but see.

One while if the Quakers do not Cheerfully obey after the Bishops rational
Applications to them for their Conviction (which, in reality, rather are
Irrational, if they all have no more, then Bishop Gauden has yet said, to say
for Swearing) the Laws of men imposing Oaths upon them against their
Consciences, they are to be Condemned and Punished as Evil Deers, that sin
wilfully and obstinately against God, and so are under the rigid Inflictions,
and severe Penalties of men's Laws most justly, as wilfully rebellious against
both, and inexcusably before both God and man.

Otherwiles again, to sin against their Consciences, The Bishop contradicting
himself.
though (...) is to be condemned as Evildoing, is to sin against God, yea to
act contrary to its appearing Principles, or against the holy Will of God no
more then s^ming ^o shine on the Soul, which (says he) is indeed the present
rule of Conscience, though they Err as to the truth of the Rule, and to act
contrary, to those dictates, which (though falsely) they judge to be Gods, or
contrary to what his Judgment represents (though but in a false Glass) the
supposed Light of God's Will, is that which n^ man (...) do, is to act contrary
to what every man stands bound to, and ought to act, is a sign of an
unconscionable Man, or one that makes no Conscienie at all in things that are
never so true, plain, clear and prospicuous, is a sign of one that has not so
much as integrity of Intention, without which, there is no mitigation of any
Fault; yea, is to sin formally, yea maliciously, yea a wilful or obstinate
rebelling against God: which sort of sinning formally, wickedly or wilfully, by
how much it is worse than to sin no more than materially (as he speaks) or
weakly, for want only of Knowledge of what is good; by so much the greater (say
we) is the Guilt and Punishment that is by right to be inflicted for the Sin
(as to take away a man's Life materially only, unawares, and with no ill mind,
is not so bad as to do it formally, maliciously and wilfully against the known
Will of God to the contrary) and by so much the more are they Good,
Praiseworthy and Commendable, (says the Bishop himself) who will rather
choose to Suffer, than so to Sin; upon which ground it is that the Bishop, who
condemns it as Evil with a witness, and as Sin in the highest degree, for any
men to sin against their Consciences, expresses himself in way of Praise and
Commendation of the Quakers, and in way of Friendship and high Approbation of
this, as a good thing in them, in as much as they choose by their Profession
thereof, in those Papers given in one day to some of the Lords, rather to
Suffer than to Sin against their Consciences, and so against God, page 10.
which choice of Suffering under the presecuting Hands of Men, rather then to
violate the Conscience before God, if it be so highly to be commended, ^o good
and praise worthy a matter, as the Bishop ( truly enough?) owner it to be; then
how little they are to be commended, who f^ fear of the Wrath of men, choose to
save themselves from it, by Sinning against God, and their own Consciences,
much more how greatly and justly they stand Condemned at the Tribunal of God
himself, who without any Just Cause (unless Innocence be a Cause) ministered to
them so to do, by Threats and Penalties, seek to cause honest men so to Sin, we
leave to the Bishop himself to judge, who has given his Consent to such
Transactions.

Howbeit, we desire him to judge it by the Light of God, which in his own heart
shows which is Good and Commendable, and which is Evil; for want of attendance
unto which, he has in the blin^ness and darkness of his Understanding, run
himself hitherto into such a mist of Confusion, and self Contradiction, as not
only to commend the Quakers as a generation of Just Ones, for choosing, rather
then to Sin against Conviction, to undergo the Penalties, which man's Law, for
God and Conscience sake, inflicts upon them; but also to commend these as a
generation of Just Over that do afflict them: For so he does, page 19. whilst
he commends those Penalties, as just Penalties, which, for doing no other thing
then what himself before commended in them, a^e by men's Laws ins^icted on
them; which two things (to wit) the Quakers choosing to suffer the Penalties
inflicted on them for their Consciences, and their Adversaries choosing to
inflict Penalties on them for their Consciences, that they should be both good,
both praiseworthy, both commendable, both justifiable and just in the sight of
God, is as impossible, as it is for good to be evil, and evil good; for if it be
good in the Quakers, to choose to Suffer, rather then Sin against it, then it
cannot be good in others by Penalties to seek to prevail with them to Sin
against Conscience, rather then to Suffer.

Object. But if Bishop Gauden shall say he would not have men Sin formally
against Conscience, nor Suffer for their not so Sinning, but for their Sinning
materially through the Error of their Conscience; against the (yet unknown)
rectitude it self, against the Truth of the Rule, as he says, page 11. Men do
when the [(...)] Judgment is not according to Truth, whose Sin of the Action
(however the integrity of Intention may be commendable, and so mitigate the
Fault) may be great, as it is an enormity, or aberration from the rule of
Eternal Truth and Justice; this being (as Bishop Gauden says) the Snare or
dilemma of the Devil, which a Conscience thus erring falls into, viz. that it
cannot ( whilst so) but sin one way or other, either materially against the
intrinsecal Justice and Truth of God, and his holy Will, or else formally and
wilfully against the supposed Will of God.

Answer. We reply, This will in no wise relieve him from the just consute of
Absurdity, Falsehood and Confusion, which he still falls under, as he pleads
that principle of any Persecution, or Infliction of outward Penalties for Cause
of Conscience, though yet erring, as to its knowledge of what is Truth; for
as much as he commends it as good in the Quakers* for choosing rather to Suffer,
then to Sin, against even an erring Conscience; and yet justifies that also as
good in those, who cause them to suffer for nothing but for Nonconforming, and
makes it the greater: Evil of the two to Conform against Conviction, than not
to Conform (merely for want of Conviction of it) to the very Truth, for hereby
he still evinces the Quakers Suffering, to be a Suffering for Good, and
consequently their work to be Evil, who for that good only, do make them Suffer.

Ob^. And if he say it is good and commendable comparatively only, or in
respect to a greater evil^, as it is from such an Integrity of the Intention as
mitiga^es the fault, but in it self it is an Evil, as here is Error in the
Judgment; albeit a lesser Evil, than to act against the Judgment, and so
justly punishable with Penalties by outward Powers.

Answ. We reply (and he that has an Ear, let him hear, what B. G. confesses
to be the just Cause of the Quakers Sufferings) at least it amounts to no less
than this however, that the Bishop would have Quakers suffer for choosing of
two Evils, whereof he says one of necessity must be taken) that which is the
lesser, and consequently for doing that which is comparatively better, and for
their declaring that, which without all controversy is the worse, which is as
just, good and true a thing in the Quakers (were their Judgments as erroneous,
as the Bishop would make them, and as it is most certain they are clear) as
that maxim is true, viz. Ex duobus malis minimum est Eligendum.

See then, and behold the sum and Substance of Bishop Gaude^s Divinity, and of
his Pity and Christian Charity to the Quakers; though he praises, approves,
and commends it as good in the Quakers, for choosing to Suffer for acting and
sinning materially only (which in reference to that other sort of Sinning
formally, he calls good and commendable) Rather then to Sin formally,
maliciously, and wilfully against their Consciences; yet contrariwise he
condemns it, not only as erroneous, but also such obstinacy and wilfulness in
their Errors, as justly deserves the severity of the Law, and its rigid
Inflictions and Penalties to be executed on them, if after a little respite
(though they never be convinced) they Conform not contrary to their Consciences.

Bish. And whereas he says, this is the Snare and Dilemma of the Devil, that
an Erring Conscience falls under, viz. that it must Sin either the one way or
the other; instancing in the Case of Paul, when he Persecuted and Blasphemed
the Christian Religion, being verily persuaded that he ought so to do against
that way; and of others, who should think they did God good Service while they
killed Christ's Disciples.

Answ. We grant that an Erring Conscience is indeed in such a snare: But this
is that very Snare and Dilemma of the Devil, that (not the Conscience of the
Quakers, which are truly Enlightened, and so escaped out of the Snare of that
old Fowler, but) the erring Consciences of their Adversaries, who Persecute
them in their blind Zeal, are fallen into at this day; as Paul (while he was
yet Saul, breathing out Threatenings and Slaughter against the Saints) was
before the time of his Conversion to the Light, in which principle of
persecution of men for Conscience, while they own it, it is impossible for them
to escape without being Judged one way or other, let them do what they will, or
to escape so, but that they must fall into Condemnation and the Snare of the
Devil; for if they Persecute the Lord's Servants, and take Crafty Counsel
against his hidden Ones, to destroy and root them out, then Wrath is upon them
from the Lord, who also will give Kingdoms for their Ransom, and Nations for
their Life, rather then let their Causless Sufferings go unrequired; but if
they cease to Persecute the Saints, of whom the World is not worthy, whom in
their be-nighted minds, they think to be such mischievous Misoreants as are not
worthy to move, and have their ^eing in it, then they are afraid they are too
negligent in doing God that good service, which (according to their Consciences
thus crookedly constituted, and erroneously opinionated) they, for want of
^eeding the Light, verily think they ought to do: Thus, as error (...) in
principio fit semper major in medio, maximus in fi^; and as posit^ ^no absurdo
sequuntur millia; so the Powers and Professo^rs of the Christian World, both
Temporal and Spiritual; Princes, Priests and People being gone off, and
degenerated from that pure, Primitive tender temper of Liberty of Conscience,
or Tolleration of all Religions in Civil States (men behaving themselves
(respectively) no otherwise then Peaceably and honestly therein) into that, as
blin^t, as bloody Principle of Persecution of honest men, merely for a mere
Conscientious nonconformity to the Priests needless Superfluous Ceremonies,
and endless Impositions and Inventions, have involved themselves in such
inex^ricable Snares, and deep Dilemma's of the Devil, that we may truly say of
some of them, but most especially of some of the Clergy, who are the stirrers
up of the strife (as Christ said of old of those Chief Priests, who were the
Chief Persecutors of his Disciples, and of those Scribes and Pharisees, whom he
called Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers) how can they escape the
Condemnation of Hell? For if they (...) not according to their Professed
Principle, so as with outward Penalties to punish and Persecute the Saints, who
to themselves, who are not of the Light and Day, but Night and Darkness, seem
Sinners, then they are Condemned in themselves, as men not faithful, trusty or
honest to their yet Erring Consciences about those Laws of men against Christ's
Disciples, in the Execution of which they dinily Divine they do God service;
but if they do act according to their own thoughts, whilst they think in their
Conscience, as Paul once did, they do God good service, when they kill his
Servants, then they can never flee from that Wrath, which is to come upon all
the ungodly and Children of Disobedience, who are found Rebelling against the
Light, and revelling in the ruins of its Children, which Wrath is no other
then the Condemnation of Hell it self, the Lake of Fire, the due Portion of all
the abominable ones, which is the Second Death, Rev. 21. Rev. 22.

The best way to escape this Snare, is for all men to take heed (which must be
by following the Light within, of that Spirit of Truth it self, which by
degrees leads all that faithfully follow it into all Truth) that the (...) or
Judgment of their Conscience be according to Truth first, and then (as B. G.
says truly indeed) to act accordingly; for while men say they have fellowship
with God, and do him service, and yet walk in Darkness, besides the Light of
God in themselves, in which God himself is manifesting his own mind more or
less in each man's Conscience, they lie, and do not the Truth, 1. John 1.
howbeit there is the most hopes of them, that, when in the same Zeal, as Saul
of old, they Persecute the true Church of God, do it yet ignorantly and in
unbelief; that all such as have now any hand in Persecuting and spoiling us,
who (excepting that* new-nick name of Quakers, by reason of which we are not
yet known so to be) are in truth the self same Church and sort of Christians,
as were of old Persecuted by Saul and others, and in Imprisoning and
Impoverishing us, through simple ignorance, may obtain the same Mercy that Paul
did, is the hearty wish, and true desire of our Souls, who can say of such, as
Christ also did, Father forgive them for they know not what they do; and with
Stephen, while they were stoning him, Lord lay not this their sin to their
Charge: But if there be any that believe we are the People of God, and yet
Persecute us out of mere malice against his Image, which they hate, having by
long Custom, and exercise of themselves, in murderous and bloody ways
contracted so completely to themselves that Image of their Father the Devil,
who has begotten them from God and Goodness to the doing of his own will, who
was a Murderer and a Liar from the beginning; so that now they cannot but
contradict the known Truth, and blaspheme against the Holy Spirit of it,
through what Vessel soever it utters it self, the Sin of such being evidently
unto Death, we are not bid to pray for that, it having forgiveness, neither in
this World, nor in that to come; yet we leave them to stand or fall to their
own Master.

Having in part discovered the Pittifulness of some of those Pious and specious
pretenses of Pity, and Christian Charity to the Quakers, which Bish, Gauden
makes, and under which, as under a Vizard, he seeks to hide the severity of his
Visage, we shall proceed to unmask him further by some observation of some
other Passages, much what to the same purpose, in both his Book and his Epistle.

Bish. He says in his Epistle, page 4. Thus the Cudgol, Sword Prisons, and
Banishments, Plundring and Sequestrations, were the Late Cruel and Flagellant
Methods, of our most Tyrannous Times, which had nothing of Reason, Law or
Religion to support them: but these are not in my Judgment, either the first
or the fittest means to Confute the falsities of men's Private Opinions, or to
rectify the obliquities of their inconform, but Innocent Actions flowing from
them, upon the account of Conscience and Plea of Religion.

Answ. By these words Bish. Gauden seems to give his Countrymen and fellow
Christians to understand, that as the Times are changed, so in his Opinion,
ought to be also the Method of proceeding against the Quakers, and other
dissenters from themselves, and that as we were dealt with then (but very
unjustly) by the Cudgel, Sword, Prison, Banishment, Plundrings, and
Sequestrations, proceeding from the Tyrannousness of those Times, from men void
of Reason, Law and Religion; so now it ought to be only by good life and sound
Doctrine, from such as have true Reason, Law and Religion, intimating also,
that the Case is not so desperate as to need any such sharp inflictions, seeing
it is but to Confute the falsities of men's Private Opinions, and to rectify
the obliquities of their inconform yet Innocent Actions, unto (which says he
there must be more tender and softer applications) accounting it no less then
even unreasonable and unchristian, to follow the Example of Tyrants in such
proceedings; so that hereby one would think, there were some good ground to
judge that this Bishop and Father of the Church (so called) would prove a
Tender, Nursing Father indeed, that did with no small disdain decline all kinds
of Cruelty and Persecution, yet notwithstanding, behold how in the very next
words, he unsaith in effect all that again; in this wise, Viz.

Bish. It may be as just, as necessary, to repress by Legal Coerci^ns and
Penalties, those Petulant obstinacies, which do resist all safter applications,
and endanger the Public Tranquillity, by giving Affro^ts to settled Religion, or
obstructions to the proceeding of Justice by Established Laws*

By which words, he not only gives us to discern (as Ex ped^ Herculem, ex
unque Leonem) what is his rigid resolution, and harsh disposition toward
tender Consciences (notwithstanding his desire to be counted of a Contrary
Complexion) but also like an unskilful builder plueks down with one hand, what
he built up newly with the other, for howbeit these words of his are not ( de
sure) applicable to us, who are called Quakers (we having never been found in
any Petulant obstinacies, nor resisted in any sense all softer applications,
nor ever yet endangered the Public Tranquillity by affronts) yet the Bishop
writing the said words with reference to them, and falsely applying them ( de
facto) to the Quakers (whom throughout his Book, as well as here, he seeds with
a Bit and a Knock) makes void, as well to the Contradicting of himself, as to
the Interdicting of that Liberty he would ^ain be believed to allow the
Quakers, what he himself had said immediately before, and so ministers to us
just occasion of Jealousy that by those words of his ( viz.) resist, affronts,
obstructions, etc. he intends no other then our denial of Obedience, the
Bishops mere minds and wills, and bare non-submission to such Laws of men, as
without wounding and offending of a good Conscience we can in no wise submit
to; so that (whatever he would seem to grant) yet all the Liberty to the utmost
he is really willing should be granted us, is only his, and his Brethrens
intimating to us, what is their mind and Judgment in Religious matters, and
the Enacting of some outward Law, to require our Conformity, upon the not
yielding of which we are to be suppressed by Coercions and Penalties, as
resisters of softer applications, as affronters of settled Religion, as
obstructers of the proceedings of Justice by Established Laws: And this is
that cuncta prius tentanda, which he is for, and all the appeal that he will
allow, we being now in his judgment unexcusable, because we cannot see with
his ey^s; and this is his Quid amplius peteram? what could I have done more?
and these are all the Lenitives he affords us, before Lancings and
Fomentations; before incisions, or amputations, and no other remedy before
rigor and severity: so that now upon mere non-submission to his and his
Brethrens Counsel (which yet was never at all ministered to us any other way,
then in this his book, thrust forth above a month after the Date of the late
sharp Act against us) it is not to be reckoned any more the scratch of a Petty
Opinion, but the Gangreen of an obstinate and rebellions humor, which forces
the abscision, under pretense of preventing a deadly Contagion to the whole
body; But (blessed be the Lord) they who are made partakers of his saving
health (as we are through his goodness and mercy) need none of these Episcopal
paternal Remedies, for such are under the Cure of the great Shepherd, Overseer
or Bishop of their Souls, who will make the wrath of men turn to his praise,
and the remainder of it will then restrain.

Bish. Again it is yet further manifested, what the Bishop intends by Liberty
and softer Applications unto dissenters, from the Religion established by
outwara Laws, in the next page, wherein he declares, how he would have them,
as no better then Layers of the Fou^dations of Distractions, Division,
Destruction and Confusion, to be deprived of all public Countenance and
Encouragement, and of the protection of the Laws, of the Favor of Princes,
and not only of public Maintenance and Honor, but also of the use of public
Churches (as he calls them) and Oratories of public Offices and Employments of
Honor, and Authority, foreign, and domestic, Eclesiastical, Civil and
Military, and all such like advantages, which he would have appropriated only
to themselves, as their proper Honoraries, who can Conform to whatsoever
Religion by Law may be established.

Answ. As for the Advantages of public Maintenance and Honor, and those
Ecclesiastical Offices, Employments and Preferments, which pertain to those
public Places, which they call Churches, we neither look nor seek after them,
but leave them to those Ministers, who look more after the Eleece then the
Flock, unto whom the Hon^s is more desirable then the Onus, and the Benefice
prized beyond the Office of the Ministry: Nevertheless, since the Bishop would
have Dissenters deprived not only of these Ecclesiastial, but of all other
Civil Advantages also; we would have him take notice, that the Deprivations of
all these Privileges, were the Flagellant methods of those most Tyrannous
Times; which by the Bishops own Confession in his Words before cited to his own
Shame, Confutation and Confusion, (for as much as he would have the same used,
and yet would seem to be against them too) had nothing of Reason, Law or
Religion to support them.

Bish. The Bishop says further in the next Words thus, With these outward
Advantages added to that Internal Power of Truth and Holiness, which are in the
established Religion, it may (as I think) not only be happily supported, but
easily prevail against all Factions and feeble Opposition, unless the scandal,
negligence, levity, and luxury of its Ministers, Bishops, Presbyters and
Professors, overthrow it by casting such inmoral disgraces upon it as make
People disbelieve and abhor both it and them; as was in the Case of Elies Sons.

Answ. That is a very weak and crasie Religion indeed, which has not internal
Power of Truth and Holiness, enough in it to support it, and that against but
feeble Opposition, without the addition of outward Force, and the other
External Helps, (...) Advantages before mentioned: Whether the Bishops Religion
be such a feeble Form or no, we leave them to consider, and examine* but this
we are sure of, that the true Religion, not only has been, and ever will be
supported, and will prevail without these Advantages and Privileges, but also
in the midst of as deep Disadvantages and Deprivations. Witness, 2. Cor. 4. 8,
9. where the Apostle says, We are troubled on every side, yet not Distressed,
Perplexed, but not in despair, Persecuted, but not forsaken, Cast down, but
not destroyed. 2 Cor. 6. 4, ^, etc. in all things approving our selves as the
Ministers of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in
Distresses, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumults, etc. by Honor and
Dishonor, by Evil Report, and Good Report, as Deceivers, yet True, as Unknown,
yet well Known, as Dying, yet behold we Live, as Chastened, yet not Killed, as
Sorrowful, yet always re^oycing, as Poor, yet making many Rich, as having
nothing, yet possessing all things.

Secondly, We observe that the Bishop is very doubtful, jealous and fearful
(and that not altogether surely without a Cause) least the Scandal, Negligence,
Levity, and Luxury of the Bishops themselves, and of the Ministers, Presbyters,
and Professors of it, should overthrow their Religion now established: But if
it had that Internal Power of Truth and Holiness in it, as he pretends it has,
he need not fear its being disgraced, disbelieved, abhorred, and overthrown by
the Wickedness of its own Ministers (as he doubts theirs may) for the Truth
will be honored, believed, loved and established, ma^gre not only the
Contradictions of Sinners, and the Wickedness of all such Bishops, Ministers,
Presbyters and Professors that oppose it; but also if all those that profess
and promote it in its Power, and not in empty Forms only (as others do) should
(as God Forbid, and as they are never likely at all to do) become as Wicked and
Negligent, as any Prelatical Ministers are, and as themselves have once been
Faithful and Diligent in the service of it: for the true and Pure Religion,
which is undefiled before God, whereby its Children (of whom alone its
justified) are kept unspotted from the World, stands not upon the Sandy and
Slippery Foundation of outward props, and advantages, but upon the inward
Principle of Gods Power, which is the Power of an endless life; But the
Children of such Religions, as (how fair so ever they seem before men) stand
not on that Rock of Ages, and are no better stablished then on the outside,
frivolous Forms of men's Inventions, derived downward by Tradition from
Forefathers, without that inward Power of the endless Life, may labor in the
Fire of their own fierce Wrath and Fury, to hold up all their own Forms (
respectively) yet weary themselves for very Vanity, and to as little purpose as
those, who have that endless task in hand, of striving to make a dead Carcass
stand, which (howbeit, it has all the outward Proportion, Shape, Parts, Limbs
and Legs of a Living man) can never possibly stand longer, than it is held up
on every side by some External Props or other, because (as one said) deest
aliquid intus, there wants the main Wheel, the master Piece of all (viz.) the
Spring of that powerful Principle of the Life within.

Bish. But I confess (says he) I would not have this Legal and avowed Religion
of the Nation, so Rigorous, Sharp and Severe (as Sarah to Hagar) by the
sudden overawing, or violent overlaying of all other different Persuasions in
Peaceable men, as not to let them breath in the same common air, or not to
enjoy their Lives, civil Liberties and Estates, with their dissenting
Consciences in all modest Privacy and Safety; I abhor as much as I dread all
Racks and Tortures of men's Souls, or those cruel, no less than curious
Scrutinies of men's Consciences, which covet first (like God) to search Men's
hearts, and then (like the Devil) delight to torment them in their Estates and
Liberties, only because they are not so wise as themselves, but as honest
perhaps, and sincere in the sight of God.

Answ. Hence we may take notice of sundry things.

But first by the way, whereas the Bishop styles the avowed Religion of the
Nation, Legal; how legal it is in one sense, we matter not much for enquiring,
but we grant (how little Evangellical soever it is) it is Legal enough (if not
too much) in another, for it seems to us by the Pomp, and Pay of its
Priesthood, who talk for Tithes, and a number more of its Levitical Ceremonious
Services, to smell much more of the Law, than of the Gospel,

Secondly, It is very observable here, that the Bishop would seem to be
against, not only the Killing, but also the Banishing of Tender, Consoientious
Dissenters, in that he says, he would have them have their lives, and to
breath also in the same common air, and not only so, but also against both the
Fining, and Imprisoning them for (says he) I would have them have their civil
Liberties and Estates: Notwithstanding, all which this Bishop (with whom
Confusion is as frequent as contradiction to himself) intimates, page 2. how
he gives his consent to the passing of that very Bill, which inflicteth on
them, both Fines, Imprisonments, and Banishments from their native Country, and
so from breathing in the same common Air with other People. Celum non animum
mutant qui trans mare currunt.
But in very deed, what kind of Liberty and Enjoyment it is, that in his Pity
and Christian Charity to the Quakers, he would have granted to them, we have
showed somewhat of before, though himself (seeking of sweeten all his four
sayings, and to sugar over all his bitter Pills, with the fair, Speeches of
Love, and Lenity) is loath to speak it out plainly; however it here very
plainly appears, either that this Bishop has assent (...) with all his heart,
to what he says he would not have, but dissent^ from, and desires the contrary
to with all his heart; or else that he heartily dissents (for so he seems to do
by his wishes here) from that which he as heartily assented to, when he passed
his yea to the late Bill, while it passed against us. Utrum horum mavis accipe.

Thirdly, Whether the Bishops wishings and wouldings here to have it otherwise,
be true or counterfeit, yea or nay, we shall not take* upon us to determine;
but this we are well assured of, that, notwithstanding his express desires to
the contrary, there is executed at this day (but it is from the Seed of Hagar,
toward the Seed of Sarah) such a sudden overawing, and violent overlaying of
the different Persuasions, from that more Legal, than Evangelical, yet avowed
Religion of this Nation, in those most peaceable men, called Quakers, as not to
let them breath quietly in the same English common Air, nor scatcely to enjoy
their Lives without hazard of loosing them, not only by the Pistols, and naked
Swords of rude Soldiers, from whom (though John the Bapist taught them to do
violence to no man) no less than Violenoe is acted, but by the hands also of
some, called Justices of the Peace, who by Kicking and Smiting the Quakers with
their own Feet and Fists, break the Peace more then the Quakers, who cannot
strike, and as much ( perhaps as the worst of men that are brought before them*
much less to enjoy their Civil Liberty and Estates: Witness the present filling
of the Prisons with them, throughout this City of London, in order to the
Fining of them in their Estases, and all this extempore, without the praeuious
use of any of those rational and religious courses to them, or resistance ( on
their parts) of the softer Applications, the Bishop seems so much to plead for;
unless by softer* Applications he means summoning to their spiritual Courts,
spoiling of their Goods, Imprisoning of their Persons (under which also they
have never yet resisted) for if by softer Applications, he intends any Gentle
Christian addresses (excepting his own invective Book, which came out of due
season) to convince them of any Error he believes they hold, of this sort they
have received none as yet from the Bishops, though Discourses have been as
often desired by them, and by others for them, as it is here once for all
seriously again desired by themselves; who are always ready, as well publicly
as privately, to render an account of what they believe and practice, and to
prostrate themselves at the feet of right Reason and true Religion: Howbeit,
the guilt of that sudden overawing, and violent overlaying aforesaid, cannot
be in any common ingenuity by us made ( immediately at least) imputable to this
Bishop or his Brethren, who are supreme more directive than corrective, and for
whom it is enough to determine what is Truth, and direct the civil Ministers of
Justice, what is to be inflicted on such as err against it, and too much to be
the Executioners also of their own Conceptions and Appointments; but we rather
impure it to the Haa^nitish humor of some few haughty Spirits in subordinate
Power, who (while all prudent and patient Men look well before they leap)
having not that more expected, then deserved homage of the Hat (an Honor, the
denial of which the King himself (so express is his humility in that
particular) takes not so much notice of a^ some Sub-subs do) from the Seed of
the Jews, run on on a sudden (with as great have, as little speed) to the
overawing of the Quakers, who stand more in awe of God, than in awe of them,
and to such a violent overlaying of the different Persuasions of those
peaceable honest men, as whereby they overcharge and overset themselves
(through eagerness) so egregiously in their undertakings, as to loose
themselves in ipso limine (and it is ill stumbling at the threshold) and (as
canis festinans coecos parit catulos) to bring forth such blind businesses in
their have, as when God and Man come to call them to account, they must
assuredly repent of by leisure, their eyes (though too late) being enlightened
then to see how they kept neither the pure Laws of God, nor those very Laws
and Acts of men neither, which they pretend to act by.

Fourthly, We observe that the Bishop likens them to the Devil, who first
search men's hearts, and then torment them in their Estates and Liberties, only
because they are not so wise, or of the same persuasion with themselves; little
dreaming how far forth in so doing, he likens himself to the Devil unawares, as
whether ( consequentially) he does not yea or nay, we appeal to himself, while
in the next Words he says, That some little pecuniary mulct for every Lord's
days absence from the public Church or Assembly, may be justly t^ld (as a mark
of public dislike) upon Dissenters and Seperaters from the established
Religion: And if he deems, he sufficiently salves this sore by that di^initive
manner of Speech, in which he speaks concerning the (...) or Fining of men in
their Estares, ^ith he would have but some little mulct or Fine of one or two
shillings for every Lords Day.

Answ. Let him remember that as gradus non ^riant (...) (...) degrees do in no
wise vary the Nature of any case, the spoiting a man of a penny being contrary
to his enjoyment of his Estate, and a Tormenting him therein as truly and
really, though not so (...), not so abundantly as the spoiling him of a pound;
so secondly, two shillings a week as (if not p^id) exposes a man to Prison, and
so to be ^mented as to his Liberty, so (if paid) amounts to more then five
pound^ throughout the year, and that is more then many conscientions Persons
have in all to live on.

Object. Or if secondly, he shall say, we wrong him in his senc^ because it is
not for their private difference in judgment ( which possibly* (says he) is
not their fault) but for their public deformity in practice that I would have
them so punished.

Answ. We Reply, this will not at all relieve him from, but subject him more to
the just censure of contradiction to himself; Since, i^ private difference in
judgment be not the dissenters own fault, then his open practicing according
thereunto, is so far from being his fault, that it is praised and commended as
good in the Quakers by the Bishop himself, page 10. and so it were rather a
fault in him to do otherwise, (all men yielding together with himself Witness
his words before, p. 10* cited and spoken to. Witness also Jos. Hall, once
Bishop of Exeten, (the same See where I. Gauden is now Bishop) who says that
the doo^ of Conscience is obligatory here on Earth* so that though ^ man's
conscience be misled, yet its not a man's fault to follow his Conscience, Sus.
page 184.
that ( consotentia errans obligat) an Erring conscience binds to Act according
to its Evidence, till it be further or more truly enlightened: And secondly, if
it be not his own fault, then, if he be punished, it must be either for the f^lt
of some other which is not just, or, which is far more unjust, for that which
is no fault at all.

Fifthly, We observe by the Bishops own confession that the dissenters may be
as honest and sincere in the sight of God, as the Imposors; and this we yield
to be indeed as true as that way of imposing under outward penalties on men's
Consciences about Religion, is a way Universally false; But this of the Bishop
may serve however as a Caution to himself, and to all imposers, upon men's
Consciences in Religions ^ters, to beware least they be found fighters against
God, un^wares to themselves, as assuredly they will be, if they be found
Persecutors of the Innocent, and of such as are more sincere than themselves*
^oreover it yet further appears, how little Liberty that is, which the Bishop
(notwithstanding his fair pretenses) is willing to have allowed; by these woeds
of his ( viz.)

Bish. Only such an Arbitrary connivance and conditional indulgence, (...)
gives no trouble for their private and untrouble some Opinions, while they are
kept within their Breasts and Closets, or in their private houses and families,
without any convention of strangers to them, and so as to be kept within
Parochial bounds, or to such a number of Persons, etc. But for dissenters to
have multitudinous Conventicles, as it were mustering of their Forces, when,
where, and as many as they please, cannot be safe, for thereby they not only
affront the Religion established, but confirm each other in their Opinion, as
char-coals in heaps, they more kindle and inflame each other by their numbers,
etc.

Answ. We never knew Truth yet untroublesome to a truthless, faithless and
Hypocritical Generation, though it is justified and witnessed to be the most
peaceable thing in all the World, by its own Children. But are not the
Multitudinous Meetings, Conventions and Mustenings together of Rude, Wild,
Wicked People, to Drinking, and Revellings, Wakes and Whitsun-ales, May-games
and Morrice-dancings, Fencings, and Cudgel-playings, Cock-fightings and
Bear-baitings, Bowlings, and other Games, Carding, Dicing, Dancing,
Vain-shewes, Sights and Stage* plays, in the Streets, Markets, and Faires,
Iuglers, Puppets, Jack Puddings, where they kindle and inflame one another in
Lust, Want^nness, and Wickedness, as char-coals in heaps by their numbers, and
thrive in Swearing, Whoredom, Dissoluteness, and all manner of Debaue^ery and
Profaneness, much more inconsistant with the Nations Safety, disturbing its
Peace (which if ever it be true, must be the effect and fruit of Righteousness)
affronting your established Religion (unless it be a Religion that allows all
Ir-religion) then for the People that fear the Lord to meet together to worship
God in Spirit and Truth* and to Preach up the Power of Godliness, that would
bring people out of all these ungodly courses to that Grace of God in
themselves, that teaches to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly in this World:
Yet where do we find the Bishops and the Fathers of the Church, so appearing in
declamations against these things? and, though there are Laws and Statutes
extant against them, yet where so^ we the Justices so busy in Execution of
them, as some are (even to rage and madness) in Execution of one Act to make
the Quakers Swear against, and ^ase to worship God according to God's Will and
their own Consciences. 2. This is only such a Liberty as is not in the Bishops,
nor in any man's Power to deprive men of, for thoughts are free, and opinion is
no crime punishable by man's L^r, being not declared by word or actions; so that
this Learned Doctor, has here unlearnedly expressed himself, in that he talks of
Indulgence to Dissenters, where there is no Law of man at all broken (as in the
case of Opinion and Thought unexpressed, or undeclared there is not) no Law of
man being made against the Thoughts, and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, and so no indulgence at all needed; The Bishop might better
therefore have spared his pains than talked of Indulgence here, unless it had
been to better purpose; for flourishing with windy words, cannot satisfy
upright hearts, for they must have truth and substance to feed upon, and not
mee^ ^pty shows and pretenses* 3. Whereas he would have them confined to
private houses and Families, without any convention of strangers t^ them; must
not then so much as their friends and relations come in unrou^ this is so fat
from allowing that Christian Liberty* which ^he Biship in his Christian Charity
would seem to plead for, and from (...) Religion, and Divi^ity, that it
deprives men of common Liberty, destroys common Society and Humanity; yea this
Private Confinement* would be worse then the Public Imprisonment of ^ant by
the Heathens, Acts 24. 2^. who did not then forbid any of his ac^int (...) to
(...) (...) him. And Acts 28. 30* ^t Rom^ it self, where he had Liberty under
the Emperor (yet a Heathen) to receive all that came in (...) him, during his
confinement, in his own hired house for two whole years together, and to Preath
the Kingdom of God to all that cam^ him, with all authority, no man forbiding
him*

But that he may seem at least ( cum ati^e insa^ire) not to be so fierce
against Dissent (...) Meetings without some cause, as a reason why he would
have their multitudinous Conventioles (as he calls them) forcibly restrained,
he urges thus ( viz.)

Bill^ It is the ambitious aim of all parties (except that which is wholly
resolved into suffering Principle*) to seek to set up their Factions a^
Supreme, not only in repu^e of Religion, but in Civil Rowex) and this cannot
be safe.

Answ. Of that sort which the Bishop excepts from among all the rest (whether
Papists, Presbyter^s, Anabaptists or Independents, who all (says he; leaving
out the party that is now treading on the head of all, as if it never affected
any such thing) affect ( Summ^ Imp^rii) as Di^repties to have the Pre-eminence,
as Lucifer and Antichrist to exa^t themselves over all) of that sort (we say)
are the Quakers; A People 1. Who Preach and Practice that Gospel of Peace,
which in it self is not consistent with that bitter enveying and strife about
those empty Forms of Worship, External Rites, worldly Elements, Beggarly
Rudiments, Bodily Exercises, Carnal Ordinances, perishing words of man's wisdom,
outward Observations, in which the Kingdom of ( God, which is the inward Power
of the endless life (as Christ and the Apostles said) neither stands nor comes;
concerning which yet there is such ^onfused noises among the Nations, and such
a direful deal of da, and such destructive contentions th^ughout the World; A
People, (...) Who much less mak^ such ^ prating, as others do, with m^icious
words against each other about earthly Prrheminences, Dominations, Advantages,
Privileges, Enjoyments, Preferments, Dignities, Maintenances, and
Advan^ements. 3. A People (as the house of Jacob) walking in the Light of the
Lord, who though they are that Mountain of the Lords house, which is at last to
be Established in the Top of all the Mountains, and Exalted above the Hills, so
that all Nations shall flow unto it* yet at present, while all other People are
walking every one in the Name of his God, walk quietly and Peaceably in the
Name of the Lord their God; and till he himself alone arises for their help
against the Mighty that oppr^ss them, (...) whally resolved un^o suffering
Principles, as knowing that it is only by the Blood of the (...), and the Word
of his Testimony that the overcoming must be, and by not loving their Lives
unto the Death; And that the Quakers are o^ this fort, there needs no other
Testimony to be used in proof hereof, then what the Bishop himself gives of
them, page 10. where he not only Pittieth the Quakers, but praises them also,
etc. for their choosing to suffer: Seeing then he excepts them from having any
such ambitious aims, as he says all other parties have had hitherto, he ought
in Righteousness and Reason to except them from the foresaid forcible
restraint; nevertheless instead of so doing, page 5. he says thus, even of
them also as expresty, as of all the rest thus, ( viz.)

Bish. It will became the Public care and Wisdom, never to trust them, though
never so soft and seemingly Innocent at the first: Har^s (as in others Creat^s)
growing out of (...) heads and hands too, as their (...) and Sinne^ gr^w
stronger, (...) their strength and (...)

Answ. Which argues not only the truthlesness, but the mercilesness too of
this man's mind (saying all his talk of Pittifulness toward the Quakers) in not
regarding what becomes of the Wheat, nor how its rooted out (contrarily to
Christ's command, under that old Clerical, Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
pre^ence, of plucking up and r^ing out the Tares.

2. The unstableness and unsetledness of his mind, and gives us ground to
conclude, that as he knows not yet what Spirit he is of, so he knows not well
what it is he would have himself, whilst he reels to and fro in a certain
mingle mangle of words, whereby he darkens his own Counsel, running along
sometimes in such a vein of savor, forbearance, Pity, Connivance, Indulgence,
Patience, Im^ssion, recommendation of the Quakers, and of their conditions as
good, in that they will not sin against God, though their condition be sad in
that for their Conscience they are put to suffer; And after a while again in
such a sharp, strict strain of Severity, Coercion, Penalties, Pecuniary Mulcts,
Consinements, Suppressions, villification, false accusation, disdain, derision,
discommendation, for a long way together, as makes all that ever was said
before in a way of more Moderation, void and of none effect.

Bish. And howbeit in a sound of words he says again, his native temper and
candor, may perhaps contribute something toward that Christian Charity of his
toward sober dissenters, which abhors, after the Genius of Primitive
Christians, all Severity and Rigors only upon the score of Religion, which he
says may seem to some too great facility and gentleness in him, an error on
the right hand, and nearest the medium both of Humanity as a man, and of
Charity as a Christan, measuring all Policies by Christ's golden Rule, to do as
he would be done unto; as if nothing but Jacob's smoothness, and nothing of
Esau's roughness, from either Education or Complextion, had influence upon his
Opinion or Conversation. Yet,

Answ. As most men love to bruit abr^d every one his own praise, but a faithful
man who can find? So this Bishop (who should have ^et another praised him, and
not himself, a Stranger and not his own mouth, as the Wise man says)
Egregiously mistakes (as Egregiously as he magnifies himself) as touching his
own Genius, Temper and Candor, inclining him to too great Facility and
Gentleness, which he calls his Error on the right hand, for if he did Err a
great deal more then he does after the Genius of the Primitive Christians, he
would not in words only, but in deed and truth, abhor all Severity or Rigors
only upon the score of Religion, without such an exceptions clause as he
intermingles among this his most merciful and pitiful matter, whereby he
snatches back again all his Christian Charity and Pity, and ingrosseth it
only to himself and his own Party ( viz. farther then is necessary for the
cure of offenders, and the Conservation of the public Peace) under which
clause of curing offenders, and preserving the Public Peace, the very Pope
himself, who pretends to Pity and Christian Charity, as much in words as the
Prelates does, not only Ushers in, but secures it self amongst his own
Children, from the censure of that bloody Tenet of Persecution for cause of
Conscience, under all that Severity Wrath, and Rigor that he has ever
exercised toward those Dissenters from his See and Counsel Chair, that have at
any time fallen under his Clerical Cruelties: Then he would not err on the
right hand (as he seems to do to himself, though in reality he is far from it,
his Error being yet very much rather on the left) but walk uprightly by that
right golden Rule of Chaist, which he commends, but comes not near the Practice
of, which only has in it the true Humanity of a man, and the Charity of a
Christian; viz. to do as he would be done unto; for the Primitive Christians
did so indeed: and as they would not have had the Jews their own Countrymen
Persecute them as they did; so they never did Persecute any (nor would they,
had they had the outward Power so to do) no not Jews that denied Christ, upon
the score of that both then and still blasphemous Religion of theirs, in order
to such an end as the cure of Offenders, and preservation of the Public Peace;
for they knew 'twas the public preservation of Truth, which was the only
thing that would break that Nations public peace, and that nothing was so safe
for the Civil Powers, and so clearly consistent with their Peace, as to let the
Truth and its Children alone, for the sufferings of which by persecution among
them, when they had filled up the measure of their fathers, who slew the
Prophets, Wrath at last came upon them to the uttermost; But this Bishop, who I
am sure would have his own way have perfect Liberty, would have It, and It,
only, to have not only all Liberty, but all outward Emoluments and Advantages
also, in a way exclusive of all others, to whom he would indeed have Facility
and Gontleness exercised, with abhorency of all Severity and Rigors upon the
score of Religion only; yet with this bit in their mouth, whereby he can pull
in all he gives and grants, viz. So far only, but no further than is necessary
to the curing of Offenders (as he counts all dissenters are in one sense,
though ( to go round again) some not offending, but obeying God in another) and
than is for the conservation of the public Peace: Neither is he less
unrighteous in condemning the Innocent with the guilty, and giving Sentence
against a People, whom he confesses to be (as elsewhere he does) possibly of no
evil minds at present, for what they may be in future time, before they are so;
He would think it unjust if we should say, he and his Brethren (let them say
what they will, and speak in never so much simplicity, and appear never so
harmless, yet) are not to be trusted in their most innocent smiles on us,
because, as some called Bishops have formerly, so these in present being,
though Facile and Gentle, yet may hereafter prove Bloody and Deceitful: And
thus he manifests himself, though called a Father, to be not only without
Compassion, but without the Spirit of Judgment, and a sonnd Mind also; and if
we were indeed ignorant, and out of the way of Truth (as we are not) we find
him not such a High Priest, as is truly touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, as knows how to have compassion on the Ignorant, and on such as
are out of the Way: Nevertheless that he may seem the more excusa^ble (after he
has pleaded seemingly for indulgence) in his counterplea for non-indulgence
again, he covers and colors himself over very frequently, with such pretenses
as this that follows.

Bish. The insolent and seditious Expressions, that bring (...) (...) and
violent Actions, especially in Pulpits and Presses, ought with great Penalties
to be suppressed, there being nothing more unreasonable than for any man rudely
to Blaspheme and Reproach that Religion, which his Prince and Country profess.

Answ To blaspheme and reproach that Religion which the Scripture does profess
to be the true one, as James 1. and which Christ the King of all Princes of the
Earth, and his People profess, which is to keep unspotted of the World, is more
unreasonable than to blaspheme that, which (at a venture) a man's Prince and
Country Professes; for That most assuredly is the true and pure Religion,
undefiled before God, while it is more then possible that This last may be a
false one, and by so much the more unreasonable, by how much more it is
unreasonable to speak evil of Good, than of Evil it self.

Secondly, As to this passage, let every other dissenting party, as far as they
are found Innocent, vindicate themselves; but if this be spoken with reference
to the Quakers, to whom the Bishops Book mainly does relate, the thing is
sooner said than proved, that any such insolent or seditious Expressions, from
whence, as from the Cause thereof, any Tumultiousness or Violence has
proceeded, have been yet found among the Quakers, or that we are found such
rude Blasphemers or Reproachers; which things we justisie not in any where they
are found; yet are able to justisie our selves, as not guilty of ought that can
justly come under such a notion on a true account; but since we, who look
better both to our Spirits, and to our Speeches, than to give way by either to
the sowing of Sedition, Tumults, Rudeness, Blasphemy, Reproach, or Violence
against any men for their Religion, are falsely counted as sowers of such
things, as Blasphemers, and Reproachers of that Religion which our Prince and
Country do profess, for no other Cause then our testifying to the Truth, and
our publishing that Gospel of Peace, that brings out of all War and Strife, and
for declaring against the mere Traditions and Inventions of men; We would know
the Bishops mind, if he be able to resolve us.

First, Whether his meaning be, as his Words here import, of every Prince and
Country (as a Prince and Country) as well as of any one, without respect to
this or that Form of Religion in it? If yea,

Then Secondly, Whether will not this Shift serve the chief Priests of the
Turk, Pope, Tartar, Pagan, and all other Ethnic Princes, to their several
sorts of Religious People, as well as the Bishops of England, to say, Nothing
is more unreasonable than for men to reproach that Religion, which their Prince
and Country do profess?

And so Thirdly, Whether by consequence this does not block up the way for ever
(unless unreasonableness it self must make the way) against Turks and Heathens
ever rejecting their own false Religions, for the true one? Since every man who
shall come to be any further enlightened in the Truth, than the dark Body of the
whole Nation he belongs to, must stop his mouth from ever declaring it in order
to the Illumination of others, and say as that Divine Heathen, or Prophetical
Poet of old, who rebuked the rude manners of his Generation at Rome,

Me mutire nefas, nec clam, nec cum serobe nusquam.

Fourthly, Whether the Apostles, who very roughly reproved the religious
Superstition of the Jews, which their then King and Country also did profess
(calling them stiff necked, and uncircumcised resistters of the holy Spirit,
calling the High Priest (now out of date, though supposing himself to stand
then by divine Institution, as those did before Christ crucified) whited wall,
stiling the circumcision the concision, preaching against the Prohibitions of
the High Priests, and their threatenings of them for speaking in the name of
Jesus (from whence often tumultuousnesse was occasioned, though caused only by
the Malice of the Priests themselves, still stiring up their People to strife
and wrath against them) were truly to be counted what by the Priests they then
were counted, and as we are now by the same Generation (viz.) so insolent and
seditious in their Expressions, as to be the Causers of Tumultuous and violent
Actions; whether they were truly counted Unreasonable, ru^e Blasphemers, and
Reproachers of the Religion of their Prince and Country? And,

Fifthly, Whether this Bishop himself, and such of his Brethren, who count us
as such, for doing no other than the very same in the same Spirit and Power,
would not have counted the Apostles so then, as the High Priests then did, had
these happened to have lived in their times, and in the Religion of their Prince
and Country: But no marvel if great Penalties be called for against men as
seditious and tumultuous, who (but that they are so nicknamed) are more
peaceable People than their Accusers, where only Self-interest, Self-safety,
and outward Security in Prosperity are sought after: But why had we not this
man's mind herein before? it may be thought surely that either this, that n^w is
so, was not his mind in the late times he speaks of, or else that, those times
not favoring the Episcopal Religion so much as these do, he had not then so
much Zeal for it as now he has, being made a Bishop himself, nor so much
courage as to bear witness to it, and appear so eager against Dissenters from
it as now he does, in the juncture of these late times of his own exaltation:
And no marvel there is such a loud cry for the suppressing under penalties to
Dissenters, of both their Pulpits and their Presses, This was the very self
same counsel that the Papists themselves gave to the Emperor, Princes and
States, that they should obstruct the Writing and Printing of Books, and also
Disputing or Preaching otherwise than according to the Interpretation and
Approba^on of the Church, and that the (...) of such Books should be punished;
see the Hist* of the Council of Trent, page 42, 48. This the Protestants liked
not when (...) under Papists, yet approve of, promote, and give out as good
Counsel, when they have got others under themselves.

This course of commanding their Ordinaries to search for earnestly, and after
to burn the Books of John Husse, as heritical; was used by the Popish Prelates
at the Council of Constance, when and where the said Husse himself also was (as
we are) (...) of O^stinacy (the old Phrase) and condemned to be burnt as an
obstinate Heretic. See Fox. Acts and Monum. Page 810.


for then all that is either Preached or Printed by the Clergy alone, may pass
for truth without reply, control or examination, and so that People, whose
principle it is ( aut solus, aut ^ullus) to stand alone, or not at all, may
(all others that pretend to it being removed out of the way) have alone that
title of Christ's and the Gospels Ministers, for they usually win all in the
dispute, who have none to contradict them, but themselves: Nevertheless how
suspicious the truth of that Religion, and its Ministry is, that fears reproof,
and is loath to stand the Trial, by whatever in preaching or printing may never
so openly appear against it, all such may easily discern who know that Veritas
non querit Angulos.
Truth seeks not to creep in corners: And how far from the true one that
Religion is that by violence oppresses others, the Bishops own forecited Words
tells us, in which he says, It was the genius of primitive Christians to abhor
all Severity and Rigors, only upon the Score of Religion, etc. out of whose
practice they must needs be found, who seek (contrary unto that which he calls
Christ's golden Rule, of doing to others as they would by others be done unto)
to cause men to become Christians by compulsion, and to our such as are made
Offenders (only for not being so) by cutting th^s off from their common
Privileges as men, and to conserve the public Peace by that common succes^ess
conserve of public Persecution.

Bish. There are but those four ways of treating any party, that dissents from
the public Establishment of Religion and its Laws, in any Church and Kingdom.
First, either to Impoverish, Imprisan, Banish and Destroy all Dissenters, as
the King of Castile did the Moors of Granada, which is a very rough,
barbarous, unwelcom and unchristian way, disallowed by all Wise Men of all
persuasions.

Answ. Turpe est Doctori cum culpa rederguit ipsum.

That there has been no other way of treating us, as Dissenters, but this
first way of the four, which is as yet also likely to continue, is evident
enough by the Act's commencement against the Quakers, on the 24th. of March (so
called) long before the Bishops Book, which he may possibly call a more gentle
way of treating, came forth in public; which Book had it been the f^test, yet
therefore was not the first, since it comes (and so to little purpose) so long a
time after the other: Which way of proceeding, by Impoverishment, Imprisonment,
^anishment, which is the very way of the Bill, to the passing of which he has
consented, it is so much the more shame to him that he did consent, seeing he
here also passes so severe a Sentence on it, as to compare it, to the King of
Castiles destroying the Moors of Granada, which himself condemns, as a very
rough, Barbarous, unwelcome and Unchristian way, disallowed by all wise men of
all persuasions. And we also appeal to himself and all wise men of all
persuasions, whether, as he consented to that very thing he here so much
Condemns, so he has not greatly Condemned himself, as one Acting, and so
sinning against his own Conscience, and so against God the very contrary to
which he commends the Quakers for) in his so consenting, and whether he does
not in his Sentencing the Quakers to destruction, by Fines, Prisons,
Banishments, Sentence himself also to be both Cruel, Rough, Barbarous,
Unwelcome, and Unchristian, and unlike to all wise men of all persuasions, and
also contrary to that Charitable Method and Temper (as he calls it) of those
Ancient Fathers of the Church, Irenaeus, Turtullian, Cyprian, Austin, Prosper,
Cyrill, Hillary, Optatus, Ierom, and others, guided by the Word and Spirit of
God, who (as he says) never used any other means but the Sword of the Spirit,
the Word of Truth, in Meekness of Wisdom, and did not call the severity of the
Secular Sword to their assistance (as many now do) before, or until they found
that depraved Opinions, put men upon desperate Actions, which as yet neither
has, nor can be justly charged upon the Quakers; so that here is a Cloud of
Witnesses, all added by himself, against his own and his Brethrens present
Practice, who before they have used all those rational and Religious means,
which they then used in Meekness of Wisdom to convince them of any Error or
mistake, have given their consent by Bill to the ruining of the Quakers, and
also, before the passing of the said Bill, have permitted their Apparitors and
other Officers, who have hunted Poor Innocents from place to place, as it were
on purpose to weary them out like Tormentors, by summoning them to Courts far
remote from each other, and that only for either not coming to the Public
Place of Worship, or for not paying of Mortuaries, Smoak-Pennies, Peter Pence,
Easter Reckonings, with other such like spiritual Impositions, which seeing we
find them not mentioned at all in the Scriptures, nor practiced among Primitive
Christians, whether they are not merely men's Traditions and Inventions, yea and
Relics of the Church of Rome, we desire to be informed by the Bishop, in all
plainness, if he judges they are not.

Bish. Or secondly, by rational convincing them of their Error, which is a
work of time and dexterity, not to be done on the sudden, though very worthy
to bear a part in the Discipline of the Church, which should require of every
one a Reason why they differ from, and forsake the established Religion.

Answ. We appeal to the Bishop himself, where ever there has been as yet any
such rational proceedings of the Bishops with us, in order to the convincing us
of Error, with such time and dexterity as he speaks of? Yea, rather have they
not run upon us on the sudden without using any of there own prescribed
remedies, without exercising that, which he calls a part of the Discipline of
the Church, without requiring (as they say they ought to do) of every one a
reason why we differ from them in Religion? Although we have been always ready
to render, not only to them, but to every one that asks us, a reason of our
Faith and Practice, but that the Deficiency has been ever on their part;
witness the Bishops own words, Page 7. where he says, of himself at least, who
has had as much to do with the Quakers as any one of them all has had, I
never conversed with any of their Persons: and page 4. With the Quakers I have
so little Correspondency, that I have not any acquaintance, not knowing any of
that way by face or name, or so much as one hours conversation. But the Bishop
who has a Plaster ready at hand to apply to every wound, that he gives
himself unawares, by his unwary conflicts with the Quakers, has one Pitiful
Put-off for this oversight also; for says he (in the same place) of the
Quakers.

Bish. They are a Generation of People so Supercilious, or so shie, that they
are scarce Sociable or accessible; speaking much in their Conventicles, behind
men's backs, but seldom arguing any thing in presence, of those that are best
able to answer or satisfy them.

Answ. To which we reply, that it is very well known that they are a People not
so Supercilious, or so shie as he would make them, for Shieness,
Superciliousness, Unsociableness, Unaccessibleness, is the usual Deportment of
the Bishops themselves toward the Quakers, whom, while they seem to themselves
to be some sons of Anak, they look upon as Grasshoppers with disdain, whose
Greatness will scarce stoop to entertain any conference with the Poor silly
Quakers (as he terms them) in order to their Conviction of the Errors they deem
them to be in, although the Holy Men and Ancient Fathers of the Church above
named (as this Bishop himself testifies of them) did not at any time so despise
the meanest of any Christians outward Condition, or the Fatuity of their
Opinions, as not to set a great value on their Souls for whom Christ dyed:
Neither do the Quakers seek Corners, to speak in behind men's backs (as he
falsely charges them with the doing of in their Conventicles, which are places
open to all comers) but appear as publicly as possibly they can in their
Testimony to the Truth, of which they are not ashamed, neither do they refuse
to argue any thing, but rather offer often to argue every thing, in presence of
those, even the Bishops themselves, who judge themselves best able to answer,
or satisfy them, and who are indeed so wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight, as to take upon them to impose things, to be believed and
done, on seventy-times seven men, that are able (were the Bishops as willing to
condescend by word of mouth to render their reasons for them) to render a
sufficient reason to the contrary.

By the Bishops own prescription then of this second Remedy, as well as of the
first; Since in this second, which he commends, he is found defective, while he
Condemns the first, which alone he is found active in, he stands altogether
Condemned by himself, not only in what he Condemns, but in what he ^wes.

Bish. Or thirdly, by changing the Established Laws for their sake, which is
not for the Piety, Prudence, Honor and safety of a Nation, and Church, when it
judges its Constitutions to be Religious, Righteous, and convenient.

Answ. This were an effectual way to end and mend all indeed, to change the
Laws Established, which are for the Establishing of Persecution, for the sake
of the Persecuted sufferers, that dissent out of Tenderness of Conscience, and
to Establish in their stead such as allow a Liberty to all Religions (while
they keep Righteousness and Peace amongst each other in outward matters)
whether Ethnicks, Turks, Jews, Papists or Protestants of what Form or
Profession soever; The Civil Power interposing between them all, to no other
end, then the bare preserving of the Civil Peace, and of equity, innocence,
honesty and truth in their dealings each with other in mere external affairs:
Yea doubless no Nation will ever stand firm in the time that is now to come,
till their Foundation be that Love, that allows to all men the same Liberty of
their Consciences, which each man desires to enjoy himself, till all People be
permitted to walk in the Name of his God, and the Lords own People, to walk in
the Name of the Lord their God, without any molestation or prohibition, for
Conscience being that truly tender part, in which (those only excepted by the
Bishop himself, which being wholly resolved into suffering Principles cannot
make resistance) all others (though never so Conformable through fear for a
time) being trod upon will turn again, and (when they can) relieve themselves
from the heavy hands of their Oppressors: And, besides all those mischievous
and ill consequences of War, which arises mostly about Religion, it is the
express command of Christ, (which what Nation soever violates will first or
last dearly rue their violation of it) Mat. 13. that the Tares, viz. false
worshippers should stand and be let alone, though not in the Garden, or true
Church, yet at least in the Field, which is the World, and the Civil States,
and several Nations thereof, which (howbeit the Bishop takes Nations for
Churches by wholesale here, as if the words Church, and Nation were
Synonima's, yet ( qua Nations) are not Churches) to grow together with the
Wheat until the harvest, or end of the World; and that with this Caveat, least
men, in the midst of their Busslings and busy minds mistaking, should under a
pretense of plucking up the Tares, root out the Wheat it self also, which what
Kingdom or People soever does ( Bishop Gaudens Counsel and Caveat to the
contrary notwithstanding, who says he is not for such a ^ame permission of
Tares to be among the Wheat, least that good seed of Religion, which is sown by
the Public Ministry (by which he means no other then their own) and fenced by
Legal Authority should be ^hoaked) had better busy it self wholly about other
and mere secular matters of wrong and wicked Lewdness, which reason wills they
should be Totally taken up with in the exercise of their Civil Power, those
being the things, which not only properly, but indeed alone appertain to them
to be exercised in, or take Congnizance of: For if the Wheat, which are indeed
those true worshippers only, who worship the Father of Spirits (who is a Spirit
and seeks such only to worship him) in Spirit and in Truth, in reference
unto whom all other outside worshippers are as nothing (for what is the Chaff
to the wheat, says the Lord) and which only must go into the garner, when all
chaffy Formalists must (in this day wherein the Lord is sifting out the house
of Israel from among the Nations, or several Sorts of Professions, as Corn is
sifted in a Sieve) fall to the ground, be driven away with the Wind, and burnt
up with the unquenchable Fire, of that great day of the Lord, which now burns
as a Oven against all Flesh and fleshly Christianities; if (we say) the
foresaid true worshippers be of God, then they cannot be withstood in a way of
Safety to it self by any Nation; Since to withstand^ them, is not only to
resist that People, which are the Chariots and Horsemen thereof, but also to be
found fighters against God himself, against whom and his People, it is as
impossible finally to prevail, as it was for Egypt to prevail against Israel,
which, when God* arose to Redeem them from their bondage, increased upon them
so much the more, by how much the more they were opressed, and intended to be
for ever suppressed Premi hand supprimi potest.
by them, God himself taking part with his own chosen against the other, who
has said he will give Kingdoms for their ransom, and Nations for their Life,
rather then his own Seed shall go unredeemed.

We say that this were the way to setle all in Peace, to change all settled
Laws that are for Persecution, into a Law for the Tolleration of all
Religions, much more of that one, which though it be struck at both by and
before all the rest, will be found at last to be the only true one, which yet
must unavoidably suffer Violence in some place or other, while that Principle
of Persecution has place in Peoples hearts, for as all Nations are not of one
and the same, but of many ( respectively) so all men are not of one and the
same Religion, in any one Nation; whereupon in case it happen that any Nation
by Law Establish that Religion, which is not Truth, that Nation suppressing by
outward Violence all Religions besides its own (whether that be Heathenish,
Turkish, Jewish, Popish, Prelatical, Presby erian, or any other) must
necessarily ( ex officio) in point of duty Persecute and tread down the Truth
it self; for if the Civil Magistracy (as such) ought de jure to root out all
Religions, but that which it judges to be Righteous, and convenient, then even
those that are heathen Magistrates, (who would be no more, as to that capacity
of Magistrates then now they are, if they should turn Christians) must root out
( quoad posse) all that is Christian, and every Magistrate being a Magistrate as
well as any one (the notion of Christian adding nothing to men's Power as Civil
Governors) according to that rule of quatenus ipsum, which includes de omni,
what ever belongs to any thing (as so) belongs also to every thing that is so,
not only those Nations, which happen to be of the true Religion must Persecute
all those that are found in false ones, but each Nation that is found in any
false Religion, must seek the utter ruin not only of all the rest, but even of
those also which are Established in the Truth; But this is the way which the
Bishop in no wise approves of, for any Nation (or at least for this) to
renounce the unsound Principle of forcing ( under Penalties) all Dissenters to
conformity in Religion unto it self, because (says he) it is not consistent
with the Piety, Prudence, Honor, or Safety of a Nation and Church, when it
judges its Constitutions to be Religious, Righteous and Convenient: But what a
contrary conclusion is this, not only to all Scripture Reason (as is showed
above) but also to all common Experience in this our Nation? in which it has
been seen in the days both of Edward the sixth, Elizabeth, and James his times
(neither can it be denied by the Bishops themselves, unless they will deny
themselves to be conscientious Dissenters from that Popery which stood here of
old) how much it was for the piety, prudence, honor and Safety of the Nation,
which did before generally judge those Popish constitutions, it was then
established in to be Religious, Righteous and Convenient, and yet upon further
and more mature deliberation, saw good ground, for the sake of that small (yet
more enlightened) Protestant Party that dissented, to change the then and long
before established Laws concerning their Mass, and many other matters, as the
Statutes themselves declare at large: The Bishop therefore by this reasonless
Reason, both condemns that course of all the Protestant Princes of England that
changed the Popish Laws before established, for the sake of tender, Protestant
Dissenters, as not savouring of piety, prudence, nor yet either safe,
honorable, or convenient for the Nation; but also secondly, justifies the Pope
himself, and all Popish Princes in Persecuting such Protestants against him, as
are found within these Precincts and Dominions, and in not changing their
established Laws against the Truth for their sakes; since (as the Bishops judge
the English Constitutions so to be, whereby they stand:) So other Nations judge
their own Constitutions to be Religious, Righteous and Convenient; and thirdly,
makes a fence against the spreading of all sorts of Protestanism, not that only
which is so at large, but of that which is Christianity, so truly called.

Moreover, where ever the alteration of any suppressive Laws for the sake of a
few Dissenters, tends to the increase of Love and Amity, Peace and Unity, which
is a better thing than Uniformity in a Nation, the preservation of which is the
main end of all civil Government, it cannot truly be supposed to be prejudicious
to either the Piety, Honor and Safety of that Nation, to alter its established
Laws for the sake of those few, which (for Conscience merely) cannot conform
in mere outward matters: And so the case is here, for, as that People that are
most truly tender of keeping the truth and peace (which are the party that
though they least deserve it, yet suffer most always, and for the most part
only under those Laws that are made to force the Conscience in case of
Religion) cannot be forced to do against their Faith, and so with more Pity,
Piety, Prudence, Peace, Safety and Honor, every way may be let alone to live a
quiet Life under all civil Governments, in all Godliness and Honesty, the
disturbing them under the pretense of their being Disturbers, being the true
Cause of most Disturbance in most Nations; So the generallity of the ruder sort
that make no such Conscience about Religion, as the upright ones do, can
without scruple change their Worship, if men will have them, and (as people did
by the lump worship that Image, which was set up, on pain of ruin, if they
bowed not to it, eccepting three that did dissent, for whose sake they found
good cause soon after to change the Edict) can conform quietly to and fro
without scruple or control (as they did in Edward's, Maryes, and Elizabeth's
Days) to what Forms of Worship shall be required of them; and so a Toleration
by Law to the rest at least that cannot, cannot be so far from a Nations,
Piety, Prudence, Honor and Safety as this Bp. Imagines, and cannot but be most
tending to its Security; for those Nations which weave the Spiders Webb, which
catches and hampers the small harmless Gnats and Flies, while Hornets and
venomous Creatures that have strong stings and great strength, that know how to
foot it through every form, and suite their peace to every Profession, crawl
over them without being caught or tangled, do draw down upon themselves that
Vengeance from the Lord, which he will as assuredly, recompense on them in due
time, as ever he foretold it by his Prophet, who said, Isai. 59. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
None calls for Justice, nor any pleads for truth, they trust in Vanity and
speak Lies, they conceive Mischief and bring forth Iniquity; they hatch
Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders Webb: He the eats of their Eggs dies,
and that which is crushed breaks out into a Viper. Their Webbs shall not
become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their Works; Their
Works are Works of Iniquity, and the Act of Violence is in their hands. Their
Feet run to evil, and hey make have to shed Innocent Blood: their thoughts are
the thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their paths. The way
of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their goings: they have
made them crooked paths; whosoever goes therein shall not know peace.

Lastly, Though indeed it is not consistent, with the Piety, Prudence, Honor
and Safety of the true Church, to alter its Laws and Constitutions, for the
sake of such as are not of it, because Christ himself is their Lawgiver, who
has not put it into her power to make her own Laws, much less to impose her
Laws under outward penalties, with carnal weapons on the consciences of other
people; and by his Law allows a latitude, as to outward observations, in
whicih his Kingdom stands not to do as every one is by him persuaded and
required in his own mind; so be that he, who observes, or observes not days,
or outward things, does, and does it not unto the Lord; neither need the
^asse-Church change her Orders for the sakes of such as dissent from it, and
are not of it (as the Quakers are not) either of the Bishops or the Popes, each
of which if they please themselves, shall not disprease us in their Acts and
Orders for superfluous Ceremonies, so be they let us alone; with whom (as being
not of their Church) they have naught to do (de jure) as with Members of it,
yet so far is it from being against the Piety, Prudence, Honor and Safety of
any Nation or earthly Kingdom, to repeal such Laws as they have made by their
Priests Direction, to bind men to conform to Religions contrary to their
Consciences; that if any happen to err aster that sort of Priests, which do
direct them (and the Bishop without the Light) which we call all men to, and
which he opposes, is no more infallible, but as fallible to the full as the
Pope and Presbyter, (yea none of the three do so much as pretend to
infallibility, save the Pope) then it is neither Godly, Prudent, Honorable, nor
so much as safe for any Nation not to change its established Laws for the sake
of Dissenters from its Error, since in not changing them, God himself is
rebelled against in such a case; whether those laws be made for Swearing or
against true Worship, which are the two things only aimed at in the Act against
the Quakers; about one of which there is the self same reason, as about the
other; and in proof of this we have the authority of the Bishops own true
Testimony to the one, which is as true, when given forth in a way of evidence
to the other, whose Words concerning Swearing, which (with the Bishops consent
to it) man's Law now commands, page 23. are as follows,

If it do appear that all Swearing is absolutely by our Lord Christ forbidden
to his Disciples, God forbid we should not obey his Word, and rather change the
laws of man than violate his Commands, to whom we Christians owe the highest
love, loyalty, and obedience, but if it appear (as say we, it does not by any
thing said in the Bishops Book, or any where else) to religious reason, that
the words of Christ do not import an absolute forbidding of all Swearing, we
must not be so much slaves to the Letter, as to lead Truth and Reason captive,
or to deprive our selves of that religious Liberty which is left us, and so not
only lawful for Christians to use, but in some cases (prudentially) necessary,
as to the expediences of men's Iealousies, Lives, Liberties, Estates and good
Names, even in private, much more in the dispensations of Justice, to the
public Peace and general Satisfaction of whole Polities and Communities,
wherein men live sociably under Law and Government.

To which Words of the Bishops concerning Swearing (mutatis mutandis) we
subjoyn concerning our meeting together to Worship God in Spirit and in Truth,
which (with the Bishops consent thereunto) man's Law now forbids (viz.) if it do
appear that all meeting together in Christ's name, of above five of his
Disciples at one time, to Worship him in Spirit and in Truth in any one place
(except in some such Churches or Chapels, as are of man's, and for the most
part of the Popes Consecrating of old for his Service (though since devoted to
a somewhat more refined Service) is absolutely by our Lord Christ forbidden to
his Disciples, God forbid we Quakers should not obey his Word, and submit to
every Ordinance of man for his sake, whether to the King, as Supreme, or those
that are sent by him, and ought to be a praise to them that do well, and for
the punishment only of Evil D^ers, against whom only God's Law is, rather
then violate not only the Kings Command, but Christ's also, to whom we
Christians owe the highest Love, Loyalty and Obedience. But if it shall appear
(as it ^asily may in any one that is of the true Religion James speak of, that
is undefiled before God, and to keep unspotted of the Lusts and Superstitions
of the World to religious reason, that the Words of Christ neither in the
Conscience, nor in the Scriptures express or import any such absolute forbiding
of all meetings to worship him, any where, or in any wise, saving in the times,
places and forms aforesaid, but by the scope of them and the Analogy of
Scripture, they have no such limited meaning (as the Bishop had when he
consented to the Act for the suppressing of the Quakers Meetings to Worship
God, and when he wrote those Words in his Epistle (viz.) for Dissenters, i. e.
from the Bishops (meaning Quakers as well as others) to have multitudinous
Conventicles when, where, and as many as they please, cannot be safe) then we
must not be so much Slaves to men's Wills, which are below the Letter of the
Scripture, which is a Declaration of the Will of God, as to lead Truth and
Reason captive, or to deprive our selves of that Religious Liberty, which is
left us by Christ, and so is not only lawful for Christians to use, but in some
cases (as namely that of conscience obliging thereunto) necessary, though else
it may be prudential to forbear our meetings, as to the expediences of our
Lives, Liberties, Estates and good Names among evil men, not only in private,
but much more in our public Dispensations of the Word of Truth; which is of
most moment and concernment to the public Peace, and to the general
satisfaction about the truth of the whole Polity and Community, wherein we live
sociably enough under the civil Laws and Governments of men, so far as we can
be both under them and under Christ.

But alas, why talk we of changing of the Law for our sakes, eleven points of
the twelve of which is possession? which when once the Clergy of any of the
three sorts at any time have eminently obtained, they tell us it is then too
late for us to expect dispute, or any other change of established Law for our
sakes, then that which the Bishop has of late been necessary to by his own
suffrage, which is no repeal of any old Laws for the punishment of Dissenters
(which were established so long ago, that they were well nigh worn out and
forgotten and ready to die out of date of themselves) but a rev^ving of them
into their former force, and an addition of new ones to the same end and
purpose; so that if our Cause be better then the Clergies, yet their claws are
longer than ours, and that is cause enough whereupon for Lambs to be devoured:
And now that the Sentence passed against us as erroneous, and seditious, should
be repealed, upon the account of whatever strength of reason is by us rendered
at so great a disadvantage, as we (who stand already both imprisoned and
condemned) do appear in against such an eminent Accuser of us as a Bishop, who
is so highly esteemed as John Gauden, who says, he is thought to be no barren
nor diffident Speaker, page 3. when he speaks for us, and is also as fluent,
as fervent, and blindly confident when he talks against us, how little is it to
be expected? (unless the Lord set home some of the Quakers honest plainness to
the Consciences of the present Powers, in whose hands the hearts of Kings are,
so that he can turn them as the Rivers of Waters) since Damnati lingua vocem
habet, vim non habet. Besides it is the manner of all those parties in these
latter days, whose professed principle it is by Penalties to prosecute all
Dissenters from what Religion shall be established in this Nation, and who are
not wholly resolved (as the Quakers are) into suffering Principles, however
they cry out of the morosness, and tyrannousness of those times wherein they
are underlings, respectively and mutually to each other, and plead with all
earnestness, and evident demonstration the Liberty of their own Consciences, to
plead down the Liberty of others, yet not without some subtle pretense, some
nice distinction between Persecution and Preservation of public Peace, or some
kind of odd Secundum quid or other: And how exquisitely soever they exclaim of
others Sharpness and Cruelty, while they feel the blows, yet to lay on
themselves with less compassion than those they complain on, when the backs of
others are to bear them, Witness, not only the grievious groans that were
uttered for liberty of Conscience, out of Smectimnuus his own mouth, while he
was under the hatches, who yet Lorded it over all others, as well as over God's
Heritage, when he obtained to sit at the stern and handle the helm himself. But
also the Cries of the Prelatick Party, both against Smectimnuus, and against
the Pope, according as they have at any time ( respectively) suffered under
either, who yet give no small Symptoms by this Bishops Book (as smooth as
it is) See Dr. Gauden. page 6.
that how soft and silently soever they went in the late days of their
Humiliation (which 'twere not amiss for them yet to beware they do not forget)
as Cats and Lions do on their Paws, yet they have sharp fangs, and reserved
Quid rides? mutato nomine de te Fabula narratur.
talons, as the others have, who never do show till they find a fit prey and
Opportunity, wherein to show their cruel claws.

Obj. And if any say, were you Quakers once in Power you would also do the same.

Answ. We reply on the behalf of our own Consciences, and the consentient sense
of all the truly Christian (and not unchristian, nor Antichristian) Church,
from Christ's time to this very day, even that general Assembly and Church of
the firstborn which is in God, whose names are written in Heaven, to which we
are come as they were, Heb. 6. That after the genius of the Primitive
Christians, which was (as all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must do) to
suffer Persecution, and not to persecute, and after that divine Nature, of
which we are made par^akers, and that native temper we are begotten into by the
Word of Christ, whose mind we have as they had of old, 1. Cor. 2. Phil. 2. We
abhor (without such reserves and exceptions, as Bishop Gauden makes, when he
says so of himself ( All such Sever^ty and Rigon, as i^ pleaded for by the
fame Bishop, that pleads against it, upon the score of Religion only, and as
King James said in one of his Speeches to his Parliament. It is a pure rule in
divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church with Violence and Blood, and
that it was usually the condition of Christians to be Persecuted, and not to
Persecut^; And King Charles the first in his Eikon Basilike, page 67. in his
complaint to God, Thou feast how much cruelty amongst Christians is acted under
the color of Religion, as if we could not be Christians unless we crucify one
another: and page 28. Make them at length seriously to consider, that nothing
violent or injurious can be religious. So is it ( God knows what ever
mistrustful minds may think, who measure others corn by their own Bushel) a
pure Rule, Principle and Resolution in our Church (as knowing nothing else but
patience toward all, even ill men, will prosper finally and overcome, and that
we are not to be overcome of Evil, but to overcome Evil with Good) to make no
violent resistance (if we could) against those under whom we suffer singly for
our Consciences, much less to exercise Violence, in order to the forcing of any
against their Consciences to be of us: Nor do we build up the City Zion by
Blood, nor Jerusalem by any Iniquity and Deceit; and who ever are otherwise
minded (how Apostolic so ever they may pretend to be) have relinquisht,
aposta^ized, and degenerated from, not that which is ours alone, but from that
pure Principle of the primitive Pastors (who had no dominion over the Faith of
any that were within, much less any that were without the pale of their Church,
whom they left to God to Judge) which said Principle can possibly stand no more
with Persecution, than God himself can stand in Union with the Devil.

Bish. Or fourthly, By way of discreet connivance, and charitable indulgence,
so far as the civil peace of the Nation will bear, until reason and religion
(of whose prevalency wise and good men never despair) have by ealme and
charitable methods recovered People from the error of their ways by the Sacred
doctrine, and good examples of those who conform to the established Laws in
Church and State.

Ans. It is remarkable, that all of those four ways of treating any party
that dissen^s from themselves, which this Bishop has prescribed, three whereof
are discreet, good and justifiable, and two of them justified by himself, and
but one very bad and condemned by him, as barbarous, and unchristian, he
himself is found (witness his assent to the Act) following and assenting to no
other then the very worst, (viz.) to Impoverish, Imprison, Banish, and so
destroy dissenters, a course dissallowed (as he confesses) by all wise men of
all persuasions: for I appeal to all wise men to judge, whether so much
discreet connivance and charitable indulgence, has been used as yet to the
Quakers, until reason and religion (of whose prevalent ey wise and good men
(we confess) never despair (though evil men despair of overcoming by their
evil manners, and so betake themselves to sharper courses,) have by calm and
charitable methods, recovered the People from that, which he calls the error of
their way, by any either Sacred doctrines or good examples of such as conform
so freely to that religion that is now established? What such sound doctrine
have we seen delivered by any of the Bishops, or by this Bishop either, in
these his pretended undertakings thereof, sufficient to convince any rational
man of the Legality of that sort of swearing, he so pleads for? 2. What good
examples have we from the lives and conversations of the Conformists, to gain
us to the belief of it, that their most solemn swearing is the will of God;
concerning whom (though they speak much against the Quakers) the Bishop himself
by way of discommendation says, page 17. that the Quakers shall rise in
Judgment at the last day, against many of those their accusers, for this very
thing, in that whilst others are common swearers against Gods own Command, and
so such as are disposed to false swearing, and gross perjury, sins of the
first magnitude; yea such as to whom when they swear never so solemnly in
Judicature, no more credit is to be given then to Liars, the Quakers (for which
no good men can blame them as he says) have a just abhorrency of the sin of
profane, easy, trivial, familiar, false and inconsiderate swearing, for which
the Land mourns; and whilst the others have no reverence of the Majesty of
God, nor the Sacredness of an Oath, the Quakers have so great a fear of an
Oath, that out of a jealousy of swearing amiss, they will not swear at all? Do
we not see Iniquity abounding beyond all bounds of modesty, and common honesty?
People wallowing in the mire of Lust, Voluptuousness, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, Excess of Riot, Pride, Profane and Predigious Swearing, by new
coined, new invented, and before unheard of Oaths, in a way of Bravado, as if
they would dare God to Damn them, and engage him to do it before their time;
Lying, Consening, Chea^ing, Defrauding, countenancing all manner of Lewdness
and Debauchery among that People who are found the most forward and Zealous
Conformitants to what ever Image the Bishops shall set up in the Church? 2.
Will the ill and beas^ly manners of brutish minded men, ever win the Quakers,
from that good conversation which they have in Christ Jesus, which is the end
of all that Religion that lies in outward, yea (as Christ says) the very Law
and the Prophets, will it ever gain them back to the old forms, upon which God
has stretched forth the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness, to
live there with the old mere Formalists, their old, wretched and unprofitable
lives over gain? Does not that sound doctrine, and good example the Bishop
speaks of remain yet invisible to the eyes of any, save such as call evil
good, and good evil, put darkness for light, and light for darkness? has it
ever yet been seen among the generality of Parish People, whereby to render
dissenters from them inexcusable, and justify that severity, which is now by
Law to be inflicted on the Oppinions and Actions of those which are true, just,
honest, and in no wise so extravagant to the prejudice of the Kingdom, as the
Bishop makes them? But the Bishop who is so wise, as to insert in the midst of
every of them, some odd clause or other, whereby to make himself a creephole
out of the censure of that absurdity, which otherwise would fall upon his
sayings, has one here also, whereby to escape.

Ob^. For (says he) discreet connivance, and charitable indulgence is to be
used, so far only, as the Civil peace of the Nation will bear, but the
permission of the Quakers Opinions and Actions (unless they be reduced to
obedience) do many ways perturb the public peace* affront the established
Religion, threaten to subvert our Laws by their disobedience thereunto, and to
obstruct all Judicial proceedings.

Ans. The Civil Peace has been ever, and is at this day a thousand fold more
disturbed, and that true Religion, that was long since established by Christ
himself and his Apostles, upon the true Foundation, which the Quakers stand on
at this day, more palpably affronted, and Equity it self which is the End * of
Finis legis est le^.
all Law subverted, and so truly, all right Judicial proceedings obstructed,
and even man's Laws, as well as Gods, more apparently disobeyed, by hunting them
up and down, and haling them out of their own private houses, as well as out of
open meeting-places, without Warrants into Prisons (as the experience of those
Hurli-burlies, that are seen in this City at this day, do evidently declare)
then ever they would have been or could possibly be if the Quakers were let
alone to declare the Truth, and to worship God in Spirit and Truth, and to live
a peaceable and quiet life (as they would do) under the King in all godliness
and honesty: Neither is it possible that the Quakers should be otherwise
Opinioned or acted then they are, or the Nation in Peace settled, or your own
(if it were as truly as ye suppose it to be, right) Religion Established, till
these rigid inflictions have an end; And to this the Bishop himself witnesses
in the very next words, which are thus, ( viz.) in this particular Case of the
Quakers who refuse all Legal Oaths upon scruples of Conscience, no sober man
can think by mere Penalties to reduce them to the Conformity with our Laws, or
to stop the spreading of their Opinions, until it be plainly showed (and that,
say we still, never will, be unless more be done, then ever yet has been done
by the Bishops Book in order to it) that it is not true Religion, but only
S^perstition in them, a fear where no fear is, a being Righteous over much, a
mistake of Christ's meaning, a wresting of Scripture by their own unlearnedness
and unstableness to their own Dectruction, as well as to the Public
parturbation: Yea sad experience (says another Author) has clearly and
plainly shown us, that forcing of Conscience, and persecuting about Religion is
not only in vain, but a direct contrary means, and a cause of Sects, and
disturbances, and of many evils, as the Chronicles of Germany, France, and the
Low Countries do abundautly testify; The States of Holland also affirmed that
it was not possible to find out means of any good and certain Peace, otherwise
then by Tollerating more Religions then one; Some say indeed that People of
different Opinions cannot live together in a Kingdom without continual
contention, and therefore say they, must that be prevented with Fire and Sword:
But what though there be Virtue and filthiness in a Kingdom, good and bad men,
which are one contrary to the other? one must not therefore (says a wise man)
to prevent it, bring a whole Kingdom or Land into confusion by stirring up the
People one against another; Moreover it is evident, that in Dutchland, Poland,
and in the Low Countries more Religions then one are suffered, and yet there
are not continual uproars, and Tumults, as some imagine such Toleration would
occasion in a Kingdom: Therefore may we conclude, that it is not the
Tolleration of more Religons then one, which produces uproar in a Kingdom, but
rather the untowardness, and perverseness of them that seek to obstruct this
Tolleration.

Moreover it was the saying of Calvin in his Just: If any one reprove or rebuke
men's evils, and teach any thing contrary to what they teach, then they account
that to be the cause of uproars, when they themselves are the tumultuous, and
if they themselves did not stir up the mighty to shed blood, there would never
arise so many uproars among the People. And it was Luthers mind also (however
both the Luth^rans and Calvinists so called, growing numerous and Potent, have
since Degenerated from the first professed Principles of those, after whom they
are respectively denominated) that those, who stirred up the Princes to
persecute about Religion, they still raised the uproars. Neither is it such a
means, as Bishop Gauden accounts it, to preserve the Religion Established from
affronts by the Quakers, for as for them they do not so affront it, or
endeavor to unsettle it, but that it may stand long enough for them, among
such as can own it to be true, if it can stand on its own legs, without the
Interposition of any Extrinsical or Foraneous force to uphold it; but if like
Dagon it fall of it self before the Ark of Gods Testament, what reason is there
to the contrary, but that it should lie there, as not the true one (as Dagon
did as no true God) unless it can help it self up again by its own Intrinsical
Power, without the outward Heterogeneous assistance or help of men, making
Laws and Penalties to impose it.

Furthermore, how ineffectual utterly and of dangerous Consequence to any
Nation, the Practice of Violence and Persecution is, is to be seen not only by
the Testimony of well nigh innumerable famous men of all Sorts and Capacities
in their Several Generations (whose unanimous persuasion in this particular is
to be understood, by their respective sayings, comprised together in one Book
Entitled, The Testimony of a Cloud of Witnesses, Collected by William Caton,
which is, or is to be Printed.
etc.) but also by sundry more of the Prudential sayings of King Charles the
first, besides those forecited out of his Book called, EIKON BASILIKE* as
namely page 70. Nor is it so proper to hew out Religious Reformations by the
Sword, as to polish them by fair and equal disputations among those that are
most concerned in the differences, whom not force but reason ought to convince;
sure in matters of Religion, those truths gain most upon men's Judgments,
which are least urged by secular Violence, which weakens Truth with prejudices,
p. 115. It being an office not only of Humanity, rather to use, reason then
force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace and ensue it, page 92. In point
of true Conscientiousness and Tenderness, I have often declared, how little I
desire my Laws and Scepter should intre^ch on Gods Soveraignity, which is the
only King of men's Consciences. And page 123. Nor do I desire any man, should
be further subject unto me, then all of us may be subject unto God. Page 76.
The enjoining Oaths upon People must needs in things doubtful be dangerous, as
in things unlawful damnable. And in page 105. In his advice to his Son Charles
the second, now Reigning; My Counsel and charge to you is, that you seriously
consider the real and objected miscarriages, which might occasion my trouble,
that you might avoid them, beware of exasperating any Faction by the rashness
and asperity of some men's passions, humors and private opinions, employed by
them, grounded only upon Religion, where a Charitable Conn^vance and Christian
Toleration often dissipates their strength, where rougher opposition fortifies,
and puts the despised and oppressed party into such a combination, as may most
enable them to get a full revenge on those they count their Persecutors. And p.
164. Your Prerogative is best showed and exercised in remitting, rather then
exacting the rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse then Legal Tyranny.

But we need not go so far abroad, to fetch in Testimonies of others to the
truth of this, seeing we have the Bishops own Testimony herein siding with us
nearer home, whose words in that 7. and 8. pages of his Epistle are these, In
point of State Policy or Methods of true Government, I do conceive that mere
Plagiary Counsels and Punitive courses, are never likely to obtain the main
end, which is to stop the contagion of Errors, and to extirpate those depraved
opinions which are justly thought to be the spawn of dangerous Actions; for
unless the generality of credulous people, who are Spectators of those that
differ, and suffer for their Opinions and Consciences, do also see so much
Light of Reason and cl^er Religion, as may justify the severity of the Laws
Executed upon those offenders, who profess Conscience for their disobedience,
and Scripture for their Consciences, it is most certain, that the Spectators of
their sufferings will very much soften to a compassion for them, and by
Sympathizing with their persons in affliction, they will by degrees Symbolize
with their Opinions, easily running as metal that is melted, into the fame
mould: At length the Popu^acy, if not fortified by Pregnant Demonstrations of
Truth, against those spreading Errors, and their Pseudo-Martyrs, will mightily
cry up their Piety, admire their courage, and magnify their constancy: At last
they will conclude, those sufferers to have some special support or Diviner
Spirit above ordinary men, because they seem to be so much above the ordinary
passions of fear and hope, selflove and preservation, which prospect of
Patience Justine Martyr tells us, was the first occasion of his examining the
Doctrine of Christians, that he might see on what ground so fixed a constancy
grew, which showed a Divine security midst humane infirmity: By such popular
pity and applause not only sufferers will be confirmed in their pertinacy,
but their Spectators also will daily increase and multiply, as the shoot's of
Trees do by the lopping of their Branches, especially i^ the lives and actions
of such dissenters and sufferers be morrally just, and civilly honest. And page
9. where harmlesness of life sets a gloss on Opinions, and Errors thereby grow
more lusty and rank, there mere robust Power, or punitive severity, can no more
pull them up, then a strong arm does Thorns and Bushes, when they are deeply
rooted, breaking of the stem or top of them, but leaving the roots still in
the ground, which will spring again and spread farther.

All this the Bishop writes in pursuit of the proof of that truth we affirm, in
justification of the above said Indulgence and Tolleration, and in condemnation
of the rashness of them who hastily run into Rigor, Severity and Persecution,
as such as make more have then good speed to the end they aim at, and are more
mischievous and Injurious then successful to themselves in their own
undertakings; Only with this difference from us, which we may not pass by
without some notice ( viz.) that whereas we look upon such conscientious
dissenters (as are morally Righteous, civilly innocent, and of harmless lives,
and are also sufferers merely for their Consciences, under what dark Form
soever because, for want of conviction only, they cannot conform to another
Form, that is false and darker) as true Martyrs, whether Papists suffering for
not turning Turks and Jews, or Protestants not turning Papists (as in the
Marian days those that owned not the real presence) or any People more
reformed in matter of Form, for nonconformity ^o those that remain behind more
Superstitious and unreformed; The Bp. mean while looks on all such kind of
suffering dissenters, though never so morally honest, just civilly innocent and
harmles^ in their lives, Which things ( say we) are not consistent with any
dangerous Errors, or damnable Opinions (and so will the Bishop say too, when he
confiders well that morality, i. e. Quod tibi nevis fieri alteri ne feceris, to
do, as one would be done to, is purer and more substantial Christianity, then
that outward Ceremony, which the Papists and Protestants Christianity is mostly
made up of, and that a blameloss life is the end of all External Profession and
Religion, in which who ere is found, can never Err nor lead others to Err after
his example to damnation.
as contagious, dangerous, disobedient offenders, spreaders of Errors, and
Pseudo-Martyrs.

In confutation of which Episcopal Error and mistake, in that particular, we
need go no further than this self same Section of the Bishops sayings, in which
he is found confounding himself, while he says, that same prospect of Patience
which is found among mere modern Sufferers, and is at this day (and thereby
many like Lions are become as Lambs to them) seen among the Quakers of all
others, whom yet with others the Bishop seems to conclude as disobedient
Offenders, Spreaders of Errors, and Pseudo-Martyrs, was seen among the
Primitive Christians, and was the first occasion of Just. Mart. examining the
Christian Doctrine that he might see on what ground, so fixed a constancy grew,
and which showed a Divine Security midst of humane Infirmity: For if it be the
same Patience, Piety, Courage, and Constancy, as was in the primitive
Christians, that now appears in the Quakers, by which they are kept above the
ordinary passions of Fear, Self-Love, and Preservation (as himself says it
was) then Bishop Gauden must either prove, that all those virtues in those
Christians, by which Just. Mart. (as by the occasion of it) was convinced, was
no true ground, whereupon to conclude them to be true Christians, but (that all
those things notwithstanding) they might be Erroneous, Contagious, Dangerous,
Depraved, Disobedient Offenders, Spreaders of Errors, and Pseudo-Martyrs, or
else upon the same gro^nd and Prospect of their Patient Sufferings, must he
conclude and acknowledge that the Quakers are proved to be true Christians, and
neither contagious, nor dangerous, ^or deproved in their oppinions or actions,
nor Offenders, nor Spreaders of errors, nor Pseudo-martyrs. And in prosecution
of the proof of the point before spoken to, (viz.) how not only ineffectual, but
also dangerous, and disturbing it is to Nations, to Persecute and not tolerate
Dissenters from the Religion established, The Bishop says moreover in the 13th.
page of his Epistle, thus. I am not for heavy Mulcts, and rigorous E^actions,
which shall Imprison, Banish, Impoverish, or Destroy modest Dissenters and
their Families, only for the variety of their Judgment, when their Civil
Actions are otherwise moral, just and inoffensive, this Severity would in some
Countries, and possibly now in England, be not only destructive to many
thousands, but very disadvantagious to the King and Kingdom, to the Trade and
commerce of the Nation, by opening a little Wicket of Royal Clemency only to
some, and shuting the Great Gate to many, whose tender and unsatisfied or
Scrupulous Consciences, do as much need and deserve it, as those that have it
in petty matters, while all other Scruples are driven to discontent and
despair, by denial of all indulgence to them in greater Scruples.

Thus far the Bishop goes along hand in hand with the Quakers in his pleas for
Liberty of scrupulous Consciences, impleading tooth and nail the Principle of
Non-toleration and Persecution, as if he were most earnestly desirous to impede
the parctice of it from the consideration of its dangerousness to the King and
Kingdom, as well as its succeslesness to its own end, and likeliness much
rather to increase and support, then either to diminish, or suppress the modest
dissenters from the established Religion, and to gender to tumultuousness and
commotions; yea, he even fears destruction, if they be not let alone, and
others also, and if there be not only the opening of a little Wicket of
Clemency to indulge some, but of the great Gate also, to let in many other
dissenting Parties, into a participation of the same Indulgence and Toleration.

Yet behold by and by again, as if he were Magor-Misabib, Fear round about, and
a kind of Terror to himself, and one that between two, wats not well which is
best and most desirable, he seems to side with another sort against the
Quakers, even with those Some men (as he calls them) whereof no doubt himself
is one, that fear the toleration of the Quakers (whom he seems elsewhere to
recommend as the modestest among the Dissenters) may be unsafe, and so
insinuates somewhat ^taeitly toward the exasperation again of the Powers
against them as follows.

Bish. Some men I find look upon these Quakers with an eye of public fear and
jealousy, least the leaven of their Opinions and Practices spreading far among
the meaner sort of People, to whose humor that Rude and Confident way is very
agreeable, while in a moment all their defects of Reason, Learning, Education,
Religion, Loyalty, Civility, are made up by a presumed Spirit and Light within
them, should after the manner of other Sects both later and elder, give
occasion and confidence to common People, to run to Tumults and Commotions,
under pr^tence of setting up God and Christ and the Spirit, by way of new
Powers, new Lights, and new Models in Church and State; of which rare Fancies
we have had of late so many Tragical Experiments in England under other names,
Notions, and Pretensions. Certainly, it will become the public care and
Wisdom, as not easily to permit the rise and spreading of any novel humors,
and ways contrary to the good constitutions and well tried Laws of this Church
and Kingdom; so never to trust them, though never so soft and seemingly
innocent at the first. And page 6. speaking of the Quakers, as a people that
may be pitied (as wrapped up in a kind of Clownish Garb, and Ignorant
Plainness^y but not trusted. I should forfeit my prudence (says he) much to
trust their hands, etc.

Answ. Some men are more afraid then hurt in some Cases, whilst they are more
hurt than they are either afraid, or well aware of in some others; and so is
the Bishop here and those (some men) he speaks of, who look upon the Quakers
with his, that is, with an evil and jealous Eye: And this, as was said before,
is that dangerous Dilemma and Snare of the Devil, which the Children of
Darkness fall into, who hate the Light: He who is the Light of the World, and
the Door of Salvation to the Sons of men, has set before his People within
their own hearts, where his Light shines, an open Door, whereby to enter into
his heavenly Kingdom; which Door no man can shut against them, which Light no
man can blow out (though many seek to do it) any more than he can forbid the
Sun from Rising, and shining forth in its Season: Nay it seems so dangerous and
destructive to some men, as to their (at least) Ecclesiastical Intrests to
attempt it, that they are afraid on the one hand to be found too forward to
shut that door, or suppress the shining of that Light, which opens and makes
manifest the Dens and Deeds of Darkness; whereupon they some times plead (at
least seemingly) an allowance of it. And yet on the other hand, if they let it
alone to shine forth, to open and display it self, without seeking to put a
slop to it, and Eclipse it; then they see the day dawns out, which darkens the
Glory of their life-less Forms and invented Worships, and that morning
appearing, which to the Adulterer, that is gone a Whoring from God's Counsel,
and Christ's own Commands, into man's vain Institutions and Traditions, is as
the Shadow of Death, in which they cannot walk without dread and terror at
they scarce know well what themselves; in which they are surprised with many
dangerless Fears, as well as with many fearless Dangers. What Tragical
Experiments have been of late from the Fancies of other men in England, under
other Names, Notions, and Pretensions, we have as nothing to do with, as we
were as little accessory to them as the Bishop himself, who would if not
father, yet fain fasten some of the fault of them on the Quakers: Some men
looked upon Christ himself, and his Apostles with an eye of public fear and
jealousy, least the Leaven of their Opinions and Practices, spreading far
among the meaner sort of people, who were they that commonly received Truth,
when High Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees mostly rejected it, should after the
pattern of other Sects (as Theudas and Judas of Gallilee) occasion Tumults and
Commotions under pretense of setting up God, Christ, the Spirit, etc. And on
such an account as this, when Christ's Birth was enquired after by Wise Men
from the East, that came to enquire after him, Herod himself was troubled and
all Jerusalem with him; and when Christ came into Jerusalem, all the City was
in an uproar, and so was it at the Preachings of Peter, John, Stephen, etc. and
also the Cities of Corinth, Ephesus and others, at Paul's Preaching the Gospel
of Peace, which never caused, but ever occasioned, and was ever accompanied
with the tumultuousness of Rude people that attended it; but what then? Was
Christ therefore not the Christ? his Gospel no Gospel of Peace, because tumults
(as Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 6.) attended the Ministers of it? Was the Truth ever
the less the Truth, or ever the less to be testified to, because its Testimony
troubled the deceitful and truthless Nations? if so, how had Truth been
propagated downward through all times of turbulent Oppositions against it to
this day? And were they therefore ever the more excusable, who with threatenings
charged Christ's Ministers to Preach no more in the Name of Jesus? And had
Christ's Ministers done well, had they (as they did the contrary) forborne it,
and obeyed man forbiding, rather than God commanding them, to Preach yet more
in that Name? And did they do well who took crafty Counsel to suppress them and
their Meetings, by Pains and Penalties; or those rather who counseled (as
Gamaliel did, Acts 4.) to let them alone, lest happily they should be found
fighters against God, and would not meddle with them at their Judgments Seats
(as Gallio the Governor of Achaia would not, Acts 18.) Seeing no matter of
wrong or wicked lewdness was charged upon them, but only matters about
Religion, and Gods Law, which he confessed himself to be no competent Judge of?
we appeal to God and all sober minded Christians to Judge between the Bishop
and our selves in this matter; And further, whereas the Bishop supposes such a
sutableness to be between the Quakers Rude and confident way (as he calls it)
and the humor of the meaner sort of people. If by meaner sort he means such of
the Ruder and Baser sort, as made insurrection against Paul at Ephesus, by the
Instigation of the Silver-Smiths, who by that craft of making Shrines for
Diana's Temple, got their Wealth; he egregiously mistakes himself, and its not
for want of Ignorance in the Bishop, both of the Quakers and their Way, that he
is so jealous and suspicious of them; for verily our way (as confident as it
is, yea, and more then confident, for we are infallibly assured it is the
Truth, and are able in the Power of God, as infallibly to make it good so to be
to such as do not wink against the Light) is so far from any real Rudeness, and
so from all agreeableness to the Humors of the Rude ones, that however those
who are meanly accounted of, and dis^ain'd by the supercilious Shool-men,
because they are Poor and Illiterate (as to secular Sciences) though of honest
hearts, embrace and own it, yet such is the guise and humor of the rude and
ignorant Rabble aforesaid, of the baser Sort, that if their mouths be not held
with Bit and Bridle (yea and though they are bridled by those Laws that are
extant, as a Curb to Routs and Riots) they tumultuously fall upon us, with
Stones and Brick-bats, Swords and Staves, in so much, that as there is no have
to hang true Men, nor need to bid Mad-folks run, so there is little need by
penal Laws to subject us more to their Wrath and Malice, who could never yet
with Patience wait for the Word of Command, nor tarry for a Law, whereby with
leave to vent and execute it: How much more may we now expect (but that God is
able to stop the Lions Mouths) to be spoiled by them? Seeing that as the
Christians of old were clothed with wild Beasts Skins, and covered with Draff,
and then thrown to Dogs and Hoggs to be Baited and Devoured: So we are now
stigmatized with those (as false, as foul, and ignominious) Terms, of a People
defective in Reason, Learning, Education, Religion, Loyalty and Civillity, in
all which the Quakers will at last upon a serious reveiw, and true account, be
found far beyond their Accusers] and then also left by Law to the Lusts of
lawless, lewd lived Ones, to be made a Prey of.

Bish. Nothing but truly Christian and Evangellical Principles, (which are in
the good old Way) do secure Kings or bind Subjects to their good behavior.

Answ. As the Bishop has commended the Quakers in some respects; So we shall
freely justify him so far as he confesses to the Truth; and that he does
plainly, and sufficiently enough in this place, but that (as elsewhere, where
Tollite, is his Tone after Tolerate) he starts aside again from his own
Position, and stands not steadfastly to it when he has done* for if he did, the
Quakers should hear no more from him such Words concerning them as he uses in
the same page a little before, page 6. (viz.) Never trust the most innocent
Smiles, and harmless Simplicities of Innovators, Dissenrers, Novellizing
Humourists, By which the Bishop seems to intend, not only the greater Hornets
of rigid Presbyterians, and the lesser Wasps of Independants, and the Gadflies
and Musketo's of Anabaptists ( as he calls them) but the Quakers also, whom we
may well judge he jerks at, under that term of other Insects.
though at first like Serpents in Winter, they seem very tame and meek, as to
their Principles and Practices. But whatever he means, for the Truths sake we
shall take him here however at his Word; for in very deed no other but those
truly Christian and Evangelical Principles, which are in the good old Way, can
either secure Kings o^ bind Subjects to their good behavior; nevertheless,
that either that furious way which some Priests would persuade their Princes to
drive on in ( Iehu-like) or the practice of such Justices, as before the
Quakers have any way mis-behaved themselves, demand Sureties of them for their
good behavour, or else send them to Prison, is that good old Way, or the
Principles of such as persuade, or practice Persecution, are these truly
Christian and Evangelical Principles, whereby either Kings are best secured, or
Subjects best bound to their good behavior, this we altogether do deny,
affirming first, that good old Way, which in worth, and time, was before all
other ways, is that of the Spirit and Light of Christ within men, which we in
as much clearness and plainness bear our Testimony unto, as its dark Opponents
do, in their ignorant plainness, appear against it in one Taunting Term or
other, in which our more beloved, than in this point believed friend, Bishop
Gauden himself, is not found wanting; who page 5. derides it, as a presumed
Spirit and Light within them, new Powers, new Lights, pretended Inspirations,
or inward Lights of which they vapor; As if [(...)] whatsoever is to be known
of God were not (though Paul says it is in the very Heathens, Romans 1. 19.)
manifest in them; As if there were no Spirit of God in man that gives Wisdom,
and no Inspiration of the Almighty (though Job says there is, Job 32. 7, 8,
9.) that gives understanding; As if God did not now speak to man himself at
all (though it is said he does once, yea twice, Job 33. 14) because man in whom
he speaks, perceives him not; As if there were no such Light come into the
whole World (as Christ says there is, John 3.) which is, in it self,
sufficient to save those that perish, because the world, mostly loves the
Darkness, more than that Light that Lusts against it in their Hearts, and so
resists it to their Condemnation; And as if because every Individual takes not
heed to the workings, and shinings of it, therefore there were no true Power,
nor true Light (as it is said there is) that enlightens every man that comes
into the World, but only some certain fictitious new Power, and new Light,
promoted by the Quakers, some nonentity, which is (as the Bishop sancies it to
be) nothing else but some mee^ new nothing: But this we say, (what ere he
thinks) is that goold old Way, yea, that truly Christian and Evangelical inward
Principle, from which all truly Christian Doctrine, Gospel Principles, and
Practices do proceed; This is that internal good Princiciple, by which (as by
Ministers without to many, ad extra, so ad intra, the Gospel of Love* and
Pity, Peace, and Mercy, Gentleness and Innocence, Truth and Equity, Purity and
Piety, is (as Paul says, Col. 1. 23.) Preached, (...), in every Creature under
Heaven, This is that new and novel way (as the Bishop counts it) which if we
prove it not to be of All ways, as well the Antientest as the Truest, when
ever called to it by the Bishops (as we never yet were) we shall be as ready to
recant it, as retain it: This Light was that way from the beginning, in which
Ab^l, Enoch, and Noah walked with God* and were found perfect, which was 2000.
years before the Letter, which came from it, had its being, which the Scripture
is a Testimony to, as those, who wrote it, did testify to it by word of mouth,
as well as by it, and were sent to turn all men from Darkness to, Ier. 6. Acts
22. 1 John 1. Tthat way which was before Always, that say they are before it,
and style it upstar^, of which each other Way that seems to it self to be elder
than it, and is now scuffling against the rest about its pedigree from Peter,
and other kind of Antiquity, may say as truly in reference to it self, as John
did ( John 1.) in reference to himself, of Christ (who is that true Light,
whose Light this is we speak of, and from whom it comes, This is it, which
though it comes after me, yet it is preferred before me, for it was before me:
And as this of the Light and Spirit of God is that old Way, in which all holy
men ever walked, and we are bid now to walk in, Gal. 5. so, whoever walked in
it, and according to those truly Christian, and Evangelical Principles, Paths,
and Practices it leads into (which were those bowels of Love, Pity, Meckness,
Mercy, Tenderness, and Compassion, as could admit of no consent to the violent
Persecution of any others, either for not professing their Religion, or for
open professing from mere Principles of Conscience] the very contrary) were
led, as to do no injury to others, which they would not have done to themselves
(and sure we are, no men would willingly be f^rc't against their Faith) so
whatever they would that others should do unto them, to do even so unto others,
which (says Christ is [i. e. as to the sum and substance thereof] the Law and
the Prophets, Mat. 7.) which golden Rule (as Bishop Gauden himself calls it,
and also intimates of it) is the best measure of all policy, and this is it
whereby all Persons of what sort soever, even all Kings and their People, that
follow it, are bound to such a good behaving of themselves according to it, as
in which they shall assuredly be secured and preserved, when those Princes,
Priests, and People, that walk beside it in that Darkness that comprehends it
not, in those dark ways and places of the earth, which it condemns, which are
full of the habitations of Cruelty, Psalm. 74. 12. as Simeon and Levi did of
old, who Sl^w Men in their anger, and had the Instruments of Cruelty in their
Habitations, will at last be divided in their Counsels, and scattered in the
imaginations of their own Hearts, however they may seek to secure themselves
for a time by such outward ways, as seeking to divide and scatter God's truly
tenderhearted Israel, for keeping their Conscience pure, and without Offense in
the sight of God and Men. For Kings, not when the Righteous, but when the
Wicked are taken away from before them, their Thrones shall be established in
Righteousness, Prove. 25. 5* yea the King that faithfully judges the Poor, his
Throne shall be established for ever, Prove. 29. 14. Yea, this we dare determine
for a truth, which we find the Bish. himself not denying, but confirming, Page
41. Primitive Christians were so exact and cautious of their words; in
asserting; or promising, that there was no need of an Oath amongst them, it was
security enough in all Cases to say Christianus sum; I am a Christian.
that as such Christians as by Gods Grace are taught to be truly honest, need
no Imposition of Oaths, nor outward Sureties, nor outward Securities, nor
outward Severities, nor outward Penalties, whereby to bind them to their good
behavior; for such are bound by a stricter tie then an humane Law, to behave
themselves as becomes the Gospel, in all Righteousness, Peaceableness, Truth,
and Innocence toward all men; so such as are not bound by that of God within
themselves to that Peace, Truth and Equity, which it strictly calls to, may
Swear, and swallow Oaths as fast as they can be imposed upon them, yet will (as
occasion serves them to help themselves) be of little the better good behavior
toward the King, or any else for that Obligation; As Bishop Gauden himself also
very well observes, to the weakening of his own proof of a necessity of
imposing Oaths upon all men, in order to the doing of Justice according to
Truth, since as good men need not be forced to Swear (as he says) in order to
the awing of them to speak the Truth; so ill men's Swearing is of little
credit. Whose Word's, page 17. are these, Nor can much credit he given any more
than to a Liar, to any man that Swears never so solemnly and in-judicature, who
is a common Swearer, and has no reverence of the Majesty of God.
and least of all, then when they are not obliged also by that bond of love
(which is begotten among Subjects, when without violence, or being forced to a
violation of them, they may enjoy the true Liberty of their Consciences) but
rather are touched in that most tender part, which such as are free to Fight
had rather resist and kill, and such as are not free to resist, had rather be
killed and die, than suffer Rape in. So that as it is truth it self that ties
such as attend to it, while it talks to them within themselves, to their good
behavior to God, the King, and to one another, so That alone, whereby Kings
and Kingdoms can be kept in safety, without Subjection to change, or shakings,
is that same truth which calls for Mercy, taken heed to by Kings themselves, as
it is said, Prove. 20. 28. Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is
upholden by Mercy, which is indeed that truly Christian, and Evangellical
Principle, and good old Way of God, which was before any of that Cruelty
(which, at the will of the Devil, was ever acted by Cain, Ishmael, Esau, and
their Envious, Malicious, Wild and Wicked, Rough and Rigid Race, against the
Righteous Race of Abel, Isaac, and Jacob, had any Being at all in the World.

Nevertheless, though the Bishop is sometimes a very great Pretender to this
Principle, and seems in sundry places (above spoken to) to be for Respite,
Lenity, and Mercy, and to be a very pitiful Pleader for it; yet contrarily,
not only to Gods Wisdom, but to his Own Pleadings for it in other Passages,
he is found, Page 3, 4. [though Stiling his Adresses to the King in his Book
His Charitable endeavors, on behalf of the Quakers, yet (to go round again)
under a pretense of exposing himself and his Kingdoms to those great troubles
and dangers, which in his own words above cited, he had said would accrue to
both King, and Kingdom, through their sufferings, if the Quakers should pass
unpunished and permitted] stirring up the King to those Severities against the
Quakers, which himself says are not Suitable to his Royal Clemency, nor Native
Gentleness, in such like words.

Bish. The public necessity will Require those severities of a Wise and Just
King, whose Lenity to any Party of his Subjects contrary to Law, will soon
become an injury to the Community, which cannot be fafe, or happy, but by an
Uniform Obedience to the same Laws, which must be the Rules, and Measures to
all men's Public Actions, the Tryers of their failings, and Inflicters of their
punishments.

Answ. We say, we appeal to all honest men to judge, whether the Bishop is not
here found in oppossition to himself, and to those many places of his Book
before mentioned, where he would be thought to advise to Lenity, Forbearance,
and Indulgence to Dissenters: For above he Intimates it to us a^ his Judgment,
that flagellant Methods have nothing of Reason, or Religion in them, neither
are the fittest means to Rectify the Obliquities of inconforme, but innocent
actions; also that to force Dissenters into Conformity, by Impoverishing,
Imprisoning, Banishing, etc. is a very Rough, Barbarous, Unwelcome, Unchristian
Way, disallowed by all wise Men of all Persuasions; that mear Plagiary
Counsels, and Punitive Courses, are never likely to obtain, etc. That he is
against heavy Mulcts, Rigorous Exactions, etc. And that such Severity possibly
now in England, would be not only destructive to many thousands, but very
disadvantagious to the King and his Kingdoms, to the Trade and Commerce of the
Nation; and much more on this Part to the Same Tune: Yet contrariwise, here (
to go round again) he intimates it to be no less then Folly, and Injustice,
necessarily injurious to the Community, utterly Inconsistent with the safety
and happiness of it, for any King not to use such like Severities, but to
Exercise the same Lenity to any Party of his Dissenting Subjects; Moreover, as
if he were wedded to his Wonted way of Walking the Rounds, whereas before he
gave us to understand, that Actions, though inconform to the Laws Established,
may be innocent Actions; Yet here he gives us to understand the clean Contrary,
(viz.) that Nonconformity of all Parties to the same Laws about Religion,
cannot possibly be Innocent, or in a Community consistent without injury, thus
( Diruit, aedisicat, mutat quadrata Rotundis) what he calls Innocence in one
place, that he calls injury in another; and what he holds out to be Wisdom and
Justice in one Page, that he holds out to be Irreligion, Unreasonablenesse,
Folly, and Unrighteousness in another.

To conclude, whereas he says, the Laws must be the Rules and Measures of all
Men's Public Actions; if by Laws he means those that men in their own wills
and wisdoms make, as touching Religion; we deny his Assertion for these
Reasons; First, because the Light of the Spirit of God, according to the
Scriptures of Truth, is and ought to be the only Rule, and Measure of all Men's
Public Actions, in all Spiritual and Religious Matters. Secondly, Because by
daily experience, it appears that the Laws of men are liable to Mutations,
Alteratio^s, and Repea^s, according to the prevalency, and constitution
(Respectively) of those that make them, and yet (though such) may lawfully be
the Rules, and Measures of men's Manners in mere Outward, Mutable, and Civil
Matters, when altered not for the worse, but for the better; But that which is
to be the Standard, and Measure in matters merely Spiritual, as Faith and
Worship are, must be something that is ^xt, ^irm, immutable, (as no outward
Letter, Writing, or Scripture is, without liablenesse to mis-interpretation)
not subject to be Rep^aled by man: For the Foundation of God stands sure, and
all his requirings must, and ought to be answered, notwithstanding any of man's
Laws and Edicts to the Contrary.

By this time it is sufficiently apparent, how the Bishops Rabbinicab rigidity
to the Quakers (as well as others) to whom he would be thought a greater
Friend, and far more favorable then to other Dissenters, has bewrayed it
self, and so much the more shamefully, First, by how much he slyly betrays
them beforehand (by his Consent to the Act) into a tasting of the same Cup of
Excommunication from the comfortable Enjoyment of their Native Countries; and
from the Commerce with the Community of English subjects, From Participating of
that Native Gentleness, and Royal Clemency, which the King has seemed always
ready to Express to all, of what Prosession of Religion soever, that live
Peaceably in his Dominions (as the Quakers do, save only that they cannot sin
against their Consciences, and so against God; for which the Bishop praises
them) And Secondly, by how much he would shroud all his doings and sayings,
under that shelterlesse Shrub of such Empty Expressions, and Non-enticall
Notions, as his Charitable endeavors, Humanity, Facility, Gentleness, Lenity,
Paternal Compassion, etc. For all the courses he consents (at least) and
sometimes incites to of Fines, Prisons, Banishment (like those of the King of
Castile, which himself calls Barbarous, and Unchristian, which yet himself
Diminishes, when he is found Inciting to them, and will admit to be styled by
no harsher or stricter Name (being as blind at home, as Eagle-ey'd abroad) then
those Severities which the Kings Native Gentleness may be Compelled to use at
last (and it may be too late, Mark how hasty the Bishop is in some places to
quicken to the use of Severity, lest it be too late; notwithstanding his
paternal compassionate pleas elsewhere for forbearance, and respite, at least
for some longer time.
and which (not the Kings benignity) but Public necessity does require of a
Wise and Just King, whose Lenity to any Nonconforming Party of his Subjects,
will soon be injury to the safety and happiness of the Community. Page 3, 4.)
We say all this his Unchristian Cruelty comes Marching in under a Mask of
Christian Charity, to which his Native Temper, and Candor (which abhors after
the genius of Primitive Christians all severity, or rigors only upon the sco^e
of Religion) does incline him. And Thirdly, By how much he deems he has
deserved so well from that People, as that (saving only their Morosness, in
respect of which he does not) he might very justly expect thanks from them for
his pains, as appears by his words that follow.

Bish. Nor do I expect any thanks for my pains, from any of that faction, while
they continue in their morose opinions, in their surly, rude, and uncourteous
manners; I do not hear that they are generally a people of so soft and
ingenious tempers, as to take any thing kindly, or thankfully from those that
are not of their own Persuasion: many of them seem to affect a reserved, and
Rustical way of Clownish, yea, of Scornful Demeanor, prone to censure,
despise, and reproach not only their betters, but even their Benefactors, and
Instructors.

Answ. This course of thanking Clergymen for their pains, that won^ed
Gratulation, they have long had from the Great Ones, when they have done any
thing that is counted by themselves a piece of Service to God or men (in which,
if they did all that they ought to do, and that's more too then they believe in
this World they shall be ever enabled to do) they ought of right, rather to say
we are but unprofitable servants, we have done what we ought) that it is now
become a matter wel-nigh of custom among such of them, as love the praise of
men, more then the praise of God, to expect, yea to exact it as their Right,
and that so ridgidly, that its counted a surly, rude, uncourteous, rusticall
way, of Clownish, yea scornful Demeanor, not to use it: Yea, with such a
strictness, as in the Case of Tithes (and other of their Privileges and
proper Honoraries) which being once of Old given, and received on no other
account, then as the Alms to all the Churches Poor, out of which the poor
Priests and Curates had their Part, that gratuity and benevolence of the People
is now laid claim to, with such eagerness, and earnestness, as their own
(not only, jure humano, but divino) that they condemn it as no less then
Injustice in People that deny to pay it, as that which is as due to them as any
man's estate is due to him, and as not only allowed but ordained of the Lord
himself, 1 Cor. 9. 13. Merely mistaking that text, in which that clause, even
so (which bears the stresse of the whole City of Babylon, as to this point)
relates to the matter, not the manner of a true Ministers Maintenance, to the
portion, not the proportion of a Gospel

Preachers Pay* Which, First if it had been Tyth according to the Law of Levies
Tribe, had been for the Poor Widows, Fatherless and Strangers, Door-keepers and
other Temple-servitors, as well as Priests; who had but the Tenth or Tyth of
the Tyth*

Secondly, was not Tyth, for then the Apostle could not have dispensed (as he
did) with the nonpaymen^ of it to himself and others, had that set sum of Tyths
been the Ordinance of God; but it is evident, he says they used not such Power,
nor wrote that it should be so done to him or them.

Thirdly, Was by way of Free Gift.

Fourthly, From that Flock they fed, and stood Pastors to, not another
Shepherds Sheep, that are fed by others.

Fifthly, much less from the People not yet converted by them, for they went
forth freely for his names sake, taking nothing of the Nations.

Sixthly, So far as to supply necessities only, and not always that (for
Paul's own hands often ministered to his Necessities, yet Preached more Gospel in a
year, than many Bishops or Priests in all their lives) not to the setting up of
such boundless Superfluity, as many thousands per annum, which some have here,
while their yearly Hirelings, who take all that little Pains that is taken for
poor Peoples Souls, have not the tenth Part of the tenth of those large Crops,
which are reaped by them*


as the set proportion to be paid them by all People, whether owning them as
their Ministers, yea or nay, in way of Justice, as well as Gratitude; as due
wages and hire, as well as homage to them for their service in holy
Ministrations. For much to this tune the Bishop talks, Page 7. taxing the
Q^akers, who are not at all of their Church and Flock, not wholly void of the
evil Principles of Coveteousnesse, and Injustice, for not maintaining the
Parish Priests by Tyths.

But for our parts as in this last Case of Tyths (what ^ver Laws any Lands may
have made for the Payment of them, since the Pope having an I^ch given him,
has got an Ell in the Christian Nations) if any Man list to be contentious* we
have no such custom as to pay them, nor had the Churches of Christ in the
Primitive Times; if they had, we will learn it of the Bishop, if he can prove
it; So as to that Case of Thanks from the Quakers, which half an Eye may see he
deems to be his due from them, for his charitable endeavors (though indeed all
his hard Sp^eches against them, and male Representations of them to the Powers
and People in his Book, as unsafe and dangerous to pass unpunisht, and such
like, well considered, he much more disserves, Calumniates, and Abuses, then
either helps, or r^lieves them) We are not so Surly Rude, Clownish, and
Uncourteous, but that we can, and do take any thing kindly and thankfully from
such as are not, as well as from such as are of our ow^ persuasions* And how be
it, we are come out of, not only any others, but out of that superfluo^s
Formallity of those, who (for customs sake) say they thank men and God often
when they think not of them; yet the Bishop's Charge, which we perceive he
makes upon hearsay, (which makes many call that Truth Heresy, which they
never heard themselves) will prove to overreach his proof of it, while he
taxes us so heavily (for Ingracum dixeris et omnia dixer^s) as a People pro^e
to Co^sure, despise, and Reproach, not only our Be^ters, but Ben^factors and
Instructors* But to speak the (...) in the Plainness and Simplicity of heart,
without Flattering, which we are far from* as we groundlesly censure him not of
such a thing, but leave him to the Light of God in his own Conscience, which
only is able to show him how far forth he has hovered, halted, and claudicared
between the Quakers, and those who are downright for their Destruction, and
whether he would not please, so as to have Praise from them both, if he could
tell how; much less ^are we reproach him, or despise his Doings, but rather
accept them, so far forth as we see ought in them of Integrity and good
Intention toward God, and us; so we find little that is much thank-worthy, and
not so much as Satisdiction to our Satisfaction there (be it where it will be)
where Malefaction Malediction, and Destruction ^shers it self in upon us, so
that it may the more ^lausibly, and undiscernably surprise us, under the fair
and specious colors of Benefaction and Instruction, Prove. 27. 6, Faithful are
the Wounds of a Friend, but the Kisses of an Enemy are Deceitful; And whether
as his Condemnations are more than his Commendations can make up; So the
Bishop's pious Pit^y, of which he speaks so much; saying, I have a great Pity
for the Quakers, page 8. Much Compassion for them, page 10. be not made up as
much of matter of false Calumniation, as of true Commiseration, let it be
judged by much more of that kind of ^alk of his here talked with.

Bish. Their Rude and levelling humor denies to show common Courtesy and
wonted tokens of Civil Respect to their Superiors, contrary to the Reverent,
gentle and humble behavior of all Gods People in all Ages, Jews and Gentiles,
then whom none were more full of inward humility, or of outward Respect, and
Civility, according to the Custom of their Countries,

Answ. If by this rude and levelling humor, the Bishop intends the not putting
off the hat, not Cringing to the ground, nor using such flattering ^les as are
according to the vain Custom of this and other Countries, as, Your Servant Sir,
If it like your honor my Lord, may it please your Grace, and such like
flattering Congees, and me^ Complementall, Pedantick postures, as People ^ yea
sometimes such as hate one another at their hearts, and are even ready to cut
each others throats) use now adays one to another, as if their bodi^s,
wherewith* they are to serve, glorify, and worship the Lord alone, were made
for men m^rly to worship each other withal; for th^se things we have no co^and
in Scripture, nor Practice of any man therein proposed to (...) (...) our Rule;
but examples rather of the People of God, both Jews and Gentiles, to the
contrary; witness Job 32. 21, 22. where young El^hu* taxing the Ignorance of
those three Friends of Job, who in years were elder than himself, saying, verse.
7. Days should speak, and multitude of years teach Wisdom* but verse. 8. Great
men are not always wise, neither do the Aged understand Judgment. Adds also
verse. 10. Therefore I also will show mine Opinion. And verse. 20. I will open my
Lips and answer; yet verse. 21. 22. Let me not I pray you accept any man's
Person, neither let me give flattering Titles unto man; for I know not to give
flattering Titles, in so doing, my maker w^nld soon take me away. Witness
Mordecai also, one of the Jews, who could not give that Honor, Homage, Civil
respect, and revereuce (as they then counted it, and now also do) which Haman
the second man in the Kingdom, as angrily as eagerly expected from him, Hester
3. 5, 6. though his refusal endangered the cutting off the whole race of the
Jews; yet was it not his R^e and Levelling humor, that moved him to deny to
show that common Courtesy, and those wonted tokens of Civil Respect; but on
the contrary, it was the haughty humor, Pride, and ambition of Haman himself,
which at length wrought the Kings wrath, and his own ruin on his own head,
that moved him to be offended thereat, and so to Stomach it, as by his false
accusations, and heavy charge against the whole People of the same (as he
counted it) odd and unwonted strain, to seek their Extirpation, in these words;
there is a certain People scattered abroad, and despersed among the People in
all the Provinces of thy Kingdom; and their Laws are diverse from all People,
neither keep they the Kings Laws; therefore it is not for the Kings profit to
suffer them. And to desire their ^nine, in these words, verse. 9. If it please
the King; Let it be written that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten
thousand Tal^nts of Silver, to the hands of those that have the charge of the
business, to bring it into the Kings Treasury: And as concerning Gods People
among the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, we find no such command to them, not
such example of the Primitive Christian Gentiles practicing such respect, as
the Bishop quarrels with the Quakers for want of, mentioned in the Scripture;
we find Christ and his Apostles so far from exhorting others to respecting man's
Person, that they Practiced no such thing themselves, yea the very Enemies of
Christ confessed thus of him, Mat. 22. 16. We know that thou art true, and
Teach the way of God in Truth, neither carest thou for any man, for thou
regardest not the Persons of men; the Apostle James also is so far from
pleading (as this Bishop does) against our Practice in this particular, that he
declares it as inconsistent (de jure) with the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ
to have respect to the Persons of men, because of gold rings, goodly apparel,
and gay clothing, riches, high places, and such other accomplishments; when the
Poor because of vile raiment are slighted and despised; and that it is contrary
to the Royal Law of the Scripture, and that it is Commission of Sin, and
Transgression. Jude also declares it to be the guise of the ungodly Scoffers,
and complainers of the last times, that should walk after their own Lusts,
while their mouth speaks great swelling words, to have men's Persons in
admiration because of advantage. Jude 15, 16. Moreover Christ's Disciples were
commanded by him in their Itinerary Ministry to the truth, to salute no man by
the way, Luke 10. 4. So that here is instance enough of Gods People, both among
the Jews and others (as in the Case of Elihu) refusing themselves, and
reproving in others the showing of the said outward respect to Superiors, whose
Just Power yet they obeyed and were subject to, as Children to Parents, hired
Sorvanes to Masters in their business, in which they were faithful, or Subjects
to Kings and Princes, under whom they had Protection, to whom they paid Tribute
also to that end and purpose, and whom in so doing they honored. See Romans 13.
7. 1 Pet. 2. 13. to the 18. Ephesians. 6. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 1. 2. Howbeit they neither
did, nor durst adore their Persons, according to all the frivolous fashions of
their Countries: Herein therefore is the Bishop found speaking contrary to the
Truth (and it is too bad for a Bishop to be found besides it) when he says the
Quakers denial of Civil Respect, is contrary to the Reverent and humble
behavior of all Gods People in all Ag^s Jews and Gentiles, then whom none
were more full of outward (...), according to the Custom of their Countries:
Moreover we appeal to the Bishop himself, whether i^ would nor have been
grossly rediculous and absurd, for Paul who was a good Gospel Minister, in
those days to have said with his Hat in his hand, and his body bowing to the
ground* to Timothy or Titu^* who were Bishops as well worthy of Honor as any
in these days, May it please your Grace Right Reverent Father, or if it like
your honor my Lord.

Obj. But the Bishop perhaps may tell us (according to the usual strain, when
ever called to give any account of that excessive, eminent Earthly Glory,
Reverence, and Preferments, which are their proper Honoraries in these times,
in compatison of what was either enjoyed, o^ expected by the pure Gospel
Ministers of the Primitive Times) that then the Church was as yet but in her
Infancy, Nonage, Childhood, and weak Estate, and had not yet obtained to that
perfection of Glory, strength of Beauty, hight of Dignity, etc. as it has
since grown to and attained.

Answ. When we talk to have all things according to the Primitive Pattern
indeed in matter of true Beauty, Holiness, Righteousness, Innocence, Patience,
Long-suffering, Truth, Humility, Love; and talk concerning growth in Grace to
the measure of those first, best, and purest People of God in former times,
that were his blessed ones, in whose hearts was no guile, who were undefiled in
the way, and walked in Gods Law,, and did no Iniquity, as we read Psalm. 119. 1,
2, 3. and concerning the perfection of Holiness so far as to dominion over Sin,
and living by the more inward Revelation of God's mind to men out of his own
mouth; then we are told that we must not presume to expect in these days, such
high seize in the knowledge of Gods Mind, and Will, such immediate
manifestations of it to us, such a powerful presence of God amongst us, such a
full measure of his Spirit Powered out upon us, such eminent gifts as the
Corinthians and other Churches then had, nor growth to such a measure of Grace,
Wisdom and Understanding, such clear Illuminations, and intimate Asquaintance
with Gods Counsel, and those internal Dictates of his Spirit, so as to discern
them from Delusions, nor such perfect Ability to walk so exactly with God as
they then did; And why? namely because the Church in the Apostles times was
eminently shining forth in its prime, luster, and full vigor, perfect glory
and beauty, and the Saints then were Fathers, strong Men, and well grown
Christians, in comparison of whom those in afer Ages, especially we of these
latter Ages, are but as Children, Weaklings, Infants, that must suck what
Knowledge, and attainment in Christianity we have, as it were from their
Breasts, so that in the Respects fore mentioned, the Church with them, which
now is grown young again, and back into its Childhood, into a state and stature
of Infancy, was then as it were in a state of Manhood: But when we query, and
expostulate with that Clergy that is but falsely so called, as in
contradistinction to them they call the Laity, For the Scri^e calls the Flock
the Clergy, ^ritage, a^ in contradistinction ^o the Presbitery, Pastoraly or
Episcopacy, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. (...).
concerning that Pomp and Lordliness they now appear in, that high
Pre-eminence, honorable Titles, of Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops,
Archdeacons, The Deans, Worship, my Lords Grace, etc. Superabundant
Maintenance, as innumerable, as unprofitable Traditions, as supersluous, as
superstitious Ceremonies, Orders, Offices, and Officials, Parsons, Vicars,
Curats, Chapters, Prebends, Canons, Registers, Apparitors, Proctors, Organists,
Singers, Choristers, and outward Observations concerning Meats, Drinks, Days,
Times, Postures, Gestures, Hats, Habits, and other not more multitudinous than
Immomentary Formallities in their Worships, of mere legal Concernment and
Consideration, never known, not heard of in the pure Days of the Apostles;
Then, in order to our resolution in this, we are by them given to un^stand
that, which can never stand under the animadversion of an impartial observer of
their Absurdities, without a just censure of Confusion and Contradiction to
themselves, to this purpose, ( viz.) That in the Apostles times the Church was
then but in her non ^age, weakness infancy, immature, unpollished condition,
and could not be seded in that compleatnesse, as to all those outward
decencies, orders, and accomplishments, which now it has; That was but the day
of the Christian Churches Nativity, wherein her Navil was not cut, neither was
she washed in Water to supple her, nor salted at all, nor swadled at all, she
was under Persecution, no eye pitying her, to do any of those great things for
her, which have since been done by Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes, who
have bestowed great Revenues on her, But since she has multiplied, as the bud
of the Field, is increased and ^axen great, and come to excellent Ornaments,
her Breasts are fashioned* her Hair grown, whereas she was naked and bare, she
is cloa^hed with broid^red Work girded about with fine Linen, decked with Gold
and Silver, eats fine Flower, Honey and Oil, is exceeding Beautiful, perfect
in (...), is attained to Maturity, has a Crown upon her Head, and is prospered
into a Kingdom; and has changed those earthen Vessels (viz. Illitterate Men,
or mere mean Mechanics) into silver Chalices, and golden Cups, Academically
educated Preachers, Scholastic Rabbis, and has ascended beyond the Minority,
Inferiority, Poverty, Pusilanimity of those suffering Times: And thus, Cum
Ecclesia peporit divitias silia superavit, i. e. (in one sense, as well as in
another) devoravit matrem.

Bish. Possibly the Quakers may in a fit, fear and slatter some men in Power,
etc.

Answ. The Quakers cannot justly be charged with Flattering of any men, or
Fearing with that Fear, that is consistent with Flattery, the Persons of any
men in Power: This is the Practice of those that seek outward Promotions, and
Greatness in the World, as the Quakers do not; for if they could have either
feared, or flattered, they had not Suffered what they have hitherto undergone,
but might have had as many Privileges, and Earthly Advantages as others have,
their Sufferings being often on no other account, but because they could
neither Fear nor Flatter (as others can, who have men's Persons in Admiration,
merely for their own Advantage) the Persons of such as are in Power; so that
the Bishop has under a pretense of Pity to us, not a little wronged us herein
also, for we believe that if we could eith^ fear or flatter this Bishop and his
Bre^hren, we should be better thought of by them then we are: And as he has
injured u^, so is he not altogether free in this place, of comradiction to
himself, if experience it self may serve in proof hereof, for if Fear and
Flattery be (as we well know it is) that outward respect and Civillity, which
according to the custom of this Country is used among men (most men putting off
the Hat, Bowing, Cringing to Superiors, giving flattering Titles upon no other
account commonly, but either because of Gay Clothes, fear of Frowns, or hope of
Favor) Then the Bishop (as well as often elsewhere) has contradicted himself
here, for as much as he first says, the Quakers resuse to give outward
Respect, and Civility, according to the custom of their Country; and yet in the
next words, says, Possibly the Quakers may Fear and Flatter some men in Power,
which is that customary Respect and Civillity of the Country which stands well
nigh universally in fear and flattery; but if they cannot be proved to fear
and flatter (as in truth they cannot) then the Bishop must needs be guilty of
either ^alsuy, or Self-contradiction, seeing the Quakers are free, not only
from Fear and Flattery, whereof he charge them, but consequently also from
denying due Respect to Superiors, according to the custom of the Country. But
whereunto may the Quakers liken this Bishop, who is pleased with them neither
full nor fasting? For when he speaks concerning that plainness, and down right
demeanor, which, in Conscience to God, and not in contempt of any man, we use
toward all n^n; This he styles a Rude, Rustical, Clownish, Levelling Humor in
us, and denial of common Courtesy, and civil Respects to Superiors, contrary
(but falsely as is showed above) to the reverent behavior of all Gods People in
all ages; But when he supposes (as he does, but falsely) of us, that in some fit
we yield that vain customary, and wanted Respect of the Country, to men in
Power; this likes him so little on the other hand, that it comes with a censure
from him, under the Denomination of Fear and Flattery.

Bish. Page 6. I have seen indeed some of their Papers, and received some of
their letters, written to my self, truly not very Rudely, nor Malepertly, yet
with so abrupt and obscure a way ( so blindly censorious, and boldly dictating)
that saving a few good Words and Godly Phrases in them, I found very little of
Rational, on Scriptrual Demonstration, many passages so far from beauty and
strength of Religion, that they had not the ordinary Symmetry of* Reason, or
the lineaments of common Sense in them, at least in m^ apprehension, who am
wholly a stranger to any Canting, or Chimical* Divinity, which bubbles forth
many specious Notions, sine Fancies, and short lived Conceptions, floating a
little in a^ airy empty Brain, but not enduring the firm touch, or breath of
any serious Judgment; And page 7. There appears to me so nothing of an
excellent Spirit in them, that there is much silliness, and never well
catechized Ignorance set off with great Confidence, an odd way of Folly dressed
up with some Scripture Phrases; like Sepulchers painted with sweet Flowers, and
fair Colors, but void of any true Life within, as convincing of Sin and Error*
or as vindicating any Truth, or necessary point of Duty and Morallity; They
seem a Busy, Petulant, Pragmatick sort of People, etc. a kind of Dreamers,
Deceiving and Deceived, D^ting in their Rude and Contemptuous Carriage, in
which is Pride and Ambition, etc. And page 6. Nor is it a small insolence in
them, to endeavor, in an Age of so much Light and Learning, to Obtrude, yea,
oppose the Rudeness and Silliness of their covetous and crude Fancies, against
the Prudence, Justice, and Piety of this Church and Kingdom.

Answ. There is a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not
washed from their Filthiness; and that is the Generation of such as call
themselves Saints in this World, yet neither believe they can be, nor mean to
be so till the World to come: There is a Generation, Oh! how lofty are their
eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up? And of this sort were of old those
lofty Laodicean Lord Beggars, who seemed to themselves to be Rich, and
increased with Goods, and to have need of nothing, whilst for want of standing
in Christ's own Counsel, and not buying of him Gold that they might be rich,
and Raiment that they might be clothed, and not anointing their eyes with that
Eye Salve of his own Spirit of Grace, they were indeed (however outwardly
accomplished) inwardly Poor, Wretched, Miserable, Blind, and Naked: And how far
forth the Church of England (so called) that calls her self a Queen, and her
Self-boasting Angel, are found in that same loachsome, lukewarm temper, we
leave to her self impartially to examine in the sight of God, who sees all her
Works, and will (unless she be yet more zealous and Repent, and open unto
Christ, while he stands at the Door and Knocks) most assuredly spue her out of
his mouth; But if we were to take a true cognizance of her State, by those
Lof^y, Scornful Strains of Derogation and deep Defiance, into which this Bishop
launcheth forth at large against the Quakers, in these, and some other of his
Words that follow, we might (without censuring beyond what is meet) conclude
her to be of such a vaunting and self-glory strain.

The Bishop seems (and that scarce without some indignation at the Quakers
insolency) to wonder (our hearty desire for him is, that he may not be found
among them that despise, and wonder, and perish) at that work that God is
working in these days, which (it seems) he does not believe yet (as obvious as
it is to any eye over which the vail does not remain in the very Letter of the
Scripture, which he accounts himself, in comparison of the Quakers, to be not a
little skilled in) (viz.) that men so mean as the Quakers, so abrupt and
obscure, so far from that Beauty and strength of Religion, which he Dreams is
among themselves, because ( perhaps) of some outward Eloquence of Speech, in
respect of which he is counted (as he says of himself, at least) not a barren,
or difident Speaker, so far below the ordinary Symmetry of reason, Lineam^nts
of common sense in their writings, so Rude, Silly, Ignorant, Uncatechised, and
Crude in there (...); should with so great Confidence, in an age of so much
Light and Learning, take upon them to be (as he at least supposes they are) so
blindly Censorious, such bold Dictators of things for Truth, which he deems to
be but their own Dreams, deceptions, and dotages, to men of such renown as
himself, for Beauty and strength of Religion, Sense, and Reason; but surely if
he did not Read the Scriptures by wholesale, more then by retail, or did but
heed the inside of that Book which he is so busy about the backside of,
unless he be one of those Learned ones to whom that Book is sealed, he might
easily understand that it is those low, silly, mean ways, whereby God ever
delights to do the greatest matters, that no flesh might glory in his presence,
nor any man, nor man's parts, strength, Learning Education, or Wisdom be
accounted of: Have you never Read, O ( obtuse Acuti Academici, ye profound,
prudential, Renowned Rabbis) how great Goliath of Gath, that defied the Armies
of Israel and the Living God, was of old brought down by a sling and stone, in
the hands of a Stripling, that came not to him with Sword nor Spear, but in the
Name of the God of that People whom he defied? have ye never (...) in the last
days of the deliverance of his People, he will do (...) like, and make his
weaklings as David, to go forth and subdue wi^ aling-stones? Zach. 9. 15. How
he will draw out that Crooked Serpent, Lev^ with a hook? yea how the least of
that little stock of his Shee^ (...) hear his voice, which the learned Scribes
had not heard at a^ime, though they pretended to great skill in searching the
Scriptures, should draw him out? how, out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings
he will perfect his own praise, and ordain strength against the Persecutors, to
still the Enemy and the Avenger? Psalm. 8. Although the Chief Priests and
Scribes, Mat. 21. 15, 16. Luke. 19. 39. were sore displeased at it, and would
fain have had them been Rebuked, and Commanded to hold their Peace? how he will
speak to the Drunkards of Epbraim, that, through the wine of their own wise
dom, and through strong drink, are out of the way, even the Priest and the
Prophet that are out of the way, through the strong drink of their own vain
divinations, and Err in Vision, and stumble in Judgment, how he will speak to
them with stammering lips, and another tongue than they look for? And how the
Word of the Lord out of the mouths of his weaned Children, shall be Precept
upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line, Line upon Line, here a
little, and there a little, that they may go and fall backward, and be broken*
and snared and taken? Isai. 28. How it seems good in his fight to hide the
Glorious Mysteries of his Gospel and Kingdom, from the Wise and Prudent, while
he reveals them unto Babes, Mat. 11. How Christ himself, and that Excellent
Glory of his, which was the fullness of that Grace and Truth, that came and
comes to his Saints in the Light by him (the shadow only of which Substantial
Image of the Father, came by Moses, and is found among all that are Learned, no
higher then the Letter) was hid under that mean outward appearance, and
Occupation of the Carpenter, Mark 6. 3. And did any of the Rulers of the
Pharisees believe in him, but only that People of whom they said, according as
they also thought, they knew not the Law, and were accursed? how, by the
foolishness of Preaching, since in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knows
not God, it pleased him to save them that believe? how he will save the Tents
of Judah, Rude Rusticks, honest poor plain-hearted Country men first, that the
Glory of the house of David, and of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Kings and
Princes, chief Priests, Renowned Doctors, wise Counselors, deep Studied
Scholars, noble, rich, proud, self-conceited Citizens, and such like, may not
magnify themselves against Judah? How, he makes foolish the Wisd^ of the Wise,
and brings to naught the understanding of the Prudent ^ow he sends his Treasure
which is the Truth, in earthen vessels ^hen the Babylonish Trash of Abomination
and filthiness, (...) Whores Spiritual Fornications is exhibited in the golden
Cup (...) (...) her hand, Rev. 17. How he delights to provoke a Nation that ha^
^rovoked him to anger by their own inventions, to Jealousy by a foolish
Nation, and to weary them by a People that are not a People in their eyes,
Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Romans 10. 19. How he made use of Aquila a Tent-maker, and
Priscilla his Wife, to take to them Apollo (then a more Eminent Preacher of
Christ then any Parish Priest is in these days, though he knew him yet but as
it were after the flesh) and to instruct him in the way of God more perfectly?
And what if God, who (as to the substance of it) is Eternal, and unchangeable
in his way, will go the same way now as ever he has done, and befool the
Learned Grecian, the Scholastical Scribe, and disputer ^f this world, by his
foolishness, which is wiser then man, and by his weakness which is stronger
then man, and put out the eyes of those men, that are so wise in their own
eyes, and prudent in their own sight, as the whole Fraternity of the Clergy
are, that seem to themselves as So^s of Anack, whilst the Quakers are looked
upon by them with disdain, as no other then mere Grasshoppers in their eyes, so
that they shall call good evil, and evil good, put darkness for Light, and
Light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter? what if he will
turn wise men backward, and make their knowledge foolish and carry away
Counselors spoiled, and send his Son ( a new) as a Light into the world, that
those that see not may see, and that those that see (as the Seers seem to
themselves to do) may be made blind? Does he any more then was wont to be done
of old? Is there any new thing thereby done under the Sun? Is it any more then
what has said he will do? And must he cease to do as he ever has done, and
has said he ever will do, because the wise men in their own eyes cannot trace
him in his footsteps, which are in the great deep? Alas poor foolish men, that
are glorying in your own wisdom, and strong men in your strength, while Gods
People glory in the Lord alone, and rejoice in his highness, who is the God of
their Salvation; Little do you think how he that sits in Heaven has them that
oppose his Image in derision, how the Virgin Daughter of Zion shakes her head
(as she did of old against the Insolent Assyrian) at the Arogant Antichristian,
which Reproaches, and Blasphems, and Exhalts himself, and lifts up his haughty
Eyes on high (for so the Eminent Ecclesiastics now do) against the Light of
Israel, that is as a Fire, and his Holy One that is as a Flame, that shall
kindle upon Thickets of the Forest, even all that vast* wast Wilderness of
External, T^tionary Religion, that is sprung up out of the bottomless Pit of
^er man's Invention, and Imagination, which knows no bounds of adding Ceremony
to Ceremony, till the Substance and Power of Godliness is eaten out of doors,
as Pharoahs seven thin ears of Corn, and lean Kine did devour the Fat and and
Well-liking; Yea verily, a little of that Honesty, Simplicity, and Truth in the
inward Parts, which is the Sacrifice God delights in, and of that harmless
Simplicity, which, with the Bishop goes for Silliness, and never well
Catechized Ignorance, Plain Breeding, Unpollished Manners, and suck like, and
of that Wisdom that makes Poor men and Women Wise to the Salvation of their
Souls from their Sin, will in the day that is coming weigh down in the Balance
of the Sanstuary all that Subtilty, Policy, Prudential Piety, and Wisdom of
Words, wherein the greatest Doctors and Dictators, who are out of the Spirit,
are found Teaching and Dictating, by which they never obtain, or bring others
to obtain the Conquest over their own hearts Lusts and Corruptions, nor bring
themselves, or others, forth of all Iniquity into God's Righteousness, nor (as
that Primitive Bishop Timothy was bid to do) ever save either themselves or
those that hear them; witness their belief of a necessity of Sinning, and
non-belief of any possible attainment (by the gift of Gods Grace) to live
without Sin, while there is any Being in the Body: So that however the Bishop
Jeers at the Quakers Writings and Undertakings, as some odd Way of Folly, dressed
up with some Scripture Phrases, void of any true Life and Beauty within; yet so
much more efficacious are the meanest of their Testimonies to the Light, not
only to the Convincing, but Converting men from Sin and Error, and to the
vindicating of Truth, and ( omiting the impertinencies of outward Ceremonies,
which are not so much as accessory to Salvation) the necessary Points of Duty,
and Morallity; then all the Life-less Preachings of those Painted Sepulchers,
which flourish their Sermons (as with Sweet Flowers, and fair Colors) with
Phrases of Junior Fathers, and Sententious Sayings of more modern Authors, that
in the Name of the whole Body of that People we say to the Bishop, of that
strange hidden Divinity of the Quakers, which he scoffs at, as nothing but
Canting, and Chemical, in the Words of the Poet,

Hoc ego opertum.
Hoc ridere meum ( tam nil) nulla tibi vendo Iliade.
Bish. My design is not to ravel into all the petty Opinions, Enthusiastic
raptures, and odd practices of the Q^ers, nor will I severely perstringe them,
etc.

Answ. We would have the Bishop to understand, that there is not any, no not
the most petty Opinion, nor odd practice that is owned by the Body of that
People called Quakers, (though every thing that is done by every one, that may
possibly bear that Name, may not be owned by them) which (however Jeered at by
him under that old Scholastic scoffing term of Enthusiastic rapture) will not
be made good against the whole Body of those Bishops, that believe they have so
much ground to except against it, were they once made as willing to condescend
from their high-mindednesse (as the Scriptures require they should, Romans 12.)
in all plainness of speech, which most becomes the weighty matters of the
Gospel to be discussed in, to confer with men of no evil minds, though of such
low Estates, plain breading, and unpollished manners, as the Quakers for the
most part seem to him to be, and whom he perstringes much more severely, by his
condemning of their Opinions, and practices by wholesale, and in the Lump, as
odd, heriticall, and erroneous, which yet is the wonted way of all the Clergy
with those they Quarrel with, then if he took account of us concerning them in
particular.

Bish. I have a great pity for them; First, because I perceive them to be very
unlearned, and unstable People, ever Learning, but never coming to any solid
knowledge of the Truth, or any great improvements in Christian gifts, men of
low parts, and small capacities, as to any point of true Wisdom and
Understanding in things Humane, or Divine, tossed to and fro with every Wind of
Doctrine, easily seduced with specious pretentions, and strange notions, even
to Raptures, and Enthusiasms, which are presented to them as novellies, by some
that are Masters of that Art, and Agitators for that Party, for what design
Private, or Public, Foreign, or Domestic, God knows, some suspect Iesuitick
Arts to be amongst them.

Answ. If these, and such like Contemptuous, Disdainful, and I^onicall terms,
as he uses here, as well as before and after, were at all seemly from a Bishop,
yet are they so much the less sav^ry and seemly from him in sundry Respects:
First, because these expressions, which savor of nothing less then such a
thing, proceed from him under a Pious pretense of his great pity toward the
Quakers. Secondly, because himself has declared this his own practice, to be
contrary to that of the Holy men, and Fathers of Old; whom he commends as men
guided by the Word, and Spirit, and so worthy to be imitated by him; for those
holy men (says he) did not at any time despise the meannes of any Christians
outward Condition, or the fatuity of their Opinions. Thirdly, For as much as
himself elsewhere, brands it as a prophant, and Atheistical Carriage, to
disdain the plainness of the way, which the Wisdom of God sees fit to hold
forth the Gospel of Salvation in; witness his own words, then which we scarce
need any other in most Cases against himself, in the 3d. page of his Epistle,
where by way of Commendation of Robert Boil, to whom he Dedicates his Book, for
vindicating that homely style, and mean way of speech, wherein the Spirit of
God has chosen to hold forth the holy Mysteries of the Gospel in the
Scriptures, he speaks thus, Your self lately Cleared the fountains of
Divinity, in vindicating the Sacred, Yet unaffected Style of the Scriptures,
against some men's profane and Atheistical Cavils, who are so ^ittily wicked,
as to disdain, even Salvation it self in that plain, but sure way, which the
Wisdom of God sees fittest for humane Capacities, whereas few I believe of
those curious Gallants, would be so foolishly morose, as to Refuse a fair
Estate, which were settled upon them in the ordinary Legal way of deeds,
because it is not conveyed to them in such oratorious Harangues, and flourishes
of Speech as they most fancy: Exore tuo, etc.

Who would think the man that Writes these words in reproof, and condemnation
against such as despise Gods speakings forth of Truth, through the stammering
lips of such as are (as to secular Sciences) unlearned, and ignorant (as Peter
and John were, Act. 4.) and Rude in speech (as Paul confesses he was) though
not in knowledge, 2 Cor. and in such a Rustical way of Clownish demeanor,
wherein Amos the Heards-man, in an age, place and presence so promising as the
Kings Chapel, obiruded and opposed the Rudeness, and Sillyness of his Crude
fancy (as it seemed to Amaziah the Priest) against the Prudence, Justice, and
Piety of the Church and Kingdom; We say, who would think that he who condemns
it as profane, Atheistical Cavillation in others, to slight the lowness of
those earthen vessels whom God chooses, by word or writing, to bear his Name to
the Nations; should so far forget himself, as in the self same Book, to fly out
so far as the Bishop does, into the self same fault of scorning of good men,
under color of pitying them, for their low parts, and small capacities, and
so fall of himself into the self same condemnation? So let every tongue that
rises up in Judgment against thine Israel, O God, and every lip that is
opened to speak proud things, Proudly, Contemptuously, and disdainfully against
the Righteous, and despises not men but Thee, who to the poorest and meanest
of men have given thy holy Spirit, be left of thee (till it learn to know how
desperate it is to despise thy day of small things) to be Cut off, and
Confuted, Contradicted, and Condemned of it self.

Howbeit, saving all this Bishop's high deifying of themselves (as he does
implicitly whilst he defies the Quakers as persons unlearned, unstab^e, never
coming to any solid knowledge of Truth, or any great improvements in Christian
gifts, of low parts, and small capacities, as to any point of true wisdom or
understanding in things humane or divine, tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine, easily seduced with specious pretentions, etc.) We do not see any
such solidity of knowledge in the saving Truth among the deepest of men called
Divines, but rather that they are deeply lost from it in the thick woods of
their own thoughts, Forefathers Traditions, and certain outside bodily
exercises, and beggarly Rudiments (as Paul calls them) about which they busy
themselves, feeding only on the Theory of the things of God, which yet they
have but a slender, superficial sight of, on the mere rind or shell of the
Letter, and gnawing the Bone of the bare words, never coming at the Kernel,
Marrow, or inward Substance, nor witnessing the Power of God opperating to the
bringing forth, and perfecting of his Image in themselves; When as ( in Aperto
and facili posita est salus) the Salvation of God, which is of the Soul from
its sins, lies in a little compass, and is seen and found in an easy, plain,
honest-hearted attendance to the teachings of Gods Grace nigh in the heart, and
not so much in an Ability of disputing and Preaching over this or that
particular unprofitable point, and imp^rtinent Proposition: Neither do we
discern such an eminent improvement among them in Christian gifts, of either
preaching ( without Notes) or Praying ( without Book) with the help of which,
men of very low Parts, and mean Capacities (as to any point of true Wisdom or
understanding in things Humane or Divine (if they have but Ability enough to
steal good words from their Neighbors, or to compose the Godly sentences, and
formal supplications of others, into the Accustomed order, and to Read them
over when they have done, and can al^o be so far befriended, as to procure a
Parchment for it) may serve to make sufficient Pastors for Country Parishes,
though perhaps they be scarce able so much as to Read the Scripture, in both
those Original Languages, wherein it was given forth, if that were the Learning
so absolutely necessary, as our Clergy (so called) to the utter unministring
thereby of most Ministers of their own making, do solemnly assert it is: And as
to the kind of Learning, which is ^o necessary, that no man can be a Gospel
Minister without it, which Ignorant and unlearned Peter (as the Priests truly
enough as to any University improvement accounted him, Act. 4.) said such as
wanted were unstable, and wrested the Scriptures to their own Ruin, (viz.) the
infallible guidance of the infallible Spirit of God, who has no fallible
Spirit, nor any fallible guidance of his Church by that infallible Spirit, that
we know of* which spirit the Quakers confess with Paul, that if they have not,
they are none of Christ's: This our modern Divines, and Scripture searching
Scribes, are so far from being skilled in, that as they deny, and do not so much
as pretend to it themselves, so they little less than damn the Quakers as
Heriticks, for pretending to it: Neither do we see so much Stability and
Stedfastness to their Principles among the Priests, as may Justify them in
their Judging of the Quakers as unstable People, tossed to and fro with every
wind of Doctrine, easily seduced, etc.

For whereas the generality of the national Priesthood have been easily drawn
aside with the specious Pretensions, and strange Notions of Self-preservation,
Provision for their Families, escaping Imprisonments, possibility of
Preferments, and such like fleshly Dreams, worldly Raptures, and earthly
Ethusiasm's, presented to them upon condition of their closing with the rare
Novelties, that are countenanced under every new Catastrophe that comes into
their native Countries, to turn to and fro like a Reed shaken with the wind,
and leaning along with the Tide, which way ere the one blows, and the other
runs, and to yield forth and back, to this and that and the other Form of imposed
Worship, rather then be plucked up from the fruitful Soil of their
Ecclesiastical Patrimonies wherein they have taken Root, unstable as Water,
conforming it self to the round or square Figure of all Vessels it is
respectively put into; yet the Quakers could never yet be seduced back again,
nor ever will be, from that true Primitive Doctrine, and Principle of the Light
of Jesus, nor from that foundation of God on which their Faith is built, by all
those various winds of Priestly Doctrine, about the Forms of their several
Woiships, for which they contend with one another, more than for the Power of
Godliness; which winds have blown now this way, now that way of latter years in
this Nation, nor by any of that cunning Craftiness, whereby the Clergy has
lain in wait to deceive them, nor by any of those above said, or any other
specious Pretensions whatsoever.

And as for those Transactions of the Quakers, which (like some Great Master of
that Art of Taunting, and Agitators for his Party against the Quakers) he
flouts at under the wonted Ironical Terms of Raptures and Enthusiasms, by which
what he intends God knows, but if thereby he quips at the Quakers Petty
Opinions, and odd Practices (as he speaks above) of blindly Censuring, boldly
Dictating in their abrupt, and obscure Way, their good Words and godly Phrases,
b^bbling forth many specious Notions, short-lived Conceptions, obtruding their
Rudeness, Silliness, and crude Fancies in an Ag^ of so much Learning, against
their Ecclesiastical Prudence: We give the Bishop to understand, that (though
it grieve him that it is not; yet) the Spirit of the Lord, which blows where,
and on whom it lists, will be never the more straightened for his forbidding it,
though he knows not the way of it, nor which way it goes from himself; who
smites the Lords Prophets, to speak unto those Prophets of his, who are smitten
by him; Nay verily, as little as the Bishop's Eyes are open to see, and their
Hearts to believe, what is so palb^bly declared to them of these last Days in
the very Scripture, of which they deem themselves to be such Divine
Interpreters, yet upon Young men who shall see Visions, as well as Old men who
shall dream Dreams, will the Lord pour out of his Spirit, even the fullness of
that in these latter Ages, which the primitive Churches had but the first
Fruits of; so that the Glory of this second house, that is crected after the
long treading down of the holy City and true Worship, by the Nations that have
got into the outer Court, (viz.) the mere name of Christians, and external
Forms of Christian Worship, shall exceed the Glory of the former that was
before the Romish ruinations of it, yea, upon his Daughters and Handmaids, as
well as on his Sons and Servants; (though the Mockers shall say, as of old they
did, Acts 2. they are Drunk and Mad) and they shall Prophefie, and grand
Gamaliels, and great High Priests that have passed for Prophets, shall cover
their Lips, because they have no answer of God, and either Learn or m^urn in
silence, while (Doctorem et Dictraorem induit ^xor) not only young and mean Men
(as Timothy and Titus) shall be old in sober-mindedness, Examples of Gravity,
Paterns of Purity, honorable for their Honesty, regenerated into Primitive
Innocence, Grace and Glory, Beautiful for Holiness, Eminent in Righteousness,
Fathers for Experience of Gods Power upon their Spirits, but very Women also be
as mothers in Gods Israel, though they seem (at least in the apprehensions of
some that go for Fathers, who are yet strangers to that Chimical Divinity, that
God is declaring forth the mysteries of his Kingdom by) to be no better than
mere Can^ens, Bablers, and bubblers forth of such fine Fancies, and short lived
Conceptions from an empty airy Brain, as cannot endure the firm touch or breath
of any serious Judgment.

Finally, as to that Insinuation, and suspicion of Iesuitick Acts to be among
the Quakers, in order to some design, but whether public or private, foreign
or domestic, God knows; We say God knows, and it is well for us (since men
are, and yet will be willingly ignorant of it, let them have never so much
experience of our Integrity) that he does know it, who will also once clear our
Innocence as the Light, and our Righteousness as the noon Day; to whom
principally we appeal to judge between us and our Mis-representers: We say, God
knows we have no other design at all, but to promote the Truth and Power of
Godliness, Liberty of Tender Consciences, and the Gospel of Peace, in the
flourishing of all which the Peace of this Nation is so eminently concerned,
that if ever it come to know perfect Peace, if any one Ecclesiastical Power,
whether Papal, Prelatical, or Presbyterial, shall be permitted by the civil
Power, which is supreme ( de jure) to exercise such a superintendency and
supreamacy ( de facto) as to suppress as well the Quakers, as all others called
Christians, but it self, then the Lord has not spoken at all by us: Mean while
this is the Joy and Rejoicing of our hearts (whatever the Bishops count of us,
or can do to us) the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity, and
Godly Sincerity, we have our Conversation both toward God and among all men;
being far from so much as seeming (save that the Bishop looks upon us with an
eye of groundless and needless jealousy) to conspire with any crafty
Loiolists, or to bear an implacable Hatred to the Church of England; the worst
evil that we do (as it is the best good in Love we can wish to which is that it
might once arise purely out of that grand Apostasy into the hundreds of
pithless Forms of it, up into the Life and Power of Truth it self, and become
as Apostolical as the Quakers are; much less under any Religious Pretensions
whatever, do we seek to undermine the civil Peace amongst any Factions, or
factions Ones whatever; Nevertheless, if this Bishop had been such a Wise Man,
and Sober Christian, as we perceive he accounts himself to be in comparison of
the Quakers, his Wisdom would certainly have justly restrained him here, and
have instructed him better, than to seem so publicly (as he does in his Book)
to be so much afraid of such a mean company of silly Fools, or to suspect
Iesuitick Acts among such senseless Simpletons, un-catechized Ignoramus's, such
home spun, plain-bred, unpollisht Manner'd, Petulant, Incapacious, shallow
Brained, Easy, Unwary, Blind People, as he counts the Quakers, seeing Jesuits
are known and owned to be Rabbis of no small Renown for Parts and Policy, as
well as their pretended Piety throughout the World: Herein the Bishop has
utterly loosened his own Tackling, so that he cannot well strengthen his Mast
to bear him up in this battle against the Quakers but that he will sink before
them, as to one or other of his Assertions, which can no more, than two
Contradictories, be both true at once, ( Ad Hominem) What can such mean People,
as the Bishop represents the Quakers to be, for Birth and Breeding, for Reason
and Understanding, as well as Estates, men so Unlearned and Unstable, of such
Rudeness, Silliness, and Crudity of Fancy, and possibly of no evil Minds,
People that have neither Wealth nor Wit to Agita^e with, be such Deep, Dreadful
Agitaters of such grand Iesuitick Arts and Designs, as the Undermining of the
Peace of Kingdoms; Herein the Bishop must quit the Quakers of one or other, or
of both these his false charges, if he will quit himself as a man of Reason,
and Understanding: Either let him say we are Crude, Foolish, Silly, Ignorant,
Abrupt, Unlearned, Plain, Unpolisht, Unwary, and so no Jesuits; or else falsely
as he does, that we smell of Jesuits, and so are no such Non-sensical Novices as
he holds us out to be; for his matter is no better than Untempered Mortar here,
and let him Dawb which way he will to make it good, and to stand sound, yet
will it hang together as well, but no better then Butter and an hot Oven.

Bish. As for the Bishop's next squeamish Piece of Delineation of the Quakers,
which he makes the second ground of his Pity toward them, viz. In that they
are a Sect lately bred as Vermin out of the putrid Matter, and Corruptions of
former Times, out of that Spawn and Filth which other Factions cast forth to
the Deformity and Confusion of all things, and had their Beginning from the
very Rabble and Dregs of Unchatechized, Undiciplin'd, Ungoverned People in
England, had their Original, and Extraction out of that Squalor, Mud, and
Fedity of Times, which destroyed all Fear of God, etc.

Answ. This is such a deformed mess of mere medley and confusion, such a
pitriful piece of putrid matter, Spawn, Filth, Squalor, Mudd, Fedity, Foul, and
False Aspersion, as we have no mind to Ravel into, if we should, how easy were
it for us to convict it not only First of much falsehood; for our first
Original, and beginning, is not (as is showed above) from so low and loathsome
a Dunghill, and Dungeon of dirt and darkness as that rabble, and dregs of
People, of which he says we were hatched, (if we were of that world, that
world would love her own, but because we are not of that sort of men, but
chosen out from among them, therefore that rabble, and dregs of People hate
us,) but we are a People born of God from above, of the Immortal Seed of his
Word, and Spirit, who has begotten us back to himself, from the Devils Image,
which once we bare with others, that are still in the Degeneration; not by an
Equivocal Generation, but a true Regeneration, and renewing of his holy Spirit;
and our beginning is from him who is the beginning and and of all things; but
secondly of much (...) also, while he makes all that loathsomness which in his
Christian Charity, and little Love he Loads us withal, a ground of his pure
pity to the Quakers, for howbeit it manifested the falsehood and wickedness of
their Adversaries plain enough, when the Apostl^s were despised, reviled, and
defamed by them, and made as the filth of the world, and the s^um and
offscouring of all things; yet it would have savoured of Hypocrisy, De^it, and
Dissimulation in the abstract, should they have pretended to have rendered them
thus vile to men, in pity to them; so it is bad enough in the Bishop to
bespatter Gods holy People, but deceit of a deeper die, and guile in grain, to
pretend in all this he acts in Pity to them; yet behold all this last most
putrid part of his Discourse against the Quakers (as mulier formosa superne
desinit in turpem pisc^) fronts it self under the fair Face, specious Form, and
pre^ence of Pity, of which pretended Pity of the Bishop to Quakers his last
pretended ground is as follows.

Bish. Lastly, I pity them, because to me it is no wonder if they were soared
from all Swearing by the frequent forfeited Oaths, and repeated Perjuries of
those times, in which the cruel, ambitious, and disorderly Spirits of some men,
like the Demonaicks in the Gospel, brake all Bonds of lawful Oaths, by which
they were bound to God and the King, daily imposing the Super-Foetations of new
and illegal Oaths, monstrous Vows, sactious Covenants, desperate Engagements,
and damnable Abjurations. Poor men, the Quakers as well as others, had cause to
fear, least if they took an Oath to day, they should to morrow be forced to
renounce and abjure it; yea, to renounce, and abjure the undoubted Rights of
others, to attest even by oath, the Usurpation of those as lawful, which were
most Diametrically contrary to the Laws of God and Man. This great Temptation,
under which the Quakers then lived, makes me have much Compassion for them, it
being not only easy, and obvious, but venial, and almost commendable for them
to be carried to an utter aversation from all swearing whatsoever, when they
saw such desperate abuse, and breaking of public, and solemn Oaths, in those
dismal Days.

Answ. We muse why the Bishop does not as well pity the Quakers, if they be
scared from all Swearing, by the frequent, prop^am, and repeated Prodigions
Swearing of these times, in which all places are full of Vomit, so that there is
no place clean, in which the c^el, ^alitious, and disorderly Spirits of many
men, like the Demo^ in the Gospel, break all bonds of those good and wholsomes
Laws against unlawful Oaths, from which they are bound (but that they obey
not) by the express Prohibitions both of God, and of the King; not only
frequently imposing ore and ore again a Superfluity of that Oath of Allegiance,
which according to the Law of man by which it is pretended to be imposed, is as
Illegally Imposed upon the Quakers, in Reference to whom it was never made, as
it is Universally omitted, and neglected to be imposed on Popish Recusants (
palpably known so to be) in Reference to whom only, and not for the other, the
said Oath was at first instituted and appointed; But also daily using on all
occasions, and for the most part without any occasion the Supersoesations of
new invented, Monstrous, Desperate, and Damnable kinds of Oaths, Iurations,
Cursings, and Execrations.

Poormen, the Quakers as well as others, have cause to fear, Lest if they take
the Oath of Allegiance before some Magistrates in one place, for fear of men,
to day, they shall be forced, before other Magistrates to reiterate it to
Morrow in another, since, though men can prove they have ^worn it ost
heretofore, (as some Quakers can) and once taking it is as much as by Law, can
be required of one man, As the Judges said in the Case of John Crook, on the
Bench in the Old Bailey, telling him, once taking the Oath was sufficient, yet
Sentencing him to a Pruminire for not taking it there again, though he offered
to prove he had taken it once before.
yet it shall be required of them again anew, as often as any Magistrate out of
malice has a mind (as a snare) to make tender thereof unto them; And so they
must come under the guilt of vain, needness, common and frequent Swearing: and
so not only encourage men by their example to Swear more Consaiently in
Courts, where they both Swear and for swear themselves already, but strengthen
the hands of those thousands of wicked, Profane Swearers, that they cannot
return from that course of wickedness, which is Diamerrically contrary to the
Laws of God and man. This great Temptation, under which the Quakers now Live,
as well as others, one would think should make the Bishop have much compailion
for them, it being not only easy and obvious, but Venial and Commendable, for
them to be carried to an utter aversation from all Swearing whatsoever; when
they see among men not only such desperate abuses of themselves, in vain
needlessly multiplying of public and solemn Oaths: But also in their daily
multiplying every where, as many abo^inable Oaths, almost, as other Words, in
these dismal Days.

But Alas, his pious (...) to Pity, being but pitiful speers of the Quakers,
^ather than (...) Expressions of any such real Pity as he ought to beat toward
them from a real ground: To me it is no wonder, that the Bishop does not so
much as pretend to any Pity to them, in such Temptations of theirs as now most
truly call for it: And as the Bishop's pretended Compassions, are but a certain
sort of (...) pouring out of Contempt, and Exprobation upon us, so (as far
almost as it is possible ^hao (...) in uni^ fit vituperatio alterius) all his
more real Praises and Commendations of the Quakers, do pull down no small
Dispraise and Discommendation (not to say Condemnation) upon himself and all
his sides-men against them, since while he praise^ them, page 10. for Choosing
rather to Suffer than to Sin against their Consciences, and so against God the
more s^ame it is sor himself the while, and for those whom he spurs on by
othersome (for all his seeming shows of bridling them by some) expressions of
his Book, to a foreing of them by Mulcts and Penalties to Swear, and so (what
in him is) to Sin against their Consciences, and so against God, for fear of
the Threats of Men, and to escape such Sufferings; which practice of the Bishop
and the Quakers Adversaries, is in such a degree as condemnable in themselves,
as that which the Bishop commends in them, is truly commendable in the Quakers.

And Secondly, while he praises the Quakers, page 10. for their declared esteem
of the authority of the holy Scripture, as the Rule of Faith and holy Life, and
their fearing to Sin against the Command there given by Christ against
Swearing, and ( however they are by many suspected to slight the Scriptures)
their strictness in doing what therein is required of them, as to Truths to be
believed, and Duties to be done to God and Man, the Bishop is so much the more
liable to Discommendation himself, who in the same page does himself (
virtually and in effect) deny the Scripture to be the perfect Rule of Faith and
holy Life: And whether the Bishop does not so, we appeal to all wise men to
judge; For that which is a perfect Rule of Faith and holy Life must be not only
standing, inalterable, immutable, and not liable to any depravation, but also
of such latitude as to stretch forth itself to the regulating of all men, in
all Truths to be believed, and Duties to be done, or left undone, by each
particular man, as well but accessory, as absolutely necessary, or else it is
not so perfect a Rule, but that it needs another to be added to it, and so
there must be two Rules of things to be believed and done, viz. one to direct
and guide men in Truths and Matters of lesser, another in Truths and Matters of
greater moment; which is as absurd as that of the Papists, who make Christ's
Righteousness (as the Bishop makes the Christians Rule, like a Ladder, that is
not long enough to reach to Heaven of i^ self, without another lesser Ladder at
the top of it to reach it out with) the main thing; but their own Works, and
will Worships so concurrent with it, that without them it cannot save them; sor
says the Bishop, Scripture is indeed sufficient for the Substance of all
necessary Truths to be believed, and Duties to be done or left undone, but it
does not stretch it self forth to the Instances of every particular
circumstance or Ceremony, which private Prudence, or public Laws may regulate
according to order and decency to Edisication; which is as much as to say,
Scripture is not a perfect Rule of Faith and Holy Life: For what is so must be
a Rule of all things that are to be Tried, Regula et regulatum mesura et
mesuratum debent esse adaequata: But the Scripture according to the Bishop is
not adaequate to all things to be tried, stretches not out it self to every
Circumstance or Ceremony (and so not to direct in Swearing which is a Ceremony)
but the private Prudence, and public Laws of men must regulate them to
edification, to supply the Defects of the Scriptures: Siccine Episcopi
agnoscunt Scripturas esse regulam?

Thirdly, Page 15. He adds this by way of Commendation to the Quakers, viz.
That they seem to have so great a fear of an Oath, that out of a jealousy of
Swearing amiss, they will not Swear at all; which Commendation as it tends to
his own Condemnation, sor as much as himself there says, That in this respect
they shall rise up in Judgment against many of those (among whom himself is
not the least) that speak much against them; so much more to the Condemnation
of that Generation of Swearers he so much sides with against the Quakers, who
seem to have so little fe^r of an Oath, that out of a jealousy lest that evil
custom of Swearing amiss should die out altogether, in order to the upholding
of it, do accustom themselves to nothing so much as to a custom of Swearing;
who shall not stand in judgment at the last day, wherein every idle Word must
come to account; How e're they may now scorn the reproofs of any of those
Quakers, or those reprovers thereof, who speak much against them.

The Second Part.
HAving hitherto noted some of those many Meandrous turnings and twinings of
the Bishop's Book, whereby (not unlike to Leviathan that crooked Serpent) i^
sometimes shrinks it self (as it were) out of the figh^ of such as are not wise
as Serpents, as well as innocent as Doves, and so perspicacious enough to
discern the design thereof, in order to the more advantageous laying out of it
self at length, to a deeper and stronger stinging of those whom (as a Friend to
them) it pretend^ to have most to do with, as if it would wash its hands from
having ought to do with any rigorous, sharp and severe ways against different
persuasions, but specially, of all men, against the Quakers, as a more innocent
people, and possibly not of such evil minds as others, while yet under the
disdainful terms of surly, rude, uncourteous, rustical, clownish, silly,
ignorant, uncatechized, undisciplined, ungoverned, rude, unlearned,
impollish'd, and such like; yea, under the vile Names of Vermin generated out
of putrid matter, and corruption extracted out of the Rabble and Dregs of
people, out of that spawn, filth, squalor, mud and foedity of Times, void of
all fear of God, he delivers them over (so far as his consent to a Bill for
that purpose, and concurrence of, his Book can contribute thereunto) as
undeservedly, as it is undesired by thousands of sober people that are not of
them, to be sold as a prey to the Rabble and Dregs of people, to be destroyed;
We come now (omitting several things for brevity sake, which otherwise we might
make some useful observations of, about his further pity to us, praises of us,
and other pro^ix and previous passages) to the Point it self propounded by him
to be proved, and to an examination of that little part of the Book, wherein
its Author (having pretended before to act the part of a Benefactor)
interposeth himself on behalf of the Bishops (whose Piety and Charity so far as
to their joint suffrages and consent with him in his Work, he presuming of page
3. We may presume it is all their sense, and the sum of what may be expected to
be said by the whole Body of the Bishops in that point) by his own privat^ and
single hand, to act the part (as to the lawfulness of Swearing) of a Convincer,
or infallible Instructor to the Quakers.

And having already rased his Outworks, and subdued his Suburbs, passing at
present through the Gates, which are as large, as of little force to afford any
aid or assistance to the City they lead to; We enter upon the City it self, and
come directly to a brief, honest, pla^n Animadversion of what the Bishop utters
upon that Subject, and of the utmost which he urges in proof of the la^fulness
of Swearing: Which part of whose Discourse in that point, howbeit (
consideratis considerandis) it looks big, and bears a direful Frontispice
enough, at first sight, to fright all feeble-minded folk into the Faith and
sudden following of all that for truth, which is therein attested, being a
Birth brought forth by no less than an applauded Doctor, and much admired
Bishop, backed also by no less now than a Law, that Subpoena's any that shall in
any wise appear against it, under the Patronage of which Law the Controversy
between him and the Quakers is by the Bishop himself as boldly determined
against them, as disputed; yet, how formidable a face soever it seems to have
amongst mere Formalists, who (their Faith standing not purely in the Power of
God, but in the Wisdom of great men, whose persons, wonds and works ( tam nil)
they have in admiration because of outward advantage) are easily frowned or
flattered into at least a seeming to see strength, truth and reason there where
in truth they see none, it has (as brief as it is) more Bulk than Bulwark in
it, to bear the brunt of those Discourses to the contrary (had he been minded
to have answered them) whereby the Quakers in their Books extant against
swearing, before his own was extant for it, may be truly said by way of
Praeoccupation, or Anticipation, to have confuted the Bishop's Book, and
enervated the strongest of his Arguments before he uttered them; and such as
are under the Power and Teachings of him, who is the Truth it self, and cannot
dote upon any Ipse dixit, so as implicitly Iurare in ipsius sententiam, to take
Truth more upon trust, than trial from naked talk or conjectural Discourses,
that discuss things at uncertainty, and can pretend no higher than probability,
but neither to any plain ^tunal, or truly Scientifical demonstration, cannot
but be^old (though parturiunt montes) how little or nothing at all of weight
(comparatively to what was by some, and well might by all be expected, when
'twas noised that the Mountains were in travel, and about to bring forth
somewhat that way) is indeed brought forth to so weighty and mighty a purpose
as his Book pretends to, viz. the proof of the lawfulness of Swearing in
Judicial proceedings, in answer to the scruples of the Quakers, of whom there
are many thousands (besides the many thousands that are not of them, yet
assenting herein with them) that are upon more sufficient grounds than the
Bishop's slender reasonings against them can remove, well satisfied how
contrary it is to Christ's command, and far short of that Evangelical
Perfection, which his Gospel calls to, for his Disciples to Swear at all, not
only in trivials, in usual Discourses, but also in Judicial proceedings.

In order to a manifestation of it, how meanly he manages the matter toward
that, which is the main end of his undertaking, we shall first take notice of
what was ( by right) the whole of the Bishops business (since he has taken the
Transaction of that affair upon him) as in reference to the Quakers in all the
several particulars of it. 2. How weakly and imperfectly he has answered it,
not in some only but even in every one of those said several particular^,
under the consideration of which (as of so many particular heads to which it is
all respect vely reducible) we shall find occasion, one where or other, to take
cognizance of the whole train of the Bishop's talk, so ^ar as it seems to be of
any true tendency to the point in question.

As then to the main ^uestion it self, the proof of which in the affirmative,
to the satisfaction of the Quakers in all the particulars wherein they except
against it, and that so, as either to convince them, or else to convict them as
justly deserving to suffer the severity of the late Act for the requiring of
it, as wilful and obstinate offenders, if not so convinced thereof, as
pract^vally to submit to it.

First, It is not whether profane or trivial Swearing,

2dly, Nor whether Swearing by any Creature (as such) not relating by it, and
through it unto God be lawful or no? for these the Bishop confesses for himself
and his Brethren, p. 14. they all agree with the Quakers to be unlawful.

Nor 3dly, Whether an Oath by any creature as in relation to, depend^g on, and
derived from God be lawful? For howbeit the Bishop would ^ain (if 'twere
possible) find out such a far fetched sense, and scrue the Quakers into a
closing with him in his con^ectural conceit, p. 27, 28. 29 30. (which conceit
of his i^ indeed the very Basis which the weight of his whole discourse so
leanes upon, that if it prove a misconceit (as sure enough it will do) his
Cornerstone fails, and his whole Castle, which he build^ in the Air upon it,
comes down to the ground) viz. That the Jews either upon a seeming to
themselves to have some Divine Indulgence and connivance, or temporary
Disponsation heretofore granted them for it, or by the hardness of their own
hearts, or the customary depravedness of those times and, manners, presuming to
take to themselves such a Dispensation, and to indulge themselves in that kind
of Creature-swearing, as a thing then lawful; and that that was the sort of
swearing which Christ and James both do aim at in their Prohibitions of
Swearing, which fancy we shall show the ^rivolously of by and by; yet the
Bishop agrees fully with us in this however, and whatever the Jews then thought
of them, that those irregular forms of Oaths, as he terms them, both were then
(saving the Jews conceit to the contrary) as well as they are at this day
unlawful:

Nor 4 hly, is the question whether such Oaths by any Creature being once
rashly taken, be obliging to performance in a lawful matter or no? For howbeit
the Bishop says, that all agree they bind, that in this case Q^od fieri non
debuit factum valet, and that like Bastards they should not have been begot,
but must be kept, and th^e the Jews though they ought not so to have sworn, yet
having so sworn, were obliged thereby, and were not excused from perjury in
nonperformance; Which saying of the Bishop that all agree to this, confutes
that saying of the same Bishop, wherein he confesses, p. 29, 30. (quoting that
of August. in proof of it) P. 29. ^urabant ^udaei per Creaturas obvias; nec se
istis teneri credebant, etc.

Et 30. Non putabant Iud^i se teneri Iure ju^do si per ista jurassent, nec
redden* dum Domino tale Iuram^ntum


That all the Jews disagreed from this, and fancied such Oaths were not binding
uyon their souls either as to truth or right; yet that is neither here nor
there to the Question.

Nor is the Question (as it lies in its full latitude between the Bishop and
the Quakers) to be coop^d ^p into this narrow Room, as the Bishop says it will
come into* p. 24, 25. viz. Whether those words of Christ and the Apostle, Mat.
^, I^ 5 d^ ^terly f^bid all Swearing in any case whatsoever, to all Christians;
so that by the Law of Christ it is a sin to swear, as in privates, so in
public Transactions or Courts of Judicature, etc. The Cishop states the
question too straightly, while he ties it up to the interpretation of those two
Texts only; for though it must needs be granted that the whole stress of the
Controversy stands so strictly upon the right or wrong understanding and
rendition of those Scriptures, that they are very well worthy to have the
preheminin^e, as to the final determination of the point; and we are willing to
refer it wholly thither* and to stand or fall in our Conflict, by a candid,
sober, clear, Christian, unprejudicate, impartial Animadversion of those Texts,
with the several circumstances attending them, and as they stand in relation to
their Contexts and other Scriptures, (and very well we may, seeing the Bishop
himself gives ground to us so far, as to confess, p. 20. that we have of them
two such notable Texts in our way, which see^ to stand as the Angel of the Lord
against Balaam, with a Sword in their hand, to stop the way of any Swearing
whatsoever; All agreeing that the words are a Divine and strict prohibition
against the sin of Swearing; and therefore the fears and scruples of the
Quakers in point of Swearing, are not to be wholly despised, but in all Charity
the words ought to be cleared, and their scruples removed) yet whereas the
Bishop says p. 25. that the Quakers do not argue any thing further by way of
rational deduction, moral grounds, or Religious Principles, either from the
nature of an Oath, or consent of other Scriptures, or from the Divine
Attributes, or glory; but barely insist upon the words, and urge the ((...))
Letter as an absolute or universal Negative; We do him, to wit, that as We own
and know indeed the Words to be an absolute universal Negative, without any
limitation or dispensation, so We are not under such an absolute limitation of
our selves to the bare Letter of those two Texts, but that if any thing of a
rational Consideration be offered, whereby to divert us from ou^ sense of them*
or ou^ judgment in that case of Swearing* We are ready to receive it, or to
return our reasons why We cannot; And as our Books already extant are not
without much of rational deduction, both from those Texts, and other Topics,
so We may find somewhat more to offer, than our sense on those two Scriptures.

And thereupon We propound the Q^stion somewhat larger than it stands stated in
the Bishop's Book, that he may have the more Field-room against us; it he can
find ought of solid Reason, wherewith to fight us.

6. The question then i^ (the other, as he states it, not excluded, but
included) Whether it be lawful for Christians to impose Swearing under
penalties, o^ to swear either by God himself, or any Creature in any case
whatsoever, in private or in public Transactions, or any Courts of Judicature,
be the matter of the Oath ever so just and true, and the manner or form of it
(as ordained by man) ever so solemn, and the Authority (Humane) requiring them,
ever so lawful in civil respects, any thing in those two Texts, or any thing
any otherwise whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. This the Bishop
affirms on behalf of his own Conscience, and the consentient sense of this
Church and Kingdom, yea of all Christian and Reformed Churches of any renown,
that the use of Swearing in Judicial Proceedings is lawful for Christians, and
that Christ's words are to be understood with such a limited sense, and strict
interpretation, as not to forbid the use of Swearing in a Religious and lawful
way We see the Bishop however loves to speak safely, though he speaks little
less then sophistically, concluding not contradictorily to us (as he ought to
do) but aliud a negato, another thing tha^ what we deny, and no other than what
we may yield to* and do our Cause no harm; for who deni^s but that swearing in
a lawful way ^ lawful, and not forbidden by Christ; but that any swearing is
lawful, is the Question, which he would sain beg, before we see cause to give
it him.


On the other side professing, that we are led thereto no otherwise then by the
Conscience of that obedience we owe to Christ* We have denied that either
imposing Oaths under penalties, or that Swearing even in Iudicial^ Proceedings
i^ lawful for Christ's Disciples, and that absolutely and universally Christ's
Will is declared to the contrary to all his Disciples in those two Scriptures.

This being the question, the negative part of which is held by the Quakers, it
was the Ministerial duty of the Bishops, who are sound in the affirmative, very
suitable to their Profession and Paternal Compassion (by Bish. Gaudens own
confession, p. 2, 3. in his motion to the House ^or some respite, till it were
discharged) in order to the Quakers Information, and such sufficient
Instruction as might answer their Arguments, remove their difficulties, (...)
their C^sciences, and either bring them into a cheerful obedience in that
particular, or else leave them without excuse before God and man, so as to
justify the truth of the Law against the Quaker, Error, and render them justly
suffering the severity of it for obstinate offending, We say it was the Bishops
duty in prosecution of the e^s aforesaid, either per se, or per alios, before
their assenting to the Edition of the Law against us (at least of B. Gauden
himself, whose own motion and confession that was) to have discharged it in
every one of these subsequent particulars.

1. He ought to have performed that business of instruction, in order to the
Quakers Information concerning the lawfulness of imposing under penalty, as
well as of taking Oaths in Courts of Judicature. 2. Of both these in such wise
and manner, cases and places as they are at this day in England imposed and
taken. 3. Now in the days of the Gospel since the ending or fulfilling of the
Law in Christ. 4. Among true Saints, Christians, Christ's own Disciples, or in
his true Church. 5. By way of proof, and not by mere affirmation only, or bare
position. 6. This proof not by way of mere probable Argumentation only, but by
way of plain Scriptural evidence, and Scientifical demonstration, that is able
to give an infallible eviction. 7. This Scriptural demonstration from the
Scriptures of the New Testament, not of the old only. 8. Any thing in any
Books put out out by the Quakers, or in those two Texts Matthew. 5 Iam. 5. to the
contrary notwithstanding. 9. Such as must succeed so as effectually to produce
its immediate end, viz removing all difficulties, such clear conviction and
infallible satisfaction to their Consciences, as actually leaves them without
any doubt, cloud or exception in themselves against the truth of the thing
imposed, and to be practiced. 10. Or else in case of non-conviction, or of
non-submission against conviction, after the Bishop's so full and effectual
endeavo^ of their information, denominate them undoubtedly such wilful
resisters, and obstinate offenders against the Law, as fall, and that so (...)
(...) the severe penalties thereof, as to he left in their sufferings without
Plea for themselves, and without any just Excuse before God and Man.
These being the particulars of the Bishop's professed Work, it remains now
that we only take some account of the residue of his Book, how accordingly he
has accomplished it, which if it appear to right reason that he has, God
forbid that we should wilfully deprive our selves of that Religious Liberty is
left us, and obstinately refuse that which is not only lawful for Christians
to use, but (as the case stands) prudentially necessary, (...) the expedienc^
of our Lives, outward Liberties, Estates, gond (...) and enjoyments; but if
otherwise it be so that our Bow, like Ioseph's, at least abides in the same
strength it did before, however the Arch-Archers of all have shot sorely at us,
to the wounding of our reputation among such as are apt to be more ^way'd by
the Bishop's proofless positions, than by the Quakers evident demonstrations,
and that our Testimony heretofore given, stands extant in the same for^ ^d
vigor as before, then (what ever others do, and what ever the contray cost us)
God forbid that we should turn aside from following the Lord, so, as to lead
Truth and Reason captive after men's (...) conjectures and conceits, and not
suffer violence quietly, without violent resistance, under the Laws of men,
rather than do that which the Bishop says p. 10, 11. no man may do, i. e. act
contrary to those dictates we judge, or but suppose to be Gods, and sin
formally and maliciously against but appearing principles of Truth, and so
wilfully rebel against the Truth, or but supposed Will of God, whose ^ly Will
shining on the soul in Reason or Religion, seeming or real, is indeed the
present Rule of Conscience, which binds so far a^ it represents (though in a
false glass, and though it err, as to the truth of the Rule) and so violate
both our own Consciences, and his Commands, to whom we Christians owe the
highest love, Loyalty and obedience.

First then as to the lawfulness of imposition of public Oaths under penalties
in Judicial Proceedings, he professes it is fit, p. 2. we should be informed
thereof (before we suffer as offenders) by the Law of God as well as Man: But
we profess we cannot find throughout his Book any proof at all for imposing
Oaths under penalties, unless he should count upon his instancing in Abraham,
Jacob, Joshua, David and others, requiring or desiring an Oath of (...) they
entrusted, but not under penalties, which is not demonstrative neither, being
drawn but ( ab exemplo) from the example of (...)* and that under the Law too,
whose practice in many things, or indeed in any thing (though they were good
men) is not our Rule, but God's own Precept under the Gospel, whose permission
of sundry things then, is no commission ^or the doing of the same things now;
whereupon if there were any ground from which to prove it lawful for Christians
now to swear in some cases with a good Conscience, that is far from justifying
it as lawful in Christians by penalties to force other Christians to swear
against their Consciences in Courts of Judicature; so that therein he has done
his work but by the halves.

2. As for that kind, form or manner of poenal imposing, and taking Oaths in
such cases and places as it is now used in, and so strictly pleaded for by our
English Professors, there is not one inch o^ evidence about the warrantableness
of that, although it is not only possible, but exceeding probable, that
thousands of people (if they were well satisfied as to the thing, in some form
or other of it, which the Powers, Priests and People of this Nation call
Swearing, though the Qu. do not so call it) who can never with good Conscience
to God, conform to those many cumbersom, customary, superfl^ous, fidling
formalities of handling, fingering, kissing of a Book, with so help me God, and
the Contents of this Book, and suck like, by which mere ceremonious,
accidental, odd, petty practices, postures and gestures, as by the substantial
and essential form thereof, they (at least) must be supposed to define an Oath,
who confine men so to them, as that they will punish them as not swearing to
their satisfaction (though offering that which is ten times more Evangelical
and Substantial, as I call God to record upon my soul; or I speak as in the
presence, or in the sight of God; or I speak truth before God, and lie not, my
Conscience bearing me witness d^ in the sight of God; or God is my Witness, or
some such solemn form of Words as may be suggested to the person at the time of
his Attestation) unless the other adventitious, inventious forms aforesaid, of
touching, or talking by road after some Clark or Crier, be conformed to; yea,
which makes the matter the more (either renownedly or ridiculously) remarkable
on the part of those Rabbis, by whose Opinions some subordinate Rulers are in
this point irregularly ruled, though they almost in all their Boo^ tell us,
that an Oath is no more than a calling God to witness, as a special honor, or
appeal to him So the Bish p. 35. 36 All the Nations have used some form of
swearing by their respective Dei^ies, as a special honor and appeal to their
Sovereignty, as the only means in cases dubious, to give satisfaction, gain
credit, and make men assured of the verity and honesty of the speaker in their
promises and testimonies, in their leagues and contracts

And p: 38. An Oath is only the Attestation of God, who is witness of all we
say and do.


; yet if we (who do not count it swearing by God, to call God to witness, any
more than it is swearing by a man, to call a man to witness, unless there be
such a form of speech used, as to say, By God, and then that is an Oath, whether
by God, by man, or by any other creature, as by Heaven, by Earth, etc.) if we
say, God is my Witness, I speak before God, I appeal to God, I call God to
record, or such like (not stinting nor limiting our selves syllabically to
those very monosyllables only* of Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay; which words the Bishop
says p. 31. (but on his own head, or by hear say only, for it is not so) the
Quakers so much affect to use, as if they would fancy themselves literally or
verbally tied to these monosyllables, and those to be repeated in all their
assertions or prom^ses, nor scrupling to use such Paraphrases or Enlargements
of speech as the matter, or the parties understanding or diffidence may
require) unless there be a punctual observation of well-nigh every tittle of
those other trifling impertinencies, we are not excused, ^ swearing, but
punished, as not swearing satisfactorily to them, even by them, who yet tell us
that to say, I call God to witness, or such a thing, is Swearing; Which is
enough to make any sober men think that the Acts for imposing and taking of
Oaths (though perhaps not so intended to be by such as made them, are yet (
being once m^de) made use of sometimes by many of those that pretend to execute
them on the Quakers, more as an Engine to ^nsnare and entra^ such innocent,
honest and tenderhearted persons, as envious-minded men have a mind to be
avenged on, than out of any such honest and good intents, as either to secure
the King, or remove the obstructions from Judicial Proceedings, which, for
ought we ye^ s^e, might go on better than they do without that needless use of
(...)* unless there were care taken by those that requir^ Oaths, to (...) less
Profane Swearing than there is, notwithstanding all the good Acts and
Proclamations that are out against it; since the Bishop himself confesses with
us at large the utter uselesness of Oaths* whilst he intimates, that honest
men's Oaths are as needless, as wicked (...) Oaths are creditless; And we would
that all should take notice how he little less than gives us the whole Cause
thereby, while he ^yes concerning the Testimony of good men, or true Primitive
Christians, thus, p. 23. Bishop Gauden himself confessing the needlesness of
swearing among Christians.
Possibly as Christians (truly such) we should need no Swearing in public or
private. And p. 41. In private conversation (primitive) Christians were then
esteemed so strict, exact and cautious of their words in asserting or promising
that there was no need of an Oath among them; yea they so kept up the sanctity
and credit of their Profession among unbelievers, that it was security enough
in all cases to say Christianus sum, I am a Christian. Just. Mart. Assert.
(...).

(...) Plat.

(...). Menand.

Iuris jurandi fidem nec promittas nec exigas* Fi^icus ad Lollianums Flamini
Diali Iurare nesas. Plu^. Ea esto probitate ut nec Iurato tibi credant.


If they urged them further to any Oath for matter or manner, or Authority
unlawful, they repeated this as the only satisfaction they could give, there
needed no more than the veracity of their bare record: They thought it not
lawful for them in such cases to swear, being in this case Emulators of the
Esseni among the Jews, of whom Josephus tells us, that their word was as sure
as an Oath; and that they avoided not only all forswearing, but all swearing,
as that which brought their fidelity in question, and lessened the Reputation
of their sect.

Thus Christians, that they might not come short of the Esseni among the Jews,
who would not swear but in Judicature, or of any men in this pious severity,
especially* in abstaining from all unlawful swearing, did keep themselves from
all kind of swearing, especially Heathenish and Idolatrous, their Profession
and Reputation being Test enough to their words. Nor did they think any men
under Heaven were so worthy as Christians, to make good some of the ancient and
sober: Heathens dictates See how all along the Clergy cr^ep their necks out of
the collar; for if this be by the Bishop propounded as a patter^ (since the old
Roman Empire became Christian) for the Clergy or Christian Priests, its
wickedness not to credit the chief of them, it seems, without Oath* when it is
made a punishable piece of wickedness for others (though it is ^onfest, above
that the Dissenter^ and (...) may be as ^incere as the Im^oser) to refuse an
Oath when they impose it. For so P. 43 also, the Bishop ^ays, when other
Christians did in publik^ swear, required by Authority, yet the Bishops of the
Church were not put to swear. Basilius a Bishop, pleaded his privilege, when
in the Council of* Calced^n ^e was required to ^ive O^th, the sanctity of his
life, and ^onor of his (...) being assurance ^ufficient for his truth. But
whether the Bishop by citing this. pleads the p^iviledge of the (...) Spi^itual
(so called) above the Lords. Temporal, or no, I know not: However ^il ultra
quae^ Plebe^us*
in this kind, ^oh as were that of Menander, so (...) (...) evil swearing, as
not to swear in things just and true: And that of Solon, A good man should have
that credit, that no man should believe him any more for his swearing, it being
some diminution to his Reputation to be put to swear, or to need an Oath to
gain credit. Diogenes Lacrt. tells ^, that the Athenians would not suffer
Xenocrate^, a man of great integrity (...) honor, to take an Oath at the (...),
as a thing unworthy of his Reputation. Nor did the Romans exact Oaths of their
Chief Priests, Indignum credentes viro tantae Sanctimoniae sine J^ramento non
credere.

Hence we find some of the ancient Fathers, as Origin, Chrysostom, Theophilact,
O^cumenius, Hillary, Athanasius, St. J^rom, Theodoret, Lactantius, and others
frequently inveighing, without any Limitation or Re^erve against Christians
swearing as to private conversation: St. Basil commends Clymas a famous Greek,
that he rather suffered a Mulct of three Talents, than he would save it by
swearing, to the loss of his Honor* which he thought caution sufficient for his
honesty.

And as concerning the testimony of wicked men, and p^ophane Swe^rers, the
Bishop says thus, p. 17. the sin of profane, easy, trivial, familiar,
inconsiderate swearing, for which the Land mourns, (...). 23. 10. disposes
men, as St. Austin says, to false swearing, and gross perjury; nor can indeed
much credit be given, any more than (...) A ^yar, to any man that swears never
so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a common Swearer, and has no reverence
of the Majesty of God.

All which words of the Bishop are here recited at large, with a rendition of
two or three of his Greek and Latin Marginal quotation^* into English As that
of Origin* It be^ not a man, who lives according to the Gospel, to swear at all.

That of Chrysostom. He forbids not only forswearing, but to swear at all.

That of Ierom. The Gospel Truth admits (...) of an O^th.


, (which the Bishop might as well have Englished himself, for the Quakers
sakes, whom he relates to be strangers to all Learning, but that possibly he
feared they had too much plain Truth in them to be uttered in plain* English to
plain-hearted people) that all may see how the Bishop has here, (...) well as
in more places, turned the mouth of his own Canon against himself, wounded his
Cause well-nigh to death with his own weapon; and in confirmation of the
necessity of Swearing, confirmed rather, first the needlesness thereof among
good men, their word being tantamount to ^n Oath without it; and the invalidity
of it among propha^e ones, forasmuch as their testimony is of no credit with
it; and consequently the utter uselesness of it among any men whatever.

Obj. But perhaps the Bishop thinks he makes up that gap sufficiently with this
bush, viz. This testimony of theirs against swearing, extended only so far as
to private conversation, not so far as to swearing in Iudica^ure; for thus he
expresses himself in two o^ three clauses of that parcel of his matter above
ci^ed, saying, In private conversation no need of an Oath, p. 41* Fathers
inveighing against Christian swearing in private conve^sation, p. 42. and the
Esseni would not swear but in Judicature.

Ans. We reply, These are but ^earms of his own shuffling in among Those
Testimonies of the Fathers, and the other Wise men whom he mentions, in
repeating of whose words, he has but made his own Rod, wherewith he would also
as roundly have lash'^ himself, had he but exhibited their witness in their own
words, without mangling them by mingling them, for his own ends, with his own;
for there is no such distinction made by them, as he makes between swearing in
private converse and public Judicature: For it is plain their judgment and
witness was against all swearing* whatever* And (...) for the Esseni, of whom
he says they would not swear but in Judicature, it is evident enough by what we
have witnessed of them out of Josephus in our Books, (see the Antidote* against
swearing, p 39.) that they would not swear in Judicature, any more than out of
Judicature; for Josephus says of them, That whatsoever they say, is firmer
than an Oath, and to swear, is among them counted as a thing superfluous: This
the Bishop might have noted in that Book called the Antidote (as well as many
more matters, which by sundry passages of his Book it seems to us ^e has* read
there) save only that he is loath to seem to cite any thing* out of our Books,
lest thereby his weakness in not answering* them, should the more bewray it
self. And perhaps, what we* quote out of Josephus in English, he (to hide both
himself and it, quotes in Greek* both in the 22, and 24. pages of his ^ook,
(...). Josephus de Essenis. And now it comes under consideration, since the
Bishop states the case upon those Terms of Swearing in Judicial proceedings, as
if he were ((...) really so he seems to be sometimes, and sometimes not again
(...)* against all swearing whatever, whether rash or serious, profane or
solemn, private or public, save only in public Judicature, or Judicial
proceedings; We have often marvelled in our selves to see the Bishop state his
Question so narrow concerning that (by which he entitles his Book on the top of
every page, from one end thereof to the other^) viz. the Lawfulness of Swearing
in Judicial Proceedings* and yet wanders so wide off from it, a^ he does in his
Disputation for it: For he comes not (whatever the matter is) so much as near
any proof of the warra^tableness of such kind of Swearing; but all that p^tty
proof he puts forth at all for the lawfulness of present Swearing, if it were
of weight to warrant any swearing at all, is more pertinent to prove the
lawfulness of Oaths in private, ordinary conversation, and common
communication, than of Oaths in public Courts and Consistories, in order to
judicial proceedings there: Indeed, if by Courts of Judicature, he should mean
(as we see not how he can) the Synodical Councils of Clergymen in inferior
Ages; It Is true, he tells us of Oaths imposed and taken, as in the (...), the
Ephesine Council 'twas so and so ordered; and in the sixth Synod of
Constantinople: Yea, nor did any Canons of the Church (says he, p. 44.) forbid
such swearing: Yea, we read of old, (says he p. 45.) some condemned by the
Orthodox part of the Church for this error, that they denied all swearing to be
lawful: And we know the Bishops, that were so backward (as Basilius was at
Calceden) to be done to as they did to others, and (looking on themselves to be
priviledg'd to the contrary) unwilling to take and be imposed upon in the point
of Oaths, were ever (or else were not like their wonted selves) free and
forward to impose Oaths on others, and to bind that heavy burd^n upon other
men's backs, which they were not willing to touc^ with the least of their own
fingers: But what is all this to us, as to convince us of the warrantableness so
to do, because those men who called themselves the Orthodox still, as they sa^e
at the (...), condemned of old all others as Heterodox, that did not dance
after their Pipe, and sing to the same Tune with them in swearing, and every
thing else, when they had once got up into a (...), Lordly Dominion over men's
Faith? And what is that consonant Judgment of those mordern, Eminent Divines,
(as he Calls them) of the Romanists, as well as Reformists, agreeing against
P^rjury, and Pr^phane Oa^hes, and yet assenting to the Lawfullness of Judicious
and Solemn Swearing, and not thinking them by any positive Law of Christ,
become unlawful, what is this in respect of the Quakers satisfaction? who know
hundreds of things wherein (as much as they fall out and fight, even to blood,
with each other about their fan^ied Formalities) they all agree against the
Light of God, the Power of Godliness, and the very appearance o^ the ^mage of
him in his holiness, who is the substantial Truth it self: We say, what is that
(...) rather Tri-(...) Ecclesiastical Authority and agreement of the Clergy to
the Quakers, whose Faith standing higher than the wisdom and thoughts of men,
cannot (as the Bishop both thinks and says truly enough, p. 41. 45.) value
them, not much be moved by any such Engine, so as to lead their Faith and
Reason captives after them, (...) any Lydium Lapidem, or infallible Touch
stone, whereby to try this or any other Truth. But if by swearing in
Iudic^ture, in Judicial proceedings, he intends that sort of Swearing that is
now imposed and used, by and before Justices, men in Authority, or Magistrates
in their civil Courts (saving that its one) of those many customs of the
Nations, which the Scripture says, Ier. 10. 3. are vain) Where does the Bishop
produce any evidence, or so much as an Inch of Inst^nce, out of the Scriptures
of either Testament, of such a thing, in order to the Quakers satisfaction?
It Is true, he tells us, as others tell him, p. 43. Certain stories, which make
more against, than for him, that other Christians were imposed upon, and had
Oaths by Officers Civil and Military exacted of them; Some whereof *(...) swear
(as he says) being required by Authority; and some did not, as (...), who when
promised dismission by the Prefect if he would swear by the Fortune of Caesar,
refused, saying, Christianus sum, I am a Christian. And (...) the Martyr, who
replied to the Officers (...).
It is not lawful for me to swear at all, being a Christian; And he tells us
(as (...) tell^ him) that the Christian (...) took Oaths in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit to obey their Commanders, not to dissert their
colors, and dye for the common welfare, which was called Sacramentum Militare,
before, and so after Christianity prevailed in the Empir^ Whence that name
Sacrament came to be applied to Christian Mysteries See how the Mystery of
Iniquity began to work in those *days of the Empires turning Christian ^y the
lump and by wholesale, to the corrupting of Christianity and and Christians,
so ^ar as to cause them to call the holy (...) of the Gospel after the Names of
the old Hea^henish customs, whence (at first) came that Name Sacrament, which
is never found in all the Scriptures, nor was in use among the Apostles.
But where is his proof of the warrantableness of such exactions of Oaths by
Officers, and of such swearings of those Christians from whom they were exacted
in Courts of Judicature, from either old or new Testament, or in order to
Judicial proceedings? among all the texts, which he ^russes together, and
thwacks one upon another, out of the Old Testament, p. 36, 37. in proof of what
we deny not, ( viz.) that swearing by God himself was then lawful, not one of
them speaks out the legallty of that solemn swearing by Gods Name any more in
Judicial proceedings, than in private communication and conversation. And as
for what he alleges out of the New, p. 37, 38, 39. from the example of Gods
Though the Lord himself (...) more then once by himself, yet that his own
example (as the Bishop calls it) of swearing, was no example for us now to
imitate, and was in ^owise a confi^ming of that old Legal ceremony of O^ths as
a practice legiti^ to his saints for ever (as the Bishop wo^ld make (...)
believe it was, and that his Oath, which ended in Christ, in wh^m all his
promises confirmed by Oath, were yea, and in him Amen, was also to end all
strife between him and men, and to put an end to all strife and Oath^ also,
that are among men (...) and strife, is ^vinced in our Books, (see one Antidote
more, etc) which till the Bishop, more punctua^ly then be (...) done, disproves
the Truth of, stands still on our ^arts unshaken by him.
Christ's, Paul's, Angels Swearing* if any o^ all that would prove any swearing
lawful for us now, as we have showed heretofore in our Books at (...) it
possibly cannot for the reasons therein sufficiently rendered; or if those
words of Christ* Amen, Amen, Verily, Verily, were an Oath (as the Bishop would
sain r^ad them (if possibly he could) under that a^nomination by his Marginal
citation of Capellus his words out of Rabbi Jonah [(...)] In veritate forma
(...) ap^d (...); though he says no more on his own head, but that it is next
degree to swearing:) And if that of Paul charging Timothy, and calling God to
witness, saying, Before God I lie not, and the rest, if any of them were either
^on or adjuration, swearing, or exacting Oaths, (as by reasons that remain as
unanswerable, as they are as yet unanswered by the Bishop, rendered by us in
the Books above said, it is proved they cannot be) yet those that shall say,
those examples then would either not prove the lawfulness of swearing
ordinarily, frequently, needlessly, and so vainly, in Letters, as well as by
word of mouth, in that common communication, and private conversation, which
Christians have each with other, in which kind of familiar intercourse Paul
uses those oaths* and adjurations (as the Bish* call them) and not in Courts,
and that without need, and so in vain, since unrequired by Magistrates, and
also among such as would take his word without swearing, and do what he
required without adjuring; or those that shall say they prove ab exemplo the
lawfulness of swearing in Courts of Judicature before Magistrates in Judicial
proceedings, will be found disputing and (...) so far besides all sense and
reason, that Nescio an Antyciram Ratio illis destinet omnem. And as much
strangers to all learning, as the Bish says the Quakers are (and truly it is
not much of that perishing thing he call^ Learning (what e're we have had) that
we now pretend to, or care much for, a little honesty, integrity and
uprightness, being of more weigh^, worth, and validity to salvation in the day
of God, than all that inferior Literature of those, who drink to drunkenness,
and divine to do^age from the Golden Cup of their own carnal counsels and
conceptions) yet the Quakers would be so deeply besotted, as not to se^ wo^d
for trees* if they were not able to see the nonsensical absurdities that
demonstrate themselves from such an inconsequen^* piece of disputation and
demonstration as that above said* Yea, this would not only demonstrate Paul to
have been a common, ord^nary, needless swearer in his familiar communication
with the Saints he wrote to, utterly uncalled, to it by any Magistrates, but
also demonstrate the Magistrates of these days, whom our Ecclesiastical (...)
(called Ministers) justify therein, to be rather Monsters of men, than
Ministers of true civil Justice, that will take the ^uakers words in their
Courts neither with, nor without an Oath, so but that they shall be punish^ by
them for not swearing, not only when they do not swear, but when they do swear
also: For ( ad hominem) though all these phrases of Christ and Paul, are (as
the Bishop says) Oaths, and none of them, which (as occasion is) they are not
as free to use (not as imposed by men, tying them at their wills to any one of
them, but as moved to any one of them, as the Lord gives utter^nce* as they a^e
to use yea and nay it ^elf: Yet though (...) say, God is (...) Witness, or any
of the rest, they will not take (...) (...) an Oath before their Courts; bu^
fi^e and prison, without (...) (...) a using of the forementioned outward
Rites: Thus (O how ^giously do absurdities, confusions and self-contradictions
multiply among a people that by a predominant Priesthood are peg'd ^p (...)
that narrow Principle of persecution of all those, that are more ^ender of
keeping truth, than themselves) among the Ministers at their Churches, and in
their Books, Verily, Verily, God is my witness, I call God to record, I speak
the truth before God, and lie not, I (...) as in the presence of God, and such
like, are Oaths, and forms of swearing; but among the Magistrates in their
Courts, and at their Benches (why else are the Quakers fined, imprisoned, and
con^iscated for not swearing, though they can use them) those, and (...) like
forms of speech are not a swearing.

3dly, As to the time wherein the Bish* is to prove swearing by the Name of God
to be lawful, it is now in these days of the Gospel, since christ crucified,
for otherwise the Bish* ^ights without an adversary, the Quakors themselves
granting both oaths of several sorts, and and many more formalities and
ceremonious (...), (...) Sacrifices, Circumeision, etc. to have been in force,
and to have been done in the Name of God, and by command from him (...) the Law
before Christ, which are not warrantable and justifiable ^ince; for the Law
said many things by way of precep^ and commission (at least permission from
God) during the time thereof, which are ended and abolished by Christ, and
would be irregularities grossly reproveable in men's manners in mo^al matters,
(...), civil transactions and communications should they be used among them who
profess the Gospel. The Law said, an eye for (...) (...), a tooth for a to^th;
the Gospel, Avenge not your ^elves, resist (...) (...), put up, forgive,
forbear. The Law, Thou shall love thy Neighbor, and (...) thy Enemy, (yea it
was lawful under the Law, and according to it* for the Jews to spoil their
Enemies, the Egyptians and the (...)) the Gospel says only, Love thy (...),
if he hunger, (...) him; if he thirst, give him drink.

But the Bish* beats the air for a great way together, and (...) not so much
(...), ^s he does (...), busying himself (and more than he need to have done,
if he had read, or been willing to seem to have re^d those Books of ours,
wherein we have (...) enough to have saved him that labor) very much besides
his (...)* to prove that which we know no Quakers denying, viz* That swearing
by the Name of God was commanded under the Law, to which end he piles one Text
upon another, out of Moses and the Prophets, p. 36, 37.

Bish. Exodus, 20. 7. Deuteronomy. 19. 12. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Numb. 30. 2. Deuteronomy.
23. 21. Isa. 65. 16. Jer. 4, 2. adding, Nor does the Lord (...) by his Prophets
condemn the Jews for swearing simply and sincerely, but only for vain, false,
perfidious and perjurious swearing. Answerably we read the unblamed practice of
many holy men, Abraham, Jacob, Joshua, David, that swear without sin and
offense in such serious and mighty cases, which the Law of God did permit or
require. Among the sons all public Testimonies were ratified by Oath, as
Buxtorf, Drusius Apud (...) i^ Iudiciis omnia jurisjurando Religione f^mata,
Dei (...) interp^sito Buxt.
and others, who write of the civil Administrations of Justice among them.

Ans. As if that were any part of the Question between him and the Quakers,
whether the Jews had any command to swear by Gods Name when occasion was to end
their strifes* which thing we deny (...), any more then himself; but this we
say, though the Lord by (...) Moses nor the Prophets that lived under the Law,
and were Ministers of it, while they lived under it as well as throw it of the
Gospel, condemned not the Jews for swearing simply; but for swearing vainly,
and for for swearing yet by his Son, who was made under the Law, and a minister
to reform it for a time, and after a time put an end to it, and to the
transgression and sin, variance, strife, etc. because of which it was added, by
bringing in the everlasting righteousness, he condemns somewhat more th^n was
condemned by Moses, and the Prophets, who yet by the Bishops own confession,
have condemnd both vain swearing, and forswearing, therefore that could be no
other then the very thing called swearing it self, even by Gods own Name, as
well as by any creature, altogether, as is seen hereafter.

But if the Bishop say he uses those Old Testament Texts and examples, as
Mediums only, and premises, by which ultimately to prove the lawfulness of
swearing under the Gospel, as one of the moral, and so perpetual precepts of
the Law which end not in Christ, nor are abolished, but established by his
coming; for thus indeed (that we may do him no wrong, ^ut right to the utmost,
so far as (...) words can help themselves) he comes to speak in the passage
following, p. 37, 38.

Bp. If from all these premises it be clear, that some swearing (...) morally
lawful* agreeable to the express Law of God, even in the third Commandment* in
which we are not only forbidden to propha^ the Name of God, but the
affirmative also is included, of sanctisying his Name by all ways, of praying,
praising, vowing and swearing; if in doing thus upon just occasion, private or
public, we sin not against any Moral Law, etc. it must under^ably follow, that
Christ did not forbid or annul the old Law, as to the sanctity and morality of
an Oath, but only take away the corruption and abuse, it being no desigh of
Christ to destroy or diminish, but to fulfill the Law (Moral) However he came in
the way of fulfilling, to abrogate the Ceremonial, yea and the Politic Laws
too, so far as they were peculiar* to the Jewish Policy in Church and State,
etc. -- Swearing was a part of that Moral Law, which Christ signally tells shem
he did not come, nor ever intended to abolish, but to maintain, so far as the
love of God and our neighbor are great accomplishments of all Laws; to both
which Religious Swearing is most conform; it being to God's glory, and our
Neighbo^s good. There is no danger then of doing hurt to our* own Consciences,
any more than in serio^s Affirmation and Negati^us (...) Oath having nothing
but the attestation of God in it, who is ^iness ^f all we say and do.

Ans* Of what the Bish. speaks, this i^ the sum, the (...) for Swearing was
Moral, as those for praying, praising, these standing under the Gospel in
force, as well as under the Law. To which we return, Let the Bish. take away
the shadow, and plead nothing but the substance of things, and leave nothing
but the morality of the whole Law, and we will grant him that it may, and must
be used at this day; But that (...) not done in all things, if it be in
anything, by the Popish, nor yet by the Protestant Bishops, to this very day.
The Law, which had the shadow of the good things to come, but not the very
Image or substance it self, that came by Moses, but the (...) things
themselves, (...), the Grace, and the Truth, is that which (...) Gospel has,
and that came by Jesus Christ. Moses and the (...) prescribed, and enjoined the
ceremony of all service to God, and the figures of the true, but as the day
breaks, the shadow vanishes, the figures flee away, and the maked truth it self
of them stands only ( de ju^e) under Christ now. How beit I undervalue not the
Law, so as to liken it thereto, as being in worth infinitely above them; yet as
all Aesops Fables, which were but fancies, had some moral or other after them,
the shevving of which they pointed at; so much more had all Moses his outward
forms and figures, some moral* substantial, more Evangelical, spiritual, and
eternal Truth, and true things, which they were but the shadows, shows and
figures of* and as the ceremoniality of the service of praying and praising,
was the offering of Incense, and Sacrifice, singing, etc. and other formal
supersluities, which then attended those services, but the substance it self is
the lifting up of the heart to the Lord, in sighs and groans, from the movings
of his own pure Spirit, and singing, and making melody in the heart to the Lord
under the Gospel, in which time the offering up of sweep incense, and other
Sacrifices, would be but the offering of Swines blood; And the substance of
circumcision is that of the heart, Romans 2. which being come by in Christ, the
other is but the concision, Phil. ^. And Christ the Passover in the substance,
in respect of whom the other killing of a Lamb, once in force, is but the
cutting off a Dogs neck; So the substance of that ceremouy of Swearing that now
abides (as the Bish. himself confesses) is no other than what we are free to,
viz. the testifying the known truth from the heart, with an addition of no more
then (as occasion may require it) some kind of attcstation of God, who is
Witness of all we say or do; and that no more than confession or denial by yea
and nay, with only some attestation, or calling ^o witness, to strengthen the
asseveration (which is no Oath, as is showed above) is that stauding substance
that answers to that shadowy, ceremonious way of Swearing in use under the law,
is most evident by the Apostle Paul's rendering of that term Swearing, as it is
spoken of in way of prophecy concerning its continuance then, as Isa. 45. 23.
To me every tongue shall swear, under that term of confessing only under the
Gospel, Romans 14. 11. Every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess to
God: confession under the Gospel, is made aequivalent with an oath under the
Law.

And because the Bish. mentions the third Commandment in proof of the morality
and perpetuity of all that Swearing that was commanded under the Law, without
annulling any tittle of it, as if he judged every Letter and Tittle of the ten
Commandments were moral, and so in all respects unchangeable, and incapable of
any unihilation by Christ's coming; He much forget^ himself in that vain
imagiuation; for all things in those ten words (in the first Table of them) are
not so moral or perpetual, without some cer^nrality and subjection to
alteration by Christ's coming, as he imagi^ and if he had but remembered the
very fourth commandment that is next to it, he would have remembered that,
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day, which then was the very seventh day of
the week, which God had sanctified, was but a sign, type, shadow, figure and
ceremony of the seventh day of the Worlds rest from its labor, and of keeping
after it under Christ an everlasting Sabbath to the Lord, by man's cessation
from his own works, as God did from his, Isa* 58. ult. Heb. 4. which Jewish
observation of the seventh day, as a Sabbath now, who so attends to, never so
solemnly, (though once sanctified and commanded to be kept) will have as much
acceptance with God (that is none at all) as he that never so solemnly swears
by the Name of God in such ceremonious ways, as the Jews did of old, or goes
beyond the bounds of bare asseveration, with attestation, which to do, we not
onley think, (as the Bish. says of us, p. 22.) but know to be an old Iudaick
superfluity, now circumcised, and by Christ precisely cut off from the lips of
Christians.

Besides, how that third commandment can be so immediately and peculiarly made
use of, as by the Bish. and the Priests it is in proof of the morality of
Oaths, or in proof of the legitimacy of them, upon any, whether Moral,
Political, or Ceremonial account either, more than other places, which more
directly and expressly (as Deuteronomy. 6. 13.) by way of precept command to swear by
God's Name, as if that were the most capital and Cardinal Text, we do not see,
(save only that the Priests have insinuated that notion of Moral into peoples
minds concerning all those ten words wrote with God's finger merely as a figure
of what he writes by his Spirit in men's hearts, 1 Cor. 3. as if those were
only Moral, and all Moses Writings by Gods own appointment, had nothing in
them but Ceremoniality, or Politycism beside them; and as if there were no
morality in all Moses Law, but in them) for it is clear to all but the blind,
and their blind leaders, that there is Morality elsewhere, and Ceremonials, and
Politicals, or Iudiclals commanded there, as well as in other parts of Moses
Law, among which ceremonials and politicals, that of Oaths to end
controversies, while that Nature was standing (as it was yet among the Jews
that affected strife) being a part, however Christ came to fulfill the Law (
Moral) yet he coming in the way of fulfilling that (as the Bish. says) to
abrogate the Ceremonial. yea and Politic laws too, it must necessarily follow
he has abrogated all laws for swearing, which the Bish. cannot deny to be
pertaining (whether peculiarly or no, that is nothing to true Christians) to the
Jewish Polity in Church and State.

And as for those words, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain, they rather forbid all, than command any swearing, if the Bish. words be
true (as they are) who says, A true Christians Oath is needless, his word
being as firm as it, p. 41. and an evil man's Oath worthy of no more credit than
a Liar, p. 17. Since upon that account, whoever swears by the Name of God,
swears in vain, and to no purpose, whether he be a true man, or one deceitful,
his word amounting to as much as his Oath; for frustra fit per plura quod
potest sieri per pauciora. And so whereas the Bish. says, there is no danger of
doing hurt to our own consciences, any more in Oaths, than in serious
affirmations and negations, We say there is, if swearing needlessly by God's
Name be (as it is) a taking Gods Name in vain, fith the Lord will not hold him
guiltless who takes his Name in vain.

Moreover, whether the Bish. who insists so much upon the morality of the
command for swearing under the Law, and so consequently for the perpetnity of
it under the Gospel, does not in effect quit and desist from that kind of Plea
for Judicial Swearing, of his own accord, we appeal to discerning men, whilst
p. 23. he pleads the necessity of such solemn Swearing, upon no other account
than as in order to cure many Christians (good Christians the whilst) of ill
diseases, jealousies, distrusts, dissimulations, frauds, uncharitableness,
unsatisfactions, insecurities; for (says he, quoting Grotius in his Margent)
Iuramentum non aliter quam medicamenium urgente necessitate usurpandum, non
adhibetur Iusjurandum nisi ad subveniendum desictui levitas hominum and
incoaconstantia dissidentiam genuit cui remedium quaesitum est jure jurando.
Judicial Swearing's necessary; not absolutely and morally, or preceptively (
as the Shool-men note well) but by way of consequence and remedy, as good new
Laws are necessary for the curb or cure of new Evils in in Polities and
Kingdoms. Possibly as Christians (truly such) we should need no Swearings in
public or private, but as men weak and unworthy, we cannot (...) without such
Oaths to end controversies, and to secure as much as man can do, the exact
proceedings of Justice; seeing then he says Oaths stands non ex necessitate
precepti, but medii only: See whether the Bishop do not here with his own
hands take that course of swearing off from the file of the Gospel, which he
could not do if it were a moral precept (for than secundum se, what is Moral
being Evangelical, it must abide unabolisht under the Gospel) and put it upon
the score of the Law only, which being added only because of transgression,
must end in Christ, and under the Gospel, by whom the strife and all
transgression is ended; as is to be showed more at large by and by.

So that whereas he says thus; Swearing is a part of that Moral Law, which
Christ signally tells, he came not, nor ever intended to abolish, but maintain;
he may as well say, Christ came not, nor ever intended by his coming to abolish
strife and transgression, which is the end of Oaths; for if he came to finish
transgression, and make an end of sin among his people, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, then to end Oaths also among his disciples, which
stand for no other end then to end strife, while and where it stands; for,
Absente aliquo sine, ( de jure) cessat medium tendens ad istum sinem.

Finally, in that he says, Christ maintains Oaths, so far as the love of God,
and our neighbor are great accomplishments of all Laws, to both which
religious swearing is most conform; Herein he palpably contradicts not only
the Truth, but himself also, who says, Swearing is to be no where, but where
strife is, which is a work of the flesh, inconsistent with true love to the
neighbor, and not most conform to it; for love fulfills the Law, works no ill
to the neigbour, ends all strife, and so puts swearing (the means to end
strife) out of place and date.

4. The Bishops said Information according to the state of the Question, ought
to be of the legality of judicial swearing in the Church of Christ among true
Christians, and Christ's Disciples ( truly so called) who are not under the Law,
that came by Moses, but under the grace and truth of the Gospel, that came by
Jesus Christ; otherwise he reaches not at all ad rem substratam, comes not
close to the case in question, between himself and the Quakers, whom he would
convince; who grant the lawfulness of Oaths of old among the Jews: What the
Bishop says p. 21. he supposes is true enough; viz. That it is so clear even to
the sylliest and most scrupulous among the Quakers, that they do not doubt of
the lawfulness of swearing lawfully among the Jews; not only as permitted, but
commanded; but Quid hoc ad Rhombum? we have this at least to say (which all men
have not) against himself, and al^ those that are impositive of Oaths upon them
which himself says the primitive Christians and Disciples of had; viz.
Christiani sumus, We are Christians, to the silencing of them from exaction,
and himself, without any more ado, from further troubling himself toward their
conviction; for the Question is not concerning the use, legulity, or necessity
of Oaths to end strife among in^urious, contentious people, that love, and yet
live in strife, and other works of the flesh, and so not under the teachings
and power of that Gospel of the grace of God that leads out of strife, and all
other ungodliness and worldly lusts, but under the power of that evil spirit in
them that lusts to envy. strife, hatred, variance, deceit, and every other
evil, and so under the law, which has dominion over a man so long as the old
man with his deeds lives in him, and he lies yet in his trespasses and sins,
how far forth Judicial swearing may be of a legal, necessary use among evil,
unconscionable men, that make no conscience of any thing, swallow every thing,
and strein at nothing, to tie them to speak the truth, is not our business to
contest with any about; we are willing to let that alone to men; nor need we
dispute against the thing (if we be against it) since the Bishop, to the
confuting of himself, who pleads for it, says thus much against it, to the
invalidating his own plea for (at least) that asserted necessity of it; viz.
That no more credit can be given, then to a Liar, to a Profane purson that
fears not God, though he swear never so solemnly in judicial proceedings; which
if so, then, what use, need or necessity there is of those men's Oaeths in
judicial proceedings, whose most solemn swearing, even there, is of no credit,
and nothing worth, we see not, nor any else whose eyes are open, let the Bishop
seem to himself to see what he pleases: Yet for quietness sake, to avoid all
jangling about jurations, so be they let us alone to live peaceably out of
strife, in truth it self, and so beyond that so necessary medium (as they count
it) of Oaths, and from whom men need no more, when we are called to give our
witness, then the very veracity of our bare words, since Christiani sumus; we
can freely leave them to swear, and exact, and take Oaths, as much as they
will, who cannot believe one another out of a mutual jealousy that they are all
liars, and yet can give credit one to another, no more than to a liar neither,
though swearing never so solemnly in Judicial proceedings, An Oath being (as
the Bish. urges out of Heb. 6.) among (not Saints, not Christians, but among)
men a means to end strife, (whether they judge one another worthy to be
believed by each other, when they swear yea or nay, that is little to us) let
those men who are in strife, make use of Oaths to end them, if they will, or
can* we should be glad to see all men to agree, and to live in peace, as it is
our desire to do with all, and in that love that works no ill to the Neighbor,
but believes all things, and bears all things, and so carries beyond Strife and
Oaths also.

But if they cannot, they may swear on for us, in Courts and Iudicatures; as
they ought not to exact swearing of us, so we should not (were it in our power)
force them to a forbearance of it in Courts, in order to end their strifes,
against their (though yet clouded and erring) Consciences.

Nay rather, how best we own Oaths to be of no other than of a Jewish and
Legal, and not of any immediate, Christian, or Evangelical consideration; yet
as to the whole world which lies in wickedness, and stands, though under some
form or other of Religion, still in strife, under the dominion of sin, and not
of Grace, as the Jews did; they may stand if they will for us, as they did
under those legal institutions, which were added because of their
transgressions, and in order to end their strifes; for if the Law in any of the
Ordinances of it, be yet remaining in any force, power or dominion, it is among
those that are not yet come out of sin and deceit, to that everlasting
righteousness and truth of the Gospel, which Christ, who puts an end to sin*
brings in among his Disciples, who seek his Kingdom, and the Righteousness of
it, but not among the Saints that obtain by participation of Christ's power,
Spirit and righteousness, to a dominion over sin, and so over the Law; for
where sin has not dominion over men (as it had before) there men are no more
under the law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. such over whom the Law had dominion
while they lived, and were in the flesh, and under the prevalent workings of
the motions of sin in their members, to bring forth the evil fruits of strife,
variance, etc. unto death and bondage, are then delivered from the Law, being
deatd to that in which they were once held, they bring forth fruits of the
Spirit unto God, love, peace, meckness, without envy, hatr^d, strife, and serve
in the ^wness of the Spirit, and not in that legal oldness of the Letter, Romans
7. wherein those walk, who notwithstanding all their profession of Religion and
Christianity in words, yet bite and devour one another, till at last they be
consumed one of another with their lying, deceit, bitter envying and strife,
for all their Oaths; yea Gal. 5. 18. 23. if men be led of the Spirit, they are
not under the law; and those that bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, against
such there is no law. So though the Law is good, if men could tell how to use
it lawfully, yet we know (as Paul did, 1. Tim. 1. 8, 9, 10.) that the law is
not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the
ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and prophaue, for murderers of fathers and
mothers, men-slayers, whoremongers, them that defile themselves, for
men-stealers, for liars, for persured persons and any other thing that is
contrary to the sound Doctrine of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, which
is witnessed among the Quakers to be the power of God, to the salvation of them
from those unrighteousnesses; for whom therefore, neither the Law, nor the
curbs and cures provided in it (as remedies against men's diseases) (...) justly
applicable, or to be imposed.

But now the Bish. beats all besides the Iron upon the Anvil, disputes besides
the Question, and makes it his main drift to prove the necessary use of Oaths,
either among the Jews, among whom the Quakers deny it not to have been lawful;
to which purpose he troubles himself to no purpose (because without need) p.
21. to prove them practiced warrantably of old among the Jews, or else, if now,
then among evil men mainly, if not only, who are in strife and envy among
themselves, which where they are, there is lying, swearing, profane oaths, for
swearing, cozening, cheating, defaming, defrauding, confusion, and every evil
work* and there we meddle little to persuade men to one thing or other about
swearing, unless the Light of God in their own hearts lead them out of their
vain, unchristian lives, to the life and likeness of Christ; some things among
them may be better than some, but all they do, whether s^aring in their Courts,
or serving in their Churches, must all once come to judgment; for the sins and
sacrifices of such are both alike, being both abomination to the Lord.

Here the Bish. might have let the Quakers alone fi (he had pleased) to whom
it is much at one what they see unchristian men doing in that particular of
Oaths; who (lor ought we ^ee by the Bishop's words) whether swearing or not
swearing, are not counted worth being believed one by another: But the Body of
his business r^ns that way, to evince the necessity of Oaths from the
wickedness of men's hearts and manners who are called Christians, in which c^se
indeed the Law condescended far in matter of Divorce, and other points, to
indulge the Jews; and how far sorth we will condescend to him in that case of
the hardness of Christians hearts (not truly such) to let things be so, as they
scarce ought to be, and were not from the beginning, he shall see by and by.

But as for the proof of the lawfulness, usefulness or necessity of them among
true Christians indeed, that not only name Christ's Name, but (as every one
ought to do that names it) depart from iniquity, and are found in his Nature
and Image, and that do not only call him Lord, Lord, (for he has too many
such Disciples, unless they learnt of him) but also do the things that he
says; the Bishop brings no proof of the usefulness, but rather of the
needlesness of Oaths amongst them; yea some would scarce discern on a sudden
whether his Arguments for the needfulness of Oaths among false Christians, or
his Arguments for the needlesness of them among such true Christians as will be
found among the Quakers, be of the two the most forcible; but we having had
good occasion to make serious perusal of his Book, by several passages, whereby
he often trips up his own heels for have as he runs, and hacks one of his legs
against the other, do find more strength by far in what the Bish. himself says
against a true Christians, than in what he says for any false Christians most
solemn swearing.

And to this end that it may be seen, let it be considered what is the main
bottom on which he builds, and the Medium from which he concludes a necessiey
of swearing among men, merely called by the Name of Christians, and we shall
find it is this, to wi^ the abundance of wickedness that is among them; Thus p.
23* the evils of men's hearts and manners, the jealousies and distructs, the
dissimulations and fraud of many Christians, their uncharitableness,
unsatisfactions and insecurities are such, as by their Diseases do make these
applications of solemn Oaths, and Judicial swearings necessary; Not absolutely
and morally, or preceptively ( as the Schoolmen note well) but by way of
consequence and remedy, as good new Laws are for the curb and cure of new evils
in Polities and Kingdoms; as men weak and unworthy, we cannot well be without
such Oaths to end the controversies, and to secure (as much as man can do) the
exact proceedings of Justice.

But when he speaks of no necessity, but a needlesness of true Christians
swearing, the Medium he uses to prove that, is no other than this (to wit)
their being ( truly Christians) in the self-same page and place, Possibly
(says he) as Christians (truly such) we should need no swearing in public or
private.

So also p. 36. he says the foundation for swearing now, is the wickedness of
men: Polybius (says he) observes that Rarus apud veteres Jurandi usus in
Iudiciis sed crescente persidi^crevit Iurandi usus.
in the better and simpler Ages of the World, Oaths were seldom used in
Iudicatures, but after that perfidy and lying increased, Oaths increased, as
the only remedy to restrain those mischiefs, etc.

So p. 41, 42. speaking of true primitive Christians (as before we have more at
large trans-printed his words, p. 11. whither we refer the Reader back again)
he says they were so strict and exact, etc. that there was no need of an Oath
among them; yea they so kept up the sanctity, and credit of their profession
among* unbelievers, that it was security enough in all cases to say,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian. If any urged them further to any Oath for
matter or manner, or Authority unlawful, they repeated this as the only
satisfaction they could give, There needed no more than the veracity of their
bare word, they thought it not lawful for them in such cases to swear. And then
naming many famous men for antiquity and sobriety, of sundry sorts, as the
Essaeans, wise Heathens, and Christian Fathers, and of their sayings, he still
drives on for a whole page together the same subject, viz how dishonorable and
needless a thing it was for good and holy men, and true Christians, to be so
much as once required to swear, seeing their Profession and Reputation was test
enough to their words, and 'twas diminution to their reputation to be put to
swear, and Indignum viro sanctimoniae sine Juramento non credere, an unworthy
thing not to believe an holy man without an Oath; and Flamini Doiali Jurare
nefas, no less than wickedness for one that was counted such a one, to swear;
and non opporter ut vir qui Evangelice vivit, Juret omnino, it is not meet that
a man who lives according to the Gospel, should swear; and the Fathers
frequently inveighed without any limitation against Christians swearing, some
saying, Evangelica veritas non recipit Juramentum, the Gospel truth admits not
of an Oath. And p. 43. speaking of Basilides the Martyr, who when Officers
exacted an Oath of him, replied, It is not lawful for me being a Christian, to
swear at all; and if other Christians did swear in public cases, yet the
Bishops of the Church were not put to swear; whereupon Basilius a Bishop
pleaded his privilege of exemption from it, from the sanctity of his life,
that being sufficient assurance for his truth.

All this the Bishop himself alleges (so that what need we bring any further
witness against good men's swearing, since all men may read so much out of his
own Book?) in evidence of the unworthiness of that course of exacting Oaths of
chief Priests, The wickedness of their Swearing, The indignity done to the
reputation of a good man, a man of integrity to be put to swear, and of a man
of honor, which is a caution sufficient for his honesty, so that he will rather
suffer a Mulct, than save it by swearing; the uselesness, needlesness, Yea
plain unlawfulness for a Christian that is ( truly such) to swear; The
strictness, exactness, holiness and sanctity of whose profession needs no Oath
in either asserting or promising; The frequent invectives of the chief ancient
Fathers, Orig. Chrysostom. Theophil. Oecum. Hila. Athan. Hier. Theod. Lactant.
without any limitation or reserve against Christians swearing. And lastly, that
security enough that is all cases, wherein a man is mistrusted, for him to be
capable to say truly of himself, I am a Christian: Which all are Arguments of
weight and sorce, so sufficiently cogent, and clearly convincing to our
Consciences, that if we had no more, we should need no more to satisfy us of
the warrantablenest of swearing, or of exacting Oaths among such as are truly
Christians.

But as for what the Bish. argues in evidence of a usefulness and necessity of
swearing among such Christians If yet there be any such ^ue Christians in the
world, (as we do not know that there are) yea ( absit absuidum) let it never be
said now, that those are Christians that name Christ's Name, and name themselves
after it, and yet depart not from such iniquities as those.
, the evils of whose hearts and manners, jealousies, distrusts, dissimulations,
frauds, uncharitableness, as diseases, do make solemn oaths necessary ( not
absolutely, morally, or preceptively) but by way of consequence and remedy, for
the curb and cure of their evils; and who are so rude and ignorant as Horse and
Mule, that their mouths must be held with Oaths (as with bit and bridle) lest
they fall upon one another with lies, false witnesses, injuries, thefts, rapes,
murders, ^heating, and all manner of unrighteousnesses, there is so much
seeming show of reason in that, as satisfies himself, and many more it is like
at least; and as for us, if so be that we Quakers who speak the truth from our
hearts, and dare not lie (as all God's People also will not, whose Savior he
is,) and desires to live a peaceable and quiet life under all Governments, and
among all men, in all godliness and honesty, and to give our Testimony in all
cases, as we be called to bear witness to the truth, in all truth, sincerity
and integrity, as in the sight of God, without those evil diseases o^
dissimulations and frauds in our hearts; we say, if we may not be imposed upon
under penalties to swear against them, who cannot so much as speak against our
Consciences, we shall not so much trouble our selves as to entertain much
intercourse, much less dispute about the other: But we are willing so to divide
the business between the Quakers and other Christians (so called) as to meet
the Bish. half way in the Controversy, in order to an agreement with him upon
his own terms; and we are content to agree with him in his consequence out of
Polybius for the use of oaths to curb evil-minded, and evil-manner'd men from
lying and false-witness-bearing, the necessary use of which among such, he
concludes from the excess of sin, iniquity and deceit that is among them,
whilst he agrees with us (as in his words above cited he does) in our
consequence, which is not ours only, but also that of the ancient Fathers,
wisest of Heathens, and primitive Christians, and even his own also) for the
uselesness, needlesness, and unlawfulness of exacting and taking oaths among
true, just, honest, good, faithful, righteous, holy men, drawn from the
diminution and destruction of that iniquity and deceit which dwells in others,
and once dwelt in them, and they in it.

And so as he agrees with us when we argue from Polybius thus: Among the good,
honest, ^ust, righteous, faithful, holy Saints of God, and true Chaistians (if
there be any such in the world, as such there are, and they are well known,
though unknown) Oaths need not be used; yea, are unworthy, wicked, injurious,
vain, superfluous, unlawful to be used; it being security enough in all cases
for a man (truly such) to say, I am a Christian; for Rarus apnd veteres jurandi
usus in Judiciis; absente perfidia, absit jurisjurandi usus: In the better and
simpler ages of the world Oaths were seldom used in Iudicatures, where no
perfidionsness is found, there is no place found for the use of Oaths.

So we agree with him in his consequence from Polybius, Crescente perfidia
crevit jurisjurandi usus: where there is increase of treachery, sin, iniquity,
deceit, etc. there that cumbersom use of Oaths increases, where Christian men's
hearts and manners are evil, full of dissimulation, there (not absolutely,
morally, nor preceptively (as the Bish. with the Schoolmen (against himself)
well notes) but by way of consequence and remedy to curb and cure that disease
of dissimulation and deceit (when otherwise possibly if they were Christians
(truly such) they should need none in public or private) the application of
solemn Oaths is necessary: and so as contrariorum tum similis, tum contraria
est ratio, so decrescente perfidia decrescit, but crescente perfidia, crescit
jurandi asus: Where there is a decrease and dying out of sin, as there is among
the Quakers, there is ( de jure) a due decrease, and dying out of the use of
Oaths; but where sin, perfidiousness, and deceit abound and increase, there
possibly might be some place for the use of Oaths, to make men that are not
true, that have not the fear of God, and would else be liars, speak the truth;
We could afford to yield thus far to the Bishops plea for an usefulness of
Oaths then, were it not for one Rub, which the Bish, lays in his own way, and
ours too, which stumbles us, and is a Gnat, at which we cannot but strein;
though such as can swallow Camels, and can connive at their own contradictions,
strein little at it; and that is the Cross-whet, which he gives to this
consequence of his, for the necessity of Oaths among false Christians, from the
consideration of their profaneness, dissimulations frauds, evil hearts, by his
representation of the uncreditableness and invalidity of their most solemn
Oaths, who are common swearers, and profane persons that fear not God; witness
his own words again, p. 17. Nor can much credit be given (any more then to a
liar) to any man that swears never so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a
common swearer, and has no reverence of the Majesty of God. For by this he so
absolutely break; the neck of his own consequence, that we cannot so cordially
close with it, as else we could do.

Nevertheless that we be not further troublesome to the Bish. then needs must,
nor seem so pragmatick as he would represent us to be; nor to be such
Busybodies in other men's matters, manners, conversations and consciences, but
purely and singly to mind the keeping clear before God of our own, lest meddling
with a strife that concerns us not (as the case of others being imposed upon in
the point of Oaths does not half so much, as the exaction of them from our
selves) we be found (as Wisdom says such one is) like to him that takes a dog
by the ears; nor to remove the heavy stones of such long standing, as those
Impositions of Oaths are, from off the Consciences of any that are not burdened
with them, but only from our own, that are; We are pretty well content to part
stakes with the Bish. in the Controversy; and as he says of himself and his
sort of Christians, viz. As Christians of evil hearts and manners, full of
dissimulation and fraud, abounding in iniquity, increasing in persidiousness,
uncharitableness, distrusts, jealousies, unsatisfactions, insecurities, As weak
and unworthy to be trusted, they cannot be without Oaths, but Oaths are
necessary (not absolutely, nor morally or preceptively, but as a remedy against
those Diseases; when yet possibly, were they Christians ( truly such) they
would need no swearing in public or private: So we say of our selves, and
those true Christians called Quakers, as Christians ( truly such) in whom is no
iniquity* guile, fraud, dissimulation, deceit, who walk in truth, out of
strife, who can say in truth, We are Christians indeed, non nomine tantum
tenus, sed reapse, which is security enough in all cases; we need no Oaths to
be used among, or imposed upon us: But this being that snare and dilemma that
hypocritical Formalists and Christians ( not truly such) but so in Name only,
not in Nature, fall into, that one sin that they are fallen into begets a
necessity of another, one inconvenience and mischief subjects inavoidably to
another, as posito uno absurdo sequntur millia, Such being yet under the
bondage of their own corruptions and lying dead in their trespasses and sins,
pull thereby upon themselves a number of cumbersome remedies, which are often as
bad as the diseases, but at best needless, if the diseases were not; And thus
God's Law is added as a lash to the lawless liver or transgressor, and as a
Schoolmaster to bring to Christ the life, and to his life who is the Truth it
self: And such Christians living in all dishonesty, ^righteousness, ^ying,
falseness, theft, cozening, cheating, enmity, hatred, malice, envy and strife,
the heavy yoke, bondage and charge of man's Laws and Lawyers, hireling Priests,
and covetous Preachers are put upon them, to keep them in peace and honesty,
^ill they come to know and ^e led by that Light of him in themselves, who only
guides their feet in the way of Truth and true peace, which they yet yet know
not, there we say with the Bish. Oaths (as, de facto, they are) so, de jure,
might be used at least, if credit could be given any more than to liars, to
such Christians solemn swearing, for posita causa ponitur effectus.

And so if the Church of England be not a Church of Christians ( truly such)
(as the Bish. seems to intimate by his own words it is not (we have the less to
say to them as concerning their swearing, they have a liberty for us (and they
would have so much the less to answer for, in the day when God takes a final
account of them, if they would let us have the same liberty from them to
decline it, rather than force men to sin against their Consciences* to swear,
as they do, and as much as they will, and that not only solemnly, but
profanely, since none of their own Laws against that can reclaim nor restrain
them from it; for while men are yet the servants of sin, as Christians ( not
truly such) are (as much, if not more then Heathens so called) they are free
from that righteousness that Christ requires of his, which is that of the
Gospel, which far exceeds that of the Law, and all legal chief Priests, Scribes
and Pharisees: But such Christians as are by Christ made free from sin, as the
Quakers are, (though once as well as others under the power and dominion of it)
these are bound as servants to that perfect righteousness of the Gospel, which,
as that of the Law, to the natural, deceitful, contentious Jew, was forswear
not, but perform thy Oaths to God, if thou make Oaths to end strife and
controversies, is, to the true spiritual Jew or Israelite, in whose heart is no
guile, even to Christ's Disciples, neither, go to law one with another, nor
swear at all.

And if England ever come to be a Church constituted of such Christians, as are
truly such, as the primitive Christians were, and as the Quakers are, who by
the Light are led out of strife, into the love that casts out all fea^s and
jealousies, and work^ no ill to the Neighbor, we shall expect (as God does)
another matter, and other fruits than that of swearing, and forcing each other
to swear on pain of Ruin; and we shall not need to clear our selves of that
which they call our crime of not swearing, for the Light of Christ will lead
all that follow it, into the same* and so as posita causa ponitur, so sublata
causa tolli^r effectus, Sin and Deceit standing, Oaths stand (though to little
purpose, where solemn swearers, being profane swearers also, are no more to be
believed than Liars.) but where sin, deceit and strife cease; there swearing
has no use nor place: and so the Bish. does confess while he says p. 23. The
Eutopian desire and aim of these Quakers is not to be found fault with if it
were feisable; And feisable we say it is, if perfection so far as to freedom
from sin, deceit, hatred, malice and strife is attainable; And that that is
attainable in the body, even in this very humane nature, if the Light of
Christ, which is that of the Gospel, be attended to, what need we prove it
against our Adversaries in that point, when the Bishop confess^s it to our
hands? And that he so does, let him take his own words at large as they lie, p.
27, 28. where speaking of the design of Christ's Sermon Matthew. 5. and how the
righteousness he calls to, must exceed that of Scribes and Pharisees. He says,

Our Savior gives many singular Lessons or Precepts of more eminent diligence,
patience, charity, mortification, self-denial, sincerity, conspicuity,
perseverance, and perfection of obedience, required now under the Gospel, above
(mark) what either the Letter of the Mosaical Law seemed to exact The
perfection of Moses Law in the letter, was, swear not vainly, nor by any
creature, but by God only, forswear not (whatever the Pharisees false glosses
allowed) Therefore either Christ must in the point of swearing call them not to
swear at all, or else in that point he calls to no higher perfection of
obedience, than the Letter of the Mosaic Law did.
, or by the Pharisaical interpretations nere taught to the Jews; and however by
Divine Indulgence and connivance, or by the hardness and uncharitableness of
their own hearts, and the customary depravedness of times and manners, they
might seem to have some temporary dispensation heretofore granted to them, or
at least to take it to themselves; yet now under the Evangelical strictness to
which Christ came to restore or raise the Church, they might not fancy to
themselves any such liberty, but were to keep themselves in thought, look,
desire, word and deed, to that sanctity and severity that was required by the
Law, and most conform to the holy Will, Attributes and Nature of that God whom
they ought to imitate as their heavenly Father in all sacred perfections, which
humane Nature assisted by the Light of the Gospel, the Grace of Gods Spirit,
and the visible example of Christ was capable to attain, at least sincerely to
aim at, and endeavor: Which whoever does (say we) shall attain; for God, whose
Grace is sufficient to save from sin such as submit to be taught by the gift of
it in their own hearts, 2 Tit. 11. 12. is in no wise wanting to any, but
willing to have all men saved that are willing sincerely so to be, and are not
wanting to themselves.

5thly, The Bishops undertaken work of Instruction and Information of the
Quakers, ought to be by way of confirmation and probation of what he speaks, as
to the main point, not by way of position and affirmation only, nor by way of
a Magisterial imposing, or insolent obtruding upon a numerous enlightened
people, in an age of so much light and learning in those Mysteries of God,
Christ; Godliness and the Gospel, that are hid from the Scholastic, and
revealed to the rude Rustic, or Russet Rabbis, (as they speak) the flashy
conceptions, incogitancies, mere crude, we will not say (as he says of us, p.
8. what ere we think) but rather uncertain conjectures of his own fancy; the
Mint of Humane Fancies, not only melancholy and timorous, (says the Bish. p.
11.) but pragmatick and adventurous, is but an adulteration of Religion, and a
kind of stuprating of Conscience: Both are injurious usurpations upon the
Sovereignty of God, whose Scepter is infallible Truth. This the Bish. himself
yields is not cogent enough (though he be a Bish*) to conviction, p. 25. thus:

It is not sufficient in order to my design (which is to justify the legal
proceeding of this Kingdoms Justice by Oaths, and to satisfy the scruples of
the Quakers) to oppose my Nay to their Yea, or to offer the husk and chaff of
words, void of such Rsasons as either ^low from the nature of all things, and
all actions, as good or evil morally, or from the Will of God revealed in the
Scriptures, which is a Treasury of right Reason, as well as a Rule of true
Religion.

But now considering how much (as is showed above by his own words and others,
whom he quotes concerning the needlesness of true Christians, and the
worthlesness of false Christians Oaths) the Bish* weakens his own words, and
sides with us against himself, to the ^saying in a manner of all that little
that he does say, for the most solemn swearing, we see not upon the most
solemn, serious, sincere and single-ey'd perusal of his most Polemical matter,
how he os^ers any more than the mere husk and chaff of changeable words, void
of real proof. or any right-drawn Reason from the nature of that action of
swearing, or from the Scripture either, and renders his Nay, which ( coeteris
paribu^ at least) were tant amount thereunto, of far less credit (as inferior
to him as we else are) to our Yea, which is always Yea, while his is (as ours
are not, and the Apostles words never were, 2 Cor. 1.) about one and the same
thing, at o^t and the same time, both Yea and Nay.

6thly, That proof the Bish. (de jure) should bring in order to the information
of the Quakers, (if erring) and to the satisfaction of their tender
Consciences, ought to be no less than clearly and infallibly, in it self at
least, demonstrative of the lawfulness of Oaths now among Christians* without
any palbably apparent just ground of exception, and such only as is capable to
put the case to a clear, as well as tender Conscience, out of question, and not
to yield no more to the utmost, than some probable evidence to the Enquirer*
against which there may be, and is brought by him as clear, or clearer evidence
to the contrary; for this leaves conscientious men liable like children, even
in the things of God, which are of such grand concernment, that he that
doubts is damned if he do them (because they are not of Faith, of which
whatever is not, is sin) to be whissled up and down, and tossed to and fro with
every wind of Doctrine, after the cunning craftiness of self-seeking men, who
for their own interests lie in wait to deceive, and ministers nothing but
occasion of endless jauglings about questions and strifes of words, whereof
come the perverse disputings of the men of corrupt minds, that know not
godliness it self to be great gain, but suppose it godliness enough to get
great gain by their profession of it.

But now whereas we are along time beforehand with him in this matter of
account, concerning our gainsaying to swear at all, having not only in a
plain, positive way proved the warrant ableness thereof from right Reason, and
Scriptural demonstration in our Books (which for ought we find he is more
pleased to pass by, than to take so much notice of, as to reply thereto) the
By* under a most specious and preheminent pretense of answering the scruples of
the Quakers, and such a fair removing their difficulties, and justifying of
Oaths to be now lawful, as in case of not yiedling their cheerful obedience,
shall leave them in sufferings without excuse before God and man, p. 2. comes
forth at last p. 26. with no more then I will endeavor to give those Reasons
which induce me to believe that the Quakers do err, not knowing, or not right
understanding the mind of Christ in those Scriptures, viz. Mat. 5. Jam. 5.
which is not to forbid all swearing, nor such as the just and Religious Laws of
England do require. Which promised endeavor (not for want of outward prudence
we believe, for he has so much of that, as whereby he stands not a little in
his own light, and hinders himself from the plain sight of the plain simple
truth, as it is in Jesus; but for want of furniture from the Scripture, such a
barren cause as he pleads, not furnishing the most capacious brain from thence
sufficiently toward its own maintenance) the Bishop performs as well as one,
that, when his proof should be no less then demonstration, and that his
demonstration a notioribus and certioribus conclusione, proves Ignotum per
aeque ignotum, dubium per magis dubium; or, incertum per incertius.

7ly. This scriptural demonstration must be out of the Scriptures of the New
Testament, it being confessed by the Quakers, to the saving of all men that
wonted labor of tumbling over their Concordances to find and heap up
testimonies out of the other, that in the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets
there are texts enough, no less then commanding the Jews to swear by the Name
of God only, as much as prohibiting them to swear by both it and Malcham, or
ought else.

8ly. Any thing in the Books of the Quakers, or in those two Texts, Matthew. 5.
Jam. 5. to the contrary notwithstanding.

But the Bishop not seeming so much as to take cognizance of any of the Quakers
books in particular, or of those particulars in them, that are of most moment
in order to his end to be throwly replied to, though from other places hereof
which give light to Mat. 5. and Iam. 5. he promises p. 26 such weighty,
pregnant, and plain reasons as shall carry the Cause, and brings no more out of
the New Testament (not because he was not capable to have found them, had they
been there, but because they were not there to be found) no more in
demonstration of the lawful use of Oaths among Christians in judicial
proceedings, but the fore-nam'd places that speak of Christ's saying, Verily,
verily; and of Panl's charging, protesting, and calling God to witness, which
we have over, and over, and over again (being anew put to it) proved to be no
oaths, nor adjuarations: and the Angels swearing, Rev. 10. whose example the
Bishop says indeed p. 39. justifies the lawfulness of some swearing; which we
have showed also, if it could be to any men, yet could not be to us any
President, who are under the Gospel of the Son that is greater then the Angels,
by the dispensation of whom the Law for Oaths, Tithes, and many other legal
Rites and Rud ments was given; which Son also all the Angels of God are bid to
worship. And lastly, that of Heb. 6. where the Apostle speaking of an Oath
among men (not meddling there to show ( de jure) that it should be so among
Saints* who as concerning strife, the occasion of swearing, and consequentially
concerning swearing, should not walk as men, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2, 3.) says ( de
facto only) that it is an end of strife, not heeding that when men once in
strife come once into Christ, and to be in him, new Creatures, Christians, and
to walk no more as carnal, nor as men, but as spiritual, and as true saints and
Christians, they come both out of strife, and out of swearing.

And as for those two Texts, Mat. 5. Iam. 5. to which the Bish. says, he would
allege other Texts that should give light; he might as well have said, he
would light a Candle to see the Sun by; for they of themselves give such clear,
undeniable evidence to the Truth that is maintained by us, and against the
lawfulness of swearing among Christians; that as the bright shining of the Sun
gives light to all the Stars, and causes them to shine out, and be seen in
their proper luster; so these two, to all other Texts in the New Testament,
which may be truly said from these, as from two Cardinal and Capital ones, to
borrow all that evidence they have, whether one way or other, as to this point:
And the Bish is so far from darkening the Testimony against all swearing, which
in answer to others we have already held sorth therefrom, that (save that p. 7.
he passes in gross a gross censure upon our writing^ private or public, as
savouring of much silliness, never well catechized ignorance and folly) one
would think he had never so much as seen any such matter, as any public
appearances of ours in that Cause, as from these two Scriptures; insomuch that
as the Bish. makes such quick dispatch in in his business, that for have he
has well-nigh left it all behind him, So we might without much prejudice to
the Cause in controversy among some wise men, referring him to what is written;
take as little notice of that little or nothing which is done by the Bish. in
disproof thereof, as he seems to take of our proofs from thence, about the
unlawfulness of swearing; Nevertheless, because some are apt to judge that
nothing can be said, if nothing be said, Something (and no more than needs) may
be said to what notions the Bishop offers in proof of his conjectures and
conceptions, why Christ and his Apostles words, Matthew. 5. Iam. 5. are not
intended as an absolute* universal prohibition of all swearing, and so draw on
to our Conclusion.

1. At preparative to the delivery of his sense upon the places, the Bishop,
who makes a long Harvest of a little Corn, before he comes plainly and
positively to speak out his mind in the Negative, as in opposition to us (as he
does briefly in p. 35.) spends about, or above thirty pages in Preambles, long
popular passages, and plausible pretenses of sundry prudentials (as he calls
them, p. 13.) that we must observe in searching the mind, and taking the true
meaning of the Scripture; many things in some Scriptures being expressed
darkly, metaphorically, figuratively, parabolically, comparatively, by way of
allusions in metonymies, synechdoches, Ironies, hyperbolies, extraordinary
commands, in universalities, which are limited to the subject intended, etc.
Lest erroneous minds, like glasses of refraction or false mediums, pervert them
from the simplicity, to their own destruction (as St. Peter speaks) it being
endless (says he) to enumerate those places of Scripture, which have something
or other in their meaning and design, more than the Letter seems to hold forth
in the bare words of it. Which swelling sayings of the Bish. may have a show of
Wisdom among an implicit-faith't people; but alas, ^ll that sound is but like a
cask full of emptiness, with the great noise whereof* many that are ever
learning, never knowing Truth, may be s^un'd from, more than established in the
Truth; neither has it more plenty of words, than little pertinency of matter,
to the purpose; for if it should be so, (as the Bish. says it is) that
innumerable Scriptures should speak one thing, and mean another, (which yet is
little less than to make the Spirit in the Penman, who used all plainness of
speech, like to such deceivers and seducers as those unlearned and unstable
ones, which unlearned Compare Acts 4. with 2 Pet. 3. sor Peter was unlearned,
as to that the Bishop now calls learning.
Peter speaks of, that with the abundance of their Ambages and circumlocutions,
lead people about, to the losing of them from the simplicity of Truth, in the
Wilderness of their own Wisdom) must those Texts therefore be a mockery of men,
and needs mean some other thing than they express? And what if some Texts have
so? must therefore these two have in them dark sayings, metaphors, figures,
parables, comparisons, allusions, metonymies, synechdoches, hyperbolies,
extaordinary commands, limited universalities, etc. Which both are so plain,
that he must be either no^ able, or not willing to see the Sun when it shines
in his face, that fee^ any such thing in them. Though then the Bish. to the
amazing of their minds, leads men about in a Wood of Wonderments for so many
leaves together, that had his Discourse been a Sermon preached on either of
those Verses, by word of mouth, and stinted by a Glass, it would have run out
before he had come at his Text; yet (taking the counsel of him, who said, Ne
immittas pecus tuuns in pratum ubi no^ est sepes, passing by the boundless
preambulations and superfluity of superstitious fears of this and that danger
of perverting them to our destruction) we shall come to the Texts, which have
enough in them to clear themselves, and Christ's meaning in them, without such
a deal of do, as we see Divines make about Christ's Doctrine, which has not so
much difficulty in it, but that his Disciples, who learn of him, and are
willing to be led by him in a cross to their own wills, into the doing of the
whole will and counsel of God, may easily know it. And when we shall have
sifted off that overgrown husk and chaff of words, and left behind us all that
heap of light grain that lies about it, we shall see that what he urges
immediately, as in proof of his conclusion, will not be forced to amount in
worth to the weight of one grain of such Corn as is fit to go into the Garner.

Bish. Indeed the Bish. says p. 17. If the Quakers will admit such cautions and
limitations as they do to other places, in the interpreting of these
Scriptures, which they chiefly allege to justify their denial of all swearing
whatever, I shall not doabt to reconcile them to my sense of them.

Ans. Which is as much as to say, if the Quakers will grant those Scriptures to
have such limitations in them, are an exceptive of that swearing I plead for
against them, (for that is my sense thereof, viz. that they forbid not all
swearing, but some only) then, per Petitione in Principij by a begging the
question, and desiring them to grant that my ( wrong) sense is right, and their
( right) sense wrong* I have gun'd the Cause. But for all his taking it of us,
before we give him the cause, which is God's, and not ours to give away, we
must tell the Bish. much what in his own words following, that whether we ever
yield to his sense or no, and whether he ever commend us for it or no, we have
such due regard to the Scriptures, that we are willing, as by a Rule of
Christians actions in this cale of Oaths, to stand to a trial of it by the
Scriptures; but then those Scriptures which the Bish. beats so much about in a
circumference of cautions and conceptions, but scarce comes near, as if he were
afraid too critically to examine them* or to enter within the bark or rind of
the context, to sind out Christ's true intent in the Texts themselves, must be
duly examined, exactly weighed, and aptly reduced to that Standard of Truth,
which is the Scriptures themselves, and not any men's false glosses on them, in
both Morals and Fiducials; which Standard of Truth admits of no strife among
those that stand and walk uprightly according to it, and consequently of no
Oaths in order to the ending of it. In order to a true examination of them, and
a clear discovery how the Bish. falls short of the utmost of Christ's purpose in
them; let them first be seriously read, as they stand ( rightly enough)
translated, for any thing the Bish, puts in to the contrary: The words of
Christ, Matthew. 5. 33, 34, 35, 36 37. are these, Ye have heard it has been said
by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto
the Lord thine Oaths: But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by Heaven,
for it is Gods Tbrone, nor by Earth, for it is his footstool, neither by
Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King, neither shall thou swear by
thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black; But let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these, comes
of evil. And Jam. 5. thus: But above all things my Brethren, swear not, neither
by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea be
yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into condemnation.

In these Texts the Quakers say, All swevring is forbidden; the Bishop says,
No, but some Oaths only: in evidence of the first, which is ours, we say
several things, which the Bishop does not deny, but confess to as fully
wel-nigh as we would desire him; and some which we judge he neither will, nor
can deny. First, That the words are truly enough translated. 2ly. That the
words are expressly, as to the ((...)) or Letter of them, an absolute universal
negative; without any limitation, dispensation, or exception, page 25. 3ly.
That at the first view they have a shrewd show of our sense, or (to speak in no
other then the Bishops own words, page 20.) both places seem at first sight
point blank (as some Commentators observe) to forbid all manner of swearing
among Christians; both have emphatical, or vehement words. 4ly. The first has
Christ's authority, reforming not only the Pharisaick corruptions of the times;
but even the Mosaic indulgences, in some things, for the hardness of the Jews
hearts. 5ly. That they are notable Texts, which seem to stand as the Angel of
the Lord against Balaam, with a sword in their hand to stop the way of all
swearing whatsoever. 6ly. They are agreed by all to be a divine and strict
prohibition of that sin of swearing. 7ly. Places not so clear on the Bishop's
part, but like the Pillar of fire that gave Light to Israel (as clear to the
contrary as they are to us, and cogent to our consciences) they are (as the
same Pillar, that was as a cloud to the Egyptians) by the Bishop's own
confession, both dark and dubious. All which grants of the Bishop (were there
no more at all to be said) are of weight enough upon the bare reading thereof
at random, to cast the scales for the Quaker's-Cause against the Bishop; how
much more (if all he says be pre cisely and strictly weighed in the balance of
the sanctuary, and truly tried by the rule of right reason) will it be found
too light to serve his purpose against the Quakers.

1. We say the Texts are truly enough translated, as they are above
transcribed; nor does the Bishop put in any exception against it. Indeed H. Den
with whom we have had very much to do already, as to Matthew. 5. makes an unjust
exception against that true translation of the word (...) by [ at all]; but the
ground of his exception being long since removed; we have no more to do with
him here, then with the Bishop in that particular.

2. As to Iam. 5. some except against that last clause, (...), as not rightly
translated nor Englished by [ lest ye fall into condemnation] affirming the
Word (...) to signify only ipsissimam Iudicandi actionem, the very act of
judging, or determining of a thing, and not the punishment, or execution of the
sentence, as to the suffering of it; 2. That that clause (...), signifies not
always [ ne] [ lest] but sometimes [ ^isi] i. e. [ except] and so they would
have the Apostles meaning to be thus, Swear notby heaven, earth, nor by any
other Oath, etc. except it be when ye come before a Iudgement-seat, or except
it be in order to the determination of a matter in some Court of Judicature; so
making the words exclusive only of swearing by creatures in ordinary
discourse, but not prohibitive of all swearing by the Name of God in cases of
weight before Magistrates.

Which sense has indeed a fairer show in it of some allowance of solemn Oaths
in Judicial proceedings, and (could it be cleared to be the Spirit's meaning)
would serve the Bishop's turn (though it is but of a learned Lay-man's
starting, that is of some present considerable sway in this City) then all that
the Bishop has served it by himself.

But this cannot possibly be the mind of the Apostle, nor the true
interpretation, as it is not the true translation of the words, for the diverse
Reasons hereunder ensuing.

1. Howbeit (...) signifie^ that very action of judging of things in order to
the passing of a verdict or sentence, yet not exclusively, but conclusively of
the Judgment, Verdict and Sentence it self, given or passed against one to
such or such punishment; yea also sometimes it is used, as well as (...) for
the very execution of the sentence of condemnation passed against a man, or his
suffering of the punishment to which he is adjudged according to the said
sentence so passing against him; witness those places Ioh. 3 19 (...), etc. And
this is the condemnation, that Light is come, etc. And Matthew. 23. 33. (...):
Where the word (...) cannot possibly be understood so restrictively, as to
signify no more than the single action of judging, by way of Animadversion or
debate upon a matter, but also both the sentencing of a man to the suffering,
and the suffering of the vengeance of (...), according to the sentence. So here
in James, (...) is not, as that forenamed friend would have it, unless, or
except ye come under the examination of a Court of Judicature, but (as it is
rendered) lest ye fall under Judgment, or into condemnation.

Again, that they are rightly rendered as we read them, is evident by that
conjunction which is copulative of this sentence with those foregoing, which if
it were [(...)] which properly signifie^ [ nisi] [ unless] or [ except] it
would have so much the more show however of possibility to be translated that
way; but it is (...), which howbeit it may possibly perhaps in some cases (but
improperly ever) be used (as it is in Hower's ^iads, for the Verses sake, in
which cases Poets often take liberty to lanch out from the native sense of the
words) for (...), that is nisi; or except; yet most properly and primarily, as
well as most commonly, ordinarily, usually, and almost universally, signies ne,
lest that; for these two words, (...), (...), and (...), non, are two
conjunctions, which when they are together in conjunction or composition, do
naturally sound forth as much as ne, or ut non, lest that ye fall, or that ye
may not fall into condemnation: And we are not (without such a palbable
necessity, as is not here found, to depart from the prime, proper, genuine and
native signification of any words, into that which is improper and foreign.

Moreover (whatever any Poet might do) yet if we consult the sense, wherein the
Apostle throughout the New Testament uses these phrases, we shall never find
(...), put for (...), so as to signify nisi, except, but either (...), or
(...), used all along, and never (...), to express unless, or except, as Mat.
5. 20. (...), etc. unless, or except your righteousness exceeds that of the
Pharise^* 19. 9. (...), etc. except for Fornication, John 3. 3, 5. (...), etc.
[except] a man be born from above. Luke 13. 3, 5 (...), etc. [except] ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And (...), wherever it is used, is
truly translated (as here) ne, ut non, lest, lest that, but never Englisht by
unless, or except, as Matt. 7. 1. (...), Judge not, lest ye be judged; Will any
knowing man read that thus, viz. Judge not, unless, or except ye be judged?

So 1 Cor. 7. 5. (...), etc. Lest Satan tempt you for your incontinency, etc.
So Heb. 3. 13. (...), etc. Lest any of you be hardened, etc.

Moreover, that that clause (...), is not in any wise an exception from the
foregoing prohibition not to swear, but rather a caution not to swear on pain
of judgment or condemnation, is yet more evident by the Word (...), which
being of (...) Cado, prosternor, incido, etc. signifies properly a falling into
some kind of mischief or danger, which attends the doing of some matter
prohibited, and not a coming as a Witness before a Court* of Judicature, and
it is nonsensical to express such an appearance by a verb of such signification:
For what sense were it to say, Never swear except you fall into, alias incur
the danger of a Iudgmentseat? But it is good sense to say, lest ye fall under
Judgment, or into condemnation:

In full and final evidence of this yet further, that it is a caution not to
swear on pain of condemnation, and not an exception from the command not to
swear; we have one place much like to this in phrase and sense, viz. 1 Timothy 3.
5. (...), lest being puffed up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the
Devil. And ver. 7. '(...), Lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the De*
vil.

Again, if it were to be rendered so, except ye come before a Iudgement-seat,
it would argue it to be permitted as lawful to swear in all manners, kinds and
cases before specified, in a Court; but that cannot possibly be, for then these
two absurdities would follow:

1. Whereas James says, Swear not by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other
Oath, except before a Court of Judicature, it would follow, that in case men do
come before a Court of Iudicat^re, then they may lawfully swear either by
Heaven, or by Earth, or by any other Oath, as well as by God alone; which were
most gross and absurd to imagine.

2. Whereas James says, Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; and Bish.
Gauden's interpretation of those clauses, Let your yea be yea, and your nay,
nay, is this, p. 32. viz. That they import that plainness and simplicity of
Christians meaning and doing as may be consonant to their words in truth and
honesty, without fraud or falsity; 'Twould follow thus, viz. use all simplicity
and plainness, and let your meaning and doing be consonant to your words,
except ye come before a Iudgement-seat, and then ye need not let your yea be
yea, or your nay, nay, that is, need not let your meaning be consonant to your
words in truth and honesty, without fraud or falslty, which were an absurdity
more exceedingly gross than the former.

Seeing then they are an universal negative, expressly exclusive of all
swearing, without limitation or exception, what hinders why they may not
punctually be taken in that plain way wherein they are expressed, we see not.

But the Bish. who rather darkens than opens the clear counsel of God, by words
without knowledge, enters his dissent, and puts in his exception to the
contrary here in such wise as others, who are already confuted, have done
before; for as Ier. Ives says, those general terms, Swear not at all, admit of
an exception, sometimes universal Propositions are taken with restrictions; so
says the Bish. p. 13. many things in some Scriptures are expressed in
universalities, which are limited to the subject intended. And p. 32, 33. As
for that absolute and universal Negative of not swearing at all, noching is
more clear and usual in Scripture, than to confine the meaning of such
generals, to the particular subject and scope intended: Negatives and
affirmatives in Scripture, are limited in the sense, though seeming universal
in the Letter or Words.

Ans. 1. What if it be so sometimes, and in some places, will it follow
infallibly (as it must do if the Bish. reach his end in reference to the
Quakers, which is undeniable demonstration in order to their infallible
convinction) that it is so ever? so every where? so here at this time, or in
this place? Divines use to tell us, that the literal sense of the words must
not be departed from for a figurative or foreign, without an evident necessity
forcing thereunto; but here is as little evident necessity of such a thing, as
there is of any swearing at all, which the Bish. himself confessing that it is
neither needed among true Christians, nor to be heeded among false ones,
concludes the non-necessity or uselesness of altogether,

2. Whereas he says, nothing is more clear and usual in Scripture, than to
confine general terms to particular meanings, that is utterly untrue, for if
there be any, as there are many Parables and Proverbs, (which ways of Wisdom
are all plain to him that understands, though dark sayings to him that knows
not the mystery of God's Kingdom) and if some general Rules do admit of some
exception and some universal terms limited in their sense, yet something is
more clear and usual then that; for it is far more clear when things are
intended literally, as they are expressed, for that is a more cloudy and dark
saying in which one thing is spoken, and another intended. 2. More usual also
for the Spirit of God to mean plainly, as he speaks, and to intend as
universally as he talks, and not (as some Divines, whom we have had to do with,
tell us) that in terminis he offers salvation unto all, but intends it only to
a few; for then who can tell ordinarily what he means in any thing?

3. If 'twere never so usual elsewhere, yet it is of all places the least likely
to be so here in these two Texts, in both which the Bishop out of Commentators
observes, that there seems at first sight to be such divine, strict, point blank
prohibition of all manner of swearing among Christians, and that by Christ's
own authority, who calls his Discipels so strictly in the following words out
of strife ^t self, the ending of which is the end of Oaths, that he would have
no resisting evil, nor striving at Law in his Church, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2. and
consequently out of Oaths, that were for the ending of strife under the Law
where it stood, and so out of, over and above that Law of the servant Moses,
that indu^g'd and allowed both Oaths and strife, into that Gospel of love,
which works no ill to the neighbor, and so fulfills the Law, is the most
excellent way, yea the price of the high call of God in Christ Jesus, whose
call is not to such uncleaness, as evil hearts and manners, dissimulations,
defraudings, over-reacings, thefts, injurious^ess, unrighteousness, distrusts,
insecurities, and janglings, but unto holiness before him, and peace one with
another: And lastly with such emphatical and vehement words (as it is also
confessed) as make the two Texts not only to seem by the words to be universal
in their sense, nor only to seem strict and point blank against all swearing
on pain of evil and condemnation, nor only to seem to stand as the Angel of
the Lord against Balaam, with a sword in their hand to stop the way of all
swearing whatever; (and we have little reason to believe those two Texts to be
such a pair of Apochryptal (much less Hypocritical) pieces, as to seem to be
what they are not, or speak another matter than they intend.) but also in
reallity are ( ex confesso) both dark and dubious to the discourser himself,
that discourses for that unchristian course of Christians swearing: All which
considerations, though many false Prophets who ( Balaam-like) love the wages of
unrighteousness, more than either to bless, or to be blessed with God's Israel,
as unconscionably as inconsiderately pos^ on* may possibly cause not only the
Civil Powers, whom they ^awn on, to wax weary of them, but also to force the
poor spur galled people, whom the said false Prophets so unmercifully ride,
like so many dull and dumb Asses to fall down at last under the burden of their
spiritual Tyranny, and being smitten by them, because they can go no farther
for fear of the Angel of the Lord, to open their mouths, and with man's voice
rebuke the madness of the Prophets.

4. Though we own that sometimes general Rules and universal expressions admit
of exceptions and limitations; yet then those limitations, exceptions and
restrictions, are either expressed, or at least those manifestly and undeniably
employed in the same Text, or in the same Testament, where those general
expressions are, as is so abundantly showed already in our Answers to others
Se^ the Antid. p. 57, 58, 59.
, that for the avoiding of tedious repetitions of what remains still
unanswered, we shall say no more here in that particular.

But as to the universal prohibition in this Text, Matt. 5. there is not only
no expression of any such exception, nor yet in any other part of all the
Scriptures of the New Testament, but rather in the same Text a fuller
explication of the same universal expression by sundry of such particulars of
it, as are (if any can so be) as expressive^ so far more forcibly, and even
utterly exclusive and exceptive of all sorts of swearing, as sin and evil, from
the whole conversation and communication of Christians, which such
transactions, as they may be conversant in in Courts of Judicature, are surely
a part of, as well as any other; Swear not at all, by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem,
the Head, etc. but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, what is more
than these, comes of evil. And 2. there is in the same Testament by the
Apostle Iam. 5. a re-inforcement of the same universal prohibition of that sin
of swearing, in terms more universally and strictly exclusive of all Oaths (and
then surely of Oaths by the Name of God, as well as ought else) on pain of
condemnation, Swear not by Heaven, Earth, etc. nor any other Oath, but let your
yea be yea, your nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation.

5. And because the Bish. says, it is agreed on all all hands that both places
are a strict prohibition against the sin of Swearing, but not against such
swearing, as is no sin; taking it for granted before it be given him by us,
that there is now (as under the Law there was) some swearing, which is no sin,
but an act of duty, according to which conceit of his he states p. 20. a
threefold Question about the interpretation, scope and meaning of the two Texts.

1. Whether all swearing be utterly forbidden, because it is, and ever was in
its nature a sin against Morality?

Or 2. Whether all Swearing is therefore now a sin, because thus forbidden by a
positive Law of Christ under the Gospel?

(...) 3. Whether only some sort of Swearing, which is a sin, is forbidden,
but not such swearing as is no sin, but an act of veneration?

To all this we reply, 1. That howbeit we affirm net all swearing is forbidden,
because it is, and ever was in its nature a sin against Morality; (for swearing
that now is sin, was one of those Ceremo^ialities of the Law, which in their
nature were not sin, but duty, for the time then being, being as all legal
rites were, subservient to, but not against the morality of the Gospel, for the
shadows were not against the substance, nor the Ceremonials against the Morals
and Fiducials, nor of them so, as to be de esse to them, as Paul says the Law
is not of Faith, yet not against it: For as Ministerial as the Law was to the
Gospel then, yet the Gospel may be, and now is without it.)

Yet 2dly, We own not any swearing to be now a duty, or act of Justice, as some
swearing once was under the Law, but affirm all swearing to be now a sin upon
the second account, viz. because thus forbidden by a positive Law of Christ
under the Gospel, who by his death ended the Iu^, or Right of that, and many
more Legal Rites and Rudiments, so that however they may de facto be continued,
not more without the guilt and sin, at least, of superstition, then pompous
Highpriests Sacrificings and Circumcisings, New Moons, days, meats, drinks,
and other holinesses of the Law, which though accessiry to the Gospel, yet so
little pertinent to it, that whosoever pleads the necessary practice and
performance of them now among Christ's Disciples, made Christ of so little
effect to himself, as that he shall profit them nothing.

So then, even that sort of swearing, which was not sin (simpliciter, and ex
sua natura) in its nature under the Law, as a thing against the Morality of the
Gospel, is now a sin upon the account of his universal prohibition of all
swearing, who was of Authority to put an end (as he did also by his death) unto
the Law.

And as some things are prohibita qui^ mala (as they speak) forbidden because
they are sin and evil in their very nature, as envy, hatred, deceit, injury,
unrighteousness, being all not only not of the Gospel, Grace and Truth that
came by Christ, but eternally against the morality of it; so some things are
mala quia prohibita, sin and evil, because they are forbidden; and of this sort
are these ceremonies, circumcisings, sacrifices, swearings, and other
Ordinances of the Law, once commanded by Moses, since ended and forbidden under
Christ, of an indifferent nature in themselves, having so much good in them,
that they have no evil; and so much evil, that they (...) no good, but merely
according as they are ( respectively) commanded by the Servant, or prohibited
by the Son in their* respective Houses.

Now against that universal acceptance of the Texts as a general prohibition
of all swearing, seeing no exception can be found in all the Scripture; the
Bish. puts in three things by way of exception: He presumes (p. 36.) those
after-evidences in the Gospel, (as he calls them) of Christ's verily, verily,
and Paul's calling God to witness, do sufficiently clear the limited meaning of
our Savior. But his presumption in that particular to be vain, is sufficiently
proved ^bove.

He urges also against the said universal acceptance by way of ^xception, the
moral nature, end and use of an Oath, which says he, p. 36* God has
instituted, without any repeal by Christ or his Apostles. In disproof of which
morality of the nature of an Oath, we have said enough before, as also how,
whatever Oaths God instituted of old by Moses the Servant, (who de novo gave
out, and so was said to g^ve or institute sundry things that were before him,
and not of him, but of the Fathers, as Circumcision, 1 John 19. 22. Sabbath,
Sacrifice as well as Swearing) those he ended in his Son, and has repealed
both by him, Matthew. 5. and his Apostle, Jam. 5. which Texts, whether they be
Repeals or not ( sub judice lis est) is the main point in Question, in evidence
of which that they are, we have said so much already for our Yea, in
confutation of what the Bish. has brought for his Nay.

But whereas he urges by way of exception, against the universal sense of the
prohibition. the occasion, scope and end of Christ's and the Apostles words, to
which his own instance by way of explication of his meaning, do best direct us,
as to what he forbids and enjoins.

We say, those matters rightly weighed, do all plead the Cause of the Quakers,
more than the Bishops, and that is evidently manifest by sundry passages,
wherein the Bish. in his examination of the said matters, most manifestly
manages his own business against himself.

In order to the opening of the true occasion of Christ's words, the Bish.
siyes thus of the whole Sermon, of which these words, swear not at all, etc.
are a part, viz.

Bish. Our Savior gives many singular Precepts of more eminent diligence,
patience, charity, mortification, self-denial, sincerity, conspicuity,
perseverance, and perfection of obedience, required now under the Gospel, above
what either the Letter of the Mosaic Law seemed to exact, or by the
Pharisaical interpretations were taught the ^ws, etc. And p. 27, 28. However by
Divine indulgence and connivance, they might seem to have some temporary
Dispensation heretofore granted them; yet now under the Evangelical strictness
to which Christ came to restore or raise the Church, they might not fancy to
themselves any such liberty, but were to keep themselves in thought, look,
desire, word and deed, [ mark, not onely] to that sanctity and severity, which
was required by the Law, (but also) most conform to the holy Will, Attributes
and Nature of God, whom they ought to imitate, as their heavenly Father, in all
sacred perfections, which humane nature, assisted by the light of the Gospel,
the grace of God's Spirit, and the visible example of Christ, was capable to
attain.

Ans. In which sayings, let all men that are of any spiritual understanding,
see if the Bish. himself do not speak as one that interprets the words of
Christ (in that point of swearing) as universally exclusive of all swearing,
even that which by Divine indulgence was connived at under the Law, as well as
that profane swearing, which was then forbidden, as well as now, whilst he says
Christ requires greater perfection of patience, love, self-denial, strictness,
sanctity, severity, than Moses Law, even such perfection of obedience as
conforms to God's holy Will and Nature, to the Light of the Gospel, the Grace
of God's Spirit, and the visible example of Christ, to the measure of the
stature of the fullness of whom the Saints are capable by the true Ministry to
be built up, Ephesians. 4. Whose example was not to strive, Matthew. 12. 1 Pet. 2.
whose humane nature attained to a state beyond strife, whose Light, Spirit and
Grace, leads into the love that admits of doing no ill to the neighbor; Whose
Gospel calls so far out of strife, the cause of Oaths, that it requires not to
be overcome with, nor to resist evil, but overcome it with good, to love, and
do good to enemies, when the Letter of the Law of Moses (which the Bish. says
the Gospel must exceed) allowed to hate, to be avenged on Enemies, Egyptians,
Amalekites, to take an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; whose Gospel in
othee points forbids and condemns rash anger, lust after women, polygamy,
divorce (except for Fornication For according to the Gospel, though the Law it
self expressly allowed it, the Lord says by the Prophet, Mal. 2. 16. he hates
putting away.
) rendering evil for evil, etc. (while the Letter no more than actual Murder,
Adultery, indulging and conniving at polygamy, humorous divorces, stripe for
stripe, wound for wound; and in that point of swearing, forbids and condemns
not only for swearing, but all swearing) while the Law allowed of, indulged
connived at, commanded, and gave dispensation (for the whole Law of Moses was
given by the dispensation of Angels, in the hand of that Mediator) for a time
to some swearing, and such swearing even by God, as was used in order to end
strife, where it was yet standing, (so be they performed their Oaths to God, or
one another, that they made by him) condemning no more than Creature-swearing,
(as the Bish calls it) as by Malcam, (as well as God) by Heaven, Earth, etc.
and forswearing, or not performing what Oaths by the Name of God, they had made
to God, or to each other.

It Is most evident then by the Bishops confession here, that Christ in every
point condemns something, which not only the Pharisees by their false glosses,
and abusive, loose interpretations of the Law allowed, but what the Law it
self, even Divine indulgence dispensed with, connived at, and by Moses
suffered, i. e. commanded, so to be For Moses of himself (the servant that
knows not what his Master does) could not give dispensation against any command
of God, for then he had not been faithful, as he was in all his house,
according to the pattern of Gods Precepts showed him in the holy Mount.
, because of the hardness of their hearts, which (as to the point of swearing)
was swearing by his Name alone (if they must needs swear) as a way to end the
strife and envying, which by reason of their distrusts and jealousies, and the
hardness of their hearts, they were full of, and fallen into.

Otherwise let the Bish. or any man living, show us wherein Christ commands a
righteousness or perfection that exceeds that of the Law, (as it is confessed he
does) for the Law said, Swear not by any creature, but by God only, and for
swear not; and if the Gospel say no more, but swear not by any Creature, as
Heaven, Earth, etc. but by God only, and for swear not, where is that higher
state of perfection? that Love that excludes strife, (and consequently Oaths,
which are but to end strife where it is) and that perfect conformity to Christ,
who neither strove nor swear, and to his humane nature, Light, Spirit and
Grace, that leads up out of strife, the occasion of Oaths? All which high
seize the Bish. confesses Christ come to bring men up to under the Gospel.

Bish. But the By. has yet one more strong string to his Bow (as he judges)
which is indeed his ultimum refugium, which if it fail, all his tackling is
loosned, and his whole talk about the limitation of the universal Negative in
those Texts, must be take it self to its heels, for any help it can hope to
have from himself or any other; and that is a strong conceit, begotten in his
mind from some few Authors, testifying of a certain sort of vulgar familiar
Oaths, or forms of common swearing by whatever came next to their hands and
tongues, as by the Temply, holy City, their own and others heads, hands, lives,
and souls, by heaven, earth, the light, waving the attestation of God, and
swearing by his Name, and putting the character of Divinity upon the creature;
and not only upon small and light occasions, but even in things of concern, as
to that charity, justice, and equity, which they owed to others, of old in use
among the Jews, (as among many Christians now) which way of Creature-swearing
they chose (says he) because they sancied such Oaths, being not with the
solemn invocating of Gods Name, were not binding upon their souls, but such as
they might play fast and loose with as their own interest, or pleasure swayed
them; as they could not do with Oaths made according to the laws command by
Gods Name, for those they thought binding.

^ On this occasion (says the Bp. p. 29, 30.) and to reform these gross
abuses, Christ gives that command, swear not at all: that is not after those
usual, presumptuous, unlawful forms, by the names of Creatures, of which he
gives so many instances to express his meaning, when he does not instance in
the lawful use of religious Oaths by the name of God: telling them there was in
those Oaths by any Creature, Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, the Temple, etc. a
tacit, calling of God to witness, since every creature depends on God, and is
in relation to him, as Heaven is his Throne, Earth his Footstool, Jerusalem his
City; and lastly, implying that however such Oaths were at to the manner
unlawful, yet they obliged, if the matter of them were lawful; so that they
were not excused from perjury in not performing, and p. 35. for these their
new, and customary forms of swearing, it being the almost only swearing in
fashion among them, Christ blaming in them, and aiming at, gives such a
prohibition of sweat not at all, that is, (says the Bish. p. 20.) not by those
Oaths, in which you now make no scruple to swear and forswear: not at all for
matter and manner as ye have accustomed your selves to swear contrary or beyond
what God allowed in his law:

Answ. In this place we confess the Bish. though he streins hard for it, has
made as fair a flourish, and spread as broad sails, as in any part of all his
book besides it, yet all will not help to carry him on to the accomplishment of
that work at first undertaken by him against the Quakers, viz. the
justification of the lawfulness of any swearing, or the defense of that limited
sense, he would put upon the universal Terms in the two Texts, wherein Christ
and his Apostle forbid all swearing; since it is most evident to any but such as
wrack their Inventions on the Tenter to find out, wherewith to draw them their
own way for their own interest, that (as in the other points immediately next
both before it, and behind it, viz. of divorce, and of loving deportment
toward injurious ones and enemies) so in this of Oaths Christ prohibits and
condemns not only those gross abuses of those things that by Divine indulgence
they had a dispention for under the law, which abuses crept in by the
Pharisaical false glosses, too much loosning the meaning of Gods law by Moses,
by their depraved examples, or popular custom, but prohibits and condemns also
those very things which, in regard of their hardness of heart, distrusts and
wicked cruelties, God himself in the very letter of the law it self then
indulged them in, and gave them both a dispensation and a precept for at that
time by the law: And so as the law of old time (before the false glosses and
selfish senses of the Scribes and Pharisees came in) whereby they wrested and
perverted it to their own wills and lusts, said in somethings so as it was not
said from the beginning, in the state of innocence, while man was merciful as
his heavenly father is merciful: If a man like not his wife on a light occasion
let him put her away: And in case of injury, as he has done so shall it be
done to him again, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, stripe for stripe, wound for
wound: And in case of enmity, hate thine enemy (for the Jew might spoil the
Egyptian, and might not spare Amaleck) But the Gospel says, God hates putting
away (except for fornication) Love enemies, Resist not evil, Do good to them
that hate you, Be like your Father that begets out of that old Image and nature
of the Devil, into his own, Be perfect as he is perfect, etc. In case of
strifes, and misbelief, dissatisfactions, jealousies, insecurities among
themselves, in which case Oaths were then allowed, God said by Moses in the
law, fear the Lord thy God and swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. But swear not
falsely by his name, Levit. 19. 13. For swear not, but perform: So by Christ his
Son, and his Apostle in the Gospel swear not at all, not only not by creatures,
heaven, earth, etc. but also not by God himself; for whereas the Bish. says
Christ's instancing of creatures, shows his meaning is to forbid only that kind
of Creature-swearing, but not swearing by God, for he does not instance in the
use of Oaths by his name, We say James uses an exclusive expression aequivalent
to an instancing in that form of swearing by the name of God, while (for
brevities sake) he adds neither by any other Oath. Therefore if swearing by
the name of God be an Oath, he must of necessity intend the forbidding of that
Oath, which is the most notable Oath of all, or else of necessity have some way
or other plainly excepted it, otherwise he had much darkened that counsel of God
in the Gospel, which his scope, aim, and end was to make more clear, whilst he
then had left them in doubts about the thing, which though they practically
erred in, yet, as to the Theory of it, was most manifest in the letter of their
law before, for the law expressly condemned all profane irregular
Creature-swearing, though they wickedly used it (as Christians (so called) now
do) and all for swearing, but as expressly allowed and commanded swearing by God
himself. But the Gospel, which is a clarer promulgation of Gods will (must upon
the Bishops principles) have been such an obscure declaration of it, as leaves
it more dubious and difficult to be understood, as to the truth of it, then it
was before, extending one thing (in words) and in sense intending another.

2. Christ's own expressions, is well as James's in the affirmative part, show
his meaning in the negative to be a prohihition of all swearing as well as any:
And here we must take leave to leave seeing with the Bishops eyes, and follow
what we most clearly see with our own, and to use one of the Bishops
Argumentative Mediums to conclude the clean contrary to what he concludes from
it, and to argue with it against himself.

For whereas p. 31. the Bish. says, that his limited sense of Christ's words
against some swearing only, not all, was Christ's meaning in the negative part
of his words, appears and is proved by the affirmative part of them.

Answ. We shall shoot his own Arrow wherewith he thinks he has hit us, back
again to him out of his own bow, and say quite contrary to him thus, viz. that
the universal sense of Christ's words against all swearing, not some only, was
Christ's meaning in the negative part of his words, appears and is proved by the
affirmative part of them; which howbeit, he says, the Quakers themselves will
(he supposes) confess, must not be taken in an exclusive latitude, or a broad
universality of command; yet (ex fals^ supposuis) he much mistakes himself, for
the Quakers affirm that the affirmative parts of both their speeches, which
are, Let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for what ever is more then
that, is of evil: let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into
condemnation, must be taken in an exclusive latitute or broad way of command:
howbeit not indeed such an odd conceited kind of universality of command, as
the Bish. fancies as enjoins to use no other words in any communication, by way
of affirming or denyiag, but barely and only those syllables of yea, and nay:
for the Quakers (as very fools as the Bish. would make them) are not so silly
as to affect to use (as he fancies they do) those very Monosyllables, as if
they fancied themselves verbally tied to them, (any more then they fancy
themselves, (as some others do) syllabically tied no to patter over their Pater
noster in tot^lem verbis without variation from that individual form of words,
Mat. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Luke 11. 2, 3, 4. Our Father which art in heaven,
etc. which if men pray after that manner, or to that same effect, they may so
vary from, as to use different words; neither do the Quakers scruple to use
such paraphrases or enlargements of speech, as the matter or the parties
understanding, or diffidence may stand in need of, as God is witness, we speak
as in his presence, or the like.

But the Quakers affirm Christ's words must be taken (though not in such an
exclusive latitude, as to forbid more ample expressions of their sense, then
the bare syllables yea, and nay; or such an universality of command, as ties
precisely thereunto) yet in such universality of command, as limits Christians
to affirmations and negations, or solemn asseverations, without any Oath, and
in such an exclusive latitude, a^ shuts out all swearing whatsoever, even that
which once was, as well as that which never was lawful, on pain and perit of
falling into sin and condemnation ^ for these words, But let your
communication, that is, the whole of it not only private but public, be yea,
and nay; do not only import, that plainness, and simplicity of Christians
meaning and doing, as may be consenant to their words in truth and honesty,
without fraud or falfity; but also that forbearance and freedom of their
speech from all Oaths, by heaven, earth; or any other Oath, whether of old
forbidden or required; and that appears undeniably to any by its being brought
i^ in both Texts, by this adsative particle [But] by the emphasis of which it
stands opposed (as an affirmative to its negative) not only to those words
that are prohibitive of for swearing, viz. Thou shall not for swear thy self;
but to those sentences that are prohihitive of all Oaths; vi^. Swear not at
all, not by Heaven, nor Earth, nor any other Oath, but let your communication
be yea, nay, i. e. be without all Oaths; for what is more then that, i. e. then
solemn asseveration and negation, is of evil, which is as much as if he had
said, for whatsoever Oaths or swearings are used now, as well as for swearing,
comes of evil. Otherwise; if the affirmative part be interpreted, as standing
in opposition to that part of the negative only, that prohibits for swearing,
it must be such Tautological nonsense as ( absit) far be it from us to think
Christ should ever speak: Since then this must be the sense, viz. of old'twas
said, Thou shall not for swear thy self; but let your yea be yea, nay, nay;
that is, perform to God thy Oaths in truth and honesty, without fraud; but I
(who say more than was said of old) say unto you, Swear not at all, but perform
to God thy Oaths in truth and honesty, without fraud; which idem per idem
whoever utters, is found more in insano sensu, than insano: But the other way
it is sound sense, viz. I say unto you, swear not at all by any Oath, but let
your communication be yea and nay.

As then the affirmative part of Christ's words must be taken in such an
universality and latitude of command, as confines to bare, solemn
asseverations, assertions or denials exclusively of swearing by Heaven, Earth,
or any other Oath, when he says, But let your communication be yea, yea, nay,
nay.

So the negative part of his words, swear not at all, must be understood in
such an universally exclusive latitude, as admits of (...) Oaths whatsoever
among his Disciples.

3. The adversative particle [But] which stands between those two prohibitions
of Moses, saying, For swear not, but perform to God thine Oaths; and of Christ
saying, [But] I say unto you, Swear not at all, do little less than infallibly
manifest it. That Christ forbids all swearing, as much as any; and even such
swearing as was not indulged to them by the Pharisees only, but by Moses and
God himself, who by his servant dispensed with them in, and instituted even
their swearing by God's own Name, who never indulged, connived at, nor
dispensed with any of that Creature-swearing the Bishop talks of; but threatened
woes to it ever under the Law, and by the Law.

Otherwise again, if all Oaths be not forbidden by Christ, as well as any,
wherein (as to the point of swearing) does he prescribe a righteousness and
perfection above, or beyond that of his servant Moses, whom he was to exceed?
by which Moses God in the Law it self so universally forbad all other Oaths,
save solemn swearing by his own Name, that there was no more swearing left for
Christ to forbid his Disciples, than what Moses had before forbidden to his own
Disciples, if he might not forbid all that swearing by God himself which the
Law allowed of.

Besides the nonsense that he must be supposed to speak, if he forbid not some
swearing which of old was commanded, appears in the particle [ But] for thus it
must run (according to the Bishop's supposition) Ye have heard of old from
Moses in the Law, ye must not for swear your selves; But I (who forbid more
than Moses ever did) say thus unto you, Swear not at all by any of those Oaths
which Moses forbad before me, but only by such as he allows you. We say on
this account (as to swearing) Christ indulges and dispenses with as much as
Moses, and God under the Gospel, as much as God under the Law; for neither God
nor Moses in the Law, (however the Jews ( de facto used it) ever ( de sure)
indulged, allowed or approved of any irregular, profane, or Creature-swearing;
and God and Christ in the Gospel (at that rate the Bish. reckons) disallow no
other: The opposition then which lies intimated in that adversative particle [
But] being not between for swearing, and profane swearing, but between for
swearing then, and no swearing now, shows Christ's intent to be to prohibit all
swearing: For it is indeed as if he had said thus: God under the Law commanded
you to swear by his Name; and when you had sworn by him in truth, to perform
the Oaths ye made by him, whether to him, or any other.

But I say now, God allows you not to swear at all, nor by Heaven, Earth, nor
any other Oath, no not those Oaths which ye did, and might of old make unto the
Lord your God in things lawful (but no Oath by a creature did God count as an
Oath made to him any more than he counted their solemn Fastings to be unto him,
(...) ^. 5.) provided ye performed it when ye had done.

4. Christ does instance in the use of swearing by the Name of God virtually,
though not formally, whilst he instances in the use of snearing by Heaven,
Earth, etc. forasmuch as swearing by Heaven (as Christ says Matthew. 23. 22. is
a swearing by the Throne of God, and by him that sits thereon; therefore
swearing by God is implicitly, if not expressly excluded: And this the Bish.
himself also confesses, p. 30. viz. That even in those Oaths, which were
a^tested only by the naming of any c^eature, as by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem,
the head, etc. There was a tacit calling God to witness, which if there be,
then (according to the Bish. who says an Oath is no more than an attestation
of God, who is witness to all we say and do, p. 38.) swearing by the Name of
God, which was once allowed and required, is here excluded and prohibited.

But however that the Bish* may not have occasion to say we deal sophistically
with him, and not so sincerely and plainly a^ becomes the Truth, we will
confess with him, that that was but a kind of profane creature-swearing, an
irregular form of swearing by the Name of God, the Jews i^dulg'd themselves in,
which he also confesses with us, is here forbidden; seeing it was but a kind of
Tacit or implicit swearing by him, and not that plain express swearing by his
Name, which the Law commanded, while it for^ad the other. But what will the
Bishop be advantaged in his cause by this our concession, so long as he asserts
it is only this tacit swearing by God under the express attestation of some
creature, which the Jews were accustomed to, in the breach of which Oaths, they
deemed they did not forswear themselves, that is by Christ and James here
forbidden, for the reformation of which abuse only, and to reduce and restore
them to that right legal form of swearing only and expressly by God's Name,
Christ speaks thus, swear not at all? Nemp^ no more than the just censure of
fastening such an absurd sense upon their words, a^ we judge no wise m^n will
own to be the true sense of either Christ or the Apostle; for at that rate the
sense and sum of their words must be to this effect: Ye have heard it said to
you by the Law of old time* Ye shall not forswear your selves, but perform to
the Lord your God those Oaths which you made tacitly by him while ye s^are
rashly, ordinarily, commonly and expressly by some creature^ which Oaths by the
Creature, though they were a tacit* swearing by God, ye held your selves not
obliged to perform: But now I say unto you, swear not at all; I mean, swear no
more so tacitly, so implicitly by the name of God, as ye were wont to do, but
when ever ye (...) (provided ye perform your Oaths) swear out aloud* more
soundly, more expressly, more plainly, more openly by Gods Name than ye have
done formerly.

5. It Is evident enough by the Bishops own words, that as well solemn Oaths by
God himself, as those familiar Oaths by creatures (in which the Bish, says
they tacitly swear by God, are forbidden by Christ; for swear not at all is
(says the Bish. p. 20.) as much as to say, not by those Oaths in which you
make now no scruple to swear and forswear.

A^s. Which if so, then solemn Oaths by the Name of God expressly; being such
Oaths as in which the Jews made no scruple to swear and forswear, those are
forbidden as well as the other.

And whereas the Bish. tells us (as Philo and Josephus tell him) they pretended
a great reverence of the Name of God, and seemed to make great conscience of
swearing in leviculis, in small matters by the Name of the Lord, according to
the Letter of the Scripture, and made scruple to swear at all by ((...)) the *
Lord lives.

We say, they might well be scrupulous of taking the Name of God in vain upon
every trivial, frivolous matter, and so decline the mentioning of it, and fly
to the nomination of some creature, what The more shame therefore to Christians
(so called) that have no such great reverenes of the Name of God ((...) the
Jews had, whom they should exceed in strictness) but that they can swear in
every joy and trifle, by Gods Name, ^ thousand times, when they never* think on
him.
came next to mind and tongue. But in solemn and we^ghty cases of concern, and
in Iudicaturs, as they need not, it being so expressly required according to the
letter of the Law, so they did not scruple swearing by Gods own Name; The Name
(...) they might possibly scruple and strain at the naming of, (...) they did,
and do at the naming of the Name (...) Jehovah. But that Name Adonai they often
as superstitiously repeat that in their much babbling, as they superstitiously
decline so much as the bare mentioning of the other.

But that in serious cases and occasions of concern, a^ to that charity,
justice and equity they awed to others, they should decline, scrupl^ and (...),
(at the Bish. says they did, p. 19.) to swear by the Name of God, when their
Scripture was so express for it, and choose that way of Creature swearing,
there is not only no reason at all to believe it, but one grand Reason of the
Bishops own ( reasonless) rendering for it, but against himself, whereupon to
believe the contrary, viz. because (as the Bish. says, p. 19.) they fancied
such Oaths, being not with that solemnity of invocating Gods Name, not to be
binding upon their souls either as to truth or right, but they might play fast
and loose with them, according as their own pleasure and interest did sway
them; which if it have as much of truth in it, as it has of weight and
strength, has reason enough to persuade any reasonable men, that the Jews in
their solemn swearings in weighty matters, did not scruple nor wave swearings
by Gods Name (which Oaths they All thought binding and wave that swearing by
creatures in order to the satisfaction and security of each other, and by such
Oaths as they judged not to be so obligatory, but that they might safely either
break or keep them at their pleasure; for such Oaths instead of putting an end
unto their jealousies, distrusts, unsatisfactions, insecuritie^ would have
assuredly created them far more than before, forasmuch as no more credit is to
be given than to a Liar, toone that swears never so solemnly and in Iud^cature,
whose most solemn Oaths are such as the Swearer believes himself to be no more
bound by, than if he had not sworn at all, and such as by which the persons for
whose satisfaction and security such a one swears, can have no more hold as to
know what to trust to, then he has who holds a wet Ecl^ by the Tail. Beside
(not to use more words than need) the Bishop himself knocks the nail on the
head for us here; and (though against himself, as in most other cases) proves
it to our hands, that the Jews did not scruple to swear by Gods own Name; yea,
were so far from scrupling it, that in all cases they used it; Witness his own
words, p. 37. cited out of Drusius

Apud Iudaeos in Iudicils omnia Iuris-jurandi Religione (...), Dei, nomine
interposito* Drus. Among the Jews, all things in Judicials were confirmed by
the Religion of an Oath, wherein the Name of God was interposed.

And that they made no more scruple of forswearing, and nonperforming what they
swear to by the Name of God, than of forswearing or non-performing when and
what they rashly, profanely, irregularly, trivially, yet commonly swear to by
the Name of some creatuces, is evident also by the Bishops own words last
recited* for as much as a common swearer by other Oaths is commonly a false
swearer, when swearing seriously by God himself, the wontedness of easy and
ordinary swearing (as the By. observes out of Lactantius and Austin, p. 42.
Viz. (...) ne jurabit, ne vel (...) in perjurium cadat, Lact N^ facilitate
jurandi in perjurium prolabamur, Aust.
in cases never so true and honest, begetting a proneness to swear falsely: Nor
is there more credit to be given than to a liar, p. 17. to any that swears
never so solemnly, and in Judicature, who is a common swearer, etc.

The Bish. then confessing, that Christ forbids Matthew. 5. to swear by such
Oaths in which they made no scruple to swear and forswear, therein confesses
Oaths by the Name of God (which were commanded in the Law) to be by Christ
forbidden there, as well as other Oaths, since the Jews made not so much
scruple as he imagines to swear by God, nor yet (being common swearers also, by
any thing that came next to heart and tongue) to lie and break those their
oaths by creatures when they had done.

And finally, if Christ's words were exclusive and prohibitive of all irregular
oaths by creatures, because those they scrupled not to make, but inclusive and
exceptive of solemn Oaths, in solemn cases, by Gods Name upon this score,
because they scrupled to swear by them: Then ( ecce mentem) the mind of Christ
in those words must be this, viz. Ye have heard of old, ye should not forswear
your selves, but perform your oaths to God; but I say unto you, swear not at
all by those oaths in which ye now make no scruple to swear; but swear only by
such Oaths in which ye now do make scruple to swear; which sense he that can
find any sound sense, seriousness, or solidity in*

-- Erit hic mihi Magnus Apollo. Having thus at last sawn ^sunder, and broke to
pieces that supposed strong, but really rotten Stilt which bore the stress of
the Bishop's Cause against the Quakers in the case of swearing, viz. his mere
conjectural, and more common than proper Commentations upon those (...)
scriptures, Matthew* 5. Jam. 5. out of which from that universal prohibition of
all swearing therein expressed, he would fain except some solemn swearing, at
least in Judicial proceedings: We leave them rightly rendered by us, to the
review of all reasonable and understanding men, by whom they will be seen to
stand against all the Canon-shot which the Bish. has shattered out against
them (some of which has done most execution upon himself) as that strong hold
out of which the Quakers cannot be stormed, so as to surrender that Interest
they have therein, as to their Plea for no swearing among true Christians; and
as Iachin and Boaz, that stood as strength and stability it self, before the
true spiritual Temple of the Lord, against the faces of all that would enter to
defile it with their own inventions and impositions in point of Oaths.

And as for that which he says (p. 26.) he adds to his Reasons ( by way of
f^ll measure, heaped up, and running over) viz. the conc^rrent Judgment of
other Christians and Churches:

It Is true, he fills up his measure, (for his Reasons are too short to hold
out) by heaping up the sayings of many Christians, which are so far from such
concurrence as he speaks of, that indeed they rather run against, and concur to
the contradicting of one another, some (if not most of them, as is showed
above) testifying more plainly and groundedly against all swearing, than the
rest whom the Bishop sides with, do for any swear^g.

Seeing then there remains no more to make up his scanty measure with, but the
empty husk and ^haff of words of some Councils and Churches of Romanists and
Reformists; and of Christians, (perhaps not truly such) whose saying^ are
profligated by many wise man, ancient Fathers and Christians of the Bishops
citing, perhaps more truly such, we shall save our selves and the world the
labor respectively of writing and reading what is of as little value with as,
is it is of small importance to the purpose.

And now at last seriously and solemnly again professing as at first that the
Bishops undertakings (not for want of willingness in (...) to see it to be
truth, if that were the truth indeed, which is pleaded by him against the
Qudkers, but for want of true demonstration in ^ll he says to show it so to
be) has not succeeded to either the removing of our difficulties, or
satisfaction of our (...), that any swearing at all is either needed, or ought
to be used among us, or any that are Christians (truly such) under the Gospel,
though under that dispens^tion of the Law, some swearing was then (...) with,
which was the professed, immediate end of his Book, and the (...) of those ten
particulars of which his Work to usward (if ever effectually accomplished) does
consist.

We 10thly and lastly, appeal to all wise and sober-minded men, who shall
impartially peruse and weigh what is abovesaid, Whether in this case of our
non-conviction by the Bishop's as defective as successess endeavors to inform
us, or of our nonsubscription to his conception, and non-submission to swear
against conviction, according to the foresaid Impo^ition, we are undoubtedly
without more ado to be denominated such wilful resisters, and Obstinate
offend^rs against the Law, as worthily fall under the severe penalties of the
late Act, whereby (though yet contrary to the te^or and true intent thereof, in
respect of their execution, who never heed that Maxim in Law, that Iudicium
penale nunquam excedit casum) we now so sorely suffer; and also whether we
suffer in so doing so justly as to be left without Plea for our selves, and
without any just excuse before both God and Man.

Nevertheless however the second page of the Bishops Book speaks out his
ultimate design to be (in case our difficulties be not so re^ov'd by this
course of his discourse concerning public Oaths* that we can swallow such
Swearings without streining, as fast as they are imposed on us) that we may
inexcusably suffer severity for our obstinacy; yet seeing in the close of his
Book he says at least, he has no design to usward, but to dispel our
needless scruples and superstitious fears (as he calls them) to show us our
safe liberty to obey, and how we may escape the penalties for disobeying the
Laws, etc. In answer to which, he expects his pains and charity should be
accepted.

We declare, That his pains is full as Acceptable to us called Quakers, as that
pity to us, and charity he pretends to, is True and Real, (which how far forth
it is, we leave to God and his own Conscience to judge of) Though first it has
not obtained its professed end to usward, so far as to clear our
understandings, any other than the clean contrary way to what he aims at, by
the sight of how little Demonstration the Bishops are able to make for that
swearing they consent and concur to have imposed: Nor 2dly, to remove our
scruples, since (as was said) we we were before without scruple or doubt of it,
that our denial of that swearing that is imposed on us, is lawful and right
before God, howere it seems so or so in the sight of men: Nor 3dly, so as to
reduce us to our due obedience, for we are not out of it, seeing as if swearing
be not lawful before God, it is due obedience to him not to obey men actively,
who impose it And so says the Bishop himself, p. 11. No Laws of men contrary
to Gods Word, are to be actively obeyed.
, so if Swearing were lawful, yet at least our Consciences being not convinced
that it is, we obey God, to whom (as the Bishop says page 23.) we Christians
owe the highest love, loyalty and obedience; our obedience to whom cannot be
disobedience to those Laws of men that are just and agreeable to his Laws, and
besides where we obey not Actively, we do it Passively, by suffering violence
without making any violent resistance, which Passive obedience all wise men own
to be true obedience, as well as Active. Nor 4thly, so as to rectify our
Judgments, which were once irregular, when we made no Conscience thereof, but
returned to their rectitude, when we became so tender as to fear an Oath. Nor
5thly* so as to stop that, which he is pleased (not for want of mistake, error
and superstition) to miscall the contagion of our error and superstition, to
others in this point; for we are persuaded many will be convinced (as well as
some are already confirmed) against all swearing, seeing how little the Bishops
have to say, and show in confirmation of it. Nor 6thly, so as to the redeeming
us from the penalties of the Law; for they are now with full measure heaped up,
and running over, even beyond the bounds of the Law it self, executing and
insticting upon several of us. Nor 7thly and lastly, so as to redeem us into
safety and peace; for howbeit we seem in the eyes of the unrighteous, and of
some Religious ones, to be in danger of perishing in our troubles; yet (come
what evil can come to us for our Consciences) we ^earkening still unto Christ
dwell safely, and are at quiet from the fear of evil, being (as the same Seed
and sort of Saints before us also were, 2 Cor 4.) though Troubled on every
side, yet not distressed, Perplexed, yet not in despair, Persecuted, yet not
forsaken, Cast down, yet not destroyed.

Dated and Dedicated in service to the Truth, in the Month called July 1662. by
Samuel Fisher, imprisoned for Conscience by the space of about Fifteen Months
of the two years last past, First in the Counter, 2dly, In Newgate. 3dly, In
the Gate House. 4thly, In Old-Bridewell. 5thly, Now in Newgate again; Where
(without the least Crime proved against him, or so much as said to his charge)
he stands (with many more so recorded in the very Calender) discharged by the
Kings late special favor, notwithstanding which he is not released, but
retained.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the first part, in the Epistle, p 5 l 30, for yet r. yea, p 2 l 39 r.
tentanda, p. 8 l. 7. r. in it, p. 9. l. 8. r was at least, ^. 9. ^. 30. r. that
he is, p. 11. l. 37. and p. 12. l 2. r. obstinacy* p. 13. l. 4. r graviore, p.
14. l. 12. for his r. their, p. 16. l. 31. for (...) r. declining, p. 20. l.
27. r. ungue, p. 21. l. 3. r to the Bishops, p. 24 l. 3^. r. to sweeten, p. 32
l. 9 r. do, p. 34 l. 4 r. redarguit, p. 37 l. 9 r. what he has, p. ^* l. 29 r.
Agitator, p. 85 l. 21 r Dictatorem, p. 89 l. 25 r. (...).

In the second part, p. 4 l. 9 r presumed, l 13 r. frivoulosity, p. 9 l. 29 r.
inventitious, p. 13 l. 15 r. Christians, p. 16 l. 3. read (...) p. 21, l. 19
for by in. r. in by, p. 21 l. 20 for in r. is, p 25 l. 4, for we, r. they, p.
25 l. 7 for of, r. of old, p. 27 l. 38 r. ( is, p 2) l. 14 ^ Diali, p. 30 l. 20
for is all, r. is in all, p. 41 l. 33 ^. Petitionem, p. 44 l. 39 r signifies,
p. 45 l 11 for (...) r. (...) p. 50 l. 13 r. yet not, l 16 r. yet are so, l. 18
r. makes. l. r 9* r. him, p. 55. l. 12 r. dispersation, p. 56. l, 23. r. as
well as, p. 62. l. 13. for wave, r. use.

READER,
Find no fault with what faults thou find'st with the Press;
Correct the greater thus, the rest lack less.

