Salt Water Sweetened; Or, a TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Great Advantages Of this NEW
INVENTION BOTH BY Sea and by Land:

TOGETHER With a Full and Satisfactory Answer to all Apparent Difficulties.

ALSO THE Approbation of the COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS.

LIKEWISE A LETTER of the Honorable Robert Boil to a Friend upon the same
Subject.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the New-Exchange in
the Strand. MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty
SIR,
WHen Mr. Boil, with my Partners, and my self attended your Majesty with the
Experiment of Reducing Salt Water into Fresh; your Majesty seemed so well
pleased with an Invention of that Universal Benefit, That We cannot but with
our Humblest Duty, acknowledge your Garcious Reception of it; However as your
Great Wisdom, and Judgment is not easy to be surpised, and your Royal
Approbation never known to be your hasty Act of Grace; your Favor and
Patronage was not fully obtained, till with the strictest Scrutiny you had
first examined those Hopes and Probabilities, you vouchsafed to Encourage in Us.

But when upon further consideration, We had obviated all Difficulties, and
salv'd all Objections against this Undertaking, (which We hope will appear in
this Printed Paper,) your Majesty was Graciously pleased to give us your
Approbation, and to Order Us your Letters Patents, which Grace and Favor,
ought to be, and is received by Us with the deepest sense of our humble
Acknowledgements and Gratitude.

And if the Fruits of your Royal Grant has not hitherto been derived to Us,
it is partly by some Obstacles we met from the suggestions of a private Person,
but more especially by the late Horrid Conspiracy, when, not only our Loyal
apprehensions for your Majesty's Danger, diverted our Thoughts from all other
Concerns, but likewise we judged it a part of our Duty not to be pressing on
your Majesty's Goodness, or on your Ministers of State in so Important a
juncture of Affairs: But having now re-gain'd Leisure and Freedom after the
dissipation of the greatest part of our Fears, We presume a second time to lay
these Endeavors at your Feet, as best Entitled to the Patronage of so great
an Undertaking by your own Subjects, and best able to Recommend it to the World
by your Royal Approbation.

This Experiment is in a great degree owing to the Eminent Mr. Boil, and
indeed well worthy so Ingenious a Promoter, being so much the more the
Favorite of his happy Genius, as it is Universally useful to Mankind; But what
ever Advantages this Country, or indeed the World may receive by it, his whole
ambition is bounded in the public profit, contenting himself with no other
Benefit from it, than the satisfaction and pleasure of seeing it accomplished
by his Friends.

The Advantages in regard to Navigation, especially in long Voyages, which are
subject (through often Calms, and on several other accounts,) to distress for
want of Water, and the benefits to Sea-Towns, which are incommodated by
Brackish Waters, Together with the Easiness, Cheapness and Wholsomness of this
prepared Water, are the principal scope of these ensuing Papers, which are
Humbly Dedicated to your Majesty's Perusal, Favor, and further Approbation by,

Your Majesty's most Dutiful, and Obedient Subject, R. FITZGERALD.

The foregoing Dedication Humbly offered to His Majesty, having discovered the
Intention of this Undertaking; it remains now to satisfy all Reasonable
Scruples which have been raised concerning the Wholesomeness and Cheapness of
Water thus Prepared.
The Queries and Answers follow.
Quest. 1. IF this Water can be made in sufficient quantities to serve the Uses
of any Ship at Sea?

Ans. About Ninety Gallons may be Prepared in every Twenty Four Hours by an
Instrument of 33 Inches Diameter, which will stand under the Deck of any Ship;
and it is computed that less than 3 Quarts is a good Allowance for any man in
that time: And if a large Ship, wherein there are many men abroad, should
require more Water, then two or more of the Instruments may be had upon
Reasonable Terms, and one man may attend several of them.

Quest* 2. In case the Operation be by Fire, it may require a Skilful Chemist,
or one known in such Operations to be on Board every Ship, who will require
great Wages?

Ans. There will be no occasion for any such person, for any Seaman may be
Instructed in an Hour or two to Prepare this Water.

Quest. 3. It Is probable that the Engine may be frequently out of Order, and
being so at Sea where Artificers and Tools are wanting to Repair it, there must
necessarily follow want of Water, which will be of Ill Consequence?

Ans. This Engine is of such Contrivance, that it is never likely to be out of
Order.

Quest. Can this Engine be of use in Stormy-weather?

Ans. Since a sufficient quantity of Fresh Water may be so easily had by this
Engine, the Mariners will be Careful to make a good Provision of it
beforehand; however it is not to be doubted but it will answer the worst
Accidents of the greatest Storms, and have its Effect sufficiently in the worst
Weather, especially considering that in such desperate Extremities men must be
content with smaller Allowances.

Quest. 5, The Operation being by Fire it may endanger the Ship, and the Smoke
be very offensive?

Ans. The Engine may easily be placed in any Ship without danger of Fire, or
offense of Smoke.

Quest. 6. Will not the Charge of this Instrument and the Materials belonging
to it be very great?

Ans. It is difficult to make exact Answer to this, but an Instrument of the
largest Size, with all the Materials belonging to it, will not amount to above
Sixteen Pound at most, and may last many years, and according to the Rates of
Ships they may be proportioned both in Bulk and Price.

Quest. 7. Will not the Fuel be very Chargeable, and take up much Room in the
Ship?

Ans. This Operation is caused by so little Fire, that it will be very Cheap,
and the Provision need not be great, nor the trouble of Stowing it in a Ship.

Quest. 8. Will not the Ingredients take up much Room, and be very Chargeable.

Ans. A Vessel less than a Barrel may contain enough of the Ingredients to
carry a Ship to the Indies and back again; and the Ingredients for one hundred
Gallons of this Seawater will not amount to above Fourteen Pence at most.

Quest. 9. Admitting this Preparation of Water may be made, and in sufficient
quantities, it may be doubted whether it be whole some?

Ans. The Famous Lord Bacon having written Learnedly of this Subject, had not
the least thought that the Seawater after it had been Diss-salted, without any
Noxious addition, was Unwholesome, and it neither now is, nor ever was really
doubted whether it were Wholesome: However, because invidious persons, who are
no well-wishers to Ingenious Designs, may possibly raise Scruples, the
Gentlemen who are concerned in this Grant, have purposely to give Public
Satisfaction, sent a large quantity of this Water to Doctor King, a very
Ingenious Physician, who is a Member of the College, and of the Royal Society,
who finds. 1. That it is Lighter than most of the Waters about the Town. 2.
That it is without Sediment and Transparent as any other Waters. 3. That it
Lathers, (as they call it,) with Wash-Ball or Soap, better than other Water,
and with less Soap. 4. That Sugar dissolveth sooner in it, than in other Water.
5. That it Evaporates sooner than common Water* 6. That whereas common Water
Putrifies, and yields a Stinking Smell within a few Weeks, this has continued
Sweet and unaltered several Months, and may yet do so much longer, being still
in as good condition as it was above four Months ago. 7. That it makes Gellies
as firm and good as any Water. 8. That it Boils Pease to Tenderness, Beef,
Mutton, Fish, and all other Meat, without giving it an ill Taste or Color. 9.
That it has no kind of ill Taste in it self, and Boils in Milk without Curling.
10. That Flowers, Plants, and all Vegetables grow in it at least as well as any
other Water. And that small Animals Live and grow in it.


Several men of great Quality, viz. The Earls of Shrewsbury, Westmorland,
Mulgrave, the Lord Dunbar, Lord Lumley, Lord Falconbridge, and Lord Chumley,
besides several Gentlemen of Quality, Officers of Sea and Physicians have Drunk
of this Water without being in the least indisposed after it; but lest any
doubts may remain, after this of the Salubrity of the said Water, the following
Testimonial of these Learned and Eminent Physicians is here inserted.

The Approbation of the College of Physicians, and of other Doctors of
Physic, Practicing in and about London.
WHereas we have received an account in a Gazet published some months since,
that the Honorable Robert Fitzgerald Esquire; has found out the way and means of
reducing Salt Water into Fresh, in quantities sufficient to serve Ships at Sea.
And forasmuch as some persons may possibly make a doubt, if the said Water be
wholesome after the Salt is taken out of it. We therefore considering of what
general advantage, this useful Experiment may be, having fully informed our
selves from Mr. Boil, that the said Experiment is made by Fire. And having
also seen an account of some Experiments made by some Members of our own Body
to declare Our opinion, that We believe the said Water is very wholesome, and
may be safely used. And being further acquainted by the said Mr. Boil, that
the very few Ingredients made use of in the said Operation, are fixed in the
Fire, and give no noxiout quality to the Water; We are therefore of Opinion
that the same may be safely used, and is at least as Healthy as any other Water
used at Sea. All which We certify (at the Request of the Honorable Robert
Fitzgerald.)

Dr. Cox President, Sir C. Scarborough Knt. Dr. Daniel Whistler, Dr, Weatherly,
Dr. Will Denton, Sir T. Millington Knt. Dr. Walter Needham, Dr. Thomas Short,
Dr. Thomas Allen, Dr. Edmond Dickingson, Dr. William Croone, Dr. Richard Lower,
Dr. John Windebank, Dr. Daniel Cox, Dr. James Rupine, Dr. Charles Conquest, Dr.
Edmond King, Dr, Willoughby, Dr. Thomas Sydenham, Dr, Edward Tyson, Dr,
Nehemiah Grew, Dr. David Ahercromby. Dr, Andrew Creagh,


Though Physic has always Flourished in this Kingdom, yet in this Age it is in
greater perfection than ever; being improved both as to the Practical and
Speculative part, by the present Fellows of the Famous College of Physicians;
who being Men of great Practice and Eminent Learning, cannot but give full
satisfaction to all such as inquire concerning the healthfulness of this Water,
Their Opinion being in this particular, the more valuable, because it is Their
own disadvantage; since the Brackish Waters of the Seacoast, and the putrifyed
Waters made use of at Sea, might probably have afforded them a great number of
Patients, which may hereafter be lessened by the use of this wholesome Water.

The Benefits and Advantages of Seawater made Fresh.
MUch Stowage will be saved, so that a Ship of 50 or 60 Tun and proportionably
of greater Bulk may take in several Tuns of Goods more than they formerly used
to carry; which will considerably advance the Trade of all Merchants, and be of
vast profit to the Masters or Owners of Ships.

The Charge of Casks is very considerable, especially when bound with Iron, as
all Sea-Casks must be; And by means of this Engine, three fourths of that
charge will be saved.

The tear and wear of Boats often going from Shipboard, and frequent loss of
the Boats and men in Stormy weather, and the opportunity of the Sea-mens being
Drunk on shore; by which many fatal accidents do happen, (by means of having
this Water-Engine) will be prevented.

Ships in long Voyages have been forced to run many Leagues from their intended
course, which much retards their Voyage, and makes them lose fair winds, and
maintain more Seamen at charges of Diet and Wages than they have occasion for;
which inconveniences may be prevented by having water within themselves.

Ships are often forced to leave their Ankors and Cables behind them, by being
forced into dangerous Shoars upon account of taking in Fresh water.

In the Affrican East and West India Voyages, great quantities of Fresh water
are necessary, which the Seamen are forced to put above Deck for want of room,
which is great hindrance to a Ships Sailing, and much endangers and weakens a
Ship in case of Calms, which often happen in the narrow Seas, but especially
near the Line, this Instrument will be of vast Advantage by affording fresh and
wholesome Water, instead of that which is unwholsom and offensive.

Essex, Kent, and all other the Sea Coasts, that want wholesome Water, may be
easily and cheaply supplied by this means; as also Venice, Amsterdam, Roterdam,
and all other places that lie near the Sea, and either want good, or have
Brackish Water.

In time of war, whole Navies may be relieved by this Engine, and opportunity
given of making the greatest discoveries imaginable.

It is further to be considered, that hitherto the richest and ablest bodied
Seamen have been averse from undertaking long Voyages by reason of endangering
their healths, and lives, by making use of putrified Water, which inconvenience
is not now to be feared there being such useful hopes of Fresh Water by the use
of this Engine, and possibly a smaller number of men may serve the use of Ships
then do at present, by which much Charges will be saved to the Masters and
Owners of Ships; and Merchants may Trade upon easier Terms.

A LETTER of Mr. BOYLES, to the Learned DR. JOHN BEALE Fellow of the Royal
Society, concerning Fresh Water made out of Seawater, Printed at the desire of
the Patentees.
SIR,
TO give you a short account (suitable to the little time I have to do it in,)
of the Transaction, which I suppose must have given the rise to the mention
made of my Name in the public Gazet; I must inform you, that one of my nearest
Relations, (Captain Fitzgerald,) and some other Worthy Gentlemen, having
acquainted His Majesty, that They had an Invention for making Seawater, sweet
and wholesome in great quantity, and with small Charge, and that I had examined,
and did approve the Water so prepared; His Majesty was pleased with very
Gracious Expressions, to command Me to attend Him, with a further and more
particular Information. Having readily obeyed this Order, and been made
acquainted with the Objections the King thought fit to make against the
Practicableness of the Invention; which, (tho a private Man had urged them,) I
should think the most Judicious that have been framed against it, I Humbly
represented to him, that I looked upon this Invention as Comprizing two
differing things; a Mechanical part, which related to the Engine it self, and
the use of it a Shipboard, and a Physical part which concerns the Potableness
and Wholsomness of the Liquor. About the former of these I did not pretend to
clear the Difficulties, especially such strong ones, as His Majesty had
proposed; but left it to the Patentees to give Him Satisfaction, which they
were in a readiness to offer. But as to the Wholsomness of the prepared Water,
I had made some Trials upon that Liquor, which gave me no just grounds of
suspecting it to be unwholesome, but several motives to believe it well
conditioned, and of great use to Navigators, and not to them only. And having
hereupon briefly acquainted His Majesty with the chief Trials I had made to
examine this Sweetened Water, He was pleased to look upon them as Satisfactory,
and [vouchsaf^d on that occasion to discourse as a Virtuoso of the Sea and
Brackish-Waters, and gave me some new, as well instructive Observations about
them: and in conclusion, dismis'd the Patentees with a Gracious Promise of His
Royal Protection, and peculiar Favor.

To this short Narrative it now remains, that I briefly Subjoyn the chief
things that persuaded me of the Salubrity of this Water, whence may be justly
and easily inferred, the Utility the Public may receive by a cheap and easy
way of preparing it.) First, then I considered that almost all the Rainwater
that falls from the Clouds on the Main Ocean, and which (except perhaps in very
few places in torrid Climates) is unquestionably received as wholesome, must be
afforded by the Sea, and consequently be but Seawater freed from its Salt
(according to the Famous Motto, Redit Agmine dulci) Next I found, (as His
Majesty Himself had done,) that the Liquor was well tasted, and without any
sensible Brackishness; and so some of it continued for between 4 or 5 Months in
a large Crystal Bottle, that I purposely kept un-stopt, and for the most part
in a South Window, where it neither did, nor probably in a long time, will
putrify, or so much as appear troubled or less transparent; during which time
it was with Approbation tasted and smelled by several Learned Physicians of the
Famous College of London. Thirdly, I found it laver very well, which most
Pump-waters, and many others that have some little (though unperceived) common
Salt in them, will not do. Fourthly, this Water will boil Pease tender, which
amongst Seamen is one of the principal signs of good Water. Fifthly, In very
good Balances with an Instrument that I purposely caused to be made for the
nice weighing of Liquors, I found this Water far less heavy than one would
expect, for if it differed at all in weight from the like quantity of
undistil'd Water, (I speak with an If, because it is far more difficult to be
exact in such nice Trials, than the unpractic'd will imagine) the difference
was not considerable, being but 1 part in 400; and that difference is very
small in comparison of that which Navigators and Learned Authors relate to be
observable in natural Waters, all of them good and potable: I might tell you on
this occasion; that the last great Duke of Tuscany, who was an Eminent
Virtuoso, and the Patron of the Celebrated Academy of the Lyncean Philosophers
is affirmed among other prudent courses that he took for his Health, whereof he
was very Solicitous to have constantly made use of Distilled Water for his own
Drinking. And I could add other things favorable enough to the Patentees
Water, if Haste, and perhaps Discretion too, did not oblige me to leave them
yet unmention'd, that I might now have time to say somewhat of the main thing
of all that convinced me of the Saltlessness of the Water I speak of. I
considered then, Sixthly, That the thing that was aimed at by those Ingenious
men, that at differing times, and in several Countries have attempted to make
Seawater Sweet, and the thing that was requir^d by proposing Recompenses, or
otherwise to Encourage the Makers of such Attempts, was to Free the Seawater
from the Brackishness without any Noxious Additament: so that on all sides it
was taken for granted, that the only thing that kept the Seawater from being
safely Potable, was its Brackishness. From which Reflection it was natural for
Me to infer a Conclusion very favorable to our prepared Water: For having long
since written a short Discourse of the Saltness of the Sea; I had been
Industrious to devise ways of comparing Waters in point of Brackishness. And by
these I found the Patentees Water to be more free from Common-salt, than Waters
that are usually Drunk here in London, of which I remember I showed those
Gentlemen an Experiment that surpised as well as convinced them. And that
which more satisfied me my self, was a Trial that I carefully made by a way
which having mentioned, but not yet (for want of opportunity disclosed to His
Majesty, the Respect I owe Him forbids me to impart without His leave: On which
account I hope you I be content to be at present assured, of these two Things;
One, that by this way of Trial, I found, (what possibly you will think
strange;) that if there were in Water, so much as one Grain of Salt, in above
two Ounces of Water, I could readily discover it. The other, that even by this
Critical Examen, I could not detect so much as a Thousandth part of Salt in Our
Prepared Water; whereas I found by Trials purposely and carefully made, that
our English Seawater contained a 44, or 45th. part of good dry Salt; or, which
is all one, that 44 Pints, or near so many Pounds of Marine Water, would yield
about one Pound of dry Common-Salt.

Thus Sir, you have a short and Art-less Account, such as my have will permit,
and the nature of the Subject requires, of my part in promoting this Profitable
Invention; to which I own my self a great well-wisher, not out of any private
Interest (tho that was obligingly proffered me by the Patentees,) but as I
think the bringing it into general use may prove a real Service to Mankind,
upon the Score of diverse Utilities and Advantages, which yet, (though I had
leisure,) I should think very needless to enumerate to so discerning a Person
as Dr. B. to whom I shall therefore hasten to Subscribe my self, etc.

An Affectionate Friend and Servant R. Boil.

THe Gentlemen Concerned in this Grant, are the Honorable Robert Fitzgerald,
Colonel Oglethorp, Mr. Bridgeman, Mr. Thomas Maul, and Mr. Patrick Trant, who
intending the General Good as well as their Private Advantage in this Design,
do intend as soon as these Papers be made public, to agree with all such as
are willing to deal with them for the Instruments and Ingredients; which
concerning so nearly the Lives and Healths of men, shall be carefully made up
under such sure and private marks, that it shall be very hard (if possible) to
Counterfeit them.

If any Corporation, Body of People, or Private Persons, are willing to be
concerned herein, they may please to direct their Letters to any of the
Patentees beforementioned, at Garaway's Coffee-house over against the
Royal Exchange, or at Will's Coffee-house in Bow-street in Covent Garden, or to
Mr. John Pie in Brook-street near Holbourn, who is the Person appointed by the
Patentees to receive such Papers as are intended for them.


