By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION, For Putting in Execution the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, for the Preventing the Exportation of Wool,
Wooll-Fells, Woollen Yarn, Morthings, Shorlings, Wooll-Flocks, Fullers Earth,
Fulling Clay, and Tobacco-Pipe Clay out of this Kingdom.
Tho. Cantuar. Summers C. Dorsett, Romney, Cha. Montague.

WHereas many Good Laws have been made for Preventing the Transportation of
Wool, Wooll-Fells, Morthings, Shorlings, Woollen Yarn, Wooll-Flocks, Fullers
Earth and Fulling Clay out of the Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, or any the Isles, Ports, Creeks or Places thereof, into
the Kingdom of Scotland, or other Parts beyond the Seas, under the Penalties of
Forfeiting Three Shillings for every Pound Weight of the Commodity so Exported,
and of Forfeiting such Wool, or other Commodities, and the Horses, Cattle,
Carriages, Ship and Vessel, Employed in the Carrying the same, and Treble the
Value of the Wool, or other the said Commodities, is Case such Wool or other
Commodity exceed Ten Pounds in Value, otherwise the Sum of Twenty Pounds, to be
Recovered of the Inhabitants of the respective Hundreds next Adjoining to the
said Kingdom of Scotland, or to the Sea Coast out of or through which any
Wool, or any other of the Commodities aforesaid, shall be Carried or Exported,
by such Person as will Sue for the same, and of Three Years Imprisonment
without Bail or Mainprize, upon any Person or Persons who shall be Aiding,
Abetting or Assisting the Carrying or Transporting any such Wool, or other the
Commodities aforesaid, and under several other Penalties and Forfeitures in the
said Laws and Statutes contained. And whereas for the Encouragement of such
Persons who shall make Discovery of any the said Offenses, several Rewards are
Appointed by the said Acts (viz.) the Treble Value of the Wool, and other the
said Commodities Transported, in Case the same be of greater Value than Ten
Pounds, and the Sum of Twenty Pounds in Case the said Wool, so Transported, be
under the Value of Ten Pounds; which Penalties are by the said Laws to be
Recovered of the Inhabitants of the respective Hundreds aforesaid, for the sole
Use and Benefit of such Person as will Sue for the same, together with Treble
Costs of Suit. And for the further Encouragement of Persons to Discover the
said Offenses, It is by the said Laws Provided, That the First Three Persons
who have been Aiding, Abetting or Assisting in Carrying out or Exportation of
Wool, or any other the Commodities aforesaid, that shall Inform thereof any
Justice of the Peace in either of the several Counties next Adjoining to the
Kingdom of Scotland, or to the Sea Coast, whereby the Punishment and Penalties
thereby Appointed, may be Inflicted and Recovered, the Party or Parties so
Discovering, not being Owner or Part Owners of the said Wool, or other
Commodities aforesaid, shall not suffer any of the said Penalties or
Punishments. And whereas by an Act made the Last Session of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for the Explanation and better Execution of former Acts made
against Transportation of Wool, Fullers Earth and Scouring Clay, It Is amongst
other things Enacted, That after the Twenty fourth Day of June, One thousand
six hundred ninety and eight, no Fullers Earth or Scouring Clay shall be
Exported out of this Kingdom, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
into Ireland, Scotland, or into any other Foreign Parts upon any Pretense
whatsoever, upon Penalty of Forfeiting One Shilling for every Pound Weight so
Exported: And that all Owners of Wool Shorn or Laid up within Ten Miles of the
Sea side, within the Counties of Kent and Sussex, shall give an Exact Account
in Writing, within Three Days after the Shearing thereof, of the Number of
Fleeces, and where Lodged or Housed to the next Adjoining Port, or Officer of
His Majesty's Customs, and the like Notice before they shall Remove any Part
thereof, of the said Number of Fleeces and Weight, and the Name and Abode of
the Persons to whom it is Disposed, and the Place to which it is intended to be
Carried, and to take a Certificate from the Officer who first Entered the same,
upon the Penalty of Forfeiting all the Wool as shall not be so Entered, or
otherwise disposed of; The Owner also to be Liable to the Penalty of Three
Shillings for every Pound Weight of all such Wool, as if the same had been
actually Transported; And that no Persons Residing within Fifteen Miles of the
Sea in the said Counties of Kent and Sussex, shall Buy any Wool before they
Enter into Bond to the Kings Majesty with Sureties, That such Wool shall not
be Sold by them to any Person within Fifteen Miles of the Sea; And in Case any
Wool be found Carrying toward the Sea side in the said Counties, unless such
Wool be first Entered and Security given, the same shall be Forfeited, and the
Person or Persons Offending therein, shall also Forfeit Three Shillings for
every Pound Weight of all such Wool. And it is thereby further Enacted, That
no Wool Removed from the Place where it was first Housed or Lodged after
Shearing, within Ten Miles of the Sea, shall be Lodged after the first Removing
within Fifteen Miles of the Sea in the said Counties, upon Pain of Forfeiting
all such Wool, if found, but if Carried away, then the Owners of the said
Wool to Forfeit, for every Pound Weight, the Sum of Three Shillings; And that
all Persons that shall Lay, or Cause to be Laid or Hid, any Wool, within
Fifteen Miles of the Sea, and not Entered, as aforesaid, all such Wool shall be
Seized and Forfeited. And whereas for the better Encouragement of Persons who
shall Discover and Prosecute such Offenders, one Third Part of the said
Forfeitures and Penalties is by the said Act given to the Use of His Majesty,
His Heirs and Successors, and the other Two Parts to the Use of such Persons as
shall Seize or Sue for the same. And whereas for the better Preventing the
Carrying of Wool out of this Kingdom into Scotland, It is thereby Enacted,
That after the said Twenty fourth day of June, every Owner of Wool Shorn, Laid
up, or Lodged within Fifteen Miles of the Borders of Scotland, shall give an
exact Account of his, her or their Number of Fleeces, and where Lodged or
Housed, to such Persons as shall be Appointed for that purpose, pursuant to the
Direction of an Act of Parliament made in the First Year of His present Majesty
and the late Queen, Entitled, An Act for the better Preventing the Exportation
of Wool, and Encouraging the Woollen Manufactures of this Kingdom; and in case
any Owner of such Wool shall Neglect or Refuse to give such Account, or shall
after such Notice given, Remove such Wool, or any part of it, without License
from the Person who shall have made such Entry, shall Forfeit Three Shillings
for every Pound Weight of such Wool; and that Wool that shall found within
the Distance aforesaid of the Borders of Scotland, not Entered, as aforesaid, is
thereby Enacted to be Forfeited, One Third Part to His Majesty, the other Two
Parts to him or them who shall Sue for the same. Notwithstanding which good
Laws, many Persons evily Disposed to the Welfare of this Kingdom, have
presumed, and do daily presume, in defiance of His Majesty's Government and the
Laws aforesaid, not only Clandestinely, but by open Force and Violence, with
Armed Companies of Men, to Convey and Transport the Commodities aforesaid, into
Scotland and Parts beyond the Seas, and also to Rescue the same out of the
Hands and Possession of the Officers of His Majesty's Customs, and others
Acting in their Aid, when by Virtue of His Majesty's Authority the said
Commodities have been Seized; and in Riotous and Tumultuous manner have Beaten
and Wounded the said Officers, and those Acting in their Assistance. We
therefore taking the same into Our Serious Consideration, and duly weighing the
evil Consequence thereof to the Woollen Manufacture of this Kingdom; And to the
end that all Persons may be informed of the several Laws aforesaid, and of the
severe Penalties and Forfeitures thereby inflicted upon such as shall be Guilty
of Transporting of Wool, or other Commodities aforesaid, and of the several
Ways and Methods thereby Prescribed for Prevention of the same, and that all
His Majesty's Loving Subjects may be Informed also of the several Rewards and
Encouragements given by the said Laws to such as shall make Discovery of the
said Offenses, and effectually Prosecute the Offenders for the same, Have
thought fit, by the Advice of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to
Issue this Proclamation: And We do hereby, in pursuance of the aforesaid Laws,
strictly Charge, Prohibit and Command, That no manner of Wool, Wooll-Fells,
Woolen Yarn, Morthings, Shorlings, Wool-Flocks, Fullers Earth, Scouring Clay,
or Tobacco-Pipe Clay, be at any time or times hereafter, by any Person or
Persons whatsoever, either Natural Born Subjects, Denizens, or Strangers,
Exported, Transported, Sent or Conveyed out of this Kingdom or the Dominions
aforesaid, or any the Isles, Ports, Creeks or Places thereof, into the Kingdom
of Scotland, or any Parts beyond the Seas; And that all the Laws and Statutes
now in Force against the Exportation of the said Commodities, be in every
Particular punctually Observed and Kept, upon Pain of the severest Penalties,
which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm may be Inflicted upon the
Offenders themselves, their Aiders, Procurers, Abetters, or Favorers. And We
do hereby Declare, That We will cause to be effectually put in Execution the
Laws and Statutes aforesaid, and that the Penalties thereby Accruing shall be
exacted as by Law they may. And We do hereby Declare, That all Assistance and
Encouragement shall be Given by the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs, and
others His Majesty's Officers, in the Recovery of such Rewards as are Given by
the said Laws to such Persons who shall Discovers and Sue for the same. And We
do hereby strictly Charge and Command all His Majesty's Officers of the
Customs, and others, who shall be any ways Employed or Entrusted in the
Discovering and Prosecuting the said Offenses, That they do use their utmost
Diligence in the Discharge of their said Trust, under the Pain of Incurring His
Majesty's high Displeasure. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all
His Majesty's Officers and Ministers to be Aiding and Assisting to the Officers
of the Customs, and others duly Authorized to put in Execution the said Laws,
and all others Acting in their Aid.

Given at Whitehall, the Twenty ninth Day of September, School. In the Tenth Year
of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. School.


