WR

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION For Apprehending WILLIAM BERKENHEAD.
Tho. Cantuar J. Summers C. S. Shrewsbury. Godolphin.


WHereas William Berkenhead, being a Middle sized Man with a little Face, of
Brown Complexion, about Fifty years of Age, and has gone by the Names of Fish,
East, West, South, and Baker, and was formerly a Custom-house Officer, was
heretofore Committed to his Majesty's Prison of Newgate for High Treason, as
being Guilty of the late Horrid Conspiracy, and did on Saturday the Nine and
twentieth of this Instant August, make his escape out of the said Prison: We
therefore, with the Advice of His Majesty's Privy Council, have thought fit to
Issue this Proclamation, Commanding all His Majesty's Subjects, to Discover,
Take and Apprehend the said William Berkenhead wherever he may be found, and
to carry him to the next Justies of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, who is
hereby Required to Commit him to the next Goal, there to Remain till he shall
be Delivered by due Course of Law. And We do hereby Require such Justice of the
Peace or Chief Magistrate to give Notice thereof to His Majesty's Privy
Council, or one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State. And We do
hereby Publish and Declare, That whosoever shall Conceal the said William
Berkenhead, shall be Proceeded against with the utmost Severity according to
Law. And whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said William Berkenhead,
and bring him before such Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate, shall
receive for Reward the Sum of One thousand Pounds; which said Sum of One
thousand Pounds the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury are hereby
Directed to Pay.

Given at the Council Chamber in Whitehall, the One and thirtieth Day of
August, 1696. In the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
decea'sd; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.


