AN EARNEST CALL TO Family-Catechising, AND REFORMATION. By a Reverend Divine.

The Father to the Children shall make known thy truth, Isai. 38. 19. Children
obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. -- And ye fathers bring up
your children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 1, 4. Woe unto
thee, O Jerusalem! [England.] will thou not be made clean? when shall it once
be? Jer. 13. 27. LONDON, Printed by J. W. for John Dunton, at the Raven in the
Poultrey. 1693.

THE PREFACE.
WHoever thou art, that wilt condescend to read this little Piece, I think fit
to acquaint thee with whatever relates thereunto, from its first conception, to
its coming thus into the World. How the poor Thing will thrive now, and what
Service this Stripling (of which I must say, Is it not a little One?) is born
for, God alone knows, to whose Guardianship, and Disposal I entirely submit it.

If thou art inquisitive of its Parentage, know, it proceeds from a Stock,
Spiritually very mean; and, in that respect, springs as a Root out of dry
Ground: Yet he that made Aaron's dry Rod to bud and blossom, and bring forth
Fruit, can do so by this.

The Author remembers somewhat of those former Times, when the Reins of
Government were not so slack in Families, professing Christanity, and when
there was a more strict, and conscientious Education of Children, than in these
licentious Days, in which many Parents outdo the Ostrich in Cruelty, and are
Spiritually hardened against their young Ones, as though they were not theirs,
Job 39. 16.

When the Foundation of the Second Temple was laid, the young Men shouted for
Joy; but the ancient Men wept, because the Foundations of the New Temple, came
so much short of the former, which they had known in its Glory, Ezra 3. 12, 13.
Methinks I find a mixture of both these Affections in my own Soul, with respect
to the private Families of Christians, which should be little Churches. I
heartily rejoice to see, or hear, even that little Measure of good Order and
Government, that is in any of them; and verily, unless the Lord of Hosts had
left among us a very small remnant, we had been as Sodom, and as Gomorrha, Isa.
1. 9. But I see, abundantly, more cause of Mourning, in that the present Glory
on Christian Families, comes so much short of the Glory of the former.

How deplorable is the personal Ruin of Multitudes, who should be Governors,
and governed in Families! For, by reason of these Neglects, Satan has made a
great Harvest of Souls, and Hell has enlarged it self, beyond Measure. But,
besides personal Considerations, how great Disadvantages have hereby redounded
to the Public. There are little visible Accessions to the Church, from
Christian Families. God's Orchard of Pomgranats, is meanly Stocked from these
Nurseries: And whence should the Churches Increases be primarily expected, but
from those on whom God has laid such special Obligations, and to whom he has
given so great Advantages? Moreover, much from the same Cause it is, that the
present Age is so generally, and fearfully Debauched, that we may truly say,
The whole World lies in Wickedness; and, all Flesh have corrupted their ways:
and take up the Prophet Isaiah's upbraiding Complaint over Judah, Ah sinful
nation! a people laden with iniquity! a seed of evil doers! children that are
corrupters! They have forsaken the Lord! they have provoked the holy one of
Israel to anger! they are gone away backward! The whole head is sick! the whole
heart saint! from the sole of the foot, even unto the head; there is no
soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores! Isa. 1. 4, 5, 6.
So that both Church and State are sick at Heart, and utter dying Groans under
this deadly Malady, the Neglects of Family-Government.

It has been often; and much upon my Thoughts, that as the present decays of
Religion, and increases of Wickedness, have, in a great measure, come in upon
us, at this breach, the neglect of Family-Order, and particularly, as to
Catechizing; so it is some effectual revival of that Ordinance, that must lead
the way to a thorough Reformation. But I have withal experienced, That there is
a sort of Catechizing, which is next to nothing, that is, to teach a Catechism
merely by rote, without a familiar Explication, and home Application of it.

We have Instances left us upon Record in History, of the Churches exemplary
Care of her Catechumens, in former Ages. And blessed be God, who has raised up
many worthy Ministers, who have, in this our degenerate Age, born a great
Testimony unto this Ordinance, though they did not live to see it grow so as they
desired. That Man of an Apostolic Spirit, that underwent such Labors, and had
such Success in carrying the Gospel among the American Indians, Mr. John Eliot,
of New England; see his Printed Life.
and was Instrumental of those Stones, to raise up so many Children unto
Abraham; has this remorable Notion on those Words of our Lord. Feed my Lambs;
feed my Sheep; feed my Sheep, Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. That the Care of the Lambs,
is one Third Part of the Charge over the Church of God. A worthy and most
intimate Friend, who did both expend a good In-come, and spend himself in the
Works of the Lord, and is now taken unto his Reward; I have heard declare, That
if he could not Preach and Mr. Tho. Brand.
Catechize too, he would rather omit the former, than the latter: Such a Sense
he had, both of the need, and benefit of Catechizing: Yea, and in his lingering
Sickness, he continued Catechizing after he had laid down preaching. A great
Master Builder in his most excellent Sermon on this Mr. Lie, Sermon 2 l. in the
Supplement to the Morning-Lectures at Cripplegate.
Subject, (which I remember not that I ever read till some considerable time
after I had finished the following Tract) gives in this great Testimony. Those
Catechisms that were composed by the late Reverend Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, I have made use of both in my Congregation and Family, now near
Thirty years, and I desire to speak it with all humility, and thankfulness, if
ever the Lord smiled on my poor Labors, it has been while I have been busied
in this great, useful, necessary work of Catechizing, and that out of these
Catechisms.

As God has in our time raised up many worthy Men, who have laid to heart this
Duty, and born their Testimony unto it: so they have likewise labored
abundantly for the promoting of it, and some have left their worthy Labors in
Print, as a Legacy behind them: insomuch that perhaps there never was an Age
that had so many great and advantageous Helps for Catechizing, as this of ours.
And though neither the Practice, nor Success has yet been answerable; yet sure it
is not for nothing, that God has put it into the Hearts of his Servants to
prepare such stores of rich Materials. I hope it is a good Omen, that this
Work, and the Success of it, shall yet revive among us. David prepared
Materials, but Solomon built the Lord's House. Herein may that Saying be true,
One sows, and another reapeth.

It has been noted that there are of one kind or other, about five hundred
Catechisms extant. The Reason why I more particularly recommend those of our
late Assembly, is not that I disrespect, or would oppose any good Catechism;
but these are extraordinarily fitted for this purpose, have had the Esteem of
Foreign Churches, as well as a general Reception here at home. Beside our
Dissenters, many Members, yea, Ministers of the Church of England, have
approved of, and used these, as agreeable to the genuine Doctrine of that
Church. My Reverend Friend, whose Pen has given us some touches See the printed
Life of Mr. Brand, written by Dr. Annesly.
on the Life of the greatly useful Master Brand, mentioning the Assemblies
Catechism, says, The Lord Primate of Armagh said, It was the best extant. And
what though this Catechism was among other good Books, not long since,
ignominiously burned, even in one of our Universities; yet we need only
consider when, and by whom it was done. This Villainy was perpetrated at a time
when all our Foundations Civil, and Religious, were out of Course; and by some
wicked Incendiaries, who served that but as they did the Lord's Prayer,
Commandments, and the Creed; which are not only incorporated with, but also
printed at the end of the Catechism: And so, no doubt, they would have served
our Lord himself, had it been in their power. These are not genuine Sons, but
Monsters, that hang on the Breast of our Nurseries of Learning. I likewise the
rather pitch upon these Catechisms; because so many worthy Men have written
Explications of them, (as I hint elsewhere,) which may be subservint to our Use
of them.

I have, of late Years, wherever I have had Opportunities, set up public
Catechizing, and have constantly observed it to produce evident Tokens of Good,
both on Young and Old. And Elder People have thus expressed themselves to me:
We answer to our selves the Questions you ask the Younger. The Method I use in
public Catechizing, is this, and I would be glad to learn a better. I first
ask the Catechumens the Questions that I particularly insist upon in the
Catechism, to prove their being perfect in the Answers. I then put further
Questions to them, (such as are in Mr. Lye's and Mr. Allein's Explications of
the Catechism,) to prove their understanding the sense of the Answers: And
finally, I sum up all with a more entire Exposition; in which I endeavor to
be Practical, as well as Doctrinal. But this I must say, it is the Questionary
part, I mean, putting particular Questions plainly and pathetically upon the
Particulars contained in, or some way relating to the Answers. It is this, I
say, that I have observed to do the main Execution. I have also laid to heart,
the great Necessity and Benefit of Family, as well as Public Catechizing. And
withal considering, that some might omit this, or not perform it to good
purpose; merely from inability to manage it effectually, and for want of
Direction how they might profitably proceed with it: Hereupon I cast it in my
Thoughts, how a profitable Method might be proposed, which might be most plain
and easy, both to them that Catechize, and to those that are Catechized in
Families. Now the result of these Thoughts, is in that following little
Treatise, which thou art here presented with.

When I had first drawn it up, I privately communicated it to some few of that
loving and kind People where then I was, and for whose sake I writ it. I
afterward summoned the Heads of Families together, with their young Ones, and
caused it to be read in their Audience, exhorting them to proceed in their
Families according to the Method which you have recommended under the Fourth
Head of the Third Chapter. And since naked Rules are not so effectual for
Instruction, as those that are backed with practical Examples; I appointed
several Meetings, for that purpose; and did, before them, Catechize their Young
Ones, not according to the freedom I use in my public Exercises of that
Nature, but expressly according to that prescribed Method. That is; First, I
began with Prayer. Then I asked the young People Three Questions out of the
Assemblies Catechism. Next I interrogated them more particularly on the Answers
out of Mr. Lye's Explanation of the Catechism, (and the same, as I have
intimated, may be done by Mr. Allein's.) Then was read, out of Mr. Thomas
Vincent's Explicatory Catechism, what related to the Three Answers insisted on.
After which, I briefly prayed. We sung some part of a Psalm, and so I dismissed
them with a Solemn Blessing. Herein we experimentally found a Presence of God
with us; as I doubt not but thou will do, Reader, if thou will, with thy
Family, make Experiment. And I pray thee be not only a Reader, but Practitioner.

After this, several that were my Hearers requested Copies of my Papers; which
I could not deny them. Some, both Ministers and private Christians, who have
perused them, moved for their Publication: Which I have now condescended to,
though, at first, I only intended them for Private Use. In Transcribing, I have
now divided it into Chapters, for distinctness sake, which I had not done at
first; and somewhat of Additions and Alterations I have made. The last Head of
all, with the Conclusion, had some particular Aspect toward that People for
whom it was first penned; to whom God wonderfully continued their
Sanctuary-Enjoyments throughout a very dark and cloudy Day. You have it without
the Alteration of what related to that Circumstance. But I may here add now,
That the more general Deliverance that God has since that time so wonderfully
wrought for these Nations, and which our Selves and Families are Sharers in,
should much more be an effectual Motive to this Duty toward God, our Selves and
Families.

And now, whoever thou art, that take this little Book in hand, thou art the
Person with whom its business is: Read, Consider and Practice.

If any who are honored with the High Calling of the Ministry, shall vouchsafe
to cast an Eye on a thing so very mean. Let even these Fathers hearken to one
Request, from the very least of all the Sons of the Prophets: In a time when
too many are like dumb Dogs, that cannot bark; do you, I beseech you, like
faithful Shepherds, rouse up your selves and your Flocks unto this Duty, that
they be not destroyed for lack of Knowledge. Possibly you may advise to a much
better Method than I have proposed; which I shall not be offended at, but
rejoice in. As to that by me recommended, I only desire, that all such would
use it, as have wholly neglected this Duty, or are acquainted with no better
way of performing it.

You that are Parents of Children, and Governors of Families, consider the
Souls committed to your Charge are precious, and should be so to you. As the
Talent is, so the Account will be great. It is worth while to perform Duty,
though without Success: Yet who knows what blessed Success may attend sincere,
though weak Endeavors. You may thus, early, prevent those youthful
Extravagances, which, like Errors of the first Concoction in the Body Natural,
once admitted, are seldom cured. If any belonging to your Families are in a
course of Sin, who knows, but a little Advice, faithfully given, may be to them
like the Remora, a little Fish, which (they say) if it stick to the greatest
Ship, will put her to a stop, when under full sail? Admitting some be Angling
for the World, thy heavenly Counsel may be like the Torpedo, which (it is said)
in a secret way transfuseth its Virtue to the Rod, and so to the Hand of the
Angler, and makes him let it fall. Who knows, but by this means, those of thy
Family may be made knowing, methodical, well grounded, steady, practical
Christians here upon Earth, and at last become glorious Saints in Heaven. What
a Blessing had that good Man, who could comfortably say, I have had Six
Children, and I bless God for his Mr. Eliot, of New England.
free Grace; they are all either with Christ, or in Christ, and my Mind is now
at rest concerning them.

I can yet condescend to offer Arguments of an inferior Nature, if by any
means I may gain some. The Books recommended for your Assistance in
Catechizing, are very good, yet very cheap; very full, yet very brief; very
deep, yet very plain. These Catechetical Exercises will tend to sweeten the
very Humors of the Family; they will mend the Discourses of the Family, at
other times. They will improve your Children's Understanding, advance Parts,
and accidentally fit for Employments, in wordly business and converse. This
will tend to make them better Husbands, and to keep, use, and improve their
Estates the better. It will be a means of increasing Family-Love, and promoting
Obedience. Your Children that are in danger to become Rods, yea Scorpions to
you, may by this means become a Staff in your Hand. It is said, That eminent
Family in Rome, received the Name Scipio, from one of their Ancestors, who was
Scipionis vice, as a Staff to his Parents. Such may yours be. The Regulation of
Christian Families, will give a Set-off to Religion, and commend it even to a
carnal World. When the Queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the
house that he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his
servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his
cupbearers also, and their apparel, and his ascent by which he went up into the
House of the Lord: there was no more spirit in her, 1 Kings 10. 4, 5. In a
word, by this means, may be raised up more accomplished Instruments in Church
and State, and both dearly need such. You that are Children, and the governed
Part of Families, hearken to that Counsel, that out of mere good Will, is given
you by one that wishes your Welfare here, and hereafter. It has been observed
by my intimate good Friend, who is now with God, How Mr. Joseph Whiston of
Jews, in Suffex.
the Privileges of the Infant Seed of Believers, has been asserted and pleaded
for by himself, and some others, who had no Children. So here you have the good
of Children, and Families, sought and endeavored by one that has neither
Child nor Family. Do not hearken to the destroyer of Souls, and turn a deaf Ear
to such as desire your Salvation. Read with fear and trembling, Prove. 1. 20. to
the end, Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13, 14. with other the like Scriptures. Many bewail
these neglects, and the sad consequences of them, on the Rack of Conscience on
a Deathbed, and some in Chains, and at the Gibbet: Yea Hell, in all the
Caverns of it, is filled with horrid Echoes of the doleful Yellings of those,
who, in vain, torment themselves with severest Reflections on their Youthful
Miscarriages. If you will rant away your time and opportunities here, you also
shall roar it out there to all Eternity. God's Prison will hold you, if nothing
will restrain you short of it.

Grinaeus rejoiced, when he saw any young Persons improving, and was wont
Melch. Adam vit Thed.
to say, That more worshipped the rising than the setting Sun.

O what great things may you do for God, your own Souls, and the succeeding
Age: Others must quickly sleep with their Fathers. The Children of this Age,
must be the Men and Women of the next: It Is in, and with you, that Religion
must live or dye. There is a Promise, Instead of the fathers, shall be the
children, whom thou may make princes in all the earth. Psalm. 45. 16.

I have been bespeaking no less of you, than to endeavor, after a truly
sanctified saving Knowledge: but if I must not prevail in that, yet let me
desire you to get, at least, a notional Knowledge, and it may be, Grace may
come afterward. And here I shall take leave to recover from Oblivion, a Passage
that I do not know, is preserved by any public Print. I have heard of one, who
being Servant in a Family of good Order, did, while there, submit to
Family-Catechising, and thereby obtained a form, though only a form of Knowledge.
After his removal thence, he fell into ill Company, and Courses, and at last
committed some Fact, punishable with Death: Being apprehended, and committed to
Prison, the Poor Creature at once saw Death and Hell before him, and began to
bethink himself how, though he must lose his Life, he might save his Soul. His
time was short, he was shut off from all Advantages abroad, and shut up with
Company, more like to harden, than soften his Heart. In the Multitude of his
hurrying Thoughts within him, he begun at last to reflect upon that good
Family, he once lived in, and he seriously recollected the good Things he then
obtained some Notion of, and it pleased God, that his Knowledge issued in
Conversion. And when he came to dye by the Hand of Justice, this was part of
the good Advice he gave to those who were Spectators, That they would get
Knowledge, though they did no more, for that the Truths, stored up in their
Heads, might afterward fall down on their Hearts. This, he said, was his case,
or else he could not with such comfort, go thus out of the World.

Let me in the close importunately beseech Magistrates, Ministers, the Masters,
and Mistresses of Schools, all Heads and Members of Families, effectually to
set upon promoting this, and other parts of Reformation, as they would escape
those most fearful Judgments, which will else, as certainly befall one, and all
of them, as there is a Righteous God in Heaven, and wicked Sinners on Earth.
God will pour forth his fury upon the heathen that know him not, and on all the
families that call not on his Name, Jer. 10. 25. It is said, of a people of no
understanding, that he that made them, will have no mercy on them; and he that
formed them, will show them no favor, Isa. 27. 11. And let not the lucid
interval of our present seeming deliverance, flatter any. The Prosperity of
fools destroys them. The Sun shone on Sodom in the Morning, and yet God rained
Hell out of Heaven upon it, e're Noon. God will not deliver us to do all our
Abominations. Except we repent, we shall perish. It must be Repentance and
Reformation, or Ruin and Destruction. In vain we flatter our selves with
Peace, if God be our Enemy, and proclaim War against us. There is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. But if we timely Repent and Reform,
It may be we may be hid in (or from) the day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2. 7.
Says the Lord, Wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
strength of Salvation, Isa. 33. 6. And, The Lord will create upon every
dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a cloud and smoke by
day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall
be a defense. As one great Step toward Reformation and Safety, God himself turn
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to
the fathers, lest he come, and smite the earth with a curse, Mal. 4. 6.

Now may these Words be as Goads and as Nails: Goads to put us on to this duty;
Nails to fix and fasten us therein, Eccles. 12. 11.

If any, when they have read this, with the following Tract, shall think meanly
of it, or carp at the Author, as one that has taken upon him a mean
Employment, thus to Write and Print a Book, chiefly to induce and direct
Families, to make use of Books written by other Men; I only Answer, That so
many able Pens have been already so variously employed in writing Explications
on those Excellent Catechisms of the Assembly, that these would give a
Supersedeas to my Writing, were I ever so well qualified for it. I may, in this
case, allude to that, For what can the man do, that comes after the king? even
that which has been already done. Eccles. 2. 12. Or as it is in the Marginal
reading, In those things which have been already done. But, beside, some are
fitter to serve under others, than be Master Workmen. It may be enough for me,
if I can follow the Reapers, and bind up what more able Laborers have laid
ready to my Hand. I have what I aim at, if I can, by the Addition of this one
little Wheel, give Motion to those greater Ones, that have been wrought by
abler Hands.

The God of Heaven himself bless this to every Family, and Person, to whom it
shall come.

Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you Understanding in all Things.
Amen.

AN EARNEST CALL TO Family-Catechising, AND REFORMATION, etc.
CHAP. I. The Introduction. The general Method proposed.
AMong the many deadly Symptoms of the Decays of Religion, and near Approach of
Judgments, one of the greatest is the so visible Declensions of Piety, and
Increases of Sin and Vanity not only in the open World, but in those that would
be counted Christian Families It is a great Mercy to be built up in Families,
and no small Honor to be the Head of one of those little Commonwealths; but
withal, the present Trust, and future Account is great. Every Person in the
Family, is a Soul committed to the Care of such as do, or should govern. The
Church, in her First Infancy, for above Two thousand Years, was nursed in the
Families of the Patriarchs, and then God's whole Worship was usually there
celebrated: and though afterward, God enlarged the Borders of his Church, and
then appointed some Solemn parts of his Worship, to be more publicly
Administered; yet it is manifest unto Reason, backed with undeniable Instances,
That God never designed his People should turn all Religion out of their Doors.
In general, they are in their Families, to offer-up the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Praise, to read the Holy Scriptures, sing Ephesians. 6. 18. 2 Samuel 6. 20. Isaiah 59.
21. Joh. 5. 39. Psalm 118. 15. Psalm 30. Title. Psalm 101.
Psalms, and instruct their Households in the Things of God, and walk before
them in his Fear: And more particularly, they are to deal with respective
Persons, under their Charge, by way of Examination, Instruction, Encouragement,
Reproof, Correction, as the Matter requires; and if, after all, they remain
Sons of Belial, will not be reformed themselves, but endanger the corrupting of
others; having duly sought God for them, and with all long-suffering, waited to
see, if God peradventure will give them Repentance, they are at last to exclude
them the Family, whether they be Children, or Servants, which is a little
Excommunication: though upon their Repentance, and Reformation, they may be
received again. But how sad is it, that in most of the Families that call
themselves Christian, there is little, yea nothing of this Holy Order; but, on
the contrary, precious time spent on Cards and Dice; their Discourses, not only
vain and frothy, but stuffed with fulsome and abominable Oaths, and
Execrations; a height of Vanity in their Attire, immoderate Expense in
Furniture, monstrous Excess in Eating and Drinking, with a full pursuit of Ease
and Pleasure, or Worldly Profit; and all this cloakt over, at the most, with an
empty Form of Godliness, as vain as the rest: And if there be any one in the
Family of a more serious Spirit and Deportment, and that cannot run with the
rest to the same Excess of Riot, he or she is but the Maygame of the other: As
if, to be truly Religious were the only Vice, to be Vicious the only Virtue; as
if it were meritorious to be Vile, and the only way to escape Censure, were to
deserve it. What a happy Thing it were, if one could do any Thing toward the
putting some stop to that mighty Torrent of Sin, and Wrath, that at once
threaten us, now Deep calls unto Deep, by an effectual promoting of
Family-Reformation!

But though I wish Families universally regulated, yet there is one special Duty
I shall more particularly insist upon, namely, Family-Catechising, which is
such a Duty, as being well managed, would influence us to many other.

I shall briefly open the Nature of Catechizing, and prove it to be a duty;
direct Parents, and Governors of Families, as to the Performance of it; offer
some Motives, for their so doing; give some Advice to the governed Part of
Families; lay down some Inducements to them, to submit to those Directions; and
in the Close, Answer those Objections, that either the governing, or governed
Part of Families, may make against what I am proposing. Of each in a distinct
Chapter.

CHAP. II. What Catechizing is. Public Catechizing by the Minister, and
private Catechizing by the Heads and Governors of Families, proved a Duty by
Scripture. A Catechism ought to contain a Form of sound Words. The Catechisms
of the late Assembly recommended.
Catechizing in general, is any Instruction by Word of Mouth; more particularly
it is a plain and familiar instructing of Persons (...) a (...) and (...),
sono, est viva voce instituere. To instruct by Word of Mouth.
in the Rudiments of any Doctrine: but yet most strictly of all it is taken for
teaching the Principles of Christian Religion; and we have both the Word and
Thing it self in Scripture. This Catechizing is either public, and as such
performed by a Minister of the Gospel. Says the Apostle, let him that is
Taught or Catechized, in the Word, communicate unto him that Teaches or
Catechiseth in all good things, Gal. 6. 6. where we read both of the Catechist
or him that Catechiseth, (...).
and the Catechumen, or the Person Catechized. In another place the same
Apostle mentions Instructors of Children, as the Greek Word in its 1 Cor. 4.
15. (...).
strictness signifies. And there were in the Primitive Churches Catechists,
that is, Teachers, whose particular Work it was to Catechize, and they had
their Catechumens, those that were instructed by them; and it might be to very
good purpose, if we had such now.

But to descend from Public to Private, or Family-Catechising, and
Instruction, which we have both Scripture-Precept and Precedent for. We have,
among other, these Scripture-Precepts and Commands for it: These words which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy
House, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. So in another place, But teach them thy sons,
and thy sons sons, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. 9, 10. Says the Psalmist, Ps. 78. 5, 6, 7. He
established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he
commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their Children, etc.
Says Solomon, train up, or Catechize, a Child in the Prove. 22. 6. in the
Margin.
way he should go, etc. Add to the rest that of the Apostle, Fathers, provoke
not your Children to Wrath, but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of
the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 4 I will now pass from Scripture-Precepts to
Scripture-Precedents and Examples, whereby this Duty of Family-Catechising is
further confirmed. Solomon writ his book of Proverbs, To give subtlety to the
simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion, Prove. 1. 1, 4. And he calls
upon his own Son, thus, My Son, hear the instructions of a father, and forsake
not the law of thy Mother, ver. 8. He says afterward, A wise son hears his
father's instruction, Prove. 13. 1. etc. Which implies, that a wise Father will
give instruction to his Son. He concludes that book of wise Sayings with the
words of King Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him, Prove: 31. 1.
etc. Which contains indeed most excellent Catechetical Instructions. Joshua
resolved, that he and his house would serve the Lord, Jos. 24. 15. having
likewise, no doubt, so instructed them, and intending to continue so doing. Who
can doubt but Timothy had been thus Catechized by his good Mother 2. Tim. 1. 5.
and Grandmother, whose faith he inherited? But a great and standing Instance,
is that of Abraham the Father of the Faithful, and, no doubt, to be imitated
by all his Spiritual Children. Now of him God himself testifies: I know him
that he will command his children, and his household after him; and they shall
keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him, Genesis 18. 19. Thus you see we
have both Scripture-Precepts and Precedents for the Warrant of this Duty of
Family-Catechising and Instruction: And what is there recorded, is for our
admonition.

Instruction ought indeed to be given occasionally, yea, and all occasions
taken for it. But public and Family-Catechising cannot be methodically, and
thoroughly managed, unless the chief heads of Christian Doctrine be first
digested in a Form of Sound Words according to the Scriptures. Now besides many
other excellent Catechisms ready provided to our hands, we have those of that
Reverend Assembly, which I recommend to you as being a little, but withal
great Body of Divinity: and likewise because diverse holy and good Men have
written very worthily thereon, whose books may assist your proceeding herein
with more ease and profit both to your selves and Families.

CHAP. III. Directing Parents and Governors of Families, for the Catechizing
of their Families.
I Now proceed to direct such as are Parents of Children, and Governors of
Families, as to a method of procedure. Wherein I include those of the Female
Sex, who have the greatest Advantage of Forming Children in their younger
Years; and whose Business engages them to be more constantly at home. If Queen
Esther observe a private fast, her maidens shall fast also, Esther 4. 16. And
no doubt, she engaged them in more ordinary, as well as these extraordinary
Duties of Religion. Mothers should be Mothers in Israel. How the Royal
Bathsheba did document her Solomon; and honest and religious Lois and Eunice
did instruct their Timothy in Scripture-knowledge, I have already instanced.
Good Monica's Soul underwent stronger Travail-Pangs for the new Birth of her
Austin, than her Body did for his first Aug. Confession.
Birth. Can you bear the Thoughts of it, That those whom you have born from the
Womb, that have hung on your Breast, and been dandled on your Knees, should be
Firebrarnds in Hell to all Eternity; and not rather desire and endeavor they
may be Heirs of Eternal Glory?

Now to One and All of you, I say in this Case, as Jotham in another to the men
of Shechem, Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto you, Judge. 9. 7.

1. I desire Parents of Children and Governors of Families to consider with
themselves, what a great, necessary, and beneficial Duty, this of Catechizing
is. Humble your selves in secret before the Lord, for your so great, and long
neglects of it. Beg of God, Courage for, and Conduct and Success in it.
Resolve, before the Lord, that you will break through all Temptations and
Oppositions, and set upon this Duty, and study to do it to the best advantage.

2. Having thus solemnly prepared your selves for this Work: In the next place,
prepare your Families: Acquaint them, you are convinced, it is your Duty, to be
concerned for the Souls committed to you; and that you look upon Catechizing,
as a proper Means for their Instruction and confirmation in those great Truths,
which they ought to believe, and Duties they ought to practice. Let them know,
you expect their Compliance in a Matter wherein God may be so much glorified,
and they benefited. Put them upon solemn Preparations for it; and if you have
observed sinful Miscarriages in any, give them particular Admonitions. As Jacob
said to his household and all that were with him, Put away the strange gods that
are among you, and be ye clean; and let us arise and go up to Bethel, and I
will make there an altar unto God, etc. Genesis 35. 2, 3. So do you say unto your
Family, when you are making your House a Bethel, a House of God.

3. See that your Family get the Answers of the Assembly's Catechism by memory,
so as to be able to repeat them perfectly, and distinctly, without Book; which
when they have done, so far as is necessary for your beginning, then set apart
some convenient time, at least once a Week; and, if any extraordinary Occasion
necessarily diverts you at that Season, be sure you take some other. And when
you actually engage in this Holy Exercise, let not the Family be scattered here
and there; nor some engage in the Service of the World, or be idly chatting,
while others are engaged in the Service of God: but summon the whole Family
together, and let them solemnly present themselves, as before the Lord.

4. As to the Actual Performance of the Duty it self, I would direct you to a
Method so easy, that those of the meanest Capacities may comply with it. And
(1.) Begin with Prayer to God for his Assistance and Blessing in this Work; for
it is he must teach to profit, Isa. 48. 17. and none teaches like him, Job 36.
22. Pray that God would make it a Means of Enlightening your Minds, Confirming
and Establishing your Judgments, Convincing your Consciences, Moving your
Affections, Engaging your Hearts, of Converting you to God, and Building you up
in Faith and Holiness, and so of bringing you to eternal Happiness and
Salvation. Having thus prayed to God, (2.) Apply your selves to your Family,
asking them some Questions in the Assembly's Catechism; to which let them
return the Answers without Book, audibly, distinctly, and seriously. Two or
Three Answers, I conceive, are as many as you can well insist on at one time.
And since learning these, and repeating them only by rote, is of little
Signification, I do further advise you, (3.) To ask them By-Questions for the
Proving, and Improving their Understandings in those Truths; and for your own,
and their Ease, in this Part of the Work, I do recommend to you Mr. Lye's
Explanation of the Assembly's Catechism, or that written by Mr. Joseph Allein
The former is more full, Mr. Lie writing his last of that nature, after the
other; and having also a peculiar Talent for promoting this excellent Work.
Toward the close of which Book, there is a most Useful Alphabetical Table,
explaining the difficult Words and Terms throughout the Catechism: But the
Latter some have chosen to use, as more familiar. In both these, you have
Questions fitted to your Hand; so that you need only to read them distinctly
and intelligibly, and the Matter is reduced to such a Method, (especially in
Mr. Lye's) that the Learner may return his Answers with a single Yes, or No.
(4.) When you have finished this Part of your Work, I would have you, if time
will permit (else at some other time) read Mr. Thomas Vincent's Explicatory
Catechism, so far as concerns the Answers you have been upon. (5.) When you
have done Catechizing, sing the whole, or some part of a Psalm, suited, so near
as you can, to that subject you have been upon: And upon Acquaintance with the
Psalms, it will hardly be possible for you to insist upon any Two or Three
Answers, but you may find some Psalm very suitable thereto. This being devoutly
performed, will yield unspeakable, both Delight and Profit. Then, (6.) Conclude
all with Prayer to God, for a Blessing on his own Ordinance. And if the time
you pitch upon, be the Evening, you may in that concluding Prayer, commit your
Selves and Families to God, for that Night, and remember to join Praises with
your Prayers. All this, I conceive, may be performed in one Hours time, or
within it, unless reading Mr. Vincent's Explicatory Catechism, should cause you
to exceed. To prevent which, you may, as you see Occasion, omit some part, or
the whole of that, till some other Evening of the Week. (7.) You may also do
well to signify, That if any of them have Doubts and Objections, they should,
at convenient times, move them to you, which will put you upon further Study
and Consideration; and so in teaching them, you will learn your selves. If
their Questions or Objections puzzle you, so that you cannot resolve them with
due Satisfaction, apply your selves to your Minister, which will put him upon
studying the Case, and be a Mutual Advantage both to him and you. Yea, he will
hereby, in some measure, know the Spiritual State, both of the Sheep and Lambs
of his Flock. (8.) When you have thoroughly versed your Selves, and Families in
the shorter, you may proceed to the Larger Catechism of the Assembly. And
having first gone through the Catechisms, without the Proofs, you may then put
your Family upon learning those, and particularly examine them, what Part of
the Answer the Proof is brought to confirm, and what Part of the Proof confirms
that Part of the Answer. This will not a little promote your knowledge of, and
confirmation in the Truths of God. I have been more large on this Fourth
Particular, because it is directive to the Actual Performance of this Duty.
Beside the Books beforementioned, Mr. Doelittle's Scheme of the Assembly's
Catechism, Printed in a single Sheet, is worth every Families having. (5.)
Labor to be well grounded your selves, and confirm those under your Charge, in
the great Articles of Christian Faith; as the Being of God, the Oneness of his
Essence; the Trinity of Persons, or Subsistences; the Lord Jesus Christ, his
Person, his Natures, Divine and Humane; his Offices, Kingly, Priestly,
Prophetic; his Sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, sitting at
God's Right Hand; his future Judging the World, with all other his Glorious
Performances; the absolute Necessity of Faith in him, and entire reliance on
his Merits, as the only Matter of our Righteousness, for Justification; that
true Justifying Faith works by Love, and without Works, Faith is Dead. The
total Impotence of corrupt Nature, as to all Spiritual Operations, and the
Absolute Necessity of the Energy of the Spirit of God; yet that it is our Duty
to be conversant with the Means; That the Holy Scriptures are a sufficient Rule
for Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Conversation. Let these, and the like
Principles, be engraven on your Hearts, that you may be nourished up in the
words of faith and of good Doctrine, whereunto you have attained, 1 Timothy 4. 6.

6. Take great care, that God's Sabbaths be strictly observed, and
industriously employed by your Selves and Families. As the Misimproving of this
day is one great in let to all profaneness, so the Spiritual Improvement of
it, will much advance all true Piety. The Sabbath should have its Double of
Offerings. You will thrive in Spirituals all the Week, according to your
Spiritual Industry that day. The Fourth Command is primarily directed to
Parents and Governors of Families, who are responsible for themselves, and
those under them.

7. See to it, that as you profess your selves a Christian Family, so you
maintain Universal Holiness of Conversation. Let no duty be omitted, or Sin
committed with thy connivance. Look strictly to it, that all relative Duty be
duly discharged; in which much of your Religion consists, and on which the
Credit of Religion and our own Comfort, very much depends. Make a
compassionate, but faithful use of that Authority which God has committed to
thee; and withal, see to it, that thou behave thy self wisely in a perfect
way, and walk within thy house with a perfect heart, setting no wicked thing
before thee, Psalm. 101. 2, 3. Else thy Endeavors for the Good of others, are
like to be both heartless, and fruitless.

8. This one thing I would add, which I would have by no means forgotten, That
you do not confine your selves only to those of your own Family, but invite,
and encourage any other Families (that have not, or cannot have those
Advantages) to come in among you, which will be a great piece of Soul-charity.
This I now mention, is not invading the Ministers Office or Work, any more than
it is to admit the Members of some poor, prayerless Family to partake of your
Family-Devotions. Yea, this being well regulated may be made greatly
subservient to more public Catechizing performed by the Minister, and I have
experimentally found it so.

9. Let me superadd this. If at any time you slip into Neglects of, or
Remisness in your Family Duties (and our deceitful Hearts, a subtle Devil, and
an insnaring world will be apt to give us too many Avocations) see that you
carefully reassume your Duty again, and endeavor to recover your Zeal and
Warmth therein. And in case there be any extraordinary cause, either from
Omissions of Duty, or Commissions of Sin, solemnly humble your selves as a
family with fasting and prayer, Zech. 12. 12, 13, 14. To implore God's Pardon
and Favor; and let this be followed with as solemn Reformation.

Thus I have, according to the measure of my Ability, given you Directions for
the profitable managing this great Duty of Family-Catechising, and Reformation.
Now the Lord himself direct you, both to, and in the Performance hereof.

CHAP. IV. Some Motives offered to Family-Governours, in behalf of
Family-Catechising.
IF it can be needful, to add Motives for the further enforcing that Advice I
have given, I would offer such as these; which I shall, for brevity sake,
deliver more promiscuously, and not stand to draw out under particular Heads.
Catechizing is a Duty, yea an advantageous Duty; and, being well managed, may
meet with those, who reap little or no benefit by Sermons, or continued
Discourses: For this is more suited to the Capacities of youth; it does more
necessitate their Attention, and put them upon the Exercise both of Memory, and
Judgment. It is a proper Means of begetting, and increasing Knowledge, and that
not only in regard of its familiar Condescension; but also, as in a little
compass, it takes in the whole Body, and System of Divinity: and Divine
knowledge is of all most excellent. It further tends to settle and confirm the
Judgment in the great Truths to be believed, and Duties to be practiced. Many
let go Truth, because they never had fast hold of it. Catechizing is a great
means of Prevention of Apostasy; and had we retained more of the former, we had
seen less of the latter. It may also be a happy means of preventing many, yea
and great Sins, or speedy convincing the Conscience where Sin has prevailed.
How many from mere Ignorance of the Extent of God's Commands, have not only
fallen into great Sins, but continued in them without repentance, to whom good
Instruction might have been a Means of Prevention, or Recovery. This may be a
Means of working and promoting Faith, and Holiness of Heart, and Conversation;
yea all Good here and hereafter. By Catechizing those under your charge, you
may mend your own Head and Heart. Family-Catechising will be mainly subservient
to that great Duty of Public Catechizing: And who knows, but that between the
one and the other, the Enemy, Sin, may be be-set before and behind, and fall in
battle. These two may be like the former and latter rain promoting all
Spiritual fruitfulness. Sure, if as children are solemnly dedicated to God in
Baptism; so parents did conscienciously endeavor to bring them up for God, and
care were further taken by public Catechizing and Instructions to fit them
for, and transmit them to a complete state of Church Communion: Churches would
(by the blessing of God) be more plentifully stockt from Christian Families,
beside the children of the Stranger that might be joined to the Lord.

By working on the Young Ones of the present Age, an Earnest may be laid for
the good of succeeding Generations: Yea a Seed of your own may be raised up to
praise the Lord, and bear up his Name in the World. Thus may your own Gardens
flourish, the tender grapes appear, and your Pomgranats bud forth, Song 7. 12.
Your Sons (thus manured) may be as plants growing up in their youth, and your
daughters (thus squared) may be as corner-stones polished after the Similitude
of a palace, Psalm. 144. 12. And you may, at the last day, give up your account
with joy; and say, Here am I, Lord, and the children that thou have given me,
and then shall you and they be for ever together with the Lord: be pillars in
the heavenly Temple, and never be removed thence. Thus have I finished what I
intend for the Governing part of Families: I shall now address my self to the
Governed.

CHAP. V. Advice to the Governed part of Families.
THE former part more-especially relates unto Parents of Children, and
Governors of Families. It may, I conceive, be needful to subjoyn some
particular Advice to Children and Servants; or any other, who may be the
governed part of Families. For if Means of Reformation be used by
Family-Governours; yet if it have not a due influence upon the Family under
their Charge, it does not reach its End, but is like Water spilt upon the
Ground. And I am the rather induced to apply my self particularly unto you,
because the Governed is usually the most numerous part of the Family: And though
you are at present, in regard of some external Circumstances, the inferior
part of it; yet you have as precious Souls as your Parent, and Governors. God
is equally concerned for you, and has commanded Ministers to feed his Lambs, as
well as Sheep, Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. And we do profess our Selves the Servants
of all; yea, and your selves have as much reason to be concerned for your own
Souls, as your Parents and Governors have for theirs. In this sense, our
Salvation is common Salvation, Jude, v. 3. and there is no distinction of bond
or free, Gal. 3. 28. Yea, if God lengthen out your Days, (and Obedience is the
way to long Life,) you that are now Children and Servants, may become Parents
of Children, and have Servants under you, being built up in Families of your
own. Now the better you are at present in your private Station, the better you
may be when advanced to a more public Capacity: For to Obey well, is the way
to Govern well. So that setting of you right for the present, may be a Means of
regulating your Families for the future; and those who shall receive holy
Instructions from you, may afterward convey the same to their Families: And who
knows, but as there shall ever be a holy Seed, raised up to praise and serve
the Lord; so there may be a Succession of Religion in those that descend from
you, till the coming of Christ to Judgment. It is observable, That though God
calls home to himself some who were far off; and he will yet more eminently do
so, when all the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the Lord, and all
the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him, Psalm. 22. 27. Yet,
Religion has been much propagated through the Loins of the Faithful. And it
has been observed, That when Grace gets into a Family, ordinarily it does not
soon take its leave of it: But though there may be some sad Interruptions, yet
it appears many times again in Grandchildren, or Great-Grand-Children; and if
not in the direct Line, yet Collaterally; as the Rivers of Water run thorough
the Valleys, though not in a direct Course, but with many Windings and
Turnings, and various Branchings; so that we are many times ready to be at a
loss in following them. Of this the Scripture does, and our own Observation
may, furnish us with Instances.

Now may I not begin my Address to you, as St. Austin one of his Sermons, Ad
vos, Juvenes, mibi sermo; flos aetatis periculum mentis. Aug. de Temp.
O, Young Ones, my Speech is to you who are in the flower of your Age, but
peril and danger of Mind. Or with very little Variation, as St. John, that
bosom Disciple of our Lord, I have written unto you, fathers, that you may
know him that is from the beginning. I now write unto you, little children,
that you may know the father. I write unto you, young men, that you may be
strong, and overcome the wicked one, and that the word of God may abide in you,
1 John 2. 12, 13, 14. Therefore, Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will
teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34. 11. I shall give you the sum of my
Advice, in the following Particulars.

(1.) Consider seriously, what kind of Creatures God has made you, and learn
to set a due value upon your own beings. The very Frame of thy Body, which is
wonderfully and fearfully made, and curiously wrought, Psalm. 139. 14, 15.
speaks something extraordinary. But then thy Soul is Heaven-born, a Spiritual
and Immortal Being, capable of the Knowledge and Enjoyment of God himself; and
by what Bonds and Ties this Material Body and Immaterial Soul are united and
linked together, thou do not know. So that thine own Being is above thy
Conception. St. Austin Aug. Confess.
wonders that Men admire other things, and leave themselves unadmired.
Consider, thou art not a lifeless Rock or Stone, a senseless Plant or Tree, an
irrational brute Beast; but a Creature endowed with a rational and immortal
Soul, capable of knowing and enjoying God here and hereafter: Yea, thy mortal
Body shall, at the last day, be raised to an Immortal State. Remember, thou art
a Creature made for Eternity.

(2.) Seriously lay to heart your State of Sin and Misery: How you are tainted
with Adam's first Transgression. The Scriptures of Truth acquaint us, That in
him all sinned, and therefore death came upon all men, Romans 5. 12. And in Adam
all died. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Consider further how your whole Nature, Soul and Body,
every Faculty of the one, and Member of the other is vitiated, and defiled with
the Leprosy of Sin. Thou have within, and upon thee a complete Body of Sin and
Death, Romans 7. 24.
with all its Members. Even the youngest Children have old Adam in them.
Infants themselves are not innocent. Thou have that Corruption within thee,
which is sufficient to betray thee to the greatest Sins, and expose thee to the
greatest Sufferings. Yea, thou art guilty of manifold actual Sins of Omission,
and Commission, and these clothed with various Aggravations. O! Consider how
thy excellent Being is debased by Sin, and how thou have plunged thy self into
unspeakable, yea unconceivable Misery.

(3) See that thou be regenerate and born again, without which, thou shall
never enter into the Kingdom of God. Thou art by Nature a child of Wrath, and
Heir of Hell. Thy Nature must be changed by renewing Joh. 3. 3. 5.
Grace, before thou can be a Child of God, and Heir of Heaven. And this know,
and remember, that the New Birth is of the whole Man, as the Natural is, if it
be a living Birth. Remember your solemn Dedication to God in Baptism obliges
you to secure your Regeneration, improve it therefore accordingly. If taken out
of the World by Death, before thou art taken out of the World by Grace; it had
been good for thee thou had never been born; for thou art undone to Eternity.
Woe to thee, if thou die before thou art alive to God: for on such the second
Death shall have Dominion, and they shall be killed with Death.

(4.) Have, and maintain an inward Value and Esteem of your Parents, Masters,
and Governors: Yea, though they be not so great, or rich, or wise, or obliging,
as some others. Esteem them as those set over you in the Lord, and as obeying
the Lord in so doing. I have heard of a Wife who said she could be Obedient to
her Husband, but he was such a one as did not deserve it. It was replied, But
the Command of God is worthy to be obeyed, and show your Obedience unto that.
So in this Case, The Yoke will gall if it be not lined with Love: but Love will
cover a multitude of Faults. Beside the Sin of Undutifulness, we profit little
by those whom we do not much affect.

(5.) Study the Duties of your particular Places, 1 These 4. 11. (...).
and Relations, and conscientiously practice them. Many study other Duties, and
neglect their own. They spy a Mote in another eye, and cannot see a beam in
their own. Do you especially study and perform your own Duties. Let your words,
looks, gestures, actions, be such toward Parents and Superiors as they ought
to be. Let their Cautions restrain you from all Vanities, their Counsels set
you upon the Practice of what is Duty. Yea, tho Parents and Masters do not
perform their Duty to thee, yet thou must perform thine both to God, and them.
You must be subject with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to
the froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. their Sin can be no Dispensation or Absolution to
thee.

6. In every Employment aim principally at the Glory of God. If thou learnest,
learn for God: if thou workest, work for God. In the choice of a Calling, be
for that in which thou may most Glorify God. Yea, let thy very Recreations
be such and so timed, as may subserve this great end. If thou unbendest the
Bow, and oylest the Wheels, let it be, to fit for Service.

7. Let thy whole self be found in all those religious Duties which God
requires. You are to read, meditate, and pray in Secret. Says our Savior,
Thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut the
door, pray to thy father which is in secret, Mat. 6. 6. Now remember to bow thy
Heart, as well as Knees. Who is this that engages his heart to approach unto
me, says the Lord? Jer. 30. 21. Offer not the Sacrifice of fools without an
Heart. God will not accept of an heartless Sacrifice, He is a Spirit, and will
be worshipped in Spirit, as well as in truth, Joh. 4. 24. And for
Family Worship, while the Word of God is reading, or Prayer made, let not thine
Ear be listening, or Eye wandering after other things, nor thy Heart be with the
fools in the farthest parts of the Earth. Let not the Lord be nigh in thy
Mouth, and far from thy Reins, but set and keep thy heart to the duty. When
Psalms are singing, make not thy self a Mute, since God has not made thee so.
Let not a dumb Devil possess thee, but tune thy Heart and thy Voice unto God's
praises. So when present at God's Public Worship, let not thy better part be
absent.

8. Submit willingly and conscienciously to Family-Catechising and Instruction.
When Parents and Governors of Families have overcome their own inward
Discouragments, let them not meet with new Conflicts and Discouragements from
thee. Be ready to learn, submit to Examination, study the Sense and Meaning of
what you learn, ask questions, for your farther Instruction, of these Elders,
or more expert than your selves: Enquire of your Parents or Governors, or
Ministers, or any other able to instruct you. It is observed, That those who
are much in moving pertinent Questions, make the best Scholars.

9. Carefully avoid all Sin, and especially watch against those Sins that you
may be most in danger of. Says the Apostle, Flee youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
Among these let me caution you, 1. Against Lying. Dare not to use it, either to
cover a Fault, or gain a seeming Advantage. The Liar is not true to himself:
his Heart and his Tongue are distorted one from the other. He deceives his
Neighbor, directly opposes the glorious Attribute of God's Truth, makes a
deep Wound upon his own Conscience, and, without repentance, will meet with his
Reward in Hell. 2. Dread Swearing, Cursing, taking the Name of God in vain, and
all evil speaking: Remember your Tongues are not your own, but God is Lord over
you and them. Let that Scripture be engraven on your Heart, But I say unto you,
That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof
in the day of Judgment: for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12. 36, 37. 3. Avoid all Pride in Heart,
Life and Attire. Be clothed with Humility. God resists the proud, but gives
grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5. 4. Shun idleness How can thou have nothing
to do, who have a God to serve, and a Soul to save? When idle, thou temptest
the very Tempter; and if thou find nothing to do, he will find Employment
for thee. 5. Keep thy self free from Injustice and Defrauding. It is a great
sin; will make a great clamor, when Conscience is awakened; and to make
restitution, tho a necessary, is a very hard Duty; and therefore avoid the
occasion. The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Let no sin of this nature seem little to thee. St. Austin was brought to
Confession, for robbing his neighbor's Pear Tree; Aug. Confession.
Which sin he greatly aggravates, as also his Cousenage in youthful Sports and
Recreations. Take heed thou indulgest not thy self in those Tricks of Youth,
which will afterward prove Sins of Youth, either here in the Day of Conscience;
or hereafter, at the Bar of God. 6. Take heed of the Sin of wantonness, even
to a lascivious Look; yea, Thought; and be not by Speech, Garb, or Gesture, an
Occasion of Temptation to any. We must not only avoid the Snare our selves, but
be careful we do not spread Nets for others. 7. Be careful thou do not
drown thy soul in a Life of Pleasure, Voluptuousness and Excess. Be not of
those who are Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. 2. Tim. 3. 4. 8.
Take heed of Worldliness. It is a sin prodigious in Youth, increases with Age,
and will at last drown the Soul in perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. 9. Beware of a
Spirit of Obstinacy, and Incorrigibleness. This remember; If thy Spirit get
above the reach of Parents, and Superiors; yet thou art not out of God's
reach, who will take the work into his own hand, and will certainly meet with
thee to thy greater trouble here, or eternal sorrow hereafter. In many places
of the World, at this very day, God is fatning the ground with the Blood and
Carcasses of children of Disobedience. The Lord has said, That the sons of
Belial shall be all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken
with hands; but the man that shall touch them must be fenced with Iron, and the
staff of a spear, and they shall be utterly burnt with Fire in the same place,
2. Sam. 23. 6, 7. 10. As you would avoid all other Sins, avoid evil Company. He
that walks with the wise, shall be more wise; but a companion of fools, shall
be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20.

10. Finally from an inward Principle of Religious Fear of God, practice
universally, as becomes such an one as is a Christian indeed. Let Religion run
through your whole Conversation. Be that in your Bed, in your Closet, in the
Family; in the World, that your Holy Profession obliges you to be. Whatever
you do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3. 17. Walk
always, as under the Eye of God, and with serious Thoughtfulness of Death,
Judgment, and Eternity.

Thus I have finished my Advice to you who are the Governed Part of Families.

CHAP. VI. Some Motives to the Governed Part of Families, to submit to the
Directions prescribed.
I Will subjoin a few Motives to induce the governed Part of Families to
receive, and practice the Instructions I have given you, and particularly as to
submitting to Family-Catechising and Instruction.

(1.) Consider how ignorant and destitute you are by Nature of all true
spiritual Good; how prone and inclined unto all Evil: Vain man would be wise,
but he is born like the wild Ass Colt. Job 11. 12. Now the Ass is a dull
blockish Creature the wild Ass an untractable Creature; and such is Man by
Nature.

(2.) Consider it will be your great Honor and true Comfort, to hearken to
Good Counsel and receive good Instructions, and that betimes: says the Lord,
Since thou have been precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, Isa. 43.
4. This made Jabez more honorable than his brethren, 1 Chronicles. 4. 9, 10.
Wisdoms ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.
17. All that ever walked in them, have found them so. They are Enemies and
Strangers to them that suggest the contrary.

(3.) Consider how much Evil both of Sin and Punishment, thou may prevent,
by a speedy attending to wholesome Counsel and Instruction. Look upon thy whole
Life, as a time of Temptation; yea, and the further thou engagest in the World,
the more thou shall find the Temptations of it. Even Infancy has its
Temptations, but Childhood more than Infancy; Youth more than Childhood. There
are such filthy Lusts of the Flesh, as make even a Child of God cry out, O
wretched man that I am! Romans 7. 24. And such would be glad of Deliverance, even
by Death. Yea, it is a great Testimony of the truth of Grace, when we can
desirously submit to Death, which even pure Nature is averse unto, rather than
be infested with Temptations unto those Sins which corrupt Nature is most
pleased with. And it is a further Testimony of the Grace of God in us, when yet
we sit patient and submissive, though uneasy, under this greatest of Burdens,
till God shall, in his own time and way, give us a fair discharge from our
service. But if these Temptations should prevail, and you should be induced to
make provision for the flesh, to satisfy the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. what
Wounds do you give to your own Souls? Great also are our Temptations, when we
come to Man's Estate; for then ordinarily we engage more deeply in the World, a
most dangerous Enemy. It was smartly, and as truly said by one, The Devil of
Business hurries more Souls to Hell, than all the Devils in Hell besides. At
this age it is, that Persons usually enter on the Conjugal Relation, which so
much influenceth the residue of our Lives; yea, and Posterity after us: And if
you should arrive at Old Age, which few do; yet that, of all, is most
unteachcable. As to Evil of Punishment, it is consequent to that of Sin: Yea,
God sometimes, even where he forgives the Sin, and exempts from Hell, yet will
not remit or abate the rigor of Chastisement here. Says the Psalmist, Thou
answered'st them, O God! Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou
tookest vengeance upon their inventions, Psalm. 99. 8. God may visit our
transgressions with the rod, and our iniquities with stripes, though he do not
utterly take his loving kindness away, Psalm. 89. 32, 33. At least, Sin will
cost us a dear-bought Repentance. Now, how much of this Evil of Sin and
Suffering may be happily prevented, by early attending to good Counsel and
Instruction?

(4.) Consider the Shortness, and withal, Uncertainty of Time; and the vast
Extent (if I may so speak) and Concernment of Eternity. Thy Time will soon be
at an end, how soon thou know not, and thou must take that amazing step into
an Eternity which has no end.

(5.) Consider, None ever complained they were brought to Acquaintance with God
too early, but many have repented it was so late. Said Austin, I have loved
thee late, Sero te amavi, veritas, tam antiqua and tam nova. Ang.
O thou Truth! so Ancient, and yet so New. By which, I suppose, he meant, so
Ancient in it self, as being Eternal; and yet so New, that is, newly discovered
unto him. Who was ever brought so early to God, but he wished it were yet
earlier, if earlier it could be. I am sure, in this, of the concurrent
Testimony of all the Saints that are, or have been, or ever will be upon Earth:
though, in this case, late is better than never; yet early is better than late.

(6.) Consider, As the Lord will be very gracious and indulgent toward you, if
you hear Instructions that you may live; so he will be equally severe, if you
reject his Counsel, and choose Death. God was highly pleased with his Sacrifice
of Lambs, and his Offerings of First Fruits: When the Ears were yet green, his
Soul desires the first ripe Fruits. When any do early attend the Calls of God,
He remembers the kindness of their youth, the love of their espousals, Jer. 2.
2. The Shepherd of Israel, even the great Shepherd of the sheep, gathers his
lambs in his arms, and lays them in his bosom, Isa. 40. 11. But if you cast
his fear behind your backs, and walk contrary unto him, he will walk contrary
unto you, Lev. 26. 23, 24. The Lamb of God is likewise the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, and will rend and tear, and none shall deliver out of his Hand, Psalm.
50. 22. He has his Iron Rod, as well as his Golden Scepter; therefore, Kiss
the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, Psalm. 2. 12.

Thus I have been suggesting Motives, the Lord himself move you by them.

CHAP. VII. Objections Answered. The Conclusion.
I Shall now apply my self to Answer those Objections, that either the
Governors or Governed in Families, or both of them, may be apt to raise against
the necessary and important Duty I have been urging. Yet thus much I must first
premise in general, That there can, in this case, no Objections be made, but
such as savor very strongly of Weakness, Sloth, Earthliness, Impiety and
Obstinacy. But such as they are, I shall give them a Hearing, and endeavor to
Answer them, that this Iniquity may for ever stop its mouth.

Object. 1.

Some weak Persons may object against Catechizing, as a Dead, Flat, Formal
Thing, not suiting the Spirituality of the Gospel.

I Answer, (1.) Solemn Catechizing, or Instructing Persons in the chief Heads
of Christian Doctrine, is a Duty of that nature as necessarily requires a
methodical Collection of those fundamental Truths that lie scattered throughout
the Scriptures. The Apostle mentions a Form of Doctrine delivered, Romans 6. 17.
And we are presented with some of the fundamental Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, Heb. 6. 1. under certain Heads, methodically and regularly disposed.
And Timothy is commanded, to hold fast the form of sound words, which he had
received of Paul, in faith and love that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1. 13.

(2.) Whether, or how far Forms of Prayer are lawful, is nothing to my present
purpose to enquire: But this let me say, There is a manifest difference between
Forms of Prayer, and those imposed; and Forms for Catechizing, either composed
or chosen, as adapted and fitted to that Occasion which necessarily requires
such a Form.

(3.) I plead, as much as you, against Formality in this, or any other
Christian Duty: yea, I exhort you to be Spiritual herein. We may be in danger
of Formality, without the Use of Forms; and we may, in some cases, make use of
Forms, and yet not be formal.

(4.) Many Christians that have experienced high Communion with God, have been
very Spiritual in these Exercises, and found their Spirituality promoted
thereby.

(5.) The great decay of Spirituality, has been more evident in the Christian
World, since the neglect of Catechizing, than it was when this Ordinance has
been more frequented. For the evincing of this, I desire you to compare the
good old Puritan days with ours.

Object. 2.

May some say, We scruple at this way of teaching, by Question and Answer:
Where have we any Precept or Precedent for this, in the Word of God?

I Answer, (1.) God, in his Word, commanding the Catechizing and Instruction of
Youth, we must perform it in that method that may best conduce to the attaining
the End.

(2.) The Method of Question and Answer is a natural way of familiar,
instructive Discourse; and the very Light of Nature has directed the Heathen
themselves to the Use of it as Plato, and Others.

(3.) We have plentiful Scripture-Instances of God's discoursing with Men, and
Men one with another by way of Question and Answer, in order to Information and
Instruction. The book of Job furnishes us with abundant examples, beside many
other in the New, as well as Old Testament: even our Lord Christ taught both
Privately and Publicly, by way of Question and Answer.

(4.) Though I recommend this as a most proper, yet I do not assert it the only
Method for Familiar-Instruction, and my Reader has his liberty to use any other
which he finds really conducing to this great End, as well as this.

Object. 3.

Some Parent or Governor of a Family may object, You put us upon a Task
extreme difficult, and next to impossible: We are not Ministers, nor can we
Catechize.

I answer, (1.) I have proved it to be your Duty; and therefore you must not
plead Difficulty. You are not to stand and dispute, but go and obey.

(2.) Being Duty, if it were a thousand times more difficult than it is, God
can, and, if the fault be not thy own, he will enable thee to perform it so, as
shall be acceptable to him, and profitable to thy self and others. Therefore
Pray the more, but Practice never the less.

(3.) According to the Method I have proposed, the thing is not only possible,
but may very easily be done. I advise you to begin and end with Prayer: and I
hope you are come so far already, as to pray in your Families; Else you and
they are under that fearful imprecatione, Pour out thy fury upon the heathen
that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name, Jer. 10.
25. For the Questions and Answers, you have them in the Assembly's Catechism;
Mr. Allein's, or Mr. Lye's Book is sufficient for the further Questionary part;
and Mr. Vincent's, for the further Exposition. One that can but read, may do
all this. And then can thou not read a Psalm, fitted to be Sung, and some one
in the Family set a tune to it? Set but thy heart toward the Work, and it will
be easily done: be Spiritual in it, and it will be well done. But alas many
Families plead themselves off from the Duty of Singing Psalms, because there is
not one among them can set a Psalm-Tune, and but few that can follow it. To
this I will only say, Can you not hear your neighbors children or servants
sing Ballads? Yea, do not some in your own Families (I speak it to your shame)
Sing vain and idle Songs? why cannot you as well learn Psalm-Tunes, and Sing
the Songs of Zion? Sure either you can sing, or may learn. You have accomplished
as difficult Tasks in other kinds. Charge this on your selves as a Duty, and
see what may be done. Look upon this as the highest Use and Employment your
Tongues are given you for.

Object. 4.

Some may object, Alas, we would be willing, yea, glad to be Catechized, but we
are sure the Heads of the Family that we are in will never be brought to
perform this Duty, and so we are excused.

I answer, (1.) The Governors of your Family ought to do it. Our Lord Christ
has left no particular exception for them, and they must answer it to him if
they do not perform it.

(2.) Judge not uncharitably, before you have made trial. Dare you bear
False-witness against, yea and judge your Superior without hearing? Use all
Endeavors to persuade him. Let the Wife of his Bosom, the Children of his
Body, beg at him to take pity on his own, and their Souls. Let Friends,
Sojourners and Servants, in all becoming ways, try to move him. One of our
Lords Disciples came to him to teach them to pray as John taught his disciples,
and our Lord immediately taught them. Luke 11. 1. So if you, with humility,
say, Sir, other Masters instruct their Families, we beg you would likewise
instruct us: it may be hoped he will do it. Nay may it not be said, as was to
Moses concerning Aaron, Behold he comes forth to meet thee, and when he sees
thee, he will be glad in his heart, Exodus 4. 14.

(3) If the Master of the Family will by no means be prevailed with, (which I
am hardly willing to suppose,) yet obtain, at least, that another may do it for
him. As the Wife, who is to be a help meet for him; or some Servant, or some
one of the elder Children, The Jabez of the family that is more honorable than
his brethren, 1 Chronicles. 4. 9, 10. Or call in the help of some charitable
neighbor.

(4) If you can by no means enjoy this beneficial Ordinance in your own Family,
put in and join with some other. Beg this Bread abroad, rather than Starve at
home.

Object. 5.

Some may object, We are a busy hurrying Family, and cannot spare time for it.

I answer, (1.) Your time is God's, and you ought not to rob him of his due.

(2.) This great business, according to the Method I have proposed, will take
up very little time: it may be one hour in a week, which is but one hour of One
Hundred Sixty Eight.

(3.) This will be no Loss, but Gain of Time. God's Blessing will more than
make it up. This Whet will be no Let.

(4.) For Shame, count not that Loss of Time, which may be Gain for Eternity.
Did ever any on a Deathbed, and when entering on Eternity, call that lost Time
which they spent in the Service of God and their Souls? Many then have called
that time they have spent on the World so.

(5.) Is not as much time actually misspent by the Master of the Family at the
Coffee-House, and otherwise, and by the Family at home, as ought and might be
employed in performing this, and other Family Duties; Yea, of all the most
seasonable time for these things, the Evening. Do you thus squander time away,
and yet object the want of it?

Object. 6.

Some Governor (or that should be Governor) of a Family, may say, Do you put
me upon Catechizing? Alas, my Family will never bear it, nor endure me, if I
should attempt it. My Children are children of Belial. My Servants as
ungovernable and untractable, as the boistrous Leviathan, of whom it is said,
in Job 41. 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, etc. Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook, or
his tongue with a cord, which thou let down? can thou put an hook into
his nose, or bore his jaw through with a thorn? will he make many supplications
unto thee? will he speak soft words unto thee? will he make a covenant with
thee? will thou take him for a Servant for ever? None is so fierce that dare
stir him up.

I Answer, (1.) If this be truly the State of any Family; Good God! to what a
pass has the neglect of Family-Government brought us? Let the Perverseness of
thy Family cause thee to reflect on thine own sinful Neglects. Thou should
have buckled sooner to this Business thy self, and have bent these Twigs when
greener. Be humbled for thy great Failings and Neglects in this Particular, and
be sensible, that the State of thy Family speaks the greater need of what I
have been urging.

(2.) Make a prudent and compassionate, but withal effectual use of your
Authority; yea, if need be, call in the Minister's help. These obstinate
Persons must at least be roundly talked with. And it may be after all, thou
may find the Event better than thou imaginest. Yea, this Ordinance will be a
means of engaging your Affections one to another. I speak it from some measure
of Experience.

(3). Begin with those few you can engage, and it may be others may afterward
comply; if from no better Principle, yet for very Shame.

(4.) If any remain obstinate, after all compassionate Endeavors and
Forbearance, remove them, and get better in their room. Say, as David, Depart
from me, ye evildoers, for I will keep the commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.
115. A froward heart shall depart from me; I will not know a wicked Person.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me:
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me, Psalm. 101. 4, 6. Resolve,
as good Joshua, As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

Object. 7.

Some, peradventure, may object, We have not observed Catechizing to do any
good; and therefore it is as well there be none at all, as to no purpose.

I Answer, (1.) I have already proved Catechizing an Ordinance of God, and have
mentioned some of the many Benefits of it; and now I caution thee to take heed,
that thou art not found guilty of bearing false-witness against so necessary
and beneficial an Ordinance. Thou art not to bear false-witness against thy
Neighbor, Exodus 20. 16. much less against thy GOD.

(2.) If the Abuse of Ordinances by some, yea, the generality, were a good Plea
against the lawful Use of them, we might, for the same reason, cast off all the
Ordinances of the Gospel, as the Word, in the private reading and public
ministry of it; Prayer, Sacraments, etc. Nay, if we may use nothing that others
abuse, we must abandon Meat, Drink, Clothing; yea, and Life it self: For too
many make an ill Use of all these.

(3.) It may be, where thou observest so little fruit, there has been some
great fault in the Performance of this Duty. It has not been set upon so
solemnly and seriously, so understandingly and judiciously. It may be, it has
not been preceded with Preparation, accompanied with Prayer, nor followed with
future Watchfulness. Can we expect God should regard our Duties, when we our
selves do not duly regard them?

(4.) Thou art not, thou can not be certain, that no good has been done
hereby. There may be good, yea, much and great Good done by this Ordinance,
though it come not under thy Cognizance. Some one or other may have been brought
hereby to know God, to bow the Knee in secret to him, and lay hold of his
Covenant. These things may be, though thou have no particular knowledge of
them: yea, if this Ordinance has but promoted one good Thought among all those
that have been under it, this alone were enough to confute this Objection.

(5.) The Time employed in Catechizing, might have been worse spent, and more
Sin then, and at other times committed against God. Now it is a great thing to
prevent, though it were but one Sin, one Act of Dishonor against the Great
God; and it cannot reasonably be thought, but that Catechizing has prevented
many.

(6.) Duty is Duty, and must be done; and whatever effect it has upon others,
yet the Performance of it will tend to our Comfort and profit, both here and
hereafter. If we have, with the Disciples, been fishing long, and caught
nothing, Luke 5. 5, 6. yet at the Command of our Lord, we must continue to let
down the Net, and may, at last, have a plentiful draught. But however, if God
commands, we must water, though it be a dry Stick, all our days: And as he
comforted himself, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious in
the eyes of the Lord, and our reward shall be with him, Isa. 46. 4, 5.

(7.) It is certain, much good has been done by Catechizing: Many Ministers and
People, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, have set their Seal to it:
And I wish, That as any receive Benefit by this Ordinance, they would give
their Testimony, for the further Confutation of this Objection.

(8.) If any have abused this, (as what Ordinance is there that some have not
abused?) their Judgment will be the greater, but the Duty is no whit the less:
Yea, let me add, Thy Judgment and Condemnation will be the greater, if after
this Admonition, thou either neglectest or triflest with this Ordinance.

Object. 8.

Some, peradventure, may yet object, Here is more ado about this Matter, than
need: Many have gone to Heaven, who never set up Catechizing in their Families,
nor were Catechized there.

I Answer, (1.) If thou only carest to obtain Heaven, but not to obey God, thou
art never like to come there. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Author of eternal
salvation to them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9.

(2.) Many that have committed great Sins, as well as omitted great Duties,
have at last, though with great Difficulty, got to Heaven; but this should no
more encourage us to omit the one, than commit the other; and we may pay dear
for either.

(3.) The whole Christian World, at this day, groans under the sad Consequences
of the past, and present Neglects of this Duty. What a Flood of Atheism,
Irreligion, Unbelief, Hypocrisy, Formality, Error, Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, and Debaucheries of all kinds, has broken in at this Gap, The
Neglect of Family Government, and Instruction? This has made that part of the
Christian World that calls it self Reformed; a kind of Hell. Though God has yet
reserved to himself a little Remnant.

(4.) Family-Reformation and Order is one of the special Works and Duties of
this Day, and God will least bear with the Neglects of that. It is hoped that
those Times are even at the Door, when according as the Lord has both
promised, and sworn, the whole Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
glory of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Numb. 14. 21. Isai. 11. 9. when
not only the House of Jacob, but all the Families of the Nations shall be
brought to know and acknowledge the Lord. And surely if Family-Reformation were
more promoted, it would have a Tendency toward; yea, look like the beginning of
that great Work. Now we should be like those Men of Issachar, who were men that
had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.
32.

(5.) God now expects this from you, more especially, who has done more for you
than for others. You have been (like Gideon's Fleece) wet with the Dew of
Heaven, when all the Ground about you has been dry. You have been in a
lightsome Goshen, others in Egyptian Darkness; Darkness that may be felt. You
have been watered like Mount Zion, others have been like the barren Mountains
of Gilboa, upon whom no Rain nor Dew descends; and therefore can yield no
Fields of Offerings. Yea, you have the Servants of God to direct, assist, and
encourage you, not only in the Temple-Work of Public Worship, but also in
making your Private Dwelling-Places Habitations for the God of Jacob. Therefore
hush all Objections, and Disputes; up and be Doing, and the Lord will be with
you.

Thus I have, as a Spiritual Shepherd, been feeding both the Sheep and Lambs of
the Flock. I have urged upon Parents and Governors of Families their Duty,
both with respect to themselves, and the Souls under their Charge. I have also
admonished Children, Servants, and the Governed Part of Families, what they
ought to do: I have suggested Motives unto each, and endeavored to remove the
Objections of all. If any resolve yet to remain obstinate and ungovernable, God
himself will, sooner or later, speak to them at another rate than I can do. The
Lord has said, of him who comes to enquire of his Prophets, but sets up
his Idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before
his face, that he will answer him by himself, Ezekiel. 14. 7. And to the froward,
he will show himself froward, Psalm. 18. 26. But if you will, on all hands,
perform your Duty, as you have been directed, God will be glorified, your
Ministers will be comforted over you, and Your Selves may reap the benefit of
it, here and hereafter.

I shall, finally, leave with you two places of Scripture, and conclude.

Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the Lord he is
God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is none else. -- Thou
shall keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments which I command thee
this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee,
Deuteronomy. 4. 39, 40.

And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, yet shall know
that there has been a Prophet among them, Ezekiel. 2. 5.

FINIS.

