Fair Play for One's Life: OR, THE Sovereign Preservative OF THE Royal Family,
Nobility, etc.

AND, OF THE ARTS of Physic, and Surgery, and the Apothecaries TRADE.

By a Gentleman of Quality of North Britain.

Non avidius ipsum Alexandrum, quam Medicum intuebatur Exercitus: pro se
Quisque dextram ejus amplexi grates habebant, veluti praesenti Deo.

Q. Curt. LONDON: Printed for M. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet;
and Sold by J. Morphew, near Stationers' Hall.

Price, Two Pence.

Fair Play for One's Life, etc.
United South-Britains,
THE Blessed Union (which I hope will never die) strugled in the Birth with
Difficulties almost insuperable. How violent were the Opposers of our
Partnership with you, whose Luxuries and Avarice will insatiably prey on the
common Stock; 8 or 10 Leaders of the Parties and Projects shall set on the
deluded People, to worry the most Honorable Zeal to do Good, to serve and to
save their Country! How immense is the Difference of our Manners? The
Protection of Life and Property is the first Article of the Compact of Human
Societies. Your most Eminent Physicians and Surgeons have been publicly
exploded by you, treacherous to the Patients, ignorant of all Diseases and
Medicines: the Collegiates have often remonstrated the numerous and the
powerful Causes of the Calamities of all the Ranks of the Nation. Are there any
Gentlemen of Reason and Honor, able to detect the malignant Disease, and apply
the Sovereign Remedy?

But, the Day the most important Article of the Union was to be debated, a
Petition of our Apothecaries was read for Permission to practice Physic and
Surgery. I had the Honor to be commanded to deliver the Reasons of our
Refusal; That we are obliged to protect the Physicians and Surgeons Properties,
as we must defend our own Estates, and Titles, and Privileges: that, if we
betray the most learned and useful Professions, we shall by the Example destroy
the Law and the Church; and in the Consequence, our Universities must be
abandoned and the Esteem and Pursuit of Learning extinguished; that the
Libertinage will encourage their Trade to increase prodigiously, and at last,
starve one another; that Millions of Native and Foreign Empiricks will break in
on their Employment, and complete its Destruction.

Strange! (my United South-Britains) the Hour of my Arrival to the British
Parliament presented me the Accomplishment of our Prediction. My Kinsman, who
had invited me to his House, observed my Disorder from the Fatigues of the
tedious Journey, withdrew, and brought his Apothecary. This good old Gentleman,
he said, has advised our Family these Fifty Years, he has more Patients and
Experience than ten Physicians and Surgeons in our Neighborhood: Treats them
from the Beginnings of all Diseases; They are called in only in the most
Dangerous near their End. I presented him a Fee, as is our Custom to our
Lawyers and Physicians. He persisted refusing to touch it. I declared most
solemnly, I never will, while I live, be advised, when the Numbers and Prices
of all the Medicines shall only pay the Reward; when I saw, passing your
Streets, eight or ten Shops in every one, and the Prentices prattling and
playing; no Preparation making, not a Remedy compounded; they are more numerous
than the Sick.

I was surpised when the good old Gentleman embraced me with the greatest
Affection, when he wept for Joy, that he lived to see one of my Quality endowed
with Wisdom to preserve my Life, and the generous public Spirit, to assert the
Safety of the Royal Family, Nobility, Gentry and People. It Is only our taking
no Fee, seeming to advise for Nothing, gives us the absolute Power in the
Houses of the Nobility and Gentry, and makes us able to invade and oppress our
Physic and Surgery. It is in our Power, (as you most wisely foresaw) to pay
our selves two or three Guineas a Day in the Wealthy, and one in the ordinary
Houses, above the real Values of the Remedies, to continue it uninterrupted to
the Recovery, and vastly above the Fees of the Physicians and Surgeons, who are
called in late in the deplorable Cases, have their ten Shillings only every
other Visit; when the Life is imagined in less Danger, they must often attend
without any Reward to prevent the Relapse, to secure the Recovery.

My dear United Britains, I cannot express my Grief and Confusion. My first
Reflection painted to me almost all the Physicians and Surgeons, treacherous to
the Sick, and ignorant of all Diseases, and the just Uses of the Medicines. I
importuned my good Apothecary, who I perceived, desired the Redress of these
terrible Grievances, to report the Disease and the specific Remedy. My Servant
attended to take our Discourse, to be published in a Sheet, as the Sermons, the
cheap Antidote and Preservative of all the Inhabitants of the Island.

N. B. I have heard, that ( Ann. 1639.) the College reported the most weighty
Affair to our most religious and learned K. Charles I. in Council, all the
Judges commanded to attend. The Attorney General was directed to revoke your
Charter; your Shops were to be adjusted to the Proportion of the City. The
Rebellion prevented the Regulation. Your Physicians after the Restoration,
published many Learned Discourses on the Subject, they and the Surgeons have
often addressed, not for Preferments and Pensions, but the Cure of the Vileness
and Desiciencies of the Arts for the public Service.

S. B. Our Advice and most diligent Attendance of all the Sick in the Families
of the Nobility and Gentry, being paid by our Bills, of as many Doses as we
please, and at our own Rates, greatly exceed the Sums they are able, or willing
to expend, to preserve their Health and Life. The Physicians Fee, (we will
suppose the Surgeons are in all Points equally concerned) is, when superadded
to our Load, the most intolerable Burden. It Is our Interest to suggest the
largest Fees, larger than they desire, to make them odious to the People. This
makes them dread the Physicians, 'till the Pains and the Dangers are most
violent. Then they request us to choose a Doctor for them. We will prefer none,
but we can confide in, who shall justify and commend all we have done, who
shall patiently bear the Scandal of the Death: He is abdicated for ever, we
advance another on the next Occasion; we are never turned off, but by one of
our Prentices setting up the next House, and prevailing on the Stewards and
Nurses.

N. B. Then farewell all the sincere and learned Practice of Physic and
Surgery. The ambitious or hungry Sollicitors of your Favor shall explode the
Endeavors of the most generous Patriots of their Country to preserve the Royal
Family, the Nobility, etc. and your Trade as well as their own Professions. Why
are you on the sudden pale and disturbed?

S. B. By Heavens! we have carried the fatal Jest too far, we are undone. The
Peoples Affection, as the Fondness of an indulgent Mother, betrays us to our
Ruin. We have our Prentices forced upon us to have the Title of Doctors, to
practice Physic and Surgery, and the Apothecaries Business. We have this
Hundred Years from our Charter, Ann. 1616, by two or three Prentices increased
to an immense Number, filling all the Streets with eight or ten, as you
observed, and three or four in all the Villages about the City. Our Gentlemen
never think, or to no Purpose, for themselves or us. Our excessive Increase
must infallibly compel us to bring them more Medicines in all Diseases
whatever, and, from Year to Year, to raise the Prices of the Doses. The Payment
grows more and more oppressive, the Physicians and Surgeons must be more feared
and abhorred, and insulted, when they crave to be heard. But why do they not
save and rescue us from ten Thousand Empiricks starting up here, and from all
Parts of the World, who take the Bread out of our Mouths? The busy or hungry
Clergy set up with their secret Cures. An horrible Number of Nurses undertake
the Management, with their own Remedies, of all the Fevers, Smallpox, etc. The
Quacks of the Advertisements deal with their single Preparations to cure
infallibly this, or the other terrible Disease, or pretend it shall cure forty
or fifty as surely as one; they make the most dreadful Havoc of the Sick and
us. How many Pretenders live plentifully by the Sale of Elixirs, Spirits,
Tinctures, Pills and Cordials; the Papers of their Virtues and Uses pedlar'd
about from House to House? Then the Gentlemen of Quality, who pretend to top us
on the Physicians and Surgeons, beggar us without Mercy; they buy the Spirits,
Tinctures, Laudanum, at the first Hand. We must strive to make up our Losses by
thrusting more of our Medicines on them, they struggle against us, by those,
and many of their own Preparations, and take the Goa stone, etc. from all the
Visitants. And (will you be able to believe it) there are many subtle
Projectors of our Company, who have put off their Shops, have contrived to
destroy me and my Brethren. They invade our Property; We shall not furnish a
Sea-Surgeon, our Brother, our Kinsman, or old Acquaintance, they must have
their Chests at the Hall, more than they want, certainly dearer; and will you
imagine them better than ours, when they are the most competent Judges of the
Remedies they use?

N. B. You see the necessary Tendencies of incroaching on one another. Do not
the Magistrates know how the Public suffers by the Invasions of the sacred
Boundaries of the Professions and Arts engaged in the Preservation of Health
and Life? You have attempted the Regulations of the Law; the lurking Pochers of
the Game are detered by the severest Penalties. It is now your turn to appeal,
to implore the Protection of the Government. Has not your Company resolved to
lay its own, and the Public Distress before the Parliament?

S. B. An Apothecary has in Print demonstrated the Necessity of repelling the
Empiricks, and of reducing our Numbers. He proposes, That one Half may be
obliged to serve the other as hired Servants. There are many of my Brethren
(when the College has often desired us to foresee the Consequences of our
endless Multiplication) have in the Hall earnestly recommended our using only
Laborers to prepare our Medicines. I know many Surgeons, who lament with us
the deadly Confusions and Disorders, and the necessary barbarous Ignorance of
the modern Practice from the feared Destruction of the College. You know the
sovereign Medicine prepared by the Royal Martyr, and the Lords of his Council.
You have seen the Discourses of Dr. Goddard, Dr. Bates, Dr. Merret, etc. and
lately, the Dispensary-Poem, which remonstrates the Integrity and Learning of
the Professions sinking more and more into the vain Presumptions of Arrogance,
or the humble Compliance of using only the 30 or 40 vulgar Remedies of the
Shops, contrived by Divisions into numerous Doses in all sorts of Diseases, to
complement our Choice of them, to raise for us out of every Fever, Smallpox,
etc. 30 or 40 Guineas; out of the long Cures, 100, or 150. This you see is the
only Title and standing Army of our Power, and their slavish Subjection. As
there are 3 or 4 Champions of our projecting Parties, there are 8 or 10
Apothecaries gain their 1500, or 2000 Pounds a Year: We raise about as many
Physicians and Surgeons, Bold Britons who stick at nothing. The Court, the
Gentlemen of Quality, can never see their own, and the common Calamities, when
their Physicians and Surgeons are presented by us to them, pretending to the
Learning in vogue, the empty Cyhimaera's and Romances of Hypotheses, every day
changed, and as soon out of fashion, the Whimsies of the unseen Motions and
Operations of Atoms, nothing to the purpose of curing Diseases, or the Cases of
Surgery. And these unfortunate Guessers and Operators are commanded by us, to
observe the Instructions we give them, to defy and damn the College and all the
generous Attempts to preserve the Public.

N. B. How many Thousand Crimes form their Character? They must abjure their
own Societies and Professions, they must for the Honor of their Preferments,
for their Salaries, expose their Patrons and the People to certain Death in all
dangerous Diseases, and carefully transmit to Posterity these detestable
Accomplishments of their Arts.

S. B. Will you allow, that they have reported almost these hundred Years, the
most Learned and public Spirited of the Society, the most troublesome
Disturbers of the Public, the most factious Reformers; that a Collegiate must
be warily observed, and prevented, or expelled from any Post of Public
Service. Shall the Royal College, Learning or Virtue flourish, when their most
deadly Enemies infatuate the Gentlemen to fly from them, to assault their best
Preservers?

N. B. Is it conceivable, that none of the Gentry shall be able to discover
their true Interest, and detect the Impostors?

S. B. When they leave the Care of their Wives, and Sons, and Daughters to the
Nurses and the Attendants, to us, and our Physicians and Surgeons, all these
our mighty Grievances must grow in Stature and Strength. As the innumerable
Empiricks, and the lurking Venders of Medicines multiply, we must enlarge the
Numbers of Doses, and their Rates; the Fevers, and Smallpox, etc. must produce
the 20 l. to 40 l. 50 l. the Chronical, the 100 l or 200 l. How can I and many
of my Brethren stint the Numbers and Prices, when every Year necessitates us to
larger Numbers and Rates? When a large Part of us gain the Dr's Fee out of
every Bole, and the Cordial-Draught to wash it down; when 3 or 4 Guineas a Day
are gained and 3 Papers of a Powder (worth 2 d.) shall produce almost the
Guinea, must they not turnpale tremble at the Sight of a Physician and Surgeon.
dreading we are laying our Taxations more heavily on them? Must they not
implore us to keep them out to the latest Exremity, and then bring the Adviser,
who must enlarge the Account.

N. B. I see these Gentlemen of the Faculties must stick at nothing; but what
Methods can you and your devoted Physicians and Surgeons use to destroy the
Physicians, whose generous Disinterest preserves you, with their Society and
Profession?

S. B. They shall assault them with the Rage of a Gladiator. Dr. G. has
published our Attempts on the Life of two of his Patients, to kill his
Reputation with them. The pious Cabal of our Surgeons and Apothecaries, near
our Cathedral, hired the Nurse to affright and poison a Lady in the Smallpox,
with Child, on the same great Design. The Assassination was prevented by her
Recovery, when their honest and skilful Management dispatched to the Grave a
Gentleman of the House, a Party of the Company and Plot.

N. B. I am an Accomplice with them, I must take my part of the Guilt and the
Punishment, if I do not in the next Parliament, lay the Universal Calamities
before the Committee of the State of the Nation. We must, in the first place,
protect you from the Numberless, most ignorant and daring Empiricks, from the
sly Pedlars of the Remedies. We must then preserve you from being undone by
your two or three Prentices in all the Shops. We cannot defend our Life, but by
the just Proportions of the Medicines in the various Diseases. We must betray
our own, and the Life of all the People, we must abolish the Faculties in your
two famous Universities, if we do not restore the Sincerity and Sufficiency of
the Profession, the most implored in the greatest Distress by Mankind. The
Gentlemen then of Great Britain will explode the perfidious Physicians and
Surgeons, will detect the ignorance of the most Arrogant, will applaud the most
honorable Zeal of the Collegiates, from the Address to K. Charles I. in
Council, to the modern Reformets of the most vicious Practice.

S. B. You may please to add, who have been assaulted by our Out-Guards, our
Physicians and Surgeons in all the Houses about the Court, but when they
presented the Public Calamities to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen and
the Common Council, and Our Company unhappily rejected the Expedient, the
Panacea, which can only redress the Confusions and Malignity of the modern
Practice, which the Committee had resolved after long and the most mature
Deliberations, the City requested the College to erect its Dispensaries. But we
cannot live without the great yearly Payments from the Poor and the Wealthy:
This gives us our Power, confirmed more and more by the long and consuming
War, to raise to ^ame, or starve the Physicians. The Poem describes our
Champions assaulting the College, and the greatest Part of the Dispensarians
have been forced for Bread to revolt to us.

N. B. The imminent Danger of the Invasion will unite us, will rouse our
vigilance and Courage, when we reflect, that we must die in all the most safe
and secure Diseases, without Hope of Relief in the most intricate and severe.

S. B. All the Professions and Arts, the Serious and the Amusing must be fed
and led by the Hand in their Infancy, will conspire in their Evidence, and
assist us to make the surest Judgment in the Cause. A young Gentleman buys a
Commission, he must be instructed by the Officers, or learn from their Footmen
and the Sutlers. The Professors in the Universities do not inform the Students,
what Authors give the most certain Observations of Human Nature, of the
infinite Diseases, which are expelled by Nature alone, of the various Medicines
and the Seasons of applying them. The Physicians of many Years Experience, with
a Generosity almost peculiar to the Profession, were the most candid Patrons of
the young Practicers. The young Arrogants now raise themselves by insulting
their improved Learning, their Observations of the Happy, or ill Success of the
various Methods and Medicines in all kinds of Diseases. But they must have one
or other to introduce them. Our Apothecaries of the different Designs, oblige
them with the suitable Instructions. You must prescribe the common Juleps and
Boles, and three or four sorts of Apozemes, from 30 or 40 Medicines, we have
confined the Practice to. You must make the greatest Pother with them, and
Blisters, and Scarifying, and Setons, to amuse the Assistants. The greatest
Part in the common safe Distempers will recover. You must pronounce every
Escape a mighty Cure, shift off from a dangerous Business, but proclaim in all
your Companies, you could have saved the Life: If you find them recovering in 2
or 3 days, show your Care, and damn all the Medicines be fore prescribed. How
different was the Practice, when I came first to the City? The Physicians from
the Universities, examined and applauded by the College (as the Clergy by the
Bishop) supported by the old Practisers, visited all the numerous Cases of the
meaner People in their Neighborhood, as the Gentlemen of the Gown open the
Causes, and advise in the Purchaces of less value. The proportioned Fees, and
the Cheapness of the Medicines, introduced them to all the Families. The
Success was assured by the frequent Converse with the Patrons of the Art, by
their Instructions or Consultations in the most Important. We were not then
their dangerous Rivals or declared Enemies. Our Shops were open to them, to
confirm and improve their Skill in the Drugs, to examine their Qualities and
Virtues, and Preparations, or to observe the Trial of the New, or lately
improved. The frequent endowed Lectures often convened the Collegiates. The
Conversation discovered the never-failing Methods to subdue the Epidemical
malignant Fevers, the specific Medicines in the acute or most obstinate
Chronical Diseases. They may now debate their own Distmpers, if the Dispensary
Poem has truly drawn by the Instructions of the President, the Characters of
the Mirmils, Querpoes, the Bards. Will it therefore surprise you that we
frequently foretell in the Chamber, that the Dr. we present to them, will order
only this and the other Remedy, and Blisters and Cupping, that the Gentlemen of
Quality avow they can see no Difference, that their Apothecaries do as well as
the most Arrogant? Shall the General enter the Field to turn the flying Troops;
or the Judge, when the Pleadings are ended? Can they ever understand a Disease,
when they are brought in by us, when all the natural Powers are ruffled and
broken; when the fatal Symptoms are first discovered by the Attendants?

N. B. How easily are Fevers, as Fires, extinguish'h by timely Care? How easily
are almost all Distempers prevented from the most dangerous Symptoms? Has the
Royal Family, the Nobility, etc. the Physicians early Conduct? How shall they
ever know the Manners of the Invasions of Diseases, their Advances, the Ravages
they make of the Natural Strength, when they have lost the ten Thousand Cases
of the Patients near them, who must stand in the Front, receive the Shocks of
Diseases, and protect the Life of the Royal Family, and the Nobility? When
shall their Physicians begin to understand them, when all the Novices in all
the Arts, are allowed their Proportions of Defeats and Blunders, especially in
the Practice which wants the experienced Patrons Instructions and Cautions?

S. B. When the natural Tendencies to collect and separate the mortified Humors
(by which only Life can be preserved in all Diseases) by the different
Evacuations are assisted, directed, or controlled, if too vehement, the
Diseases shall be rendered more benign, the Ferments of the Humors to greater
Malignities prevented, and a large Part evacuated the first Days, the Feeble
remaining subdued by the internal Motion of the Blood. When they are suddenly
brought to the unhappy Turn of the Disease, what can we expect from their
Observations and Advice only in the Morning, when after the Storm during the
Night, all the Symptoms are allayed? While the Medicines prescribed are
preparing, they often begin to rage more violently, seize on the Brain, the
Breast, the Bowels. The Medicines may be in the Evening destructive. The
salutary Exclusion of the Humors may be fatally stopped, or the Evacuation
fatally promoted by them.

N. B. I remember you asserted, That the Physicians are confined to 30 or 40
vulgar Remedies always ready in the Shop, to be mixed and divided into the
Doses. I suppose, because you are engaged in the advising and attending your
own Patients, and cannot attend to any new, or nice, or difficult Preparation,
how can they apply them to the many different Indications of Cure?

S. B. It Is now thought unbecoming the Physicians to examine all the Chemical
and Galenical Preparations, and select the best of both. We have many Years
past, detered them from that most necessary Part of their Art. We have
therefore, often in the Court of Requests, and in the private Families,
published their lamentable Ignorance, that if they hazard the Prescription of
any but the common Receipts, the Colors, the Scents, the Tastes, the
Consistences expose them to the Laughter or Pity of our Prentices, that they
must be redrest by us, before they are sent to the Patients. And we may send in
what Remedies we please, without the Dread of their Discovery of the Fallacy.
You will be informed, that 6 Eminent Apothecaries Preparations, now of the most
general Use, were condemned in our Hall, vilely sophosticated, wanting every
dearest Ingredient; that 3 or 4 Apothecaries supplied the Army in Ireland with
the most infamous Drugs, confessed by the Druggist; that our Gentry often debate,
whose Apothecary has the best Things; but our Physicians never distinguish, if
the Bole, or Julep, or Powder, or Pill which are mixed by their Order, of 8, or
10 Preparations, are compounded of the best or the worst Ingredients,, cannot
be assured, if the Bark, the Laudanum, the Spirits or Tinctures are good;
whether the Ignorance of the Disease, or the horrible Remedy prevented the
Cure. The College lately voted the Necessity of composing a new Dispensatory,
rejecting the worst Preparations, and substituting the most rational and
efficacious, which the improved experimental Philosophy in all the other Parts
of Europe has discovered, but the modern Learning is of no Use to them and the
People: Disease and Medicines can only be known by the most diligent
Observations and Experiences.

N. B. Are not the Gentry able to detect the Imposture?

S. B. They have many Years suspected it; In almost all Diseases, fly for Help
to the experienced Preparations of their Families communicated to them, before
our Physic and Surgery were corrupted and debased. But when we and the Artists
combine to disguise the Fraud, how easily will the Amusement prevent the
Conviction? If the Fevers are attempted to be cured by Acids, the Chemical
Corrosives are used, whose Force the Metals cannot resist; they operate with
too much Violence, precipitate and colliquate the Blood. If by Alkalies, what
Success will you hope, unless the Constitution can expel the easy Disorder,
when 1000 Doses may be taken without any sort of Operation; and the Bezoar is
demonstrated by the best Physicians of the Age, and many late Experiments to be
indissolvable, which the most corrosive Chemical Spirits cannot penetrate. Not
many Years past, 5 Medicines only pretended to conquer all Diseases whatever,
with our Cordials, designed only to fill the vacancies.

N. B. What are the Remedies we want?

S. B. You know the Bark is a powerful Specific in all intermitting Fevers,
which mixed with the Blood subdues its effervescence, but it must be fatal, when
the Humors are malignant and detained by it. The College therefore in the Poem
complains, That the Art is dwindled into the mere Craft of deceiving the Sick
with few vulgar Compositions; but it wants the generous Specisicks or
Alteratives, that the great Enquiries or the Recovery of them, have been lately
expelled the Practice. Dr. P -- has in his Comments, explained the Design of
the College in that Publication, as my Lord Cook the Tenures of Littleton.
Common Sense, as well as the Philosophy of Physic will inform us, the morbid
Humors are not always prepared to be evacuated by Sweat, by Urine, by the
Bowels, that the vicious Qualities of the Blood must be reduced and disposed
for the Evacuation, by the Medicines of the contrary Qualities. The alteration
of the Blood inflamed, extremely Vicious, fermenting with Violence, and
preventing the collection and expulsion of the morbid Matter, or acid or
watery, or roapy, or the Crasis broken, and the necessary Ferment too languid,
ought to be the first Intention and Design of the Physician. Then he must
warily observe the Progress of the Natural Efforts, and distinguish which of
the different Evacuations are chosen in the various Constitutions, then assist
and promote, and direct the Exclusion, or moderate or repel the precipitate or
excessive Evacuations.

N. B. This is the most Sovereign Present Mankind can receive, if the Health
and Life of all the Inhabitants, are of any value to themselves or the Public;
oblige me with a short Report of it.

S. B. The Comments Publish and Demonstrate the 4 certain Principles or
constituent Parts of all Vegetables and Animals, which variously altered and
mixed produce the Healthy and Diseased Qualities of the Blood: The happy
Application and Union of the Qualities of the Medicines cannot fail to restore
the Natural and Healthy Crasis. They present us the abundant Plenty of the
Degrees of those Qualities mixed and compounded in the vast varieties of their
Virtues, the Magazine of Medicine, Providence has provided to prevent and
subdue all Diseases. Chemistry has unfortunately attempted to improve them by
separating and destroying the Divine Compositions. The separated Principles
cannot unite with the Blood act on it with the most vehement Impressions, are
only of the noblest use in the rare Cases, when the Salutary Violence is
demanded, as the Burnings and Incisions of Surgery, are most necessary to
inflame the languid Spirits and Blood, but they dissipate and wast, with
themselves flying off, the most active Spirits of the Blood and the Nerves.
They are (the Vinous and Volatile Spirits, the Oils) most necessary to enforce
the Evacuations of Sweats and Perspiration, to blow up the Vital Fire when
almost extinguished, or (the Acid Spirits, the fixed Salts) to cool and repress
the inflamed Oil of the mixture of the Blood. But how despicable is the Penury
of Chemistry compared with the Riches and Magnificence of Nature. All the
Vinous, and Volatile and Acad Spirits are but three Medicines differing only in
the Degrees of one Quality. The unfermented Oils are only discriminated by the
being more or less diluted. All the fixed Salts are only varied by the
Circumstances of their Fusion. The Magistcries and Calcinations are a deed
unactive Earth. when you except the Preparations of the Minerals. The greater
part of the Additions of the crafty Arabians to the most rational Pharmacy are
the most absurd Medicines in the World. Most of the Conservet and Sycups
pretend only to prevent the trouble of preparing the most generous Remedies,
the Extracts, Infusions and Decoctions, but are the most oppressive in the
Stomach, the most corrosive corrupters of the Blood. The largest Part of their
Compositions is infamous from the horrible tumults of the contrary Qualities of
50, 100 Ingredients in one, controuling and destroying one another's Efficacies.

N. B. The most Self-evident and serious Truths! The noble Specisick, the Bark,
must be taken without Addition, Powdered, or, infused or decocted, or
extracted, shall it be debased by Sugar to a Conserve or Syrup; or Distiled to
a Simple vappid Water, or to a Brandy Spirit from a fermented Liquor? Shall the
stronger Fire force over the stinking Oil? The wonderful Composition of its
Principles is vitiated or wanting, or corrupted by their brutish Cookeries of
the adored Specific. Surgery will use the Oils, or the Subtilizations of them
by Fermentation in the Vinous Spirits on the rare Occasions, but the
Fomentations, and all the other Topical confess their powerful Operations from
the preserved entire Qualities of the Vegetables. How ridiculous are the
Pursuits of Chimistry, designed only for surprise and the Pleasures of
Amusement? How vain the Ambition to outdo by our Artifices the inimitable
Masterpieces of Nature? How unhappy are the Great and Noble, poor in their
Confinement to the enjoyment of the Trifles they reserve to themselves?

S. B. The Alterative Specificks are the Medicines, which in all the Ages past,
restored the most Difficult Diseases to Health, by correcting the vicious
Qualities of the Blood, by uniting with it and supplying the Principles
defective in the respective Disorders. The innumerable Fevers, Diseases of the
Brain, Breast, Bowels, the Viscera, the Dropsy, Jaundice. Gout, the
Scorbutical Colliquations, the Disorders of the Sex can only be cured by the
frequent use of their Alteratives in the proportioned Quantities, as the
Waters, to dilute with the Efficacy of their Minerals. The Comments range them
under the obvious Classes of their Qualities and Virtues, 1. The Aromaticks,
the Acrid, Spicy or Cordial, the Restorers of the Oil and internal Motion of
the Blood, 2. The Astringent, 3. the Bitter, 4. the Acid, 5. the Sweet, 6. The
Watery. But the Wisdom and Powers of Nature are boundless. The Aromaticks are
more Acrid, or attemperated by the Astringent, or Bitter, or Acid, or Sweet or
Watery Qualities, every other Class regales us with the same large Abundance
and Variety.

N. B. You observed, That the more rare Indications demanded Bleeding, the
Vomits, Purgers, Sweaters, the Chemical Spirits, and the Vinous Waters, to
revive the Vital Flame. I have heard, a Sect of Physicians has cured all
Diseases by the Alteratives you have described conveyed into the Stomach and
Blood, with the Nourishment of our Foods, and the three last are avowed to be
restorative by Nourishment, and Medical, and Correctors of the Vicious Humors.
Will not the Patients fear, that the dead distilled Waters of the Fruits and
Herbs, will turn their Blood into a Dropsy, that the fermented Spirit of the
Grape, of all the Vegetables will evaporate and consume the more active Parts
of the Blood, the Spirits, and therefore every Hour raise the craving a new
supply, till the Apetite and Digestion are destroyed to a Dropsy or
Consumption? Will they command their Cooks to prepare the Flesh with Sugar, or
Distill it to a Simple or Compound Water? Will they feed on the Drops of the
Oil extracted from it?

S. B. Not more than 3 or 4 Centuries are past, since the Arabian invented the
Distillations. EVROTE long preserved the use of the Specific Alteratives, the
collusions of the last Age made the fatal Deluge of the Simple and Compound
Waters. The Ease and Profit of the Apothecaries have abdicated the vast Numbers
of them. Milk-Water and of Black-Cherries, and 3 or 4 of the Compound are only
retained in service. The Physicians are indifferent which of them make the
Julep for the Head, Breast, or Stomach, etc. The Evidences of the Comments are
irresistible, from the attestations of all the most successful Practicers of
this Age, who avow they only divert their Patients with the temperate Juleps,
as Sweetmeats, and from the Philosophy of all the kinds of Distillation, which
can bring over no one Part of the great Natural Composition from any of the
Specific Vegetables but the Aromatic, and from them only the Oil separated
from the other Principles. If there are 50 Plants in the Compound Water, and 25
Aromatic; you have 25 Oils with the smatch only of the Qualities of the Plant:
Every Oil must vehemently inflame, raise the Nausea's and Flatulencies, and the
Tempests of Wind they are pretended to break. The good Sense therefore of our
Gentlemen and Porters prefer the Simple Spirit, or the Infusions Rattafia and
Vsquebaugh before them, and the surest Success in all the windy and Phlegmatic
Colicks supports their Judgment. Shall our Arrogant Physicians and Surgeons be
able to appoint none of the Appropriate Remedies, but these most offensive
Punches, in all the Hours of all the Diseases of all the Constitutions and
Ages? The Appropriate Alteratives, either the Watery Oily, or the Watery Sweet,
or the Sweet Acids, or the Acid bitter in the most agreeable Animal Liquor
lately presented from the most efficacious Plants of the Field, and the more
agreeble Liquors, whose Oils are attemperated by the other Principles, shall
abate every Hour the deputary Motion of the Blood in all the inflammatory
Diseases, reject a part of the Recrements, every Hour, by the Pores, by Urine
or the Bowels, and gradually reduce the ferment to the Natural Temper, and make
the just Crisis by Sweats, and the other Evacuations or the Cutaneous or
Glandular Separations. When we shall have this and a thousand other
Reformations, the Physicians and Surgeons obliged to learn, and prescribe the
most useful Medicines, the Apothecaries carefully preparing the Remedy adapted
to the Circumstances of each Case and Constitution: The People will generously
reward our Industry, we shall not insult and destroy the Professions to make
our Reprizals on them, because Millions of Empiricks, the daring Privateers and
Pirates on our Trade, invade and plunder us.

My dear United Britains,
I assured my good old Gentleman at parting, that War shall be proclaimed
against the wicked Empiricks, that their Defeat shall give the first Triumph to
Great Britain. Though they are as numerous as the French in Flandess, our
Gentlemen of Honor and Virtue, (if every one cares only for himself) will
bravely attack their Intrenchments, when their Courage shall be enflamed, after
reading the Memoirs of the English Practice, presented to me by all the
Physicians and Surgeons of Integrity. When the Arabian Chemistry had presented
to Europe the admirable vinous and volatile Spirits, and the Oils, the acid
Spirits, and the fixed Salts, which justly applied, exert the almost miraculous
Powers; the first reviving the almost dead vital Flame, the other instantly
extinguishing the Fire of the Blood in the Dose of few Drops and Grains:
Millions of Empiricks pestered Italy, France, Germany: Every one pretended to
his own Discovery and laborious Preparation of a supernatural Remedy, each Drop
demanded the Piece of Gold, the Reward of its Title and Achievements: An Army
of Empiricks, as the old Saxons, invaded our Island. The Princes and Nobility,
(who is secure from the Enchantments of the Craft of Physic?) admired and
applauded them, decry'd all the Learning, and Observations, and Medicines of
the Practisers refusing to rely on them in all the Diseases of Mankind. The
fiery Quackery triumphed, 'till the Cheapness of their little Doses was
detected, were forced to load the Sick with the Proportions of other Medicines,
which could support their Gain. The Manufactures flourished in all Parts: The
Officers licensed the Strolers of Plays; the Tumblers, the Monsters and
Elephants, and Tigers, and Bears: They first granted their Licenses to the
Stages, to delude, and cheat, and destroy the People. Our glorious Patron of
Learning, K. Henry VIII. the Lords and Commons, ( Ann. Dom. 1524.) Established,
by Law, the College, and the Surgeons Company, avow in the Act, that they dread
the most public Calamities impending on the Nation, if they expose the Life of
the Subjects to Undertakers, not examined whether they understand the
innumerable Diseases, and the cautious Use of the Medicines. Secondly, If the
Advisers receive their Reward from their Arbitrary Numbers and Rates of the
Doses, obtruded on all Disorders whatsoever. Would to God, Committees of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, were appointed to sit, till they had collected
all the Calamities, which the Sick from the Numbers of Doses in all the
Diseases and Constitutions must suffer. In that and the following Reigns, the
Kings in Council, the Lord Chamberlain, the Judges, frequently animated the
College, to the most vigilant Detection of the Empiricks, often commanded the
Lord Mayor, the Justices, to assist the Censors in their Apprehension and
Punishment. The Society is composed of the Graduates from our famous
Universities, which can only give the Lauguages, the Philosophy, the Rudiments
of the Art, but must be advanced to the greatest Perfection in the most
popoulous City, which presents Millions of Cases, the most diligent Attendance,
the Reports to one another of the salutary or unhappy Success of the most
different Methods and Medicines. The Nobility and Gentry meet in the two Houses
of Parliament to debate de arduis Regni Negotiis, the Physicians mutually
impart and receive in the endowed Lectures, and their Conferences, their
Observations of the most difficult Diseases, the Triumphs of the Specific
Remedies. There is nothing can bassle the most wise Establishment of the
College, but the Arrogance of the Physician, who assumes to himself, as our
Prophets, the whole Art of raising his Patients, as from the Grave, has
monopoliz'd the Science of all things past, present, and to come, affirms all
Societies are useless. But in the Reign of K. James I. ( Ann Dom 1616.) all the
legal Establishments were overturned by the Grants bought of the Courtiers, to
invade all the Professions and Arts. Then 114 Apothecaries obtain a Charter to
deal only in Medicines. The Waters, Spirits, Tinctures, had been sold by the
Distillers. The Confections, Powders, Pills, Ointments, Plasters, by the
Grocers, who sold the Spices, Fruits and Drugs, and the Medicines in the large
Quantities to the Families, who had learned the Mixtures of the Waters, and the
Divisions of the others into Doses from their Physicians Instructions.

My dear Britains. I assure you, Providence can never fail in the abundant
Provision of all things necessary to support Life. Have the People the
Property, and the just Right and Demand of our Care of the Plenty of Bread and
the other Foods? The most sovereign Medicines are equally the easy Purchase of
the Poor, or the Charity of the Wealthy. I appeal to your Experience of the
Medicines prepared in the Houses; of the Quantities bought of the Apothecary,
Chemist, Druggist, or the Compositions imported by the Merchants, of our
Hospitals, where many thousand Patients are yearly medicin'd at the Expense of
a Nobleman's Family. But the Physician's Fee is more affrighting than the Pain
or Fear of Death. But our Kings, the Ministers of State, the Officers of the
Fleet and Army, the Judges, the Clergy, have their Fees from the proportioned
Taxations of all the Conditions; and the Nobility and Gentry, receive the
little Payments of the Cottages of their Manors. The Fees of the Nobility and
Gentry can have no Bounds, but all the Populace cheerfully presented their
Gratuities proportioned to their Circumstances, but with the inestimable
Presents of the innumerable Diseases, which daily increase the Treasure of the
Physicians Knowledge. The Nobility, etc. The Merchants, etc. then gave their
Physicians their proportioned Salaries. The Physicians then near their Houses,
(warranted by their learned Education, and the Examination and Applause of the
College) were tortured by their greatest Interest to subdue the Disease in its
Invasion, abate the Malignity of the Fevers, and often overcome them in 3 or 4
Days, to prevent the necessary Attendance of the Mornings and Evenings of the
tedious Course. Their Interest compelled them to communicate the cautious Use
of the most excellent Medicines in the frequent safe incidental Diseases of the
Families. The vicious sophisticated Medicines were prevented or expelled from
the Chambers. Will you be surpised, when I affirm, that the Physicians
advising all the Sick, and the numerous Distempers near them, shall in few
Years acquire a Science ten thousand times more estimable than the Moderns can
presume? They observed all the Acute and Chronical Diseases, as the Gardner his
Plants rising out of the Earth; and, as a Pilot at the Helm, had no Opposition
from any separate or contrary Interest, and were in all the Dissiculties
assisted by the Council of the most generous Patrons, who bequeathed the Arcana
of the Diseases and Remedies their Predecessors had left them. Will it be
objected, we pursue our Luxuries and our Avarice beyond all the Universe, but
then in the intervals, we are the bravest, and wisest, and most public
Spirited, outdo all in Improvements of Wit, and Pleasures, and Manufactures:
Our Physicians and Surgeons, (though in the great Assemblies we despise and abhor
them) are imagined from their imprudent Prattel in the Public Houses the
greatest Artists of Europe. We have often (my dear United Britains) fought for
Plunder on the Borders; here I defy you, as the Princes of old contested the
Discoveries the most useful and Royal. Our Physicians demonstrate, that the
Philosophy of Nature has but lately advanced Northward, has been insulted in
its Progress by the fierce Disputes of imaginary and impertinent Notions, by
the Hypotheses of Principles and Corpuscles above the Reach of their Senses and
Understanding. Physic, which claims the Honors and Prerogatives from
employing the Philosophy of all Nature to the Divine End of preserving Health
and Life, was the Pursuit of all the Princes, Nobility, Philosophers, after the
first Affright of Diseases. They collected all the Observations of the Powers
of all the Natural Causes and Energies, invading or protecting Mankind.
Hippocrates and Galen, etc. collected all the fundamental, infallible,
universally received Laws of Physic, diversified, as the Governments, by the
various Climates, and Manners, and Diet. The Establishment of the Royal
College, designed the Detection of the Diseases from our Climate, Air, Manners,
and Diet, the Adjustment to them of the Methods of Cure, and the Qualities of
the Medicines approved by the numerous Ages. The barbarous Irruption of
Empiricism, as of the Goths and Vandals, has broken almost all the Attempts.
Dr. Sydenham revived the vast Enterprise, by the Care of all the Sick in his
Province, comparing the Impressions of all the Diseases, the Efforts and
Tendencies of Nature, (the first and most powerful, and most solicitous Agent
in all the Diseases) where its Symptoms promise and operate the never-failing
Recovery, where it craves to be assisted, directed or moderated, or opposed.
History gives the surest Instructions to all the Governments in Peace and War.
The Conduct of Diseases, the Uses of almost all the Parts of the Universe to
prevent or conquer them, are to be addressed to the peculiar Constitutions of
the distant Nations from the great Magazines of their Success. But we must
imitate the Ancients in their Sincerity and Industry. Our Physicians had the
little, but mighty and most necessary Artifice almost peculiar to themselves;
had the proportioned Fee in the Morning, but to prevent the mortal Suspicions,
assumed the frequent Visits most necessary in the most acute and impending
Dangers. How often did they preserve the Patients, and enrich their Knowledge
by the hourly Views of Apoplexies, profuse Vomiting, Purging, Bleeding, when
they remarkt the Operations of the Medicines, directed more powerful, or more
feeble, when they saw the Approaches of new and contrary Symptoms? I have been
assured by my Physicians of Honor and Virtue, that the first Degrees of all
Diseases, which can affect Mankind, are safe, the appearing fierce and painful
Symptoms often ensure the Life, the Efforts of Nature directed, not repelled
and destroyed, but the advanced Degrees of all the Distempers are as fatal as
the Pestilence. Our Physicians than could hear or see the first Signals of
Danger. They did not in the first Moments decree the Methods of Bleeding,
Vomiting, Purging, the 8 or 10 sweating Doses for the succeeding 24 Hours. But
they warily observed the Pulse, the Heat, the natural Evacuations by the Pores,
Urine, or the Bowels; the next View demonstrated the Blood now depurating it
self, the Salutary Evacuation begun, or the continued Evacuation rejecting the
morbid Humors, abating the Fury of the Disease, and promising the Victory. The
other Artifice produces its wonderful Effects. The different Conditions gave
the half Fee in the Chronical Diseases at the Physicians House. They did not
advise the poor Gentlemen at the Tipling-Houses, without the Informations of
the Urine, an Hour before a Part of the Blood, and the surest Messenger from
it, examined with the other Evidences.

Shall we then, my dear South Britains, conclude with the Gentlemen of Quality
and the Remonstrance of the College in the Poem, that the Modern Physic is a
Dangerous Craft, and put it down, as the Royal-Oak-Lottery, or restore it to
its Integrity and Sufficiency. The Disease is known, and the Remedy most
obvious, the excessive disproportioned increase of the Apothecaries, and the
Oppressive Invasion of their Property by the infinite Empiries. In all the wise
Government in Europe they are prevented from their multiplication pernicious to
themselves and the Profession and People. The 114 in the Charter ( An. 1616.)
increast by the 2 or 3 Prentices in every shop, had filled all the streets of
the City and the Villages about it. In their Distress from the Encroachments of
the Quacks and themselves, the Court-Physicians, and a small part then of the
Collegiates proposed to go snacks with them, taking the half of the 20 or 30,
or 40 l. from all the Fevers and the Smallpox, etc. the most easy and secure,
as the most perplexed and hazardous, and 100 or 200 l. in the long Disorders.
How can it be? But what cannot the combination of 2 Artists atchieve? The
vulgar Medicines are only to be used; the Cordials, Sweaters, Sleepers, etc.
Instead of their Mixtures and Divisions in the Family from the then known and
cheap Quantities, all must be parted by the Apothecary into little Doses. They
are disguised from their Knowledge by contrived Pompous Names, in the Latin
Prescription. Every Dose must be pretended to be a rare and precious thing, all
the Boles and Powders avowed to be compounded with Bezoar, though the ten
thousandth Part is not imported, and all the Juleps in all Disorders must be
enriched with Perle, inferior to many of the most plentiful Alkalies. That the
Prescript may swell to the admired Bulk and Grandeur, the common Medicines,
which are each perfect and complete for the respective Intentions, must be
jumbled together 20 or 40 in each Dose, whose Ingredients may make 300 or 400
Drugs in each Medicine. You see My dear South Britains, That the first Great
Law of Nature is violated, that, as the Bark, its Sovereign Medicines in all
the other Afflictions shall not be affronted and disturbed by the absurd
additions, which ^ertainly make the benign Distempers most fatal, and the
dangerous most deadly. The Physicians and Surgeons then confessed, that ^hey
killed the Patients and their Arts and Societies, but they would ^ast their
Time, they had the greater Fee for the Morning Visit only, they had the
enjoyment of good Company. The Apothecaries had the ^are of the Symptoms of the
Evening and Night, the Medicines must be taken at the appointed Hours, or new
directed by them, or from their Report of the greater or new Distress to the
Physician. The Conspirators generously bestowed the meaner Patients on the
Apothecaries, and assumed the Grandeur of treating only the Diseases of Quality
and Wealth. But when the terrible Payments of the Bill made the Fees
insupportable, the Houses were compelled to use the Apothecaries in all Cases,
till the Life is despaired of, who then appoint the most choice Physician. Is
it not inevitable, that the Men of the Character of the Mirmils, Querpo's, and
the Bards, shall attest that there is no Omission or Commission in the Method
of Cure the Patient has been under, that they communicate their Knowledge and
all their Medicines? They shall be discarded if they abate the number of the
Doses of the now 30 vulgar Medicines of the Shop, if they presume to restore
the Appropriate Specificks, which must govern the Cure of Diseases. It is not
impossible (my BRITAINS) to find out the Redress of your Calamities; Your
Ancestors have reserved many of the infallible Medicines long since abdicated,
and thy have bequeathed to you their care of the Public, and their Wisdom to
preserve it. Their first care was to support the Fidelity, and Industry, to
improve the Science of the young Physicians, warranted to the People, as the
Judges of the Circuits, as the Coins and Measures. The Charters preclude the
Hospitals from usurping the Diseases from the Physicians and Surgeons care.
They are commanded to receive only the maimed and wounded Seamen and Soldiers,
or the Casualties of the City: They foresaw the Dangers of the Diseased from
the rude conveyance to them: from the stench of the Rooms, by the excessive
Numbers, and the Scents of Dressings: from the Sleep broken, by the Groans of
the Pained and Departing, and the clamorous Attendance: from the gross Diet as
in the Houses of Labor: from the use of the vulgar Remedies only, and the
suspected cruel Refusal of the just Proportions: from the rare and confused
Advices of the Physicians and Surgeons. The Clergy, who in the Spittal Sermons,
report the Restrictions of their Charity to the wounded and maimed, will revive
in the Citizens the Ancient Usage, when the Poor were saved by the hourly care
of their Physicians and Surgeons, observing the tendency of each Disease, and
the Powers of the Remedies, with the affectionate Attendance of the Houses, the
undisturbed Reposes in the Air not corrupted, the Diet adjusted to all the
Constitutions, and the steady use of the Specific Medicines. This Charity will
introduce the Rewards given to the Physicians and Surgeons in all the Cities of
Europe, with the Assurance, that this Method only can raise Physic and Surgery
to the greatest Perfection, and the Applauses of the Calamitous near them
relieved by their Bounty. The Universities and the Clergy will animate your
Zeal to protect the Professions established by Law. The College has in the Poem
humby proposed, That the weighty Affair may be examined and judged by Visitors,
who will command the surrender of the Physicians and Surgeons, and Apothecaries
Charters that Statutes shall be adjusted, which shall not be broken by their
mutual rage and the abhorred Apostasies of their Members. We may fix the
necessary Boundaries from the Laws the Eastern Emperors and Ministers (...)
State Religously observe, who must, every Year, hear an Hour one of all the
Professions and Trades. In the mean time, the Physicians and Surgeons, must
most industriously discover the innumerable Circumstances of all the Diseases,
must examine the Qualities, and Virtues, and Preparations of all the Medicines.
Then the Government will view with Pleasure, when it shall restore the
Societies, (as when the Universe was formed from nothing,) the Beauty, and
Goodness, and Harmony of the Parts. The Harangue on St. Luke's Day, will
entertain the Audience, that we have at last begun to apply the Sacred Truths,
the Observations of many Ages, collected by the famous Greek and Latin Authors,
to the British Diseases, whose Language and most useful Philosophy has not been
understood by our most eminent Practisers. Will the Orator be able to persuade,
that in England, the Advice for Nothing had undone the Poor in every Sickness
by the Sovereign Medicines, ten times cheaper than their Food: that it raised
the Apothecaries and the Empiricks on the Ruin of Physic and Surgery, who are
elevated and sunk by the Apothecaries, and must therefore, with the most
infamous Treachery, assault and destroy one the other, and their Professions:
That the Physicians and Surgeons near the Court, had never seen the Rise and
Progress of any Disease, had tampered only with the common Receipts of 30
vulgar Remedies, almost always fatal to the Royal Family, the Nobility, and
Millions of the People? How will they be surpised, that an hundred Years had
past, during the Sales of Patents and Charters, and the Rebellion, and, after
the Restoration, and the more pernicious Civil-War of our Follies and Vices,
before the Collegiates could convince the Nation, that the Right and Property
in the Plenty of all the Remedies, and the Protection of their Life, can only
be restored by the Defense of the Apothecaries against the Deluge of the Native
and the Foreign Empiricks, and the Regulation of the Number of their Shops?

FINIS.

