HONOR THE KING A SERMON Preached on the SOLEMN FAST, January 30. 1672/3.

Wherein the Duty of SUBJECTS to their SOVEREIGN is Opened and Asserted, the
Principles and Practices inconsistent therewith are Detected and Condemned, and
the Innocent Vindicated from Unjust Censures.

At Birmingham in Warwickshire, at the Public Meeting Place there Licenced
according to His MAJESTY'S Gracious Declaration.

By Samuel Fisher, M. A. late Preacher of the Word at Thornton in Cheshire.

He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both
are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15.

Praesens aetas probris onerabit quos oderit,
Posteritas suum cuique impendet.
London, Printed for George Calvert at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane, and Hierom
Gregory Bookseller in Birmingham in Warwickshire, 1673.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE Lord DE LA MERE, Baron of Durham-Massy.
Right Honorable, and my very Honored Lord,
THIS poor Brat that now creeps under your Lordshps wing for shelter, was
begotten and brought forth upon your Lordships Freehold at the Parsonage of
Thornton in Cheshire, to which your Honor (without my seeking) was pleased
freely to present me; in that place, after your Lordships great adventures to
serve His Majesty, our Lord and Sovereign, in your cordial endeavors for His
reduction to His undoubted Right, with the hazard of your All in Temporals, and
your great sufferings in the Tower for those Loyal (though misconstrued)
endeavors; and after God, had succeeded second attempts, (when your Lordship
had broken the ice) and had brought our Sovereign Lord (with great rejoicing)
to His Native Soil, People, and Inheritance; I judged it my duty to acquaint my
People of that place with my duty and theirs to our Sovereign Lord the King,
which accordingly I prosecuted several days from that Text, and in the same
method and expressions as they now lie before your Lordship.

Since that time it has pleased the wise and just providence of God, to suffer
my self, with many hundreds more, and more deserving, to be laid aside as dead
men; save only that (through a merciful connivance of Authority) those dead men
did speak now and then to smaller numbers of the People, where it might be done
with least noise and appearance of contempt to Authority, (which we heartily
bless the Lord for, and give thanks to Authority for their moderation. In this
condition (my Lord) I had thought I should have lain, being upon the sixty
eighth year of my age, till God should call me off the stage of this world: but
in the midst of dying thoughts, and under the stroke of a civil death, of ^
sudden, and unexpectedly, came forth words of life to those that were in their
graves, from His Majesty the Lords Anointed, whose Heart the great God had
inclined to give them a gracious Indulgence to stand up again, and to speak in
the Name of the Lord to his People. How joyful this has made the Hearts of
Thousands of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, both Ministers and others, it is
hard to express. Upon this good news, (my Lord) amongst others, I applied my
self, with the first, to petition His Majesty's License; which being obtained,
I did without delay fall upon my work, to wind up the bottom of my days in
the service of my Master, and for the Souls of Men. Whilst I was in the
improvement of my slender T^le^t, the Thirtieth of January coming on, it was
resolved amongst us solemnly to observe the Day, the preaching of the Sermon in
the Sermon in the afternoon (the Congregation having been at the Parish Church
in the morning) was by my Brethren made my Province. I submitted to their
determination, knowing that I had a Sermon in readiness to serve the occasion.
When the day came I did address my self to the work, (though much indisposed,
by reason of an arrest of the Gout, which had siezed upon me in the interim)
hoping that when my Sermon was done, my work had been ended; but contrary to my
expectation, when the Sermon was preached, I fell under an honest rape, (I dare
not give it worse language) and was beset from all quarters by those that were
Hearers, to Print the Sermon; and was told plainly upon my refusal, that if I
would not part with my Notes, they would amongst themselves gather up the
fragments of what they had taken, and Print them without my leave. My Lord, I
was I thought fixedly resolved, having once escaped the Press, never to come
there again, there being so many in this learned Age, able to serve their
generation to all purposes, with the Artillery of their Pens, which I never
durst think my self in the least measure accomplished for: but (my Lord) who
can withstand a torrent? I am forced with an unwilling willingness in this
storm* to throw my goods overboard to prevent a wrack; what will be the fate
of this poor Sripling, thrust into the wide World, I know not, if innocence in
the intention, and charity in the interpretation do not procure its pass, it is
like to suffer; however, it must to the Waters in an Ark of Bulrushes, and take
its lot.

Now, my honored Lord, I have given you this trouble in a broken account of
what has passed in the latter p^^t of my days* I humbly crave your Lordships
pardon for ^he boldness of this address to your Lordship, having none amongst
Nobles to whom I owe more, nor from whom I can promise my self more candor,
and fair respect, then with your Lordship. My Lord, since I left those parts,
distance of place has not made me forget my duty; and though I have wanted
opportunity to wait upon your Lordship where your residence has been, yet I
have not ceased daily to make mention of your Lordship, and noble Family, for
the blessings of the great God, the Father of mercies, to fall upon your
Lordship, and all yours, that you may live long, and whiles you live be
singularly instrumental for the glory of God, the service of His Majesty, and
the Country round about you. Now to that God (who has promised to honor those
that honor him) I do humbly commend your Lordship, and beg leave to style my
self.

My LORD, Your Lordships humbly devoted, (when I can do nothing else) to serve
you with my poor requests to God, who has Heaven in his gift, Samuel Fisher.
From my Study in Birmingham, March 10, 1673.
Honor the KING.
LET no man wonder to see a Minister of the Presbyterian persuasion stand in a
Desk this day, to preach a Sermon upon occasion of this sad Solemnity: to call
my self a Minister is no presumption, to be of the Presbyterian persuasion, I
take it for no disparagement, to stand here upon this day to preach, is no way
excentrick to the motion of Presbyterians.

Presbyterians are as willing to observe the commands of Authority as other
men, in matters indubitable; and where I have lived, it has been the practice
to obey Authority in the observation of this day. I grudge no man the Honor of
his Loyalty, but I cannot but look upon it as a heavy grievan^e, for any sort
of men to monopolize the style and opinion of Loyalty to themselves, as if
other ^en of different persuasions in some other matters, must needs have
forfeited their Loyalty because of this difference. It has been the sad fate
of the Presbyterians to lie under this odium; when men have had nothing else to
charge them with, to make the World believe that they wanted Loyal hearts to
their Prince. But if to pray for the Lords Anointed, and those that are sent by
him; if to preach subjection to their Authority as God's ordinance, if to obey
and submit for conscience sake to their just and lawful commands, if to pay
tribute and custom to them according to Law, if to endeavor to preserve, to
rescue, to vindicate and engage for them, if t^ disown unjust and usurped
Power, and to suffer upon such an account, may be accepted for a testimony,
these men do not, will not want their Vouchers. And as to the sad occasion of
this days Solemnity, let it offend no man if I say (not to make comparisons)
they were not behind most, if any, in their cordial, stren^^^^^ endeavors,
upon the suspicion of the design, to have prevented that Barbarous Bloody
Stroke; and when it was given. were as true and sad Mourners, did carry as
heavy hearts, and moyst-eyes, for the loss of their Sovereign, and the sin
against God, as others that would fain blemish their Loyalty: And blessed be
God His Majesty, our dread Sovereign, being possessed of the truth, has
honored with His testimony, when the envy of other men would have blasted
their reputation. Loyalty terminative is a Flower of the Crown; blame us not if
we be unwilling to be excluded from bearing a part in adding to those Ornaments
that must Crown the Royal Brow. And if any will yet question their Integrity,
let them show us a fairer testimony then the R^monstrance of the Presbyterian
Ministers of London, sent in a Letter from them to the General and Council of
War, Jan. 18. 1648. when they were upon the Trial of His Majesty in the High
Court of Justice; in which they deal most plainly, convincingly, and very
clearly, though to the hazard of their lives, with which they were threatened.
Besides their representation to the General, and Council of War, they published
their Vindications from the unjust Aspersions cast upon them by Malevolent
Spirits; let me give you one passage in their Vindication, it is this: We hold
our selves bound in duty to God, Religion, the King, Parliament and Kingdom, to
profess before God, Angels, and Men* That we verily believe, that which is so
much feared to be now in agitation, viz. The taking away the Life of the King,
in the present way of Trial, to be not only not agreeable to any Word of God,
the Principles of the Protestant Religion, (never yet stained with the least
drop of the Blood of a King) or the fundamental constitution and Government of
this Kingdom, but contrary to them, as also the Oaths of Allegiance, the
Protestation of May 5. 1641. and the Solemn League and Covenant, from all or
any of which Engagements, we know not of any Power on Earth able to absolve u^
or others.

1 Pet. 2.17. Honor the KING.
I Shall neither look backwards nor forwards, as it is usual, but take the very
words as they lie, Honor the King, (...). It may be understood specifically,
as differing from other Governors, and the chief amongst them; him whom the
Apostle calls Supreme, by way of distinction, (...), ut qui superemineat, or
supereminently, 1 Pet. 2.13. or synechdochically, as comprehending all others
of what kind soever, the rest that are subordinate being but sprigs from this
root; and so Calvin understands it: And he thinks the Holy Ghost makes use of
this name the rather to put the duty out of all question.

1. Because this name, and the kind of government, was of all others to the
People of Rome most offensive; yet the Apostle urges it upon these scattered
Jews, to Honor the Rulers, though Caesar's, yea, though Heathen Caesar's: and
the rather, because they being Jews, and the seed of Abraham, were apt to shake
off the yoke, and thought much to be in subjection to any, especially to
Heathen Princes and Governors: And therefore after he had more largely urged
it before, ver. 13. he touches it again ver. 17. Honor the King. Vid. Calv.
sup. locum.

Honour] it is comprehensive of the whole duty of Subjects to their Princes, or
Rulers, to say the least, whether the supreme and most excellent amongst men in
his Territories, (for in no other sense do we give Supremacy to any) the
highest among men having one above him, i. e. God, by whom he reigns, and to
whom he must give an account. And in such a sen^e are the words Supreme to be
understood in the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, as Dr. Reynolds does
answer to Calvin, and the Magdenburgh Centuriators, vid. Rivet in 5. praec.

I say this Honor is comprehensive of all duties, as we find it in the fifth
Commandment, where the wisdom of God (which delights to express much in little)
coucheth all relative duties in a word, Honor thy Father and Mother: So here,
all the duties of Subjects in this, Honor the King.

The Doctrine: It is the duty of all Subjects to Honor their King.

I shall not at this time, nor do I need to discourse of the several kinds of
govern^^nt, nor particularly of Kingly government; nor of the nature and
distinction of Subjects, especially in a Monarchy, where all are Subjects,
except the King himself that is Supreme, and amongst men has none above him.
Subordinate Rulers, though they bear some part of the government for the ea^e
of the Prince, and for the benefit of the People, yet they are still subject to
the chief Magistrate, to whom from them the meanest Subject may appeal in case
of mal-administration. Scripture proof, the fifth Commandment, Exodus 20.12.
Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 7. Titus 3.1. Prove. 24.21. Eccles. 10.20.

The opening of the duty to Honor.
Question. What is implied in this duty to Honor?

Answer. There are diverse things implied, though some make more, some fewer:
They are such as these.

First, Reverence: and this is both inward in the heart, in the high estimation
of them, and maintaining awful and reverential thoughts toward them, 2 Samuel
14.17. and Chap. 19.27. the contrary forbidden Eccles. 10.20. And as it is
inward in the heart, so it ought to be outward in the expression, in speech,
gesture, action, as there is occasion to express it.

One gives us six particulars whereof this Honor of Reverence is made up.

1. Divinae ordinationis agnitio, the owning of Gods Ordinance and Institution,
Romans 13, 1 Pet. 2.13.

2. Honesta de Magistrat^ existimatio, an honorable esteem of the Magistrate:
we must look upon them, as one says, tanquam Deus terrenos, i. e. as earthly
Gods; as Gods, because they represent him, and are in his stead; yet but as
earthly, because they must die like men, Psalm. 8^.7.

3. Honorifica Magistratus compellatio, such honorable titles as may best
express the reverence that is in the heart, as the Woman of Tekoah and
Mephibosheth did, 2 Samuel 19.27. 2 Samuel 14.17. Yet here we must take heed of
flattery, and unjust praises, least they prove a temptation to them, and a
provocation in God's eye, as in the case of Herod, Acts 12.

4. Honorifica coram Magistratu inclinatio; such reverent gestures of body, as
carry the fairest sign of respect and reverence to Authority, as it was
observed of Ioseph's Brethren to Joseph, as Lord of the Country, Genesis 42.6. in
Nathan to Solomon, 1 Kings 23. and in Bathsheba's Mother 36.31.

5. Infirmitatum condonatio, or rather obtectio: I shall render it, the
charitable covering of their infirmities. They are Men in respect of
infirmities, not Angels, though, in respect of Dignity, as Angels among Men;
they have their naevi as well as their Subjects. They do but flatter them that
ascribe perfection to them, and will undertake to justify every thing that a
Prince does, because he does it that is a Prince; as if the very place did
alter the nature of the action: this is to call evil good, which has a woe
denounced to it, Isaiah 5.20. We may endeavor to cover the infirmities of
others; this common charity requires to our Brethren, Prove. 10.12. and 17.9. 1
Cor. 13.5. much more to our Rulers, because their places are higher, and their
temptations greater; but we must not justify them, least we make our selves
partners. Doubtless it is a fault to inhance, to aggravate, and much more to
divulge and spread with an evil intention the errata, especially of those that
are chief; every thing should be construed in the better part, that may bear a
better construction. There may be many things that we know not of to excuse a
tanto, either ignorance, provocation, evil counsel, or want of those that
should and would deal faithfully with them: and such things considered would
make them objects of our pity and grief, rather then of anger and displicency.

6. The last is Vitatio detractionis, Exodus 22.28. Eccles. 10.20. but this I
take to be included in the former, which will not stand with detraction.

Secondly, The next thing implied in this duty of Honor, is obedience; and
this is a singular way of honoring: And therefore the general in the fifth
Commandment, which is couched under the name of Honor, when it comes to be
taken in sunder, and the duties of Inferiors to Superiors particularly
applied, it makes obedience a special part of this Honor, Wives must obey,
Ephesians. 5.22, 24. Children obey, Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20. Servants obey, Col.
3.22. People obey their Ministers, Heb. 13.17. and it cannot be imagined it
should be less to the Prince, and chief Ruler of the People, from his Subjects,
but rather to be strengthened by the eminency of his place; the greatness of
his Authority, the necessity of subjection for the common good. To the
Magistrate is committed the power of Rule by God, and therefore they have their
name Rulers, 2 Samuel 23.3. Exodus 22.28. And if of right it belong to them to
Rule, it must needs follow that it is the Subjects duty to obey; for these two,
Rule and Subjection, are relatives: He does not rule, that has none of right
to yield him subjection and obedience. But for this the Scripture is clear, and
is not questioned, Romans 13. Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. Genesis 41.40. Deuteronomy. 17.8, and
14. Josh. 1.16, 17, 18.

The command of God, Titus 3. the celsitude and dignity of Magistra^y, Romans 13.
the utility and profit that* comes to subjects by the vigilant ca^e of Rulers,
Romans 13. the necessity of subjection, because it cannot be denied without sin,
and danger of Gods displeasure, Romans 13.2, 5. Prove. 24.21. There be examples
enough of the judgments of God, upon those that have rebelled against
Authority, Numb. 16.3, 29, 30, 31, 32. And we need not to go far for the proof
of it, if we have been observers of God's providence in our own times.
Obedience is certainly a duty from the Subject to the Sovereign; but we must
understand it of lawful commands, where the command of the Magistrate does not
clash with the commands of God. It obedience be required to things unlawful, we
must fly to that of the Apostle, Acts 4.19. and 5.29. Whether it be lawful to
obey God or Man, judge ye. In such cases, though we may not resist, yet we may
and ought to suspend our act, using the best lawful means to qualify the
Superior power. As

1. To offer our protestations, that we refuse not out of perverseness, but
conscience.

2. To use the mediation of Friends to beget a right understanding.

3. Humble Petitions to the Magistrate for his Indulgence, that our Consciences
may be kept pure, and our God at peace with us.

If this will not serve, we are bound to yield up our selves to the penalty of
the Law, and to compensate the want of active, by a passive obedience, chosing
affliction rather then sin, mourning that we should be put upon it to suspend
our active obedience to our Superiors for the preventing of God's wrath, and
the security of our own peace and happiness. I am not unprovided altogether to
solve the cases that border upon this Doctrine, but did foresee it would cut
off all the rest of my work. Besides, we are under the sense of the warm and
benevolent beams of our politic Sun, who has given the world to know, that he
carries tender bowels toward his Subjects tender consciences, who must be
convinced by Arguments, rather then forced by penalties. And therefore by an
act of grace; he has pleased to suspend the execution of the paenal Laws
against such, and to indulge his Subjects of different persuasions, a liberty
to worship God as they are fully persuaded in their own minds that they ought
to worship him. And for this grace and favor, as we bless the disposer of
hearts for inclining his Majesty's heart to afford us this gracious indulgence,
so we trust we shall never cease to bless his Majesty, and to give him thanks
who has prevented our petitions to him, and given what we impetuously longed
for before we asked: And we do profess our selves for ever obliged, not only to
acknowledge this superlative favor, but to endeavor to the utmost to walk
worthy of it, that it may never repent our Sovereign that he has thus warmed
our hearts with his Indulgence. And shall ever pray that he may never want
mercy from our gracious God, that has so freely showed mercy to us, in setting
both our hearts and tongues at liberty to utter the high praises of the eternal
God, and to pay the largest acknowledgments of our gratitude to our gracious
King.

Thirdly, Another duty incumbent upon Subjects, is the free and cheerful
payment of tribute and customs, according to Law. I shall neither trouble my
self nor you with the etymology of the words, tributum, vectigal, redditus, nor
with the several distinctions that some of the Learned do give, in reference to
the persons, whether urbani or rustici, or from the matter whence they arise,
whether de mobilibus, or immobilibus, de exportatis, or importatis; whether
privatum or publicum, ordinarium or extraordinarium. I take in all the just
payments due to the Magistrate, of what kind soever, whether hereditary or
voluntary, and which way soever to be raised according to Law.

1. For this duty the Scripture is clear: 1. We have the command of God, Romans
13.6, 7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute, and
custom to whom custom is due. And this was the determination of the case by
our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was maliciously set upon by the Pharisees,
sending the glavering Herodians by propounding a Question to get an advantage
in the Answer; the Question was, Whether lawful to give tribute to Caesar or
not? ushered in with a subtle insinuation, Matthew. 22, 11, 16, 17. Christ
though well aware of their wicked hypocrisy, though he rebukes them sharply,
yet refuses not to resolve the Question: And you may see how wisely, and how
justly he determines the case, Matthew. 22.19, 20, 21. Render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's: Which is in
effect, let Caesar have his due, but let him see he neither deny, nor incroach
upon God's right.

2. Christ himself he might have challenged freedom, yet to avoid offense did
himself pay tribute, the Most probably this was the yearly tribute to the
Temple, gathered by the Jews according to Exodus 30.13. not a tribute to the
Roman Power, but to the King of Heaven; so our Savior intimates, that he was
the Son of God, and therefore, according to the privilege of Kings Sons; should
be free, only (the Jews not being convinced of this) to avoid offenc^ he
submits to their demand. Vid. Dr. Hammo^d in Matthew. 17.26.
Didrachma, which was of the value of fifteen pence, when it was demanded, as
you see Matthew. 17.24, 25, 26, 27. for Peter was sent to the sea to take a Fish,
in whose mouth he should find a piece of Money, i. e. a Stater, which was half
an ounce, to serve for them both; by which, though to avoid offense he
submitted to the payment of tribute, yet in doing it, he showed himself a
greater Lord, then he was for whom tribute was required of him, Lord of the
Seas, that could command his tribute from the irrational Fishes; yet how great
soever, tribute he pays: and in paying of it himself, who might so justly have
pleaded his freedom, (being of the Royal stock) he gives us a pattern, and puts
it out of doubt as our duty, who can pretend to no such immunity.

3. The Apostle gives a special reason for this exhibition of tribute and
custom, because they are the Ministers of God, that do continually attend
upon* this very thing, Romans 13.6. It is the employment of Princes to wait upon
Government, as the Ministers of God; and therefore since it is their work, it
is reason, as in cases inferior, and far different, they should have the
recompense of their work, and a recompense answerable to the dignity of their
place, and nobleness of their employment. Shall the Ministers of Men in the
lowest services be rewarded, and taken care for, and shall it be worse with the
Ministers of God in so great a service? Romans 13.6.

4. There lies a necessity upon it, for the service of the Commonwealth; the
great things that do lie upon the hands of Kings and Princes, cannot be managed
without a great charge: Tributa illa sunt ornamenta pacis, subsidia belli and
nervi Reipub. And Cicero says, Impossible est ut sacris tributis non illatis,
alioqui Respublica conservetur. How shall the just splendour and magnificence of
Princes be upheld; Ministers for Embassies, Negotiations, Counsels,
Intelligence be provided for, military Forces, whether for Sea or Land, toward
the defense of Kingdoms be maintained, Palaces of Princes raised or repaired,
besides many other Public services, nisi tributa sisco Magistratus inferantur?
I^ is a saying of Menenius Agrippa, As the whole body must needs be brought to
a mouldring condition, alimentis ventriculo denegatis*: so it m^st needs fare
with the Commonwe^lth, if the Magistrate be not supplied by his tributes. Nec
quies Gentium sine armis, nec arma sine stipendiis, nec stipendi^ sine tributis
haberi possunt, says T^^i^us.

5. Thus it has been from the beginning, and all Nations wh^^soever have still
paid tribute and cu(...) their Lords and Rulers, our Savior takes it for
gr^nted* Matthew. 17.25. 1 Samuel 8.11. 1 Kings 4.6.2 S^^. 8.2. This duty takes
hold not only of persons in a Civil, but in an Eccle^^astical capacity, as is
(...) by our Savior's practice, and the general command. And therefore we
cannot but explode and damn the presumptuous encroachments of the Romish Clergy
in their Plea, and challenge for immunity, both to their Persons and Purses
from the Civil Magistrates power and claim both of tribute, and service from
them. For though it be true that some Christian Princes, have indulged great
Privileges to the Churches Servants in the Ministry, yet its as true, those
liberties, especially amongst the Romish Clergy, have been abused to the
contempt of Magistracy, to Pride, Sloth and Luxury, and the great injury of the
Commonwealth. And it is as true, that the privilege not being of Divine right,
it is no less in the power of succeeding Princes, to require both tribute,
obedience and service from them, then in others to give it way; especially
where the abuse of a privilege calls for the retraction and abrogation of such
Indulgence. And though it had a very great show of piety and devotion in some
Princes to grant such an Indulgence to the Church, yet I am of the mind of
Festus Hominius, Serio it aque Principes Christiani cogitare tandem debent, an
aequum sit in tant^ honorum Ecclesiasticorum affluentia, istis immunitatibus
tot otiosorum ventrium luxum atque ignavia^ foveri, atque interim reliquos
subditos tanto gravioribus vectigalibus onerari?

Fourthly, That which treads upon the heels of the former, as a duty incumbent
upon Subjects, is not only to obey, and not to resist lawful Authority, but to
defend the supreme Magistrate, and those that are lawfully deputed by him in
their Persons, Government, and just Rights against all Invasions by foreign
Enemies, all usurpations of Men that ambitiously hunt after unjust Dominion,
all cursed As^assinations or murderous intentions against their Persons, with
all traiterous Conspiracies, whether against their Persons or Government from
any whatsoever: and this they are bound to do though it be to the hazard and
loss of their estates, lives, and whatsoever is dear unto them in a lawful way,
and according to their capacities.

1. The ground of this is not only the general Rule of the sixth Commandment,
which engages every man to be his Brothers keeper, and to endeavor the
preservation of his Brother's person, as the fifth does his Honor, the eighth
his Estate.

2. But because the Prince is the Lords anointed, a person designed,
appropriated and consecrated unto the place and employment of Rule and
Government. And God has given a peculiar charge, saying, Touch not mine
Anointed, do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.15. Kings, Priests, and Prophets,
were all anointed under the Law, as typifying the triple Office of Christ the
Mediator: and of these consecrated ones God took a special care, and gave a
special charge, Touch them not ( i. e.) to offer any violence; to do them any
injury.

3. All the people have an interest in him; he is a public, yea the most
public Person, in a sort the breath of the Peoples nostrils, Lam. 4.20. their
lives, peace and welfare are much what bound up in his; he cannot fall,
especially in a way of violence, without the disturbance, nay hazard and
confusion of the whole Body, to which he is the politic Head. We have had
woeful experience of this in our own times, in the wicked and monstrous
Usupations of some, who by the cutting off of the supreme Magistrate, under
specious pretenses, took the reins of Government into their own hands, not only
to the great dissatisfaction, discontent, and abhorring of all loyal Subjects,
but to the oppressing of many, and the hazard of overturning all our just
Privileges, yea of the very being of the Nation, if God in his mercy had not
prevented.

4. This our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy do bind us to, which ought to
be esteemed sacred and inviolable: no man can attempt any thing in this kind,
but he must dash upon the Rock of Perjury, as well as Treason; sins that are
sufficient to split any man upon the Rocks of Death and Damnation, if not
repented of, Romans 13. You see how tender David was of the person of Saul,
though he was David's enemy, one that did persecute him with deadly rage, Psalm.
7.4. Psalm. 143.3. one that in his persecution hunted after his precious blood,
and engaged all that he could to be serviceable to him in his design, 1 Samuel
18.25. and 19.2, 10, 11, 20, 21. and 22.7, 8. and 23.7, 8. one that hated and
persecuted him without a cause; a man that not only had never done him h^rt,
but had been the choicest instrument of service for the preservation of him and
his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 19.4, 5. Psalm. 7.3, 4. and 35.7. yea though he were himself
anointed to be King in his room, and had the prom^se of the Kingdom, 1 Samuel
16.12, 13. yea further* though he had the opportunity, and the life of Saul,
his bloody enemy, put into his hand more then once, 1 Samuel 24.4. and the 26 8*
9. yet he would not* he durst not put forth his hand against the Lord's
Anointed: and when he had but for testimony cut off the lap of his garment, he
has upon record left the account, how his heart smote him for the doing of it,
1 Samuel 24.1. As the rebellion of Absalom was most unnatural and accursed, for
which himself and his confederates were involved under the just wrath of God, 2 Samuel 15. and 18.6, 7, 8, 9. so was the faithfulness of Hushai, and those that
went with David, highly renowned; you have the story of Hushai seeking to
defeat the counsel of Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 17. 7, 8. But that which I would
present you withal, is the loyal and most memorable expression of the
tenderness of those that adhered to David, when he was deserted of other of his
Subjects, you have it 2 Samuel 18.2, 3. I pray read it.

If you read the Scriptures, you will be furnished with instances of Peoples
readiness to go forth to enounter enemies in case of invasion to their greatest
hazard, 2 Chronicles. 14.8, ad 14. and 20.20. Judges 4.10. and 5.9. How memorable
are the names of David, 1 Samuel 17.32, 33. and 19.8. of Mordecai, in discovering
the treason against the King, Esther 6.1, 2. of Iohanan, Ier. 40.13, 14, 15.
you might be loaded with excellent examples from the Histories of Romans and
Greci^ns, running upon death themselves, to rescue and preserve the lives of
their famous Governors. But I have said enough, to show that there lies a duty
upon Subjects to stand up for the preservation and defense of the lives,
government, and safety of their Princes.

And 1. this may serve to discover the degenerate state of the Church of Rome,
and those cursed Doctrines and Practices maintained there against this
Scripture-loyalty: What must we think of their Doctrines, Let him that
questioneth any of this himself, read but Council. Lateran. sub Innocent. III.
and Council. Romans sub Greg. VII. and Henry Fowlis Book of their treasonable
Doctrines and Practices, who by a multitude of exact citations proves it not a
few single men's Opinion, but the current Doctrine of their Church, and most
famous Doctors; a Book that more fully opens them to the World then any one
that ever was before written.
that do teach, That Subjects may lawfully break their Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy to their Natural Liege-Lord, if the Pope absolve them from them?

2. Of the lawfulness of Killing and Murdering Princes, if their Church
declare them Heretics, and it may be for the Advancement of the Catholic
Cause?

3. And is not the Practice every way as Damnable in giving Dispensations to
Subjects from their Oaths?

4. In their Jesuitical endeavors to engage Persons to this desperate
employment of killing Kings and Rulers?

5. Consecrating Persons, Knives, Pistols, and other deadly Instruments for the
Work?

6. And what are their Prayers for success in these hellish Achievements?

7. Their Pardons given out to free their Assassinates from all their sins, and
from Purgatory it self?

8. Their Canonizing of such cursed Miscreants, and unnatural Monsters, for
Calender-Saints, though Hell it self could hardly yield more wicked Imps?

Judge ye what the Church of Rome is come to* and how far degenerate from her
primitive purity, when St. Paul wrote his Epistle, and therein that famous
Doctrine of Subjection to Rulers, yea though they were then Heathens that ruled
over them. Oh how does the Romish Whore stinck in the nostrils of all the Purer
Churches, for the bloody cruelty of her Doctrines and Practices of this kind:
For their Doctrine, their own Books will condemn them; enough of this is held
forth in a Piece, called The Mystery of Iesuitism. And for their Practice,
Raviliack of France, Faux and his Accomplices in England, besides many more, have
given them their Brand, to be Traiterous, Blood-suckers, and King-killers. And
surely i^ Scripture do oblige Subjects to such a passive subjection as you have
heard of, and such an active defense of Princes, even to the hazard and loss of
life, how execrable in our esteem, and in the eyes of all loyal Subjects, must
that design and practice be accounted, which we come this day to acknowledge,
bewail, and to witness our abhorrence of, yea and implore the grace of God to
wash away the guilt of, that it may not cleave to these Nations? I mean that
most horrid, and almost unparallelled practice, of putting to Death our late
Sovereign Charles the First, Father to His Majesty our now gracious King, and
undoubted Ruler: the thing it self, with its circumstances, took so deep an
impression upon our hearts, and is to this day ^o fresh in our memories, that I
need not now again represent the Tragedy.

1. If it be considered, by whom this fact was committed? His own natural
Subjects.

2. In what manner? in a form, and under a pretense of Justice: Heavens blush
to see a King standing at a Bar before his Subjects.

3. At what time? after His large Concessions, and the Parliaments Judgment,
that they were a sufficient Ground to proceed upon for a lasting Peace.

4. The Execution it self, with the Circumstances; to be Beheaded at His own
Royal Palace Gates in the highest contempt.

5. The Consequents of it. 1. The Dispossession and Banishment of the undoubted
Heir, with the Banishment of all the Royal Seed. 2. The Intrusion of the Bloody
Usurper. 3. The Subverting of Government and Laws. 4. The Confusion of the
Nations Order, Peace and Settlement. 5. The Discontent, Grief, and Heart-break
of all Loyal Subjects. 6. The Shame of the most Glorious and Loyal People in
the World. 7. The greatest Scandal of the Reformed Protestant Religion that
ever it endured. I say, if these things be considered, our practice this day
may very well be justified, to make use of this day to confess, bewail, and beg
pardon, as for other of the crying sins of the Nation, and for other blood,
both of Prophets and Innocents, so especially for that thrice-dipt Rebellion of
shedding the Blood of the Father of his Country, and the politic Head of these
eminent Kingdoms: And the Lord give us sadly and mournfully to lay it to our
hearts, that the guilt of it may not lie upon our heads.

Fifthly, Another and great duty that Subjects owe to their Rulers especially
to the King as supreme, is their prayers and hearty desires for their universal
good: We are bound to pray for all, 1 Timothy 2.1. yea for our very enemies, Luke
6.28. how much more therefore for Princes and Governors, that have rule over
us by God's appointment, Romans 13. 1, 2. and so great an influence upon the
Subjects, either for their welfare or their hurt? This duty the Scripture holds
forth with as clear and pregnant instances, precepts, and examples, as any duty
we owe to them, 1 Timothy 2.1. here you have an express command for whom, and upon
what grounds we should make our prayers: And it is observable, that the Apostle
enjoins this to Christians when the Magistrates under whom they lived were
H^athen. Genesis 47 -- it is said twice, that Jacob blessed Pharaoh, verse. 7, 10.
Hoc est (says one) fausta illi prec^tus est, a^ seriis precibus, ipsius ^c
regni incolumitatem Deo commendavit. Jeremiah gives this advice to the Captives
in Babylon, Ier. 29.7. that they should seek the peace of the City whither God
had caused them to be carried away Captives, and to pray to the Lord for it,
for in the peace thereof shall you have peace. And in this (though I cite no^
Baruch, because not received as Canonical) where it is said, they were charged
to pray for the life of Nebuch^dn^zar, and his So^ Beltbazar, ye^ it mus^ n^ed*
be understood, that in praying ^or the peace of ^he City, they did pray for the
King, under* whose go^e^n^^nt and protection the City was, and they in the
City. When Daniel spoke to the King D^^ius out of the Lions Den, b^ing
miraculously preserv^d from ^he ^aws and teeth of those ravenous Beast^, upon
the King'^ appro^ch to the Den, Da^. 6.20* ^ King live for e^^r. My God ^ath
s^^t his Augel, etc. which was expression of his loyal affection, and desire of
all good and prosperity to the King. And this was according to the custom of
the Jews, upon the inauguration of their Kings, to cry out, God save the King;
or Viva^ Re^, let the King liv^, 1 Samuel 10.24. 1 Kings 1.34. But most
considerable is that piece of Scripture, viz. Psalm. 20. -- which contains a
Prayer of the Church for the King; which though it look at Christ in the
managing and success of his spiritual Kingdom, yet must needs take in David the
type, and inspired Penman of the Psalm; the whole Psalm is a Prayer, and
expression of confidence upon their Pray^r: and this Prayer, that God would
hear them for the King, and bear the King when he prayed for himself or them;
and that God would incline the heart of the King to hear them, when upon
occasion they should call to him in any mat^^r of conc^^nment. So much you may
see in the general scope and tenor of the Psalm, perhaps I may make some
^^rther use of the particulars afterward.

Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians, who were often burdened with
false Charges of Sedition and Treason, said, Nos pro salute Imperatorum Deum
invocamus, Deum aeternum, Deum vivum. We Christians do pray for the safety and
prosperity of Emperors to the eternal God, to the living God, whom the Emperors
themselves do desire to find propitious to them, besides others, and before all
others: And therefore we do pray for all Emperors, that they may have long
Life, a secure Government, a safe House, valiant Armies, a faithful Senate, an
honest People, a quiet World, and quaecunque Hominis and Caesaris vota sunt.
The Speech of Bugenhagig of Pomerania is worthy observation; If we were so
ready as we should be to pray for Magistrates, as we are apt to murmur and
detract from them, it would be better with us under their government then it is.

Question. If you ask, What we should direct our prayers to God for, in
relation to our Princes and Governors?

Answer. I answer in general, for their universal good; for all that they do,
or may stand in need of in every capacity, as Men, Christians, Magistrates, and
all that may be useful to fit them for, and make them successful in their
government. Whatsoever we read in Scripture of the duties of Princes, of the
qualifications of Princes for their duties, of the commendable practice of
Princes in any cases, of promises of God made to them in reference to their
persons on government, if made to them as such, not with any special or limited
reference; whatsoever we read of their sins, failings, miscarriages, or God's
^nger and displeasure against them; all that tends to their good, and the good
of their relations, government, people, or the preventing or removing of ^^y
evil t^reatned, or in execution, may very fitly be turned into prayers.

It i^ not within my ^each to reckon up ^ll that may engage our prayers for the
chief Magistrate, and those that are under them, there are besides ordina^y and
stated cases, many emergencies and extraordinary cases, which may call for
alterations, or additions in our prayers. It behooves us therefore to be
acquainted with Scripture, to know what is behoveful for them; and to enquire
after them and their government, to know what is meet for us in our capacities
to know of the state of their persons and affairs, that we may suitably make
our applications to God for them. But I shall hint some particulars.

1. It concerns us much to pray for the health, welfare, safety and
preservation of the King's person, that he may be kept from sickness, weakness,
or any thing that may disable him from the free and cheerful attendance upon
his duty, and most advantageous management of his government; that he may be
kept from all Treasonable plots* Conspiracies, and Bloody attempts against his
Person, such as have been endeavored or practiced against other Princes. That
God would lengthen out the thread of their lives, grant them long and many
happy days, It has been the ancient Vote of the People, Vivat Rex, Let the
King live* and great reason, because it is threatened as a Judgment to have many
Rulers, i. e. to have the Seat of Government often changed by a multiplied
succession of Princes, whether taken away by God's hand immediately, or by the
violent hand of Traitors; seldom is there a change of the person, without some
shaking of the Seat and Government it self: Be earnest therefore with God ^or
this, as for your own lives, that God would secure and preserve the life of the
King for many days, Daniel wished this for Darius* when he was in the Lions
Den, Dan. 6.21. O King live^ for ever. And the Church prays for the King that
the Name of the God of Jacob might defend him.

2. Because the Kingly Office (and so of other Rulers) does require high
endowments, special qualifications, and a greater measure both of natural,
moral, and supernatural accomplishments, then is necessary for other men;
therefore God is to be sought earnestly to bestow all such gifts and graces
upon them, as may serve to accomplish them for their high and weighty
employment; by observing what the Scripture directs to, as qualifications in
Persons to be chosen to, or set apart for Government; or what the Scriptures do
commend in such as were called to Government, in the management of their
places, or what any have prayed for for themselves or others for them, that may
and should we pray for our Princes and Rulers. It is an honest ambition for
People to desire that their own present Governors might be equal to, yea, if
it were the will of God, might out strip the best of those that have gone
before them in any Kingdom. Now if you read Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 1.13, 15. 2 Samuel
23.3. 1 Samuel 13.14. 2 Samuel 22.24. 1 Kings 3.6.5.9. 2 Kings 22.19. In these
places you may see some of the excellent qualifications that are fi^ to be
seated in the heart of a King, viz. 1. The fear of God. 2. Wisdom and ability.
3. Justice. 4. Vprightness. 5. Hatred of covetousness. 6. Tenderness of heart.
7. Zeal for the Hou^e of God. 8. Temperance. 9. Love to and care of ^he People,
as Mo^es. Make these therefore, and whatsoever else you find, as ^ Jewel in the
Crowns of Princes, which has rendr^d them famous and illustrious, whether
Meekness, Mercy, Magnanimity, Courtesy, Liberality, Truth and Faithfulness in
performing Promises, etc. the object of your Prayers; and be earnest with God
to enrich and enoble His Royal Majesty, our King, with all these excellent
Graces, by which he may be furnished and fitted for all the parts of His
Government.

3. Pray also that in the execution of His Government, all things may be
rightly administered according to the rule of God's Word, that he may show forth
the beauty and glory of such rare and virtuous endowments as we have spoken of.

1. That in His and Their personal carriage, He may be free from all that may
in the least eclipse His glory, that His graces may sparkle in His
conversation, and His example make all others ashamed that are tainted with any
thing contrary to the virtues of the Prince. It Is a glorious thing for a Prince
to go before His Subjects in the practice of that which is noble and
praiseworthy; Regis ^d exemplum, etc. Psalm. 101.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Kings 20.3. It
is a shame for Subjects to appear vicious, when the Prince draws such fair
lines in His course to be their Copies.

2. That His Family may be rightly ordered in all points; and therefore that He
may have such (and none other) to serve Him, as are themselves most careful to
serve God. It is noble for a Prince to take up Ioshuah's resolution, Josh.
24.15. and add David's to it, Psalm. 101.6, 7. and to follow Abraham's practice;
(...) ^8*18* 19. and i^ must need^ be worthy of (...) People (...) pray for the
^rince that He may ^o so.

3. In reference to the Public^, we should pray to God that our Princes end
Rulers, may

1. Always, in the first place, look to the Interest of God and Religion, above
any of their own Interests and Concernments, Psalm 132.2, 3, 4. Psalm 69.9.
because the settlement and security of theirs, lies principally in the
maintenance and security of God's Right, 2 Chronicles. 29.3. and 34.3. It cannot be
expected that God should indulge them theirs, if they be careless of his
Property. Pray

1. That by their Authority, they may make the way open for the free passage of
the Gospel, that it may run and be glorified, 2 Chronicles. 29.3, 4.

2. Call the Ministers of the Lord, and such as are to wait upon God's Altars,
to attend upon their Charge, and be diligent in it, 2 Chronicles. 29.4, 11, 25, 30,
31. and not to suffer any that are idle, or scandalous, in God's House.

3. To cast out Idolatry, with all the Relics and Monuments of Idolatry, that
nothing remain to be a snare to the People, to make them turn from God, or to
have an itching toward it, 2 Chronicles. 30.14. and 31.1.

4. To see whatsoever is wanting to the Worship of God, which God has
appointed, be restored, 2 Chronicles. 30.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and if any thing be crept
in, which is not of God's institution, as Worship, that it be swept out.

5. That the Lord's Ministers, who labor faithfully in the Word and Doctrine,
may be encouraged to their Work, by having their Portion set out for them, and
duly exhibited to them, that they attend their Work without distraction, 2 Chronicles. 31.4.

6. That care may be taken for the preserving, encouraging, and keeping pure
the Fountains and Nurseries of Learning and Religion, the Universities, that
from thence may still be raised up a learned and godly Ministry, to officiate
in God's House, and to administer the Holy Things of God in all succession,
that there may be no room for the incroachment of Errors, Heresies, and False
Doctrines. These are things that have a special influence upon the happiness
and welfare of Kings and Kingdoms; and therefore God is earnestly to be sought,
that herein principally our Princes may approve themselves, that they may have
God with them and for them: A pure flourishing Church does usually make an
happy and flourishing State; God's promise is to honor them that honor him.
And on the other side, the Apostasy, Corruption, and Degeneration of the
Church, has fatally proved the Ruin and Destruction of the State; beg
therefore, above all things, that Kings and Princes may be Nursing Fathers to
the Church, Patrons to pure Religion.

2. We should pray that our Princes and Rulers may bend themselves to look
after the peace, welfare, prosperity, establishment, and good government of the
Commonwealth, that all the People, as much as in them lies, may live in peace,
and lead quiet and peaceable lives under them, in all godliness and honesty, 2 Timothy 2.2. that every man may be encouraged to serve God, and follow his
particular calling for the public good; and that this may be, God is to be
sought unto, to bless the King and Kingdom.

1. With a grave, wise, sober, religious, publick-spirited Council, such as may
be ready to advise for the best, both between the Prince and People, and in all
other the great Affairs of the Kingdom; not such as Rehoboam's, 1 Kings 12.8,
9, 10, 11. Absalom's, 2 Samuel 16.20, 21, 22. Abasuerus, Esther 3.8, 9, 10.
Zedekiah's, Ier. 38.4. Nebuchadnezzar's, Dan. 3.8, ad 13. Darius, Dan. 6.6, 7,
8, 9. had, but the best of the Nobles, and Elders of the Tribes.

2. With learned, religious, and righteous Judges, Justices, and inferior
Magistrates, seeing the execution of the Laws lies especially in the hands of
these subordinate Ministers of State; and for the most part such as they are
that are entrusted, such is the administration in their hands: I^ requires
prayers for the King, that God would incline his heart to see that his
Authority be entrusted in the best hands, and such as are most like to
administer justice faithfully and impartially to all his Subjects; men of
truth, and hating covetousness, Exodus 18.21. Pray to God to restore Judges as
at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, Isaiah 1.26. and 60.17. To
make our Officers peace, and our Exactors righteousness, Ier. 7.5, 6, 7. and
22.3, 4. It is the great happiness of a Kingdom to have judgment executed
faithfully, sin suppressed, disco^nte^anced, punished, godliness, sobriety,
justice, truth, mercies, and all good works praised and countenanced, this is
the end of Magistracy; and therefore it should be our prayer, that none may be
en^rusted with power, but such as will endeavor to answer the end of
government, and that those may answer the end that are entrusted with the
power; that so Judgment may run down the streets like water, and Righteousness
like a mighty stream. And if these, Religion and Righteousness, according to
the just measure of them in the Word of God, be established, we may conclude,
the King's Throne, and Kingdoms happiness stand upon a sure foundation, Prove.
16.12. these are excellent supporrers, strong pillars to bear up Dominion.

3. It behooves us, as a thing that may have much influence into the happiness
of King and Kingdom, to pray to God to bless the Royal Bed, to raise up a
numerous and virtuous Issue, that there may never fail of the Branches of that
Royal Stock to sit upon the Throne: God entailed this as a blessing upon David,
that he should not want a man to sit upon his Throne, Psalm. 132.11, 12. And I
do not know but that (with submission to God's will) we may pray, that our
Kings and Princes may never want of their Seed to sway the Sceptres of these
Kingdoms.

4. It is of concernment to pray, that God would bless his Majesty with loyal,
faithful, courageous Armies, that both Officers and Soldiers may be men of
clean conscience, and great courage; and indeed it is hardly to be expected
they should be of good courage, if they be of debau^hed carriage and guilty
conscience, Josh. 7.1, 4, 5, 10, 11. That such they may be that are entrusted
with Martial Affairs, whether by Sea or Land, is worthy our prayers, that so
(though Peace is to be desired in the first place, and that God would bless the
King and Kingdom with Peace) yet seeing War in some cases is an Ordinance of
God, Deuteronomy. 10.1, 2, 3. it is not below prayers to desire (if War must be) that
it may have a just ground, be against the Enemies of God, not Friends; be
rightly managed, and happily succeeded by Gods blessing. And thus we may do for
a blessing upon all Counsels, Negotiations, Embassies, which have Gods warrant
for them, Gods approbation of them. We may and ought to pray in a special
manner, that God would keep the King, and all Rulers, from every evil way, and
from all evil counsels, because both themselves and their Kingdoms are subject
to a great deal of hazard and mischief thereby; but if they do sin, whether it
arise from their own inclination, or the provocation of evil Counselors, ( and
who is it that lives and sins not? Eccles. 7.20. 1 Kings 8.40.) then it is our
duty to be instant with God, for the pardon both of his and their sins, that
the guilt of them may not remain upon the Throne, Lev. 4.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. We
may also, and ought to pray as the Church does, Psalm. 20*3, 4, 5. that God
would fulfill and grant him all his righteous desires and petitions, that the
King may be a Iedidiah to God, 2 Samuel 12.24, 25. that God may singularly
delight and take pleasure in his Anointed, and that God may be to him his Crown
and Glory.

Finally, Let us pray to God to bless his Majesty with a numerous and great
People, because the glory of a King consists much in the multitude of his
Subjects, Prove. 14.28. and that therefore nothing may be done on either part to
provoke the jealousy of God, by any sweeping judgment to ^ut off and lessen
the number of his Subjects, as in David^ time, 2 S^m. 24.1, 10, 12, 13, 15. but
especially let us pray, that he may be blessed with a loyal, religious, and
obedient People, which will be as much his honor, and much more their strength
then their multitude; the multitude honor him with their names, but the loyal
and religious will serve him with their hearts; and theirs will be the best
service, because whilst they obey their Prince, they are men that rule, and
have power with God, Hos. 11.12.

I need not use Arguments to urge this duty, I hope there is no man but is
convinced of it, and in some measure does desire to perform it; only I would
persuade you to make a business of it, not a complement; to do it seriously, to
do it frequently, to do it strenuously and fervently, to do it feelingly and
with affection, as those that are with Child, and do more earnestly long after
all that concerns his Majesty's happiness then our own. I would beg of you this
day, as often as you bow your knees before the eternal God for your selves, to
make conscience to lift up your hearts to God, who has the life and hearts of
Kings in his hand, for all the blessings of Heaven and Earth, of this and that
life that is eternal, for his sacred Majesty: Almost every thing be speaks this
at your hand; 1. The command of God, 1 Timothy 2.2.2. The dignity and celsitude of
his place, 2 Samuel 23.3.3. The worth of his Person, better then thousands of us,
2 Samuel 18.3.4. Our relation to him, as Subjects to their Prince, Titus 3.1.
Sheep to their Shepherd, Isai. 44.28. Children to their Father, Commandment
5.5. The influence that their government has upon us, either for ou^ good or
^urt, our good if it (...) with them* our hurt ^f they miscarry. ^. Th^^r
business and their burden is exceeding great; though they wear Crowns, their
Crowns have Thorns. O^ the wisdom care, watchfulness, sedulity, patience,
magnanimity, required in so great a charge, as the preservation and well
ordering of such vast bodies, such great vessels, so richly laden with the
lives, peace, wealth, yea souls of Subjects, especially the steering of them
amongst rocks and shelves in the midst of storms and tempests.

Their temptations (not inferior) indeed much greater then any of their
Subjects; it is not ordinarily considered how dangerous their standing is, and
its the more dangerous, because it is so high.

1. In high places men are naturally more obnoxious to the swimmings of the
brain; and if they fall, their fall is more pernicious, because of their
distance from the Earth: It was a temptation to be on a Pinnacle, Matthew. 4.5.

2. Though they be Princes, Psalm. 118.9. Angels, Gods, Psalm. 82.6, 7. in their
titles, yet in respect of corruptions, infirmities, temptations, they are men:
the best not free, not Moses, David.

3. It is Satan's great design to corrupt Princes, because if he can get
advantage of them, he shall be sure to have company with them, 2 Kings 3.3, 4.
they seldom fall but they have others to fall with them; they are not always so
happy, as to have all that are about them, faithful to them; some that get
about the Throne will be Corruptors and Flatterers, though some others be never
so upright; and those that are corrupt will watch their advantage, and use
plausible pretenses of the Kings honor and profit, as Haman, Esther 3.8. when
the bottom of the design is their own advantage, the Kings dishonor, and the
Peoples damage.

. Besides, there is much danger in the greatness of the Revenue; it is a hard
matter where there is so much coming in, to issue it out again in the service
of the Public, without the gratifying of some sinful Privadoes, that will call
for maintenance out of so rich a Treasure: They are something more then men,
that in so great a fullness can master ambition, lust, intemperance,
prodigality, and such like, which though it may be done, yet will be better
done by the help of Gods Peoples prayers, Deuteronomy. 32.15. 2 Chronicles. 26.16. Solomon
himself could scarce manage his Prosperity.

5. The miscarriage of Princes is dangerous, not to themselves only, but to the
People; as the Peoples sins may occasion much evil to the Prince, especially
where his neglect has given any life to the breathing out of their sins. So on
the other hand, the sins of the Rulers may entail a judgment upon the People, 1
Kings 12.28, 29, 30. and 14.15, 16. because for the most part the Peoples sins
are the imitations of the Rulers miscarriages; the danger is mutual, and
therefore there is need of mutual prayers, that neither the Prince may suffer
for the Peoples, nor the People for the Princes sins. Prayer is God's
Ordinance, and it is a mighty Engine by which the poorest Peasants amongst men
do go forth, and commence Princes with God, as it is said of Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
I will not disparage Armies, because they also are in some cases God's
institution; yet I shall not fear to say, that an Army of Prayers may do more
then an Army of Soldiers; and Soldiers do always fight best, that do edge
their weapons with their prayers. When Moses prayed the Israelites prevailed,
Exodus 17.11. Iehoshaphats and Hezekiahs Prayers did more service then the
Soldiers Arms, ^ Ch^on. 20.3, ad 19. and 32.20, 21. We are b^und to serve the
King with our B^dies, Lives; and Estates, and yet we cannot do him better
service with any thing then our Prayers. In Prayer poor Mortals deal with God,
whilst Armies only deal with Men, Exodus 32.10. Deuteronomy. 9.14. In the con^est of
Prayer, the great God suffers himself to be overcome by his weak Creature,
whilst in contesting with Men, many Men lose their own lives, if the whole Army
do not lose ^he Field: at the utmost they do but conquer Men, but in Prayer Men
(I desire to speak with humble reverence) do gain the Victory of God himself;
and it is no disparagement to Him to be overcome by Prayer, because it is not
an Enemy, but a Friend, that overcomes him, his own spirit in his Peoples
prayers, and their conquest over him, brings him a conquest sometimes over Men,
sometimes over Lusts, sometimes over Devils, for what is the Conquest of
Prayer, but a prevailing with God, to exert his Power for the subduing and
conquest of his own and our worst Enemies. Oh puissant mighty Wonder working
Prayer! Restrain not Prayer, but improve it to the utmost in behalf of the
King, and all in Au^hority. By this you may serve them in any Case, in every
Case, and so you cannot do with Arms. Prayers have undoubtedly been the
happiest Engines for the bringing in, and peaceable settling him upon the
Throne: His Majesty did most religiously, and affectionatly acknowledge it as he
passed through London to the Ministers that humbly presented him with a Bible.
Prayer has done no little for his Majesty and us since his entrance, and I am
very hopeful there are yet great things to be done by Prayer for his Majesty:
follow it, and try the issue of it, I dare say it will not repent you. Prayer
will stir God, if you stir God, he will stir all things else, and it may be,
may stir up the heart of the King to be his Instrument ^o do something for him,
that we do not dream of. The hearts of Kings are in Gods hands, and Gods hands
are very much ruled by Prayer. Oh Pray, Pray for the King, and be not
discouraged, because by some men your Prayers are slighted: they little think
how Prayers, contemned Prayers of private men, who pray in and by the Spirit,
may shake them who fill their Discourses with Invectives against Prayers.


