I Appoint Richard Janeway to Print this my Satisfactory Relation or Account,
Witness my Hand this Eleventh of October, 1680.

JOHN FITZ-GERRALD.

THE NARRATIVE OF Mr. John Fitz-Gerrald, Late of the Order of St. FRANCIS, In
the Kingdom of IRELAND.

Wherein is Contained

1 Several things relating to the Irish Plot, Managed by Plunket the Titular
Archbishop of that Kingdom (and now committed to the Goal of Newgate.)

2 The Intrigue of Sympson Tongue, to Invalidate the Testimony of his Father
Doctor Israel Tongue, Doctor Oats, and other of the King's Evidences.

3 An Account of Captain Elie and their cursed Contrivance to undermine the
Protestant Religion.

4 The strange and wonderful manner of his Conversion from Popery, with many
other Remarkable Passages.

All Published for general Satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway MDCLXXXI.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have herein endeavored for your Satisfaction, to let you see the Treachery
and Deceit of the World, and to our woeful Experience the Long Reign of the old
Man Satan, who was the only chief Instrument of depriving our Fore-Father Adam
of the great Privileges and Enjoyments he had in the Garden of Eden, and the
Glory he had in his first State of Purity and Innocence, but Satan through his
Envy and Malice, promised him Bribes, the which Bribes were, that if he had
eaten the forbidden Fruit, he should be capable of Good and Evil. Secondly, he
tempted Judas to betray Christ, and sell him for thirty pieces of silver. And
dear Reader, by these and several other Circumstances we see what Efficacy
Bribery has, and what Iniquity and Wickedness ensues from it.

I must acknowledge I am not in a Capacity to grace this Paper with painted
Eloquence, or deciphered Phrases, but notwithstanding the purpose that I
designed it to, I suppose you are as concerned to know it as I am; for it is
most certain, that the Serpent lurketh about seeking whom to devour, which is a
Caution to us to have a care whom we trust, though indeed sometimes we may
mistrust honest Folks, and entertain Knaves, as we find it often falls out so,
but not to hinder your-coming to the reading of this my Endeavors for your
satisfaction. Blame me not for wanting Elegancy, for Sincerity is better than
Oratory. I hope you will receive it kindly of me, to trace my purpose, as well
as I could, and excuse my weakness and errors, in matter of Penning Orthography
or Sense, for it may be my Expectation will not be frustrated, but some that
read this will be Charitable, and receive plain truth more desirable and
welcome, than false Philosophy; for I am sure of the two Comparisons, Truth
will take place, as it is said Omnia vincit Veritas. I will leave you to your
serious Consideration, and charitable Opinion of me, and take me as you please,
but I shall remain a Friend for England, and so Farewell.

H. P.

A SATISFACTORY RELATION OF Three Persons, Who thought upon three respective,
several Accounts, to persuade the King, Parliament, Council, and Subjects, of
these three Nations, no not adhibit, Credit, or Belief, to any or all of the
Discoverers of the late Popish Plot, which by divine Providence, has been
Discovered, to the undeniable and ample view of the World.
AND thus, the above three mentioned Persons, (whose names are, as follows)
(Captain Elie, Simpson Tongue, and John Crawley:) laid about their three several
Designs; The First Captain Elie, whose Design, was, and is, to propagate, the
Popish Interest, and also his own Exaltation, and Fortune. Secondly Simpson
Tongue, whose design was, to be revenged of his Father, as I shall give an
account of more at large, in the ensuing Treatise.

And thirdly, John Crawly who through distress, and want, and also his desire,
and inclination to serve the Popish Party, was by that, and the Consultation
and Combination he had with the other two, persuaded that he could serve the
Church of Rome, and purchase for himself a better Interest of Livelihood, than
he had before, which as is manifestly known, by his bare Garb, and spare Diet,
he had no Livelihood at all.

Having plainly laid down before you the Reasons, and Designs, the above three
mentioned Persons, proposed to themselves, if they could by their audacious
Subornation, disanul the King's Evidences, push off the King, Council,
Parliament, and Country, of these three Nations, from believing the real being
of any such thing as an intended Plot by the Papists, kindled against his
Majesty's Person, his Laws and Government, or Church-Settlement, and
Establishment of England. But instead of that they would first assert, that the
Popish Party in these three Kingdoms are the best Subjects, and what they are
imputed with, of an insurrectious Conspiracy, or Plot, sprung first from
Inveteracy, Malice, and Hatred, and also an old Root of Antipathy, that the
Papists assert the Protestants to harbor for them. These I say are the
strongest Grounds, the foresaid three Persons, have for their firmest
Foundations, to carry on such Presumptous, audacious and false Undertakings, to
contradict, and invalidate the King's prudent and wise Understanding, as also
the Great Parliament of England, and the most Honorable Privy-Councel, who to
any man's rational understanding, are Persons of incomparable Prudence, Wisdom,
and Learning, as that they would not undervalue their said several worthy
Faculties and unparalleled Understanding, and likewise their Christian
Principle, as to give Credit to any uncertain hearsayings, nor vain blasts of
false Informations, but their great Wisdom leads them narrowly to search and
dive into the depth of all Causes, that come before them to be tried. They are
so careful, how to pass their Judgment, as that they try the very foundation,
of the Kings Evidences, how? and in what measure, and in what years, and in
what times of the year, the Evidences became acquainted with the first, and the
whole summary agitation of the Popish Plot.

And if they find by the Evidences, Instances, and Circumstances, that they
have truth on their side, by several Informations, Depositions, and
Confessions, that they make unto several persons, distinctly and diversely, or
in diverse places; the Lords before whom these examinations and Depositions are
taken, do compare one Confession to another, and proceed accordingly, and
accordingly place their Instances. This through and ample search the King,
Parliament, Council, and subordinate Magistrates, through all Causes that come
to be tried before them, so that thereupon, it is a great Presumption, and a
contumelious Incredulity, for any person or persons whatsoever to go about to
invalidate and contradict, what the said Lords or Subordinate Magistrates do
upon well grounded and certain Instances, confirm and acknowledge to be truth.
And therefore their Trials in such Causes, and in many inferior Causes, in any
matter relating to the Popish Plot, their approbation of it passes as is above
mentioned, so that no particular Cause is winked at, but is tried as the Gold
in the Furnace, which implies that people of so great Wisdom, as the Governor,
and Governors of these three Kingdoms are, who narrowly search the truth of
all things before they pass it by as credited or contradicted. So that we have
more reason to accept and receive for current what they confirm, than what
three false Suborners would fain blow up unto our understanding to the
contrary, whose Designs, Intents, and Purposes are as above cited, and as I
shall more amply give you an account of. These said three Suborned Witnesses
that falsely, and contumeliously, contradict the King's Evidences, who passed
through such Purificatory of Trials, as they have done.

I say it is very hard if such Enormities, committed against King and
Government, should pass without Correction. Now I must turn to give you an
account of the said three Suborned Witnesses, or Evidences, whose names are
above cited. I am acquainted with two of them, but one whose name is Elie, is a
stranger to me, but I find by a relative account, I have had of him, how he
designed to carry on this Subornation, which is the last of many monstrous, and
horrible cheats he has committed, controled and contracted this many years in
England. But of this particular, you shall hear more at large in the ensuing
part of this Treatise. And now I must come to hint of his two Confederates, who
are my Acquaintance, and of the said two I do intend to treat, who thought to
invest themselves, with a pretended Coat of Loyalty, to his Sacred Majesty of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland; But the said Coat being but a secondhand
one, and bare-thread worn, and the Color of it being Black, and as the nature
of the color Black is to wear, or rot away, sooner than any other Color
shall, by reason that it is too much boiled in the dying. But I shall not
insist to give an account of a Trade that I have no more skill in, than the
above three Gentlemen had in choosing such a rotten Garb, which wore out so
soon, and tore so unexpectedly, that the rent appeared so strangely, as that
soon their Nakedness were espied and discovered, which more plainly to let you
understand it, their Knavery, and Subornation, was descryed: and as it is
thought, afterward may ensue, that their Iniquity shall not pass uncorrected;
But now in the Interim, notwithstanding their great dependency, upon the
mainest supporters of Subornation, as that we see, for all the Combination of
the Pope and the Devil; their Iniquity shall be brought to light to their shame
and Confusion. So as that they will be glad, to make them Aprons of Figtree
Leaves, to hide the iniquity and wickedness of their sinful devilish and
malicious undertakings, which to my understanding, I cannot term it better; for
whoever he or they be, that are led away by the wicked instigation of Satan,
are hired or bribed to take false Oaths, and bind themselves in Covenant with
the Devil, irrevocably, and that in as much as they will ransack their
Consciences, and make a shipwreck of them, as these three Suborners have done,
though indeed I must confess they were put on, so to do, by the Counfounders of
Christianity, Religion, Godliness, Holiness, and Piety, and all other Christian
Laws, and Governments, to use all means whatsoever with a general Indulgence,
for so doing, for to Confound the King, the Church, Government, and Kingdoms of
these three Nations, expecting that this late most Abominable and Horrible
Plot, should be placed as a perpetual stain, over the heads of Protestants. The
proposals of the which Contrivance, being thus; That if the said three
Suborners, could or would, whether right or wrong, take their Oaths, that they
knew such Contracts, in the Writings, of the chiefest and strongest Evidences
the King has, as that what they several times deposed upon Oath, and
manifestly proved in such a through and Emphatical manner, as that all Persons
of whatsoever Degree, Dignity, or Quality, durst not nor will scruple, (that is
to say, such as are endued with common Sense, Reason, or Understanding) but the
said Evidences of the King, spoke nothing but real and manifest truth, in what
they have declared or deposed as to the proof of the Plot. But the Ancient
antipathy and Malice of Rome, is still bent and ever will be, during the Reign
of the Romans to do all the mischief to the Protestant Religion and Government,
to the utmost of their power, and to this end they thought to make themselves
more drunk with the Cup of Abomination, and then to vomit it out upon the heads
of English, Irish, and Scottish Protestants; when they seeing that the Lord was
pleased to break the Vail that covered and hid their untolerable wickedness,
and let their shameful deeds be seen in and through the World. But they who
much may be compared to the Magicians of Egypt, as often as Moses through and
by the power of God, turned the Rod to several vivificant or lively Postures of
twelve Creatures, so the Egyptian Magicians by the Power of the Devil, worked a
formal resemblance to that which the man of God, and by his power Acted, which
thus implies, that as the Lord was pleased to discover to let the people of
England, see the malicious naked Sword of Rome, that was ready to cut their
Throats: so the Popish party on the other hand, with their Magical Spells of
Money, thought to raise such perverse, perjured Suborners, for to swear that
the Plot was first contrived and hatched by the Protestant Party, upon the
which Sound of the Magic Money Art, the above mentioned Captain Elie, Sympson
Tongue, and John Crawley, contrived together, and thought it a great prey, and
cried one to another, Come let us go to the Popish Party and swear three Oaths,
That Doctor Tongue, Doctor Oats, Captain Bedloe, etc. were the first Contrivers
of the Popish Plot, and that they have so contrived it, as that they made the
King averse against his Subjects, and expells some of them into foreign
Countries, banished some of them that were in great Favor at Court, and
deprived them of the privilege of bearing Office or Commission of Magistracy
under him within his Jurisdiction, or Dominions, I say, as to the said
Suborners, that their Hands were greased, and their Lips anointed for to
exclaim against the King's Evidences, in hopes they may procure more people to
compact with them in Perjury, and Subornation, and they would share with them
in what moneys they could receive upon that account. I have given you thus far
an account of the Subornation of these three Persons, and now I will let you
understand what three Persons they are, their Intents, Designs, and Purposes,
as I have promised in the beginning of my foregoing lines. That Captain Elie,
who was the Chiefest Ringleader of the other two, is frequently termed a great
Statesman, and a Jesuitical Contriver, which may very well be seen in the
Method he took to manage his Business, when he went about to raise a Company of
Suborned Witnesses, to serve the Devil against his King, as I shall let you
more clearly see, before I bring my notes of him to a period. I will insist a
little longer upon so worthy a Subject as he is, and though I am not personally
acquainted with him, yet I am told some people compare him to a Kidnapper, and
the reason why they compare him to so unbeseeming a Comparison, is this,
because the Kidnapper, when he is about to snap up people for his purpose, he
is like the Fisherman, who lays out several fair and inviting Baits, which
tempts the poor innocent Fish, so that through the temptation thereof, he gives
such a snap at the Bait, thinking or little suspecting to be prejudiced by that
saib Bait, but poor Creature, there is a hook in the Bait, that as soon as ever
the fish gives a snap, and a pull, the said hook takes hold, in his Jaws, or
Throat, so that the Fisherman draws him to shore, and takes his hook out of
him, and puts the fish into his Basket; these said Resemblances, of Kidnapping
and Fishing, in my thinking become very well Captain Elie, and his Jesuitical
Baits of drawing, tempting, and leading poor people to Prejury and Subornation,
expecting thereby, to propagate the Popish Interest, advance his own fortune
and to seduce such as he takes, to temporal and spiritual misery. But he being
not the only Subject of my Discourse, I do intend to desist speaking any more
here of him until he comes into my purpose in the next Clause. And now to come
to the main of my present matter, and purpose, I have given you some small
account of Captain Elie's Proceedings, who was the only Ringleader of this
mischievous Contrivance of Subornation, who also was the Captain of Sympson
Tongue, who is a man of a great esteem of himself, and thinks himself to be a
man of competent Knowledge, Capacity, and Worth, and for my part thus far I
have to say of him, in those my following lines, that if he had but money
enough, as he expected that Captain Elie would procure for him, I am certain he
would allow the Ladies of Honor a Glass of the best Wine, a Dose of Physic,
and a good Allarm when they are drinking of the Wine, which he thought, or at
least expected he could have been always able to maintain, by his being one of
the above mentioned hirelings, or Suborners of the black Coat: but poor man! he
is sadly disappointed, and irrecoverably frustrated. For instead of their
pretended carrying on the work of Subornation, and the wearing of the Black
Coat, whereby he expected to be able to keep a Coach, and six Horses, and
likewise he expected to occasion the King's Evidences to be trodden under foot,
and the Parliament and Council, to be counted ridiculous and foolish, and the
Laws of the Nation to be unjust and unrighteous, which thus the said Evidences
proposed to themselves, that if they could get the King's Evidences
Countermanded, and Counterpoised, and by the same get them invalidated; all the
neighboring Princes and People in Europe, would cry shame upon the people of
England and their Laws and Government, how unjustly they execute their
Subjects, without any certain foundation or well-grounded Reason for so doing.
Nay it would be a perpetual blemish upon the head of England, until Doomsday:
I say, this was the intended design, and purpose, of these Suborners, to see
whether they could baffle the King out of his Judgment, contradict the Lords of
both Parliament and Council in their Knowledge and Understanding, and so
blemish the Laws of England for ever. But as I have promised to hint further of
Sympson Tongue, I must needs confess he had another reserved aim in the purpose
of his Subornation, as I shall let you see when it comes to my purpose, and in
the interim I shall only hint his Torn black Coat, in the which he thought to
wrap himself up from the Reproaches and Scandals that he purchased for himself,
for his Confederacy, Combination, and Contrivance; with his so called Noble
Captain Elie, and his Cousen John Crawley; having wrapped himself as aforesaid,
so closely, narrowly, and roundly into the Cloak, that it tore away; and the
rent was so wide, and he being in company with his Ladies of Honor who
discovered his Nakedness, and then cried away with him, he is clapped, he has
got no Money, let him come here no more, and they also cried to him in a
Laughter and a Table-talk, you had better go to Madam Cellier who is a good
Midwife, and has skill in Surgery, who also if she gets it her self will
convey it to another, by reason of her converse with the people over whom you
thought to spread the black Cloak, whom also for some time you fed with Fancy
and Conceit of your great Works, when you expected to cast over the blame of
the Popish Plot, when your Father, Doctor Oats, and the rest of the King's
Evidences, and thereby bear the popish Party spotless, and blameless, which
indeed if you could do, I must acknowledge you would be a happy man, and they a
happy people both as to the state of their Bodies and Souls.

For they have got so deep into the Mire of it, that they cannot so soon be rid
of it, for if it had been as false as it is true, and that they were as
Innocent as they were Guilty, I am certain wherever he be that could clear
them, would make himself a happy man, and them a happy people, as to the view
of the World; But not before God, for it is said in Scripture, Non demittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur oblatum; But not that I am about to Preach to you,
nor to hinder such a man as this man Sympson Tongue is, who promised to bring
truth to light, but instead of so doing he has brought falsehood under the
cover of his old Black Cloak, but as the Lord will have it, he prevented his
false Designs, and turned him and them into a rejection and disdain in the
esteem of any Rational People, and thus he cheated himself and deprived himself
of the privilege he might have obtained in the natural affection and love that
he might have been still partaker of, but let him see what it is for a man to
forfeit certainty for uncertainty, and when he thoroughly, and perspicuously
looks into it, he may as well say to his two former Confederates Captain Elie
and Crawley; as he said to the women when they beheld his Nakedness, and
discovered his Venus Disease, as he cried, Alas they cheated me! But judge you,
what it is to build a Tower of Defense upon the words of a treacherous Villain,
and therein to confide, as Sympson Tongue trusted confidently in the fair
promises and sweet words of Captain Elie, when he first deluded him, and next,
judge what it is to build a Paradise, with Kisses, Wine, and Money, in a woman's
Bosom, the which three materials, are as steadfast as he is treacherous: I will
direct you, to learn the uncertainty of these two Comparisons, of him who most
tried to his woeful experience the event of such matters, and the next thing it
is how much this poor man has to bemoan and bewail his wretched and desperate
Condition. I Instance you this simile, as much as it had been from his own
mouth, what it is to begin to love Women so soon as he did, and that in such a
measure, as that he would run any hazard to enjoy it. And seeing that he could
not enjoy it, not half to his lascivious desire, by reason that he had not
money enough, his Means being but small, whereupon he thought it his only and
nearest way to procure money and accomplish his desire, to play a Game at
Sice-Ace, or Tick-tack, with the Pope and his Party: and I would wish with all
my heart, that the Knave could win one thousand pound of the Pope; but hang the
Pope, he is a Serpent-like Dog, he is so crafty, and subtle, and covetous, as
that in so short a time as Sympson had to do with him, it is impossible to pump
so much money out of him; but I must needs confess, as I find Sympson was ever
unlucky, if he were wise he might have cheated the Pope, for he is an old blind
Cuckold; and cannot well see, nor ever did, nor ever shall as long as he
continues in his devilish Superstition and Idolatry, but I must kick by the
Pope a while and take another dish of discourse with Sympson Tongue, which is
this, that I must tell him as I find several well grounded, solid, and learned
men, unanimously to agree upon this opinion, that there is a decretal let,
decreed for a man in his life time in this World, the which lots and decrees
are manifold and sundry-fold, and every man has his proper decree, or lot,
whatsoever it be good or bad he cannot avoid it, which is to say, by the very
observation of the Firmaments, as is commonly observed by the Mathematicians,
and Astrologians, as thus, if a man be born under a twopenny Planet, he will
never be worth a Groat in his life time. I do not intend, to trespass upon your
patience, with the circumspective Observations that those words would require
to be traced in, for I suppose you would say, it had been too tedious so to do;
and in another place, it is anciently observed by the before old Arts-men, viz.
Mathematicians, and Astrologians, that if a man be born to be hanged all the
world cannot prevent it, or save him, and I doubt very much if Mr. Sympson
Tongue escapes either the one or the other, of the said decrees, or lots; not
that I trust, or give credit to any such Observation, but by his own very
Carriage, and by the dreadful view I have of his most monstrous Enormities; And
now seeing that I undertook to treat of one more of his other two Confederates
in Knavery, and Subornation, I do intend to begin where I left off; Having
given you an account already of their Names, Conditions, and expected
Commissions, their conditions you must of necessity conclude with me, that it
must be some Great Orator, that is able to define their said malicious,
perverse, and wicked Conditions, and I must leave it in the mean while to your
own prudent Judgment, what condition such Audacious, Contumelious, and perverse
Rogues can be endured with, who went about to contradict the Eminent and Great
Wisdom that the most of the Peers of England are endued with, who sit both in
Parliament and Concel. Nay furthermore, they went about to outface the Great
and Dread Sovereign of the three Nations, who was by strength of reason, and
undeniable Evidences convinced and satisfied, that there was nothing surer,
under the Godhead, than that there was a real Plot in agitation against him by
the popish Party, and as to their respected Commissions, if the Black old worn
Coat had endured a little longer; But it was too threadbare before they got it
that they could do no good with it: but every one of them as to his respective
Commission, whereupon they relied the future welfare of their being, As for
Elie he should have been the second General Monk, or the second Chancellor
Hyde; And as for Sympson Tongue, he expected to be Bishop of Canterbury, or of
some other great Archiepiscopacy, at the next vacancy; And as for John Crawley,
he expected to be a great Officer, at least a Captain of a Man of War, or a
Captain of the King's Lifeguard. Whereof all their three ambitious Designs and
wished for desires, were grievously disappointed, and frustrated. Such
disappointment, had been most suitable to all such perverse Perjurers, and
Suborners, (as I suppose,) the Event of the Progress will be no better than
what I term it. Though at their first growth they may grow up with a visible
possibility of continuing in the same manner that they grow in, but it is very
remarkably observed, that all sorts of Grains, Trees, or Leaves, or any thing
that grows, that soonest, and unexpectedly yields a fragrant Blossom, but it is
concluded all such as yield their Blossoms before their natural time, they fade
and wither away, so that there comes no fruit of their Blossoms; which I verily
believe, will prove the same with these three upstarted Imps, in whose
proceedings they only glory themselves, and upon their boughs they beheld very
comfortable Blossoms, whereof they did much glory and rejoice, but when it came
to the time of Fruit, they yielded none, but their Blossoms withered away
before they came into any maturity; and they themselves, remain like three
wetherbeaten old Stumps, without either fruit, happiness, or good success in
their undertakings, which is what we expected when first we heard of their
proceedings. You may see, the event of Iniquity is commonly Destruction, and
Ruin, incident to the Workers thereof; and I do not question, but it will be
the event of these three discontented Suborners, to fall ten degrees lower than
ever they were, for they are not favored neither on the one side nor on the
other, but of all sides they are dejected, rejected, undervalued, and
disdained, so that I can compare them to no better similitude, than they are
like three mad Dogs, who after falling mad, run away from their master, every
body cries, kill them! they are mad! which is the same in course with Captain
Elie, Simpson Tongue, and John Craivley, three who thought themselves merry men;
I suppose they have no such pleasure in their mirth now, but that I dare say
they would give it in exchange for mine. And I leave them to what they enjoy,
and to that indeed that may lead them to repentance.

Now having completed their several Styles, and Titles, their Aims, Designs,
Intents, and Purposes, and having also given an account what they expected to
benefit themselves by their kindling of their Subornation, which I am certain
they could not so confidently propose to themselves, without the Promises,
Supportations, and Assistance, of some great People. But seeing we have not,
(as yet,) any sufficient grounds of Reason, to build our suspicion upon any
particular Persons, to be concerned in the raising of such Suborners, we will
only thus conclude, and so rest silent, until the Lord, (who has seen and
knows their Iniquity) may be pleased to discover them, and their mischievous
Proceedings, and Designs; as he has been graciously pleased with his powerful
hand, to protect these Kingdoms, and to discover all Mischiefs, and malicious
Contrivances and Connivances, that were like to fall upon them by the Contracts
of evil People; And for his Protection, Guidance, Shelter, and Direction, which
he has many a time been graciously pleased to show these Nations, we desire to
render unto him, the Praises, the Glory, the Honor, and Renown, both now and
for ever.

I must hint once more at Sympson Tongue, who as he is taken notice of, is very
well known to be one that loved best, and chieflyest preferred the love of
strange women, beyond the love of his natural Parents, which is a Quality, was
very much discerned and beheld in him, since he came to the knowledge of good
and Evil; Which is a very remarkable, manifest, and inspectious Demonstration,
of the want of Grace in any Child, to prefer any worldly pleasure beyond the
love of his Parents, the which want of natural love is discerned to inhabit in
the breast of the said Simpson Tongue. Which his Father having thoroughly read,
by his Carriage, and natural Inclination, and accordingly, by all the means
possible he could, watched how his said Son spent his time, in what Company, and
in what Exercise, he most delighted: and the manner of spending his time, and
what little Money he could scrape of his Father and Uncle, he spent it in the
Company of Women, as far as it reached. But his Purse falling short, and weak,
he could not thereby purchase any women's Company keeping, so that he
understanding he could no longer frequent their Society, but instead of so
doing, he lighted on a company of scurrilous fellows, that would Drink, Sing,
and Smoke with him, (for he himself is an indefatigable Smoaker,) there is no
kind of Liquors that come amiss in his Dish whatsoever, the more he drinks the
more he would, the longer he sits the longer he would. So that Singing,
Drinking and women's Company keeping, (if he could be his own Carver) would be
his delight all his life time. And if I write here more, as to the Description
of his Inclinations, than what you may be apt to believe, of these my
Descriptions of this Gentleman, if you be so concerned, and that your fancy may
lead you, to enquire, whether those my Descriptions of him, and his worldly
Delights and Pleasures: you may then if you please, enquire of those that are
longer acquainted, and nearer related to him, than I am. Who I am certain, if
they lay by Impartiality, and declare of him, what their Conscience leads them
to, will confirm what I herein write, or declare of my knowledge of this man,
to be real truth, in most or all the particulars of his Life and Conversation,
that I have undertaken to give an account of. Nay I will say moreover, if they
were examined and put to their Oath, if they were really led by their
Conscience, whether or not they know these things to be true that I write in
this Paper, and that if they do not forswear themselves, they will confirm what
I say herein. It is very well known that he has been cured of the Disease
called the Venus Disease, or that which is found in Venus Garden, and his
Father paid for his Cure several times, and also Chastised him with such
Fatherly Correction, for his several and manifold Debaucheries, Drunkenness,
and Whoredoms, every time that he could trace him in it. But he getting in
favor with his Fathers Acquaintance, and Servants, as that the tenth part of
his Enormities, and wicked Relapses, were not brought to his Fathers knowledge,
so that most of them passed without Correction; and when his Father (to his
great Grief) understood that his unhappy Son was so overpowered with the Works
of Satan, and so filled and overwhelmed with such Gross, Horrible, and
Abominable Enormities, and Relapses, he with many Sobs, and Sighs, determined
to cloud his Countenance from him for some small time, which he was forced to
make use of such Notions for his said Sons Castigations several times, and that
to the end that he might understand how much the Lord abhors Sin, and how
grievous it would be to his Father to see his Son run headlong in Apostasy
against God, and in Disobedience against his Father. And upon the other hand
again, that he may understand what Peace, Pleasure, and sundry other
advantageous Comforts and Consolations it is, to the Soul and Body, to be in
peace with God, and in the dutiful Obedience that Children owe to Parents, and
whilst they keep that peace with God, and that loving natural Obedience they
owe to their Parents, the Lord will shield them from all or most other
Temptations of the Devil, and that in such Measure, as that the Devil shall
never have power over such obedient Children, as by their Disobedience to God,
and their Parents, they purchase him to have over them. O alas! then how shall
it be with that Child? who for the small Lucre of a filthy Gain of Money, will
not only be contented of a Revenge against his Father, would not be satisfied
to discontent and displease him many a time, but must needs use all the means
he could to take away his Fathers Life, And that by taking false Oath, and
complied with others so to do? which indeed, will go very near to be
accomplished by him and his Confederates, if Perjuration and Subornation, if
likewise the Amity betwixt the Pope and the Devil, would be taken any notice of
by the Administers of the Law of this Nation; But as we have reason to bless
God, and pray for the well and long Rule and Reign of our King, and the
continuance of our Good Laws, which I hope, may at long run, take to
consideration the monstrous and unhumane Iniquity and Wickedness of these said
three Suborners, and handle them as their great Transgressions shall require.
Who went about to cloud the Nation with an Aspersion of innocent Bloodshedding,
which questionless would be done through the means of the said Suborners, had
it not been prevented by the divine Providence, and an hundred more clear
Manifestations and truer Demonstrations, than ever they (with all their
Subornations) shall be able, Emphatically, and Efficaciously to contradict.
Though indeed I must confess, that if the Case stood so sted fast on their
side, as they are grounded in Lies, and Falsehood, it would do very well with
them; They have related up and down the Town, amongst their Whores, and Holes,
or (at least Simpson Tongue has) that the King received him with a great deal
of Honor, Respect, and Credit, Embraced him in his Arms, placed him upon a
Couch hard by him; which is but one of his Lies, (although a most false and
incredible Story) it is to any Persons that have competent Judgment, that the
King would harbor with so great a Reception such a shitten Schoolboy, who
never attained to such Knowledge, or Worth, as to be esteemed a Favorite by
our Great Monarch, as he most falsely and audaciously affirms he has been.
Which I state here, as an instance unto you, that you may judge whether or no
he that would tell such an abominable and an unprofitable Lie for nothing,
would tell a more Heinous (though this is very Heinous) for his Expectation of
being made Bishop of the next vacant Bishopric. I infer this to this Effect,
that if the Credit, Reputation, Honor, and Safety of these three Nations, upon
such a rotten Foundation as these three Persons are, who will stick no more to
Truth nor stumble no more at telling a Lie, then they will to kiss their
Whores, when their Lusts most burn them, or drink their Liquor when they are
most desirous to be Drunk, the which desire (in them) is never wanting.

Having shown this one instance, of the insufficiency and unlawfulness of such
Evidences, to be taken in less importances and Consequences than the welfare of
these three Nations, I expect this Paper may come into some bodies hands whose
good and knowing Inclination may lead them to construe well of this my
inference. As also, of another that I shall place after it, which is this, that
I would desire to know, whether or not it is lawful for a man, who takes upon
himself to be an Evidence in Matters of State, nay in any manner of Case in
whatsoever Evidences are required? when he or they undertakes to carry on and
stand by as Evidences, for to maintain such Cases, as he proposes or promises
to do, and having so promised, afterward to go with his purse of Money to
bribe people, as I shall hereafter prove, that the said Sympson Tongue and
Captain Elie, have given forty shillings in money to a Woman, who was
Housekeeper to Doctor Tongue; And afterward they offered her three pounds more,
upon Condition she would declare and take upon Oath what they would have her
do, as to the placing of the first Offspring and beginning of the Popish Plott,
upon the heads of Doctor Tongue, Doctor Oats, etc. and if she would yield to
take the said Oath, she should be preferred to any preferment whatsoever she
would desire. From this Instance I infer, that seeing motions of Bribery and
Ambition of Exaltation, is much made use of by the foresaid Persons, for to
raise suborned Witnesses, which I suppose when you take it into Consideration,
you will judge the Promoters of this said Subornation, should not nor must not
be received as Evidences for the King, or any State-Matter, nay you must of
necessity grant, that it is abominable to suffer any such Bribe-hatchers to
speak in this behalf; for I am certain if it be so now in England, that the
Evidence of such people is received as Material and Colloteral, it has not
been so in old times, and the Laws are as good now as ever they were, if
Suborners could be kept at distance, which if not it is not safe for an honest
man to live in his own Country. For he does not know who to trust to, whereas
Bribes and pitiful ones, leads away the Son falsely, and treacherously, to
betray his Father, And all that in hopes and Ambition of a little Preferment.
Which consideration when you read this will show you the unlawfulness of such
Persons, who would not stumble to cut your Throats for their own Interest. I
pray therefore, beware of Wolfs in Sheeps-Cloathing. For I am sure, these three
persons of Subornation can be compared to no better thing.

Now having shown you these persons Condition, that is to say, two of them with
whom I was chiefest acquainted, how and in what manner they lived, only I left
off giving an account of John Crawley, whose dependency of Livelihood, depended
most and chiefly upon the Benevolence of his Acquaintance here in Town, his
Business here was upon pretense of learning the Law, and for ought I know, he
may learn his belly full of it, and that in such measure as that if you will
give him rope enough he will hang himself: he is an Irishman by his Country,
he is a man of a very loose Life and Conversation, he is a great Whoremaster,
mighty debauched in all Exercises, a great Curser, Swearer and Drinker: mighty
forgetful of the natural Course of Temperance and Modesty, I speak nothing but
what might be proved, therefore in as much as I have in short shown you, the
Lives, Conversations, and the distressed and destitute Condition, of these two
of whom I promised in the foregoing part of this Relation to give you an
account of; whose demerited distress, by reason of their Debauchery, and evil
course of Life led them to be tempted by Captain Elie's Moneys, which when you
thoroughly weigh and consider, the rate they led their lives in, you will and
must of necessity grant, that there is but little or no trust to be confided on
the Words or Oaths of such debauched and lewd Livers, from whence I shall infer
the unlawfulness of their Evidences; But I shall cease of so doing, until I
give a further account of Doctor Tonge's Son: of whom I have to say that he or
whoever, that goes about to betray his own Parents, which is contrary to the
Precept and Commandment of God so to do, that I guess, Reason may guide any
rational Christian, to place the less trust or Confidence in him, for he
whoever he be that would be so soon led away, and so easily persuaded by the
World, the Flesh and the Devil, to counterpose his dear and good Father, who is
known to be a worthy and a reverend Man, and a good and loyal Subject, true and
trusty to his King and Country, upon the which account he has spent all his
Estate, to defend, maintain and propagate the King, Church and Government
Interest in these three Nations, to the utmost, and beyond his power, Capacity,
and Ability; and when this moderate, learned and discreet man, could not with
safe Conscience, neither his Stock, nor his Estate was able to maintain the
inordinate and riotous Desires and Designs of his Son, but according to his
Capacity, allowed him competently as he thought fit or necessary for him. But
his Son being not therewith contented, nor satisfied, as he was ever
unsatiable; he betook him to a serious Consideration, which way he should be
revenged of his Father, for cutting short his former and accustomed Allowance
of Maintenance and Subsistence. And thereupon after some premeditation and
deliberation of time, he rushes forth into these Exclamations against his
Father, and said, come hang it (thought he) I will be thus revenged on him, I
will raise a measure of the dust and Streetsweepings of Rome about his Ears and
Eyes; And therewith I shall stifle and blind him, and thereupon after having
resolutely determined to be thus revenged of his Father, and nothing wanting to
his power to prejudice both his Father and the Country, but the next
opportunity that may answer to that Effect. Having within a small time
afterward met with an elderly man, whose name was Mr. Lane, whose Son served
Doctor Oats, and afterward for some Misdemeanors, that he had committed
against Doctor Oats, was sentenced by course of Law to stand in the Pillory.
This said old Lane and Sympson Tongue had entered into discourse (Sympson Tongue,
who never was backward to prate and talk to every body, as well unacquainted as
acquainted) the old man understanding by him, that he was inclined to cast
opprobious Aspersions upon Doctor Tongue and Doctor Oats, as he is seen by his
disturbed and discontented Mind, and by the Relation he gave him of his Father
and Doctor Oats, and thereupon made answer unto him; if that you prove trusty
to me, and the Trust you say you will take in hand, I will put you in a way to
be revenged upon your Father for his Cruelty and Hardheartedness unto you, and
also to be revenged on Doctor Oats, who was so Tyrannical toward my poor Son,
who served him for some time; If you will therefore draw up in Writing what you
know of your Father's Privacies and Secrets, and accordingly Countermand them,
as I am certain you are able to do; being a Son to Doctor Tongue, and a
Scholar, and do it Efficaciously and Materially, and having so done, or at
least drawn up the common Heads of what you intend to Evidence against Doctor
Tongue, Doctor Oats, Captain Bedloe, and the rest of the Discoverers of the
Plot. And I shall find a trusty and honest Gentleman, unto whom wholly and
totally you may impart the summary Substance of what you intend to maintain
against them, and the said Gentleman will advise and direct you in the best way
and manner, how to bring your business emphatically about. He is a Gentleman
that desires the Propagation of the Church of Rome, his name is Captain Elie,
he can bring you and your Writings to the acquaintance of the King, the Duke of
York, and several great Lords about Whitehal, and the Lords in the Tower:
through whose Acquaintance and Knowledge, you will meet with the occasion or
means, to be recompensed some degrees beyond any that were the King's Evidences
in the Discovery of this Plot, nay you shall be of greater Esteem and more
Famous, and your Name higher extolled than your Father was, or would be, if he
had been Archbishop of Canterbury, and there are many of the Lords (that I
told you) both at Whitehal and the Tower, that will recompense you to your
hearts desire and content; Upon the which welcomed and great terms, both these
persons gladly entered into a banquet of incomparable Conceits and Expectations,
they so fed themselves with such pleasant hopes, of being revenged of their
Enemies, and accomplishing their hearts desire, with great Treasures of Silver
and Gold, the which Treasure they thought would suffice to maintain their
Ambition, during the rest of their days, together with the Esteem and
Affection, they would daily receive, of the Favorites of Rome, which might
have been enough to maintain their Pomp all their lifetime.

And they having so thoroughly discoursed the Business amongst themselves, so
that to the end they should not delay no time nor let slip an opportunity, the
said Mr. Lane betakes himself to Captain Elie's Chamber, where after some small
waiting there, he met with him, and he gave him a full and true account of what
Doctor Tongue his Son unfolded unto him at his house, where also he waited to
give Captain Elie a full and summary account, of what he thought or expected to
make out concerning the carriage of the Plot, by and between Doctor Tongue,
Doctor Oats, Mr. Bedloe, etc.

Upon the which Relation of Mr. Lanes to Captain Elie, Immediately Captain Elie
repairs with all Expedition possible he could, unto this said Lane his house,
where he met with Sympson Tongue, after having information in what Room he was,
having also offered some Salutations the one to the other, The Captain said Sr.
I presume that you are the Person, the man of the house (naming Lane) has
informed me of, he also told me that you had a desire to speak with me. Sr.
said Sympson Tongue I have discoursed with the man of whom you now speak. Sr.
(said Captain Elie) would you be pleased to tell me what may be your occasion
with me. Yes, (says he) if you will be pleased to tell me your name. Sr. (said
he) they call me by the name of Captain Elie, and then Sympson Tongue (replying)
you are the Gentleman that I desire to see, and then having after some small
circumstances, entered thoroughly and deeply into one another acquaintance, and
accordingly Sympson Tongue discoursed with Captain Elie the total and whole
substance of what he designed and intended to proceed against his Father,
Doctor Oats, and the rest of the King's Evidences. The which Relation, and
account of Sympson Tongue, relished and tasted with the Palate of Captain Elie,
as sweet as if every word had been overflowing with honey; whereupon he
replied, Sr. I perceive your present Condition may be bare, and therefore I
shall suddenly procure you some relief of Money, which I perceive you may have
occasion of at present. The which free offer of Captain Elie, pleased very well
Sympson Tongue. That being the progress of their first Discourse, they departed
very satisfactorily contented the one with the other, for their first meeting,
and from that time forth they had more frequent resort to one another Company.
So that Captain Elie procured as he promised, a recruit of Money for Sympson
Tongue. Now having given you an account of the first Offspring of this
Subornation betwixt these two forementioned Persons, who thought fit to find
out a third Supporter, to hold up the Brandiron upon which stands their
Brewing-pan; whereupon Sympson Tongue met with an old Confederate of his, in
whose Company oftentimes he bestowed many kisses to his Ladies of Honor, as is
mentioned in the foregoing part of this Treatise, the Which Confederates name
was John Crawley, who I told you was one of the three that wore the black Garb,
with Captain Elie and Sympson Tongue, of whose Proceedings, Designs, Lives and
Conversations, I have given you as large an Account as I thought fit to
trespass your patience with the reading or hearing of such unworthy
Transactions, heinous Offenses, against God and Man, and treacherous relapses
of a Son against his Father; and my design in giving you the trouble of
understanding these particulars herein mentioned, was to let you understand
that I do expect your Reason and Understanding will lead you to grant me
undeniably, when you read and consider the total course and whole passages of
these three Suborners, and also when you understand to what intent and purpose
they designed their Undertakings, in this their work of Subornation, that they
should not, nor ought not, be received, or accepted, but as they are, and as
they may be properly called, Perjurers, If it may be read in their course of
Life, which is all the instances we can show for their Insufficiency of being
received as Witnesses, in Matters of State, and all that I have to say, is to
pray that the Lord may keep you from such deluding Instruments, Farewell.

And all that I determine to treat of, as to this my present purpose, or
relation of these three self-designed and interessed Persons, as they are
termed, and mentioned generally and severally in the foregoing part of this my
account of them, so that I judge it both mine, yours, and all other Christians
Duty, and not only our Duty, but we should make it our Care and Business, to
pray earnestly and diligently to the Lord, That he may be graciously pleased to
extend unto us, a handful of his Great Mercy, and with his accustomed Clemency,
Consideration and Pity, lodge us under the Shadow and Shelter of his Wings, and
there that we may dwell under his Tuition, Direction, and Protection, where we
might be safely secure, from the Claws and Clutches of such ambitious and
hungry people, as these or any such other self-designed Persons are, of whose
Ambition, self-Interest, and Want, I have already given what account I think to
handle at present.

And now I shall ^^ly let you see, how and in what measure the Lord is pleased
to order the inordinare and unlawful Designs, Intents and Purposes, and how he
thinks fit to repay them with the self and same Allowance, as he did repay
Cain, Esau, and Judas, The which three Persons were led as we read in the holy
Scriptures, by their ambitious Pride, vain Glory, and unsatiable Desires, and
intended to purchase such Interests, as would render them every one as his
Inclination was, whether for lucre of Gain, Ambition and Pride, Envy and
Malice: which you may read in Cain's History, of his destroying his Brother, as
to one of those three respective Particulars, that I herein instance. The next
of Esau, whose aim was to be his Fathers Heir, and to have his ample
Succession, in the enjoyment of the plenty of the Flocks, of his Father Isaac,
and for the purchasing the same, he thought to use all means possible, to
accomplish what he aimed at, which indeed, answered his Expectations, in many
or most Respects. And Judas of whose Treacherous Design was the third and last
Instance, of my present Treatise, as I mention them, Cain, Esau, and Judas. The
which three persons were led, (as we read in our Recourse of the holy
Scriptures) by their Ambition, Pride and unsatiable Desires, as it is most
manifestly seen, if you look through their Conditions, The one of them intended
to propagate such an Interest, as would render him and his Successors Famous
and Eminent through most Generations. The second, for the sake of a
Prerogative, which he expected to obtain, if he could but play his Cards, as he
proposed several times to himself so to do, but at last to his everlasting woe
failed him. And the third, for the sake of a small filthy Lucre, and also Envy
and Malice; and also every one of the said three Apostates, having his
particular Design, Intent and Purpose, in his Heinous and wicked Relapse, and
abominable Apostasy, thought to Conquer all Obstacles, Interruptions, or
Obstructions, that stood in his way, and hindered him of enjoying his unlawful
Wishes, and having so conquered them, he expected thereby to Crown himself in
the Throne of his ambitious Aim or Usurpation. The which indeed I may say, was
the main of all their designed Interests, of them that combined with them in
their said Undertakings. You may be pleased to see and thoroughly view and
consider, in what height and measure of Estimation, Ambition is harbored in
the Bosom of some or great many persons of these times. And to let you see more
plainly, to the end that you may be pleased to take notice of the several and
sundry Inconveniences, that ambitious, covetous and envious Persons are made
subject to, by reason that they leap before they see, so that by their
unadvised Undertakings, they fall into several Laborynths and Snares of
Inconveniences, and that instead of being made partakers of what they aim at,
they are frustrated and deprived of their Expectations, and they are also
rebuked, reproved and reproached in the Opinion and Judgment of the most
discreet, solid and wise men; which I shall let you see is the Event and Fruit
of these three mentioned Persons, that I took in hand to speak of, in this my
account to you of them.

And now you may see, the ancient Root of Ambition and Malice, which sprung,
and proceeded from our Predecessors, in the former Ages, may be very well in
many respects compared to this present passage, that I presume you are
thoroughly acquainted with, of Captain Elie, Sympson Tongue, and John Crawley,
for every one of these three present Persons, had their particular Aims and
Designs, to propagate their particular Interests, but woe be to them, they are
by divine Providence most shamefully and reproachfully disappointed asyou shall
read in the following lines.

For as the Lord is not pleased to suffer such Abominations as those persons
proposed to themselves, to maintain and go through with, without Reprehensions,
Reproofs and Reproaches, and that in a scandalous and ridiculous Manner, as
indeed the Guilt and the Crime of their Undertakings does require Punishment,
which I do not question, but they may receive it after their own measure;
neither does the Lord think fit, to see his Anointed, viz. the Great King of
these three Nations, together with the Subjects and Ministers of Law, Aequity
and Justice; to be perpetually spotted and blemished, by the Enemies of the
Government of this Land. Who in general are incomprehensible, but it is
generally and assuredly grounded upon the Chickens, that are hatched in the
Hutch of Rome, which you nor no other person can deny: if he be either a
Closet-Reader, or a Traveller, but that it is the daily study of the said
Chickens, and both their Male and Female-Dame, to cast all the Enormities and
scandalous Reproaches, they possibly can invent and forge, upon the Reputation
of Protestants, as I could instance several satisfactory Instances and
Examples, to the said effect. But I designed to handle it in another Paper,
that I intend to let you see more at large, what I have seen, heard, and
understood, how and in what manner and measure the Popish Party, under whose
wings I have been hatched for all my lifetime until the beginning of July 1679,
that I Renounced them by the Direction and Tuition of God, being led so to do
as you shall read in my next opportunity. And to hint where I left off in the
foregoing words of the Design of Elie, Crawley, and Tongue, to asperse the King,
Country, Church and Government of these three Nations, which indeed there is
many a Soul, that joins with them in so doing, at least in their wishes, and
thoughts, they would willingly assist and back them, for they could do it
without being seen in it, so that they are loath otherways to be Concerned, but
in their Clandestine way, they stir up others to blow the fire, and they kindle
it themselves, which is a thing easily proved, if it had been thoroughly and
narrowly examined, but for my part, I do not intend to press my Evidences to
that effect upon any man, though that I may safely say, and not only say, but
firmly aver that I have performed the duty of an honest Subject, a zealous
Christian and a loving Countryman. And having so done as is manifestly seen
that I am readier to serve than people are to receive me, which the old Proverb
being performed, which is called, Propriate Service is not accepted. But to
hint a little more of my purpose, to let you see as a Confirmation to your own
understandings, how this contrived Contradiction of the verity of a Plot, was
contracted by the above Persons, and I do not question but they had many
Assistants, in these their Undertakings of Blemishing and Disgracing the King's
Subjects, and Laws of these three Nations, as surely they would have been made
privy to, by the Lurkers and Peepers, officious and busy Persons, that lurk
and peep from forth their Windows, listening and waiting whether they could
hear any such Rumors or Reports, as the contradicting and discrediting of the
Popish Plot, and upon the other hand expecting likewise, to cast it over upon
the heads of Protestants, in hopes to clear themselves, and lay the Guilt upon
them; these I say, and such other Reports, as would relish best their Pallates
with such a savory taste, as to say that There is no Plot, It is proved there
is none, The Kings and Council are convinced to the contrary of the being of
any Plot in agitation at all, and that it is but a slam; and Captain Elie;
Sympson Tongue, and John Crawley maintained it so to be, and therefore he that
says there was a Plot in agitation shall not be the better thought of. Alas! I
say, this is the long wished and languishing Desire of the Church of Rome and
all Members thereunto belonging; That they may hear such a general and
unanimous Contradiction of the Plot, and indeed Reason will show us, not to
blame them in that respect; for it is no marvail, that the People should defend
their great Interest, and keep it as pure and blameless as possible they can,
but I must say it is not for their Care of so doing, if they had taken it in an
honest way, we blame them. But for their evil accustomed practices, for
conniving and contracting Massacre, Murder, Rebellion upon all whosoever that
contradict their Tenets, Governments or Laws; and after having so done, by
their fiery Instruments of devilish Exploits, they do absolve them, and
dispense with such abominable Wickedness, as has been Recorded of them in
several Ages. Which would be tedious to instance them or some of them in this
and such like little pieces of Paper, by reason that the Matter does require to
be more spaciously handled than I can well at present bestow time upon. But I
say we can expect no less of any people which are so manifestly proved to be
Guilty and Criminal, but that they would with all their Endeavors hide their
Guilts and Crimes, and employ their best Wits, how to recall the Reputation by
famed Honesty and Innocence, which we see daily, that they, that is to say, the
Roman Catholics do practice and use all means whatsoever, to get themselves
into a renewed Favor, and procure them the title of harmless people, but I
judge that what they can do to that purpose cannot yield them such Reputation
as they have lost, by their several, sundry, and manifold Connivances and
Contrivances, for they are by several Authors Recorded in old Ages remarkably
to be a people that continually harbor an Antipathy against Protestants, which
I would let you see by several Instances, but as I have excused my self in the
foregoing lines, that I must wait till another Opportunity, and expecting upon
such Considerations, (which I shall thus reason unto you hereafter) and shall
(in the Interim) recommend you to your own reading, in several approved
Authors, which I question not, but you may be furnished with them, and if you
be not you may borrow of others, who are so concerned to be curious in keeping
(for the reviving of their Memory) such Books as may confirm the Truth of what
I do tax Popery to be guilty of, in many Ages, Reigns, and Governments; though
that the Roman Catholics do unjustly assert, that the very first Offspring of
Protestants proceeded from Luther and Calvin, in King Henry the Eighth's time,
about one hundred and fifty years ago, Whereupon, Papists may take occasion to
contradict me, in claiming an Interest in the knowledge of their Error in many
Ages. For they are a people that are apt to purchase all Demurrs whatsoever
that they can light of quoted in any Writings against them, for I know they say
that Protestants are but new upstart Apostates, and that they can claim no
Rights in the Primitive Record, much less they say in the Apostolical
Church Government; and the reason they produce for that false Assertion of
theirs, is this, That the Primitive Records and the Apostolical
Church-Governments were established for many hundreds of years, before the Name
or Government of Protestants was invented or published; yet we find we believe
great many steadfast and well-grounded Authors, that Protestants were for some
hundreds of years before that time that they take to be first dissenting of
Protestants from the Roman Catholic Church, which I shall undertake to
maintain to the Contrary on some other Occasion. And well understanding that
you may be as acquainted with the truth of it as I am, I take it as one of the
Reasons or Considerations, (as above mentioned) for not further satisfying you
with preambled Instances at present.

The next Reason I have as to that matter of my silence, in letting you see
more of the Transactions of the Popish Party is this, that I intend to make use
of Opportunity; which shall be with as much Expedition as I can, to give you a
larger account of their Malice against Protestants. And upon these
Considerations I leave you to your thoughts of these Matters: And shall only
tell you that the old Spirit of Popery and Envy, is much revived now adays, and
I am afraid in this City, Suburbs, Court and Kingdom, which I could wish with
all my heart, that the said City, and Country might not feel the burden,
Smart, Strength and multiplicity of the said Party. I do also pray to the Lord,
that my King as his Subjects could been purged from their long burning
Sedition, that they cast in between him and his Subjects; I could wish, that
his Majesty could be rid of the daily troubles, he, his Parliament and Council,
are daily toxicated with, by reason of the said Parties mutinous and rebellious
old Satanical Disobedience, that they contumaciously and contumeliously harbor
and entertain for him, and his Gracious Government. And if that he could but be
so clearly rid of them, as I could wish with all my Soul he were; I am certain
he and all his Subjects, would be united together and they so tied to him in
Loyalty as that the Splendour of their peaceable Union and Loyal Amity, would be
reported and highly Commended all over the World. But in the mean while, a man
cannot sleep well in a bed full of Fleas. But God grant that his Majesty's
Dominions may be rid of all Seditions and Insurrections, and of the Authors of
them, that we may see our King and his Subjects united together as firm and
steadfast as any King and Subjects of the whole Universe. The which means of
their amorous Union and Injunctions we ascribe unto the Lord who is God and
King over all, for to rectify the Condition of our present State of Affairs,
as shall be most acceptable in his own glorious sight and useful to my King and
Country.

Now I do intend to let you understand, something of the Event of the
proceedings of these three Persons, viz. Captain Elie, Sympson Tongue, and John
Crawley, which is this, that after they bussled the Kings Majesty, and his most
Honorable Privy Council, with their composed, but ill grounded, and false
Contradictions of the realty of the Popish Plot, and their bustling being so
great, as the noise of their barkings was so both abominable and terrible, as
their howlings occasioned some other Helhounds to follow them, because as it is
said Birds of a Feather flock together, thinking to rouse up a Dear to Chase,
but instead of so doing they were forced to Chase a Fox, and the Fox being as
his nature is the subtlest of most Beasts, after having all the day made them
follow him, at last when it grew late, and the Road overwhelmed with Darkness,
therewithal the said Fox understanding full well his time, and his place, he
whips down into his Hole, and the darkness so overwhelming, the Hunters and the
Hounds strayed from both their Chase and Trace, so they were forced to retire
most shamefully home to their several houses. This simile I make, and thus
apply the same, in comparison of these three Hunters that thought to deceive
several and especially the transitory Pleasures of this World which by some
Critic Authors is compared to a Fox, which no man ever deceived, neither the
Fox nor the World. For in the first place, though the Fox be taken by the force
of many Hounds, yet it is very well known that he is not afraid of any man; and
so the World, Though men for some season Encompass, Enjoy, and take Pleasure in
it, yet it is visibly seen, that it deceives more than deceive it, as I may
refer my self to the Experience of these three Gentle-huntsmen, of whose
proceedings I gave you some account how they went about to chase themselves out
of their way, so that it was very difficult for them to find out the way again.
Which I question if ever they find it any more. And to hunt this Subject
(called the World) which most people call their mainest and greatest Concerns,
to covenant with it, and also to forfeit for a transitory being, a perpetual
enjoyment, it is to be thought a great madness in them so to do, for when they
assure themselves of the constant continuance of it, they are then most like to
be farther from it, as you may observe in several passages of this very time,
to the woeful experience of these three Gentlemen, who traveled hard for it,
for I am afraid that they run a dangerous hazard in hopes to gain it, and so to
purchase themselves such means in it, as to make themselves merry with the
Pleasures and Comfort of it. But alas! they were sadly mistaken with its
subtle promises, it gave them the slip at the last. This I say is the Event
and Offspring of all such that covenant with the World, it goes into its own
hold, after they chase it aslong as ever they can for their lives, and they are
never the wiser of all their spent labor about it. You may ask Sympson Tongue
if I speak truth or not, who has bought the Experience that I give you of the
same Relation very dear, which I am certain if he were to buy it again at such
a Price or Rate as it is like to cost him, I am confident he would Consider
before he would be at half the trouble or pains that he was at. He spent his
Labor, his Reputation and Credit, and forfeited the comfortable and natural
Affection of his Father, in hopes to exalt himself to a greater Fortune, which
you may see how short he came of what he aimed at. And I suppose you will let
me tell you, or at least give me leave to speak what I think of the matter, he
would be thoroughly satisfied and contented, not to have purchased to himself
such Discords and Discontentments, as he made himself partaker of and also
subject to go through, of whose proceedings I have told you already. Yesterday
being examined before King and Council, and he having nothing to say for
himself, but standing as a block, without much either Grace or Countenance, to
answer what was imputed to his Charge, neither was he able to answer some
particular Questions as were propounded to him by the King, whereupon at the
Request of the Lords, the King was pleased to Order Mr. Attorney General, to
prosecute the Law against him, and Captain Elie, for whose proceedings I have
no further to show you; but I desire that the Lord may endue me and others with
more Grace than to employ my time upon so uncertain a Foundation, and upon a
clearer Conscience, than this Youth has lived. This I say is all that I
determine at present, only recommending us all to the Tuition and Protection of
the Divine Deity, as also the Government of our King and Country, and next or
lastly, I Recommend all our Concerns under the gracious keeping of God, and so
Farewell.

FINIS.

