FOR THE BILL AGAINST Clandestine Trade.

Fair Trade, besides the Heavy Duties it lies under, suffers yet more from the
Frauds of Smuglers and the Exactions of Officers, for preventing both which,
the BILL before the House is Calculated so that it is no wonder if the Private
Interests of Clandestine Traders and Officers, should unite, in raising a
Clamor against it.
The Clauses whereof are to the Effect following. 1. THAT all Ships under just
suspicion of an Irregular Trade, by hovering and remaining unnecessarily near
the Shore, should be subject to a Search, and the Master obliged to declare his
Consignment. SUCH Declaration of the Master, is no more than what is already
required from all who come into Port, and this Clause will not delay any Ship
which duly prosecutes her Voyage, or prevent taking in necessary Supplies. 2.
The second Clause subjects all Persons any way aiding or assisting in Smugling,
to a Penalty, and also forfeits the Horses or Carriages employed in such
Service. This was in the French Prohibition Act, and the speedy Conviction,
will make it more Effectual, as well as more Useful, to the Poor. 3, 4, 5. The
third, fourth, and fifth Clauses require the Making True Entries, with
reference to the Country, and also the Property of the Goods, under a Penalty,
on any Prevarication. This necessary to prevent Coloring French or Aliens
Goods, under other Names; but if the Swearing Toties Quoties be objected to, a
General Oath may suffice instead of it. 6. The sixth Clause provides for the
Security of Goods casually cast on Shore, till the Duties are paid. The King's
Interest in such Goods, would help to preserve the Subjects Right better than
it would be otherwise. 7. Brandy in small Casks, or Salt in Bags, to be
forfeited, if found on board Ships pretending to be bound to Ireland, or the
Neighboring Islands, as well as if Imported to England. This Clause makes the
Smugling more difficult in these Instances, wherein it was before too
frequently practiced. 8. No House to be broken open in Search of Uncustomed
Goods, but on fresh Pursuit, or Information upon Oath, and the Informer to have
Equal Share with the Officer. It Is no unusual Practice for Merchants to disturb
one another in the same Trade, by whispering Stories to Officers, without any
Foundation, which is a great Mischief, when it goes so far as to break into
Houses. The other part is for Encouraging Just Informations. 9. All Merchants
to be Civilly treated and diligently dispatched, on pain of suspending the
Officer who neglects his Duty herein. That is in dispatching due Certificates
of Over Entries or Damage; and Post Entries to be avoided as much as is
possible. The Fundamental Security to the Revenue arises from the Obligation
upon Merchants to enter their Goods before they land them; And all Short
Entries under Color of Damage or any other Pretense whatsoever, subjects so
much to Frauds by Collusive Practices with the Officers at the Waterside. 10.
Goods brought to the Warehouse at the Merchants desire, for securing the Duty
to be entered in a certain time, or the Warehouse room to be paid for. This only
to oblige the Merchants to dispatch the Entering their Goods, in order to clear
the Kings Warehouse. 11. Wines to be Imported in Certain Cask, on pain of
Losing the 12 per Cent. for Leakage, and to be obliged to enter as filled up,
gauging the Wine if otherwise Imported. The Rule in the Book of Rates, which
allows Outs, supposes Certain Cask, and the Merchant who had before his
Election on the Entry, Whether to Enter filled or unfill'd; will have it now on
the Importation. 12. Damaged Tobacco to be destroyed, on certain Conditions.
The partiality of Officers in the Allowances for Damage, is a great
Discouragement to Fair Trade, which this Clause prevents, as well as prejudice
to the Subject, by the Mixing of Unwholsom Tobacco with Sound: and if the like
Practice might be used to Unsound Wines, it would probably have the same good
Effect every way. 13. No Person to be admitted to Claim any Goods seized,
without giving Security to answer Costs of Suit. This to prevent Sham-Claims of
Persons no way interested in the Property of the Goods. 14. No Goods to be
carried Coast-ways without a Custom-house Dispatch, or Landed, but in presence
of an Officer. These Three Clauses necessary to prevent the Frauds usually
practiced in the Coast Trade. 15. Fisher Boats, Coal Ships, or other Coasting
Vessels, taking in any Uncustomed or Prohibited, or Certificat Goods at Sea,
without Warrant, shall be forfeited, unless in Cases of absolute necessity. 16.
Foreign Goods carried up the Navigable Rivers, shall have Custom-house
Dispatches, as if carried from Port to Port. 17. Endorsed Cocquets to be by
Actual Endorsement on the first Warrant in all Cases where it is practicable.
This saves the Merchant the unnecessary trouble and charge of Two Entries, and
secures the Revenue better from double Shipping of Subsidy Goods and Double
Debentures for Certificat Goods. 18. No Bounty to be paid for Corn Exported,
without the same Proof which the Law already requires, before the Bond be
Cancelled. Security being already required for Exporting such Corn, the Reason
of the Law holds against paying the Bounty, till such Security be duly
discharged by a Certificat of the Actual Exportation. 19. No Ship importing any
Foreign Goods shall discharge the same into Lighters, but on a Sufferance with
Condition to secure a due Entry of all such Goods. The unshipping Goods before
Entry creates a Forfeiture in Law; And though Trade may be accommodated in this
Particular, yet the King's Security should not be lessened. 20. Officers to be
settled in the Isles of Man, Guernzy, and Jerzy, etc. with Authorities to
prevent Irregular Trade. Without such Care those Islands may be made Magazines
for Plantation and Prohibited Goods, which will be more easily stolen from
thence into England. 21. and 22. Certain enumerated Goods paying very high
Duties, as also all French and Prohibted Goods being seized and condemned to be
sold by Inch of Candle; The King to have Two thirds of such Sale, paying the
charge of Prosecution, and no Letter of License to be granted for Compounding
such Seizures. The Reason of these Clauses is, that the King's Share by
Composition, and even his Moiety of the ordinary Appraisements, comes to less
than the Duty on some Goods, which tends to run the Revenue into Forfeiture by
Collusive Seizures, wherein the Merchant will find his Account. 23. The
Commissioners may compound Petty Seizures only where the Subsidy does not
exceed 40 shillings. This always allowed in the Commission of the Custom, as
supposing the Goods will not answer the Charge of the Prosecution in the
Exchequer; nevertheless the Practice of it is uneasy to hat Court. 24. The
Register of Ships hitherto required for such only as trade to the Plantations,
to be extended to all English Ships trading to any Foreign Parts, in order to
preserve the Privileges intended by the Act of Navigation to English Ships and
English Seamen entire to them. This Cluse does only pursue the Intention of the
Act of Navigation, by encouraging the Juilding of Ships in England, and
employing of Englilish Seamen. 25. Masters of Ships coming from Foreign Parts,
though pretending to be in Ballast, to make Declaration at the Custom-house That
^he Pretense of Ballast may not be a Cover to Fraud, as it proves too often.
26, and 30. The Commanders of Men of War and Yatchs coming from Foreign Parts,
as also Masters of Vessels employed in the Service of the Navy, Victualling, or
Transports, to be subject to Declaration and Rules as well as others. This
naught to be a necessary Caution, to prevent Opportunities of Smuggling, under
Color of the Public Service. 27, 28, 29. The Oaths required from Masters of
Ships to be writ down on the Reports Inwards, and the Contents Outward, to be
Signed by the Masters of the Ships, and to be attested by the proper Officers
administering the same respectively. The Law already requires the Oath and the
making it more solemn, by writing it down to be read and subscribed, before
sworn may procure a greater Regard of it. 31. A Regular Account of all Seizures
to be given from time to time to the Commissioners. The necessary to prevent
Discharges without die Course of Law. 32. All Bonds duly Certified to be
Cancelled, and the Certificate to be annexed to the Bond, to justify the
Officer in Cancelling the same. The present Practice, is to return the Bonds
into the Exchequer without Cancelling; so that if the Certificate happens to be
lost, the Merchantis unreasonably prosecuted. 33. Bonds not duly Certified, to
be returned regularly into the Exchequer, in order to a Prosecution. This no
less reasonable than the other, to discourage Irregular Practices. 34. The
Impositions to be accounted for in the Exchequer by the Patent-Officers in the
Year-Books as well as the Subsidy. Those Duties now amounting to more than the
Old Subsidy, may deserve as much Care from the Officer in rendering a just
Account of then. 35. Collectors to give in their Quarterly Accounts of
Incidents upon Oath, and all Officers to attend diligently at reasonable Hours
the Dispatch of Merchants Business. The first Part but a reasonable Caution
from the Officer, and the other a just Regard to the Accommodation of Trade.

Upon the whole Matter, This Bill is of very Public Concernment: For as there
was in the Year ending at Michaelmas l^st near 1500000 l. in Money received for
Duties at the Custom-house, and applied to the Discharge of the Debt of the
Nation, It is plain that a due Collection of these Duties does not only tend to
encourage Trade in General, but to ease the Land of every Gentleman in England
of so much of that Public Burden which must otherwise come upon it. And if
there be any one Clause in the whole Bill, which upon due Deliberation shall be
found Impracticable or too Rigorous, the Bill being framed as it is by Rules to
make it more intelligible in fewer Words, any one of them may be left out
without Prejudice to the rest, as having no necessary Dependence on, or
Connection with one another.


