FIVE IMPORTANT QUERIES Humbly Propounded To all true Lovers of the Peace and
Safety OF THE CHURCH AND STATE.

By a sincere Well-wisher to the Old Protestant Religion.

Volutus Lapis nunquam capit Muscum.

Often Changes presume Death at hand.

LONDON: Printed by Nathaniel Thompson next Door to the Cross Keys in
Fetter-Lane, MDCLXXXI.

FIVE IMPORTANT QUERIES Humbly Propounded
To all true Lovers of the Peace and Safety of the CHURCH and STATE.
I. WHether it be necessary to endeavor any Alteration in the Church, in this
Juncture of Affairs, considering, 1. There is nothing practiced in it contrary
to any known Commandments of God: 2. Nor can its bitterest Adversaries affirm,
that its Communion hinders the salvation of men's souls: 3. Nor does its
continuance cross the Laws of the Land (as the practice of all other Sects do)
since it is established by the Law: 4. Nor is there any evil at present, or
greater danger, then has been for some years last past, from the parties of
either side, to hasten such alteration: 5. But such alteration may soon move
Asperities of either side, great enough to endanger the State.

II. Whether it be profitable to endeavor such Alteration, considering, 1. The
parties are of both sides as much engaged against the Papists at present, as
ever they will be in their Union. 2. The fiercest and rigidest of the Sects can
never unite, but by utter destruction of the Church: For the Quakers deny all
Sacraments, and cannot mix with them that are for them, since they are matter of
daily and personal practice. The Anabaptists cannot close, for then England
must be all un-Churched and un-Christianed; or they must forsake their
principles. Nor can the Independents; for they profess none can be a Church of
Christ, but what are gathered by their own consent, and make an explicit
Covenant, and exercise all jurisdiction in a single Congregation, which is
inconsistent with the Constitution of this Church. 3. The Presbyterians, as
they are few in number, (if any) so can they not assure the Law-alterers, to
bring any of their people to our Communion, after all pretended alterations
made. 1. Because they are bred up in a perfect aversion from Liturgies. 2.
Because they are too proud to held themselves with the vulgar. 3. They love to
seem more Religious than their Neighbors. 4. They hold Gods people to be a
little Flock separated from the world; and conclude they must have a world to
rail at, and distinguish themselves from, though it be from Christians baptized,
and professing the true Faith; and that they cannot go with the multitude of
believers, but to do evil; and must contend with Magistracy, that through many
tribulations they may enter into the Kingdom of God; and so ungovernable, that
their own Teachers affirm they cannot rule them. So that it were prudence in
Lawmakers to take a List of their Names, subscribed by themselves, that would
unite upon such abatements, lest they should toil all day and get nothing. 4.
It Is certain when Presbytery was nigh establishing in 1645 without Ceremonies
or Liturgies, the Dissenters swarmed, and armed against them as fast as now,
and found occasions enough of disputing and separating. Nor is there at present
any Liturgy or Ceremony in the Church of Scotland, but the Field-Conventiclers,
and the Regular Clergy, pray and preach without distinction, in the same
method; yet is the separation strenuously kept up upon other grounds, when
Liturgy and Ceremonies were taken away. So that the profit of alteration is not
like to quit the cost; besides the offense it may give to the serious
Conformist, who should not be valued the less for being tender of disobedience
to Authority. And 5. It Is most unreasonable to hope, when the Law is relaxed to
malcontents, that conquest over the Laws should make them more humble or
peaceable, for it will seem to them a victory over King, Lords and Commons, to
make them more insolent.

III. Whether it be expedient at this time to attempt such Alteration,
considering, 'twas but 18 years since the Churches last Settlement, and the
same men for the most part are still in the Legislation, who either acted then
with mature consideration, or not: if they did, what accident since should make
them attempt a change? Are there more Sectaries than at that time? or fewer
Conformists? or is the Liturgy and Ceremonies grown worse than they were? Or
the Dissenters more peaceable and humble? or is there greater danger in
continuing, than there was in first settling the Church? But if not done with
due conscience and regard, it is a sad reproach to the Legislators, nor can
they secure us that greater care will be taken now, since they implicitly
confess they prevaricated before: besides the dishonor will reflect on the
King of Levity and Inconstancy in the great Affairs of Religion, to alter its
Modes faster than Fashions. 2. Such Alterations will cast a blur on the
Reformation, and disturb the ashes of our pious Martyrs, as men that settled a
Religion and sealed it with their blood, which a good conscience could not
comply withal. 3. It will justify the Papists in their sufferings, and condemn
our whole Laws and National Justice; that we should punish them so many years
for not coming to Church, and complying with a Religion that now our selves
think fit to be exploded; and the parties to be gratified, declare, that no man
with a good conscience can comply withal; a greater wound than which cannot be
given to the whole English Nation, nor a fairer palm of victory to the Papists,
(thus made) Martyrs or Confessors at the least.

IV. It will be of very ill consequence to all sorts: For 1. when Scruplers
shall find they can master Laws, and get their wills over Authority, it will
encourage and increase scrupling, yea even to the ruin of them that are now to
be gratified, for others by their example will hope to rise by the same evil
Arts. 2. And for the common people, it will take off their reverence to
Religion, by seeing it represented so trifling, light and changeable; and so
will tempt them to believe there is no God, by reason of the Tricks and
Experiments the State makes with his worship; nor will they much value at any
time what they see kicked about like a Football, and win think any Settlement
will be in fashion but for a few years, and thence reckoned evil and
ridiculous. 3. Yea, the wisest and best of men will stumble, when they see the
way of Religion, in which they have for many years comfortably worshipped God,
now at last in a hurry hissed out of the world by prevailing Faction. 5. The
Roman Factors make all the profit; for that mighty Argument that has perverted
thousands already will now be stronger, That there is no Settlement, union or
peace any where but in the Roman Church, nor any steady Religion else to place
themselves under, seeing us toss and tumble our Worship from one mode to
another, as the Tumble alters his postures; thus we take pains to drive Fish
into the Popes Net. Besides which, it will wonderfully harden and encourage the
Papists, when they shall see us not only to reject their Errors, Novelties and
Superstitions, but even the grave usages of the Primitive Church: so that they
will conclude we walk by no Rule but our own wills, and are Nonconformists not
only to their Church, but to all since Christianity begun in the world. Yea,
when our people shall see Parliaments so apt to change the shapes of our
Worship, they will suspect that when occasion serves, they will bring up the
old Roman mode, as they did in the first year of Queen Mary, which may tempt
the people to prepare themselves for it against the time.

IV. Whether it be lawful for Parliaments so often, and without being called on
by the Church Representatives, to attempt those Alterations, considering, 1.
The Laws of God condemn such as are given to change, and all that are
busybodies in other men's Matters, and require submission in all lawful
things, with meekness and lowliness of mind, the Spirit directing Christians to
give themselves up to the Lord, and then to the guidance of the Church, 2 Cor.
8.5. by the will of God, whose faith the Saints were bound to follow, Heb.
13.7. and not to meddle with doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. and much less to
attempt perpetual Alterations. 2. The Law of Nature made all the Ceremonies of
Religion unalterable* unless on very great occasion, as may be seen in all
Mythodogists. 3. Right Reason assures us that what we do without just cause, we
have some unjust cause for it, as prejudice, partiality passion, or the like.
4. The Law of the Land forbids it, while the great Charter secures the Church
all its privileges, one of which was to be first and chief in all Matters of
Religion; and what alterations were made, did owe their rise to them, the
secular Power followed their Decrees with the civil Sanction. 5. It looks very
odd, that at every Election of a new Parliament, we should put our Bodies and
Souls, Religion and Worship, as well as Liberty and Property, into the hands of
our Representatives, whom we choose on the Kings Writ, to be as Arbitrators for
us in those things, that the King at that time has to propound; England rather
takes Parliaments for a Civil then Spiritual Court. How would a good Conscience
tremble when a Parliament sits down, to think that now the Worship of God is in
danger to be blasted by a major Vote? The Ark of God would totter at every such
Assembly.

V. Lastly, Whether it be fair dealing to attempt such Alterations,
considering, 1. That the Body of the people of all ranks and degrees,
cheerfully complied with the Settlement, in hope to live peaceably all their
days under it, and to be no longer distracted with endless divisions, but to
rest themselves here as in the true Ark of God: But such Alterations thrust
them into the Floods again, and charge them as men of no Conscience, for
embracing that way of Worship, that is now thought fit for nothing but the
dunghill; and send them to seek some new Assemblies to march along with to
Heaven, in the midst of infinite distractions, and exposes them to the scorn of
Dissenters, that will deride their Christian humility for base and cowardly
compliance, etc. a sad requital for their holy and humble demeanor. 2. The
Clergy whose Conformity will seem their scandal, and their many Declarations
and Subscriptions, be accounted but as so many unconscionable ownings of a way
of Worship, not fit to be endured by Christians. And the most stubborn and
rebellious Schismatic be judged the better man, yea, their meekness,
obedience, and peaceable behavior, will be reckoned base complyances with
false ways of Worship, while the pride and stubbornness of the Sectary will
pass for Christian fortitude, the injustice of which will happily be equaled by
nothing but the sentence of Pilate upon our Savior.

Now for a Conclusion, we may Query, Whether it would not turn much more to the
advantage of Piety and Peace, that each Bishop be urged to reside at his
Cathedral, and attend his Consistory, that all Causes may be decided with
greater justice, and the Censures of Christ be managed with just and holy
hands: And in case of necessary absence, that the Dean, and 4 or 3 at least of
the gravest Prebends, as Co-assessors, supply his place, that Righteousness may
run down like water, and Judgment like a mighty stream, to refresh the Church
of God, and bring it to its due and true Reverence; which being a way of
Christ's Institution, is more likely to recover straying Sheep, then all
annihilation of Laws to unite them in I know not what ill-tempered Syncretism.
Nor can such Bishop want judicious and acceptable Presbyters, to send amongst
the Dissenters, to convert them from their Errors, and to convince them of the
dangerous estate of Schism, in which they stand, if industriously prosecuted.
By this means chiefly the ancient Schisms were demolished, and Peace and Unity
restored to the Church; but never by cassating the Laws, to make the
Malefactors behavior not illegal, whilst he continues in his stubbornness
without repentance or amendment, the secular arm still inflicting some small
penalty, that men may not sin out of wantonness.

This is written plainly to all Capacities, and sincerely, designing to prevent
those horrid Mischiefs, that will attend these designed Alterations, whenever
they are made. God grant such a judgment to be made of it by our Rulers, as the
Matter deserves.

FINIS.

