THE ART OF Preserving and Restoring HEALTH.

Explaining the Nature and Causes of the Distempers that afflict Mankind.

Also showing That every Man is, or may be, his own best Physician.

To which is added A Treatise of the most Simple and Effectual Remedies for the
Diseases of Men and Women.

Written in French by M. Flamand, M. D. and faithfully translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, in Covent Garden; H. Bonwick, in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and S. Manship, at the Ship in Cornhill. 1697.

THE French Author's PREFACE.
I Shall have all the Reason in the World to complain of the Injustice of the
Public, if my Charitable Design in Publishing this little Treatise be looked
upon as an effect of my Vanity, or an Arrogant Undertaking to prescribe Rules
to Physicians. I am sensible of the vast acknowledgments we owe for the daily
and important discoveries they make in that useful Art; and that they do not
stand in need of any Light to direct 'em, but what they acquire by their own
Experience and Studies. I never entertained a Thought of controverting the just
Right they are possessed of, to give Laws to the rest of Mankind; nor was ever
guilty of the least Intention to dissuade my Readers from following the
Instructions of their lawful Guides: My only Design was to serve the
Necessities of those, who, though they are not professed Physicians, are
nevertheless Masters of a sufficient Stock of Sense and Judgment, and are
neither too scrupulously fond, nor unreasonably negligent of their Health; for
it is eertain that the two opposite Extremities are equally to be avoided upon
all Occasions. I hope I shall easily obtain pardon for retaining some Terms of
Art, when the Subject could not be distinctly handled without 'em, especially
since I have always taken care to explain 'em. I never intended to court any
Approbation but that of the Candid Reader; and I shall think my self abundantly
recompensed for all my Labor, if there be any thing found in my Book that may
deserve it.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters Contained in the following Treatise.
THE Art of Preserving Health, and Preventing Diseases by Instinct, assisted by
the Light of Reason, Page 1 OBSERVATION I. That Man is endu'd with Instinct.
Ib. The Definition of Instinct, according to the Ancient Philosophers, Ibid. Of
the Nature of Instinct, according to des Carts, and other Modern Philosophers,
2 The Doctrine of Instinct confirmed by Reason and Experience, Ibid. Cato the
Censor was Physician to himself and to his whole Family, 3 Montaigne relates
the same of his Ancestors, though he was a professed Admirer of Medicine, 4 That
Man may be assisted by Reason in the choice of proper Remedies, 5 That a Man
cannot make use of a better Physician than himself, Ibid.
OBSERVATION II. Of the Temperaments or Constitutions of Bodies, and of the
Causes of Diseases in general, 6 Of the Nine sorts of Temperaments, according
to the Doctrine and Definitions of the Schools, Ibid. That the Knowledge of the
Temperaments serves to discover the Inclinations of Men, and the Distempers to
which they are subject, 7 That there are two sorts of Persons; the one strong
and healthy, the other Feeble and Tender, 8
CHAP I. Of the principal Causes of Diseases in the general. Ibid. That there
are Four Causes of Diseases, two remote, and two more immediate, Ibid. Of
Melancholy, The first remote Cause of Diseases: Of the bad Effects it produces
both in the Body and Mind; and of the Remedies that may be used against it, 9
What ought to be done in order to prevent the Effects of Vexation and
Melancholy, 12 That there are two sorts of Cures, the one perfect or
eradicative, and the other imperfect or palliative, Ibid. That Melancholy is a
Distemper both of the Mind and of the Body, Ibid. The Cure of Melancholy or
Vexation, 14
Of Debauchery or Intemperance, The Second remote Cause of Diseases, 15


CHAP. II. Of Excess in Eating and Drinking, Ibid. How Distempers are
occasioned by Excess in Eating and Drinking, Ibid. Rules to be observed with
respect to Eating and Drinking, by those that are in Health, 17 The Signs of
good and wholesome Food or Nourishment, Ibid.
CHAP. III. Of the immoderate Use of the Pleasures of Love, 18 That the
immoderate use of Amorous Enjoyments is prejudicial to health, and for what
reason, Ibid. What ought to be done by such as live single, in order to subdue
their lustful Inclinations, 19, 20 Of the Diseases that may be occasioned by a
rigorous abstinence from the Pleasures of Love, when care is not taken to
prevent 'em by the use of cooling and opening Medicines, Ibid. That the
excessive use of those Pleasures is more dangerous than an entire abstinence
from 'em, and for what reason, 20
CHAP. IV. Of the quantity or abundance of the Blood, the first immediate Cause
of Diseases, 21 How Diseases may be occasioned merely by the quantity or
abundance of the Blood, 22 An account of the Distempers that proceed from the
Redundancy of the Blood, 23
CHAP. V Of the Depravation of the Blood, considered as an immediate Cause of
Diseases, occasioned by the retaining of the Excrements in the Body* 24 How the
Digestion of the Aliments is performed by the Stomach, Ibid. How a Cacochymy or
ill dispositition of the Blood is produced, 26 Two Objections answered, 27, 28
The Excrements compared to a heap of Dung, 28 That the Liver alone is not able
to free the Blood from all its Impurities, and for what reason, 29 How that
little quantity of Blood that passes through the small Vessels of the Gut Colon,
may infect the whole Mass of the Blood, Ibid.
CHAP. VI. Of the Cure or Removal of the First immediate Cause of Diseases, by
lessening the Quantity of the Blood. 30 Two ways to lessen the quantity of the
Blood; Abstinence or a spare diet, and Bleeding, Ibid. How the quantity of the
Blood is lessened by Abstinence, and in what Cases this Method is most proper,
31 Of Bleeding, and when we should have recourse to it, Ibid.
CHAP. VII. Of the ways to remove the Second immediate Cause of Diseases
occasioned by the too long continuance of the Excrements in the Cavities of the
great Guts, 32 Four ways with which Animals are inspired by Instinct, to hasten
the Expulsion of the Excrements, 32, etc. Diet is the first Expedient that
contributes to the Evacuation of the Excrements, 33 The ill consequences of an
irregular Diet, Ibid. What use ought to be made of this Expedient, in order to
prevent Distempers, 34 Bleeding is the second way to facilitate the voiding of
Excrements that are too long retained, Ibid. The Usefulness of Bleeding in
Defluxions, Wounds, Childbirth, etc. Ibid. How Bleeding promotes the Expulsion
of the Excrements, 35 That Bleeding ought to precede the use of purging
Medicines, and for what reason, Ibid. Of the most proper times for Bleeding, 36
Of the Rules that are to be observed in order to make a right use of Bleeding,
37, 38. The ill Consequences of Bleeding without necessity, 38
CHAP. VIII. The Signs by which every Man is forewarned by his own Instinct, of
an approaching Distemper, 39 The bad Effects of Purging without necessity, 42
When a Man is threatened with Sickness by many and pressing Signs, he ought to
prevent the danger by a speedy use of proper Remedies: But if the Signs be few
and inconsiderable, he may defer the use of Remedies, and for what Reason, 43
Though it is dangerous to use Medicines too much or too often, yet the strongest
and most healthy Persons may sometimes stand in need of Remedies, and why, 44
CHAP. IX. Of Clysters and other Medicines; the third Expedient which Instinct
has taught Animals to forward the Expulsion of their Excrements, 45 That we
ought not to make a Custom of taking Clysters, and why, 46 How to know when we
ought, or ought not to use Bleeding by way of Prevention, Ibid.
CHAP. X. Of the way of using Remedies for the Preservation of Health, 47 That
Clysters ought to precede the use of Medicines, and why, 48 That the Effect of
Clysters is very irregular, and what must be observed on such occasions, 49
That a Purging Medicine should rather be taken by way of Infusion than in
Substance, and why, 49 Four Observations concerning the right use of
Purgatives, 50
CHAP. XI. Of Purgatives, and how they operate: Of the Time and Manner of using
them. 53 Of a common Property of all Evacuating Medicines, 54
CHAP. XII. Of the Purgatives that ought to be used for the preventing of
Diseases, 56 Medicines that purge by stool ought to be preferred before all
other Evacuating Medicines, and why, Ibid. What manner of Persons those are who
may expect Benefit by the use of Vomits, Ibid. Who may use Sudorifics, Ibid.
Who may have recourse to Diuretics; and so of the rest, Ibid. A Rule of great
Importance to be observed in the use of all Remedies whatsoever, 58 That
nothing can be more uncertain than the effect of Purgatives, Ibid. That the
most gentle Purgatives, and such as are most agreeable to our Constitution, are
of two sorts, 59 What our Opinion is concerning the effect of Remedies, Ibid.
CHAP. XIII. The Solution of certain Difficulties that deter most Persons from
making use of Purging Remedies for the preventing of Distempers, 61 The First
Objection, against Clysters and Purgatives answered, 61 The Second Objection
answered, 64 The Third Objection answered, 65 The Fourth Objection against
Bleeding answered, 66

The End of the Table.
BOOKS lately Printed.
THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion
and Government of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with ^igures. Done into English.

The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a faithful Account of the
Manners, Religion, and ^overnment of that People. By Monsieur de S. Olon,
^mbassador there in the Year 1693. Adorned with ^igures.

The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke of Riche^^eu, Principal Minister of State
to Lewis XIII. King (...) France and Navarre. in Two Volumes. 8vo.

Letters, written by a French Gentleman; giving a ^^ithful and particular
Account of the Transactions (...) the Court of France, relating to the Public
Inte^^st of Europe. With Historical and Political Re^ctions on the ancient and
present State of that ^ingdom. By the Famous Monsieur Vassor.

The Roman History, from the Building of the ^ity to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by ^ugustus Caesar: Containing the Space of 727 Years. ^esign'd as
well for the Understanding of the Ro^an Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By
Laurence ^chard, A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge.

A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the ^hief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, ^^atues, and Antiquities of that Country. Toge^^er with
useful Instructions for those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian Misson,
Gent. Do^^ into English, and adorned with Figures. In tw^ Volumes. 8vo.

The Life of the Famous John Baptist Colbe^ Late Minister and Secretary of
State to Lewis XI^ the present French King. Done into English from French Copy,
printed at Cologn this present Year 169^

A New Voyage to the Levant: Containing (...) Account of the most Remarkable
Curiosities (...) Germany, France, Italy, Malta, and Turkey; W^^^ Historical
Observations relating to the Present (...) Ancient State of those Countries. By
the Si^ du Mont. Done into English, and adorned with ^^^gures.

The Complete Horseman: Discovering the su^^ Marks of the Beauty, Goodness, and
Vices of H^^ses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their ^^^eases; and the
True Method both of their Pre^^^vation and Cure. With Reflections on the Reg^^
and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. T^gether with the Art of Shooing,
and a Descrip^^^^ of several Kinds of Shoes, adapted to the var^^^ Defects of
Bad Feet, and for the Preservation (...) those that are good; and the Best
Method of Br^^^ing Colts; with Directions to be observed in Bac^ 'em, and
Making their Mouths, etc. By the ^^^ de Solleysell, one of the Heads of the
Royal Acad^^^ at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Reviewed and ^^thodically
Augmented; Done into English, (...) Adorned with Figures. Folio.

THE ART OF Preserving Health.
OBSERVATION I.
That Man is endu'd with Instinct.
THE Word Instinct may be considered, either according to its Signification or
Etymology.

Instinct, according to the Etymology, comes from the Latin Word Instigo; which
in English signifies to incite, stir up, etc.

According to the signification, Instinct in Beasts is an Impulse, which moves
them toward those things that are useful, and makes them shun those things
that are hurtful.

This is the Opinion of Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, and, in a Word, of all the
ancient Philosophers: But, according to des Carts, and other modern Writers,
the Instinct of Beasts is a certain Principle, which is the cause of all their
Actions, just as the Wheels of a Watch make it point out and strike the Hours;
for, according to the Moderns, Beasts are nothing but a sort of Clock-Work, or
mere Machines: But this Opinion begins to lose Ground, as well as others.

This being premised, we may define the Instinct of Animals to be a Power of
Acting; which is, as it were, the Cause of the Actions that contribute to their
Preservation, which we commonly ascribe to their Instinct And may not Man then
have such a Principle, which in him may be the Cause of the like Actions? if we
consider him purely as an Animal, for, Abstrahentium non est mendacium, say the
Philosophers, we may presume that Man, as well as the Beasts, acts by Instinct
for his own Preservation.

Reason and Experience confirm this Truth; for it cannot be denied, that Man in
his Infancy, while Reason is clogged and obscured by the Imperfections of the
Organs of his Body, does many things which are advantageous to him, and which
can not proceed but from that Principle which is common to him with the Beasts,
since at that time he has no use of his Reason; for we find that an Infant,
as soon as it is born, applies it self to the Nipple which is presented to it by
the Mother or Nurse, and sucks out the Milk, without considering that it wants
it for its Nourishment. And soon after, when the Organs of his Senses are
strengthened, and when he begins to fix his Eyes upon such Objects as present
themselves to his sight, do not we see that he endeavors to avoid those that
are disagreeable to him; that he cries and is troubled when an unknown or
deformed Person takes him out of his Nurse's Arms? And is it not plain that
these are the Effects of Instinct, since Beasts do the same, without the Light
of Reason.

But we are not only guided by Instinct during our Infancy, for we are sensible
of it even in the Vigor of our Age. How often does it happen that while our
Thoughts are ^ntent upon some important Affair, we approach the Fire in the
Winter, or eat a hearty Meal, and do several other things without thinking on
them.

Cato the Censor, one of the wisest Persons among the Romans, was Physician to
himself, and to his whole Family; and he who writes his Life, tells us, that
that Illustrious Roman was wont to boast that he always kept himself and his
Family in per^ect Health, by the help of such Physic as he prepared himself;
which is as much as ^f he had intimated to us, that he was a di^igent Observer
of the Dictates of Nature.

Montaigne, one of the most refined Wit^ of our Age, relates the same of his
Ancestors, in the Second Book of his Essays, Chap. 3^ My Father, says he, lived
seventy four Years my Grandfather sixty nine, and my Great Grandfather near
eighty, without so much as tasting any Medicines; for whatsoever was not
commonly used, served them instead of Drugs.

Nevertheless, it is certain that he did no^ write this because he had an
Aversion to Physic, for he was too wise and judicious no^ to have a particular
value for so useful a^ Art; as appears by another Passage of hi^ Works, where
he expresses himself in the^^ Words, Health is a precious thing, which rea^
deserves that a Man should employ not only b^ time, but every thing else, for
its Preservation.

If Men will join Reason to their Natural Instinct, they may know themselves
be^ter than the Beasts can possibly do, which perhaps have no Knowledge, or at
le^^^ are incapable of Reflection.

I am not ignorant that Monsieur de (...) Chamber, a very Learned and Eminent
Physician, has written a particular Treatise concerning the Reasoning of
Beasts: But t^^ Reader will give me leave to own that (...) am neither of his
Opinion, nor of that (...) some other Philosophers, who affirm th^^ Beasts act
formally and directly for the a^taining of their End, though in an imperfe^^
manner; since, according to the Philosopher^ the distinction of Degrees, or
More and Le^^ does not imply a special Difference; and since there is no Effect
that does not depend upon, or proceed from, an Internal Cause, which can hardly
be allowed to Beasts.

Besides, Reason enables a Man to choose, out of many Remedies, that which he
knows to be the most proper for himself; whereas all other Animals of the same
Species, use the same Remedies, because they are not capable of making so nice
a Distinction.

To conclude; as it is plain that certain Junctures of Time, and other
Circumstances, have a considerable influence upon the Effect of Medicines, it
must also be acknowledged as wholly owing to Reason, that a Man who has made
use of the same Remedies at different times, when he comes to reflect upon
their various Effects, is able with more exactness and Judgment to choose fit
Opportunities to secure or promote their Success. It Is thus that many
Husbandmen, Laborers, and other Country People preserve their Health for the
space of seventy or eighty Years, and live to a great Age, without having need
of any but their own Internal Physician, that is, their natural Instinct, and
the Light of their Reason, which admonishes 'em to avoid Debauchery, Excess,
and Ambition.

It Is certain then that we can make use of no better Physicians than our
selves, provided we would seriously apply our selves to the Preservation of our
Health and Strength, and di^igently follow our Instinct and the Light of our
Reason.

OBSERVATION II.
Of the Temperaments or Constitution^ of Bodies, and of the Causes of Diseases
in general.
'T WOULD be needless to trouble the Reader with the Definition or Etymology of
the Word Temperament or Constitution and its Division into nine different
Species which are the common Subjects of Disputation in the Schools; since
there are ver^ few who know not that a Temperament ^ nothing else but a Mixture
of the four Qualities, viz. Heat, Coldness, Moisture and Dryness.

And on the other Hand, though a Man shou^^ know that there are nine Species of
Temperaments, viz. one temperate, and the other eight intemperate, he would
not, perhaps, b^ the more Learned; Nevertheless, lest my Silence should be
imputed to Ignorance, I wi^^ give such an account of 'em, as may in some
measure satisfy the Reader's Curiosity.

The Temperate Constitution is that which is composed of a due and convenient
Mixture of the four first Qualities, either according to the Quantity, which we
call a Temperate Constitution ad pondus, i. e. to weight* or according to the
Quality, ad justitiam, fit for every Faculty to perform its Operations aright.
I leave it to be decided by my more Learned and Experienced Brethren, whether
they ever met with such a Constitution in their Practice.

An Intemperate Constitution is that in which there is an Excess of one or more
Qualities above the Temperate; and it is twofold, viz. Simple and Compound.

The Simple is that which is caused by the Excess of any one Quality, viz. Hot,
Cold, Dry, or Moist separately.

The Compound is that which is produced by the Excess of two or more Qualities:
Thus Heat and Moisture conjunctly make a Sanguine Constitution, which answers
to Adolescency and the Spring; Heat and Dryness agree with Youth; Choler, and
the Summer; and so of the rest.

An Intemperate Constitution, as well Simple as Compound, may be either
Healthful or Sickly, Equal or Unequal, with or without Matter, etc. But since
these Distinctions would engage me in unprofitable Debates, I refer the Reader
to those Authors who have treated on that Subject.

And though the Knowledge of the Constitutions may be of some use, to discover
the Inclinations of Men, and many Diseases to which they are subject, I will
choose rather to say with a late Author, that there are but two sorts of
Persons, one that are endowed with a healthy and strong Constitution; and the
other with a feeble and weak Constitution, who are almost always sick, and
enjoy but very little Health.

It Is a great Advantage to be naturally well-disposed both in Body and Mind;
for such a Person may enjoy a perfect Health by leading a regular Life: But
when one is naturally of an ill Constitution, he loses his Health as often as
he neglects the Admonitions of his Instinct, and consequently must lead a very
troublsome and uneasy Life.

CHAP. I.
Of the principal Causes of Diseases in the general.
THERE are four Causes of Diseases viz. two remote, which are Melancholy or
Vexation, and Debauchery; and two immediate, which are an excess of Blood, and
the too long continuance of the Excrements in the great Guts.

Of Melancholy,
The first remote Cause of Diseases: Of the bad Effects which it produces both
in the Body and Mind; and of its Remedies.
THere are very few Persons who are not acquainted with Melancholy, either by
Reason or Experience, since the Life of Man is a continual Revolution of
Prosperity and Adversity; and the Oppositions betwixt those two Conditions,
excite in us contrary Motions, and very different Passions. That Tranquillity
of Mind which accompanies good Fortune, is very proper to preserve the Health;
for though the Mind and the Body are of a different Nature, yet they have an
Affinity, which keep 'em in such Dependence one to the other, that there is
nothing regularly done in the whole Composition, unless it be carried on by an
equal Combination of the two Parts.

All our Actions are performed by the assistance of the Vital and Animal
Spirits; and it is their Commerce which maintains that perfect Union, between
the Heart and the Brain, which are the principal Organs of the Body. For it is
plain that the Brain cannot produce the Animal Spirits, unless the subtle parts
of the Blood be conveyed thither through the Arteries; and that the Heart,
which is a Muscle, has not power by its continual Motion, to diffuse the Blood
through the whole Body, but by the assistance of the Animal Spirits: Now when
the Mind is serene and undisturbed, that all the Parts may be sensible of her
Impressions, she furnishes 'em with a sufficient quantity of Spirits, to enable
'em to perform their respective Actions.

But, on the other hand, when the Mind is agitated with a Crowd of dismal
Apprehensions, that give Entrance to Grief and Melancholy, she is perpetually
ruminating on the Causes of her Disasters, and endeavoring with all imaginable
Application, to remove 'em, which must needs occasion a vast expense of
Spirits. So that all the Animal Spirits which are generated in the Brain, are
scarce able to supply those Parts which are subservient to the designs of the
Soul, in the performance of those hasty Motions she requires from 'em; and
consequently since so large a quantity of the Spirits flows into the Nerves,
that are bestowed upon those Parts, there are but few left for the other
Nerves: Now the Parts which help to change or digest the Aliments, and are
subservient to all the Actions which are called Natural, being of no use to the
Passions, it is plain that the Nerves which go to those Parts, receive but few
Spirits from the Brain, and consequently that their Fibers are very weakly
moved, and their Actions disorderly and irregular; so that the Excrements can
hardly be expelled; and their too long continuance in the Guts is the immediate
Cause of Diseases.

We may add, that the great dissipation of the Animal Spirits, when the Soul is
vexed and disturbed, is the occasion that a greater quantity of Blood than
usual is sent from the Heart to the Brain, to make up the Loss of those
Spirits; and consequently the Nourishment of all the other Parts is both much
lessened and changed as to its quality. For it is always the best part of the
Blood that runs to the Brain, and the Body is deprived of its best Nourishment,
particularly the Membranous Parts, which are weakened and dried up, for want of
fit Matter to preserve them; and this Inconveniency reaching the Intestines, as
well as all the other Parts, it is certain that they cannot expel the Excrements
with vigor, by their Vermicular or Peristaltick Motion, being deprived of the
Animal Spirits, by whose Assistance they were moved.

We also see, that those who are naturally of a melancholy and peevish Humor,
who apply themselves to study, or to other Employments, which require much
application, are usually lean, and subject to be often Costive, and commonly
fancy themselves to be extremely sick, before they have the least disposition
or tendency to Sickness.

What ought to be done in order to prevent the Effects of Grief or Melancholy.
ALL Diseases, as well of the Body as of the Mind, may be cured either
perfectly or imperfectly.

A perfect Cure consists in the entire destruction of all the Causes of the
Disease, which must necessarily cease when the Causes are removed; Sublata
causa tollitur effectus: This sort of Cure is called cradicative.

Grief is not only a Disease of the Body, but it is one of the most considerable
Distempers that can possibly afflict the Mind.

It cannot be always cured by an entire removal of its Causes, since they are
not always in our power; and the best Reasons that can be alleged, to persuade
a Man to raise himself by the Strength of his Mind, above the reach of Ill
Fortune, may serve indeed for a fine Amusement to a contemplative Genius; but
are rarely able to allay the torment of an afflicted Mind: For as it is easy
for those on whom Fortune smiles, to comfort the Miserable, so it is hard for
those who are in trouble not to feel the weight of their Misfortunes.

As for Example; if a Man was entirely ruined, or reduced to extreme want by a
litigious Action entered against him by his Enemies; a grave Philosopher might
indeed admonish him that the Estate he had lost was transitory and perishable,
and that he ought not to have settled his Affections on it, neither as a Man,
because he should have considered that he must have left it sooner or later;
nor as a Christian, because as such he ought not to look upon such fleeting
Enjoyments as his Portion, but upon those which are Everlasting? These are
certain and undoubted Truths, but would not, in all probability quiet the Mind
of a Person in such Circumstances, or make him forget his Loss. And it is no
less certain that the Recovery of his Estate would be the most effectual
Expedient to restore the Tranquillity of his Mind.

Grief may be also occasioned by many other Causes, which are no less without
our power, and beyond the reach of Medicines, than the former.

But that which seems to be peculiar to this troublesome Distemper, is, that
whereas other Distempers are commonly cured by things that are contrary to 'em;
that which is contrary to this, commonly augments, rather than abates the
Distemper.

For a Man who is drowned in Sorrow is incapable of taking Pleasure in any
thing; and Joy, which is opposite to his Grief, is so far from easing him, that
he cannot endure to perceive the least appearance of it in another.

'Twou'd be needless then to attempt the Cure by endeavoring to divert his
Thoughts; and therefore, (in expectation that Time, which is the only Physician
in such Cases, may heal the Wounds of his Mind, or some of those unexpected
Revolutions, to which all the World is subject, may put an end to the Cause of
his Sorrow) we must content our selves with persuading him at least to resist
the fatal Influence which this Passion may have upon his bodily Health, because
of the strict Union that is between those two Parts which compose the Man.

It Is certain that Grief may be the Spring and Fountain of many Diseases, by
causing the Excrements to remain too long in the great Guts: And therefore we
must endeavor to make the best use of the Signs by which the Internal
Physician acquaints us with the stoppage of those Impurities in these Passages,
lest the Mind should by degrees communicate the infectious Contagion of its
Distemper, to the Body; that is, we must expel those Excrements as soon as we
perceive any signs of fullness; and in order to this, we must choose the most
convenient Medicines. For, as I intimated before, we must either entirely
remove the Causes of a Disease, or at least endeavor to prevent their Fatal
Effects.

Of Debauchery or Intemperance,
The Second remote Cause of Diseases.
DEbauchery consists chiefly in two things, viz. in excess of Drinking and
Eating, and in the immoderate use of the Pleasures of Love; for it is by this
means that the most healthy Persons destroy themselves, and shorten their Days,
even though they be otherwise of a stronger Constitution than others.

CHAP. II.
Of Excess in Drinking and Eating.
THAT we may comprehend the manner how Diseases are occasioned by excess in
Eating and Drinking, we must examine the Action of the Stomach and Guts in
converting the Food into Chyle: for if we consider that all the Fibers which
compose the Contexture of those Parts, are as it were so many small Springs,
being which successively slackened and contracted, keep the Food in a continual
Motion, which, with the assistance of dissolving Acids, attenuates, bruises,
and entirely changes its Nature. Now it is plain that these Springs may lose
their force and activity by a continual Pressure and distension, occasioned by
an excessive quantity of Food, which fills the Spaces that are formed by their
Turnings and Windings, even as the Springs of our Machines are stopped when their
Relaxation is hindered by a strong Pressure: For as a Bow cannot long retain
its Spring if it be kept continually bent, and the finest Machine in the World
will decay insensibly if it be not diligently kept in Order, so the most
vigorous Stomach may be spoiled by an over-proportion'd quantity of Food,
because the Fibers both of that and of the other Parts which help Digestion,
are either broken, or so weakened by a continual Extension, that they cannot
afterward contract and expand themselves, either to concoct the Food, or to
expel the Excrements that are separated from it: Now Indigestion and the
Stoppage of the Excrements in the Body, are, in a great measure, the immediate
Causes of Diseases.

But let us suppose that the Stomach, tho loaded with Food, may nevertheless be
able to digest it when the Body is very strong and vigorous, what must be the
consequence of such a Digestion, but that the redundant Chyle flowing out of
the Stomach, and not being admitted into the Milky-Vessels of the Mesenterium,
must remain in the small Guts, and afterward pass with the Excrements into the
greater, where it must quickly be corrupted, for want of a sufficient ferment
to keep up its Motion, and consequently must of necessity corrupt the
Excrements, and occasion all those Disorders which shall be mentioned in the
Chapters that treat of the immediate Causes of Diseases.

We ought therefore diligently to avoid excess in Drinking and Eating; and for
that reason it is necessary that every one should be acquainted with his own
Constitution: As for Example; the Choleric have occasion to eat oftener than
the Phlegmatic, because those are much hotter than these, and the Heat not
meeting with Matter to digest, takes hold of the Alimentary Juice, and thereby
insensibly weakens the principal parts of the Body.

Whoever enjoys a perfect Health, ought to use indifferently every thing that
is fit to Nourish him, especially when he has observed that any particular sort
of Food is endu'd with all the necessary Qualities; as first, when it is
agreeable to the Taste; for when the Stomach loathes any particular kind of
Meat, though at the same time it be very good and wholesome, we ought to abstain
from it, because it will infallibly either cause Indigestion, or provoke
Vomiting.

Secondly, When it is easily digested, without occasioning either a slackness or
straitness in the Belly: These are the surest Marks of wholesome Food; and there
remains nothing more to be observed, but that the Quantity must always be
moderate. We must then, to preserve our Health, eat when we are hungry, and
drink when we are thirsty, whatsoever is proper to be eaten or drunk, without
forcing Nature, and without either starving or cloying our Stomachs.

CHAP. III.
Of the immoderate Use of the Pleasures of Love.
THIS sort of Intemperance is no less dangerous and prejudicial than the
former: I need not mention those infamous Marks and Effects of Lechery, the
Gonorrhaea both simple and virulent, Phimosis, Paraphimosis, Excrescencies,
Bubo's, and in a Word, the Disease which is commonly entertained by all
Nations, though none of 'em are willing to own it as a Native, these are the
usual Consequences, and the just Rewards of unbridl'd Lust. But besides, it is
certain that the immoderate use of those Pleasures dissipates the Spirits,
extremely weakens the Brain, robs the Nerves, and Membranous Parts of their
proper Nourishment, is fatal to those who have a weak Breast, heats and drys up
the whole Body, and makes way for a whole Army of Diseases, by weakening the
Action of the great Guts, by dissipating the Spirits, and by drying up the
Fibers.

It is therefore necessary to moderate the Pleasures of Love, if we would
preserve our selves from irrecoverable Ruin; and consequently in our amorous
Inclinations, we ought to consult our Strength, and never to give a full career
to our eager Desires.

We must be entirely Masters of our selves, that we may be able, upon Occasion,
to curb the heat of a Passion which has in all Ages fooled the wisest Heads,
and baffled the severest Virtue; since the Wisdom of Solomon, the Holiness of
David, and the Strength of Sampson, could not moderate the Sallies of this
ungoverneable Passion: And 'twas this that made the modest Virgil say, Omnia
vincit Amor, and nos cedamus Amori.

Reason, which ought to guide us in all our Steps, is never less obeyed, nor
more strangely puzzled than when she attempts to calm the impetuous Motions of
Love, that are stirred up in us by an infinite Number of Objects, and after a
thousand several ways.

To make our selves Masters of this Passion, we must not only be possessed of an
unshaken Firmness and Resolution, but be furnished with constant Supplies of
Grace; for Chastity in Youth is a sort of Martyrdom, or as a Father of the
Church terms it, Martyrium sine sanguine.

This Consideration obliges me to advise all unmarry'd Persons to abstain
entirely from the Pleasures that are proposed to them by this Passion, provided
their ordinary Food be not too Juicy and provocative, such as new-laid Eggs,
Capons, Partridges, Woodcocks, Pigeons, Artichokes, Asparagus, Celery, all
sorts of Salt and Peppered Meats; as also some kinds of Pulse, because of their
Windiness, as Pease and Beans; and therefore such Persons must content
themselves with less Nourishing Food, and cool their Bodies more or less,
according to their Age and Constitutions; which they may do very easily by
consulting their Physicians; for otherwise they may, by abstaining entirely
from the Pleasures of Love, render themselves obnoxious to many Diseases, as
Stoppage of Urine, the Gravel, Stone, Vapors, Faintings, the Jaundice, and
Green Sickness.

It Is certain that an excessive use of the Pleasures of Love is more dangerous
than an entire abstinence from them; for the Ebullition of the Blood ending
sooner or later with Age, the Passions are extinguished with it, and the Calm
we enjoy after the Storm, makes us soon forget all the Pain we suffered to
resist it: whereas the Inconveniences that remain after the immoderate use of
those Pleasures, such as the trembling of the Nerves, Palsy, Shortness of
Breath, Phthisis, Gout, etc. make us pay very dear, in a long and infirm Old
Age, for the transitory Charms we enjoyed, and the frivolous Amusements of our
Youth.

What has been said may suffice to give us an Idea of the remote Causes of
Diseases; and therefore in the next place we must proceed to consider their
more immediate Causes.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Redundancy or too great Abundance of Blood, the first immediate Cause
of Diseases.
THE Blood, which is the Treasure of Life, when it exceeds either in Quantity
or Quality, may prove the Cause of Death when there is more than a sufficient
quantity of it in the Body, which we call a Plethora, or a fullness of Blood; or
when it has acquired some bad Quality, which we call Cacochymia, or a
depravation of the Humors: Bleeding destroys or removes the former, and
Purging the latter.

We may easily comprehend how Diseases may be occasioned merely by the Quantity
of the Blood, if we reflect upon the Disposition of the Organs which contain
and convey the Blood, and conduce to its Motion.

In order to this we may compare the Veins and Arteries of our Bodies to the
Pipes of a Fountain, the first of which, or those that are next the
Springhead, are very big and large, but grow insensibly smaller as they spread
themselves into Branches; supposing, for Example, that the first gives passage
to a Foot of Water, and that the last do not give passage to above an Inch. The
same Observations may be applied to the Blood Vessels.

The Arteries which proceed from the Heart are very large, and are divided into
others of a middle bigness; these again are divided into smaller Branches which
are successively subdivided, till they become so small, that they are usually
called Capillarie (or Hairlike) and Invisible. And in all parts of the Body
where these invisible Arteries are found, they meet with very small Veins,
which grow larger as they meet, and join with one another, and return at length
to the Heart, where they terminate, and are as large as the Arteries at their
coming out of the Heart. Now the Blood flows through all those Pipes, and the
Heart directs its Motion, as a Conduit-Maker directs that of the Water in the
Pipes of the Fountain. And as it often happens that the Water-Pipes are either
stopped or broken when a Body that is Bulky enough to fill up the Passage enters
with the Water, or a greater quantity of Water than they can contain; so the
Blood Vessels are frequently obstructed, and sometimes broken, when the Liquor
they contain is either redundant, or thicker than it ought to be, from whence
proceed Fevers, Ebullitions of the Blood, Abscesses or Impostumes, both in the
inward Parts, and upon the Surface of the Body, Bleeding at the Nose, and other
Parts, Apoplexies, Suffocating Defluxions, and Obstructions of the Intrals,
which make way for an infinite Number of Diseases. But if the Abundance of
Blood may be looked upon as the Cause of so many Distempers, it is certain that
the depravation of it may produce a far greater Number of more stubborn and
dangerous Diseases.

CHAP. V.
Of the Depravation of the Blood, considered as an immediate Cause of Diseases,
occasioned by the retaining of the Excrements in the Body.
SINCE the retaining of the Excrements in the great Guts is that which most
frequently makes the Blood lose that good Disposition in which our Health
consists, and occasions a Cacochymia which we have already intimated to be the
Cause of the most stubborn Diseases; 'twill be convenient to give the Reader a
comprehensive View of this fatal Source of Distempers.

The Meat which we eat receives its first Change in the Mouth, by the help of
the Teeth, which are as it were small natural Knives, to mince it; and of the
Spittle, which may not improperly be said to serve instead of Salt, to help its
Concoction. From the Mouth it is carried through a long Chanel, which Anatomists
call the Oesaphagus or Gullet, into a spacious Cavity, called the Stomach,
where either by a proper and peculiar Virtue belonging to that Part, or by the
help of an Acid, or some other Ferment which it meets with there, it is changed
into a liquid and greyish Substance, which they call Chyle. Then continuing its
Journey downwards, it goes out of the Stomach by its inferior Orifice, and
slips into the upper part of the Intestines, to the several Parts of which
Anatomists have given different Names, according to certain Remarks and
Observations they have made upon these Parts.

The first part, which in the dissection of several Animals, they found to be
about twelve Inches long, is called the Duodenum; that which follows, which
some pretend is not so full as the rest, is termed the Jejunum; that which
consists of most Folds is called the Ileon; and so of the rest. The greatest
part of this Intestine is fastened about a Part, which by reason of its Folds
or Plaits, resembles those Ruffs that were formerly worn about the Neck, and is
called the Mesentery: Its Figure renders it very apt to retain in a small space
a considerable part of this Intestine, which is variously wound or twisted
about its Folds.

It Is in this part of the Intestines that the most useful part of the Chyle
insinuates it self into the Mouths of certain Vessels, called the Lactean or
Milky, which run along between the Membranes of the Mesentery. And the grosser
Particles, which cannot enter into the Branches of those Vessels, continuing
their Course, descend from that part of the Intestines which is fixed to the
Mesentery, and enter into the great Guts, where they are stopped.

This being premised, I proceed to show that the remaining part of the Chyle,
which is properly an Excrement, after its entry into the great Guts, infecteth
the Blood, by its too long continuance in that part wit^ a Cacochymia, which,
as I intimated before, i^ the immediate Cause of most of our Indispositions:
For since the Excrements are unfit for Nourishment, and are of no use in the
great Guts, they cannot continue there long without Corruption. Now there can
be n^ Corruption of any Matter without Fermertation, by which some subtle
Particles a^^ loosened and separated from the corrupte^ Matter, which meeting
with a Porous Substance, are easily dispersed through it by the i^petuosity of
their Motion. Thus the Cacchymia is at last communicated to the H^mours; for
the Excrements that remain lo^^ in the great Guts are fermented, after which
the Subtle Particles that are separated by the Fermentation, striking against
the Sides (...) Coats of the Guts, find the Pores of th^^^ Vessels which
surround them, fit to receiv^ them, and slipping into those Passages,
communicate their Corruption to the Blood th^^ circulates through those Vessels,
which, continuing for a considerable time, they inf^^^ the whole Mass of Blood;
and this Inf^ction proves the Source of many Diseases.

It may by objected, that it does not seem probable that the Excrements should
be corrupted by remaining in the Body, since it has been observed, that those
which have remained long in the Body are not so stinking, as those that have
lain there only so long as they ought to do naturally; that Stench is the most
certain Mark of Corruption, and that consequently the longer they stay they
ought to stink the more, if they corrupted proportionably to the time of their
continuance in the Guts.

But the reason why the Excrements stink less when they have remained long in
the Guts, is, because their Humidity is dissipated by the continued Action of
the Heat; for the moist Particles being rarified and subtiliz'd by the Heat,
exhale from the Mass of the Excrements, and finding, as I observed before, the
Pores of the Vessels which environ the great Guts, disposed to receive 'em,
they slip into these small Passages, and produce an Alteration in all the Blood
that passes that way, which makes it degenerate from its natural State; and
therefore it will not follow that the Excrements which are retained are
exempted from Corruption, because their Smell is not so offensive, but that the
Heat having consumed all the Moisture that was on their Surface, and having
dried, or rather burnt it up, they cannot be supposed to yield so noisome a
Smell as before those Steams were exhaled.

The same Alteration may be observed in a Heap of Dung, which after it has been
long exposed to the Sun, casts forth no bad smell, provided it be not moved or
agitated; but if it be turned or moved to the Bottom, it will smoke, and cast
forth a more noisome smell than when it was first brought to the Dunghill. After
the same manner the Excrements that have remained long in the Body, are dried
up in their Surface, and are scarce offensive to the Smel^ when expelled
naturally; but when they are agitated by the Bile, as in a Dia^rhoea or
Looseness, their Stench is insupportable.

It may further be objected, that the Vei^^ and Arteries which environ the
great Guts are so inconsiderable, that it is hard to conceiv^ how that little
quantity of Blood which pass^^ through them, can spoil the whole Mass, because
the small Portion of Blood being forthwith carry^^ back from those Vessels into
the Trunk (...) the Vena Porta, is freed from all its impurties; and even
supposing that there remain^ some ill quality in it, it may be presum^^ that so
small a quantity of ill Blood passi^^ from the Roots of the Vena Porta into the
Vena Cava, and from thence to the Heart, (...) so at last mingling with all the
Blood of (...) Body, can no more corrupt the whole Ma^^ than a Glass of Water
thrown into a Hogshe^^ of Wine can weaken that Spirituous Liquo^

For a satisfactory Answer to this Objection, we must examine whether the Liver
is able to purge the Blood of all its Impurities: now it is certain that the
Liver alone is not able to perform so great a Task, since the Spleen, Reins,
and other parts, are appointed for the same use, and since the Liver serves
properly to purge the Blood only from the Bile.

It will not then follow, when the Blood is infected with corrupt Particles,
that slip into the Vessels which environ the great Guts, that in its passage
through the Liver, it throws off all its Infection upon that Entral, because that
Part being only proper to separate the Bile, it is probable that the Corpuscles
which insinuated themselves into the Vessels of the Intestines, being of
another Figure than those of the Bile, may pass through the Liver with the rest
of the Blood, without any Stoppage or Separation.

In the second place we must consider whether the small quantity of bad Blood
which passes through the minute Vessels of the Gut Colon, is able to communicate
its ill qualities to all the Blood of the Body.

To this second Difficulty, I answer, that since the Blood circulates through the
whole Body, it is plain that a great quantity must pass in one Day through the
smallest Vessels, and consequently that the Fermentation of the Excrements
which are not unfrequently retained eight Days, and sometimes longer, in the
great Guts, giving occasion during all that time, to a continual Efflux of
Subtle Particles, which are received into the Pores of the Vessels of that
Intestine, may in many Circulations corrupt so large a quantity of Blood, that
it may in a short time infect the whole Mass; And by the same Hypothesis we may
give a Natural and Satisfactory Account how the venomous Particles that are
darted by a poisonous Insect into one of the Capillary Vessels, and that even
in the Extremities of the Body, may, in less than an Hour, spread their
Infection through the whole Mass of the Blood.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Cure or Removal of the First immediate Cause of Diseases, by lessening
the Quantity of the Blood.
THERE are two general ways by which we may lessen the quantity of Blood, viz.
by preventing its Increase, and by evacuating with all convenient speed, what
is already generated: And to answer these Indications there are two great
Remedies, viz. Fasting and Bleeding.

We may have recourse to the first, when we perceive some inconsiderable
Symptoms of Diseases that proceed from the excessive quantity of the Blood; in
which case we may content our selves with a very regular Diet, which though it
has not so quick an Operation as Bleeding, at last it produces the same Effect,
and that without occasioning any remarkable weakness; for Abstinence hindering
the production of new Blood, does, for the same reason, occasion a dissipation
of part of that which is already generated; and consequently answers both the
Indications that were proposed.

But if the Disease requires a speedy Cure, which cannot be performed by
Abstinence, as it oftentimes happens, we must have recourse to Bleeding, which
by a present Evacuation of the Blood, destroys the Cause of the approaching
Disease.

'Twou'd be ridiculous to object that Bleeding causes greater Alterations in
the Body than Abstinence, or a thin Diet, that it occasions a sudden
dissipation of the Spirits, and consequently is attended with a much greater
decay of Strength; for that Loss will be much sooner and more easily repaired,
than the Disorders that are occasioned by Diseases.

CHAP. VII.
Of the ways to remove the Second immediate Cause of Diseases occasioned by the
too long continuance of the Excrements in the Cavities of the great Guts.
'THO the Excrements that are retained in the great Guts are mere Impurities,
and extremely prejudicial to Health, yet we must proceed with Caution in the
means we use to expel them.

We must not begin with the quickest ways, because they occasion great
Disorders in the Body, and it has been too often observed, that inconsiderable
Distempers have been exasperated and confirmed by an overhasty Cure, and
therefore gentle Remedies are both safest and most successful.

Instinct has furnished Animals with two sure and effectual Expedients to
procure the expulsion of the Excrements that are retained in the Cavities of
the great Guts, viz. Clysters and Purgative Potions, which, it is probable Men
began to use when they observed the great Advantages which Animals received
from them.

Bleeding and Abstinence, which second the Effects of the former Remedies, are
also Lessons which Men owe to the Brutes; and these four Expedients acting
either jointly or separately, are the safest and most effectual Means that can
be made use of, to hinder the stoppage of the Excrements in the great Guts, and
consequently to prevent the Diseases which proceed from such Obstructions.

It is easy to conceive how Abstinence or a regular Diet may contribute to the
Evacuation of the Excrements, if we consider that those Excrements are the
remainders of our Nourishment; That the more we eat and drink, the more
Excrements are bred in those Parts, so that the Evacuation of those Excrements
would be an endless Work, if the emptied Guts were presently filled with the
superfluities of a greedy Stomach.

But in the mean time, a Diet which is only prescribed for prevention, ought
not to be so regular or thin as that which is enjoined to sick Persons.

It is known that too nice or sparing a Diet is prejudicial to Health, and is
so far from assisting Nature in the Evacuation of the Excrements, that it
renders her unable to expel 'em. Besides, the Liquor which serves to dissolve
the Food, not finding Matter to work upon, acts upon the parts that contain and
receive it, by drying and consuming them.

It may be further added, that a Man who takes Physic only for prevention,
does not abstain from Labor and Exercise, and therefore stands in need of
Nourishment to repair the expense of his Spirits.

Wherefore, to prevent Diseases, one ought only to fast moderately; at the same
time he ought to avoid as much as he can, eating in Company, because People are
usually wont to eat a little more than is necessary; and besides, he ought to
choose such Aliments as will leave but few Excrements in the Body; and
especially he must take care never to eat to satiety.

The second Expedient we proposed to facilitate the Passage of the Excrements,
is Bleeding, which is doubtless one of the best Methods that Nature could
suggest to Animals; for it is certain, that besides that there is no Remedy
which depends more absolutely upon the Pleasure of the Person who either orders
or performs it, so there is none which in most Cases gives more speedy relief
to the Patient.

Every Surgeon knows how useful Bleeding is to put a stop to Defluxions, and
the falling down of Humors, which are always apt to fall upon wounded Parts,
how effectual it is to dissolve large Tumors, with which Wounds are frequently
accompanied; how powerfully it stops the inordinate Flux of Blood in the Wounds
of the Vessels; and both Surgeons and Midwives know how helpful it is to
facilitate so difficult a Work. Our Business at present is to enquire how it
may contribute to the Expulsion of the Excrements out of the Cavities of the
great Guts.

The Expulsion of the Excrements retained in the Cavities of the great Guts, is
performed chiefly by the Contraction of its moving Fibers, assisted by those of
the Muscles of the lower Belly, and by the continual Inspiration which obliges
the Diaphragma to press all the Guts. All these Actions are performed by means
of the Animal Spirits, which upon such Occasions flow plentifully to the Parts
which are the Organs of these Actions. Now these Spirits are continually
dissipated, and that expense must be repaired by the Blood of which they are
composed, provided there be a reasonable quantity in the Vessels which are
appointed to contain it; for when there is a Redundancy of Blood, the Spirits
are as it were suffocated and drowned in the abundance of their Matter; so that
the best Office we can do to Nature on such Occasions, is, by Bleeding, to
reduce the Mass of Blood to a moderate quantity, in order to ease her of an
unnecessary Burden which obstructs the liberty of her Actions.

Bleeding ought always to precede Purgations when both these Remedies are
indicated by the signs of a Redundancy, excessive Heat, or Corruption of the
Blood: For we find by Experience that Purgatives operate both more gently and
effectually, when the Vessels are emptied, and the excessive heat of the Blood
allayed, and its Depravation corrected by Bleeding.

It Is further observable, that we ought rather to bleed early in the Morning,
than at any other Hour of the Day; and that when we are obliged to have
recourse to this Remedy in very hot Weather, we ought to be let Blood before
the Rising, or after the Setting of the Sun; and in very cold Weather, at Noon:
But, in the general, we ought to avoid Bleeding as much as we can, when the
Season is either excessively hot or cold; for it is certain that Bleeding is
always attended with better Success when these Cautions are observed than when
they are neglected,

With respect to the Age of the Patient, we ought to bleed Infants less
frequently, and to take less Blood from them than from other Persons, because a
great part of their Blood is consumed in the Nourishment and Growth of their
Body in all its Dimensions: So that from six Weeks or two Months after the
birth of an Infant, which is the time at which we may begin to let him Blood,
if there be a pressing Occasion, to the Age of five or six Years, I would not
take away more than from three to six Ounces of Blood: From six to ten or
twelve Years, you may take six or eight Ounces: From twelve to fifteen, and so
to fifty, you must observe the Signs of Repletion, and the Strength of the
Patient, and accordingly you may take away from nine to twelve or fifteen
Ounces of Blood.

After fifty Years of Age, we must be more cautious and moderate both as to the
frequency of Bleeding, and the quantity of Blood we take away, for fear of
causing too great a dissipation of the Spirits, which from that Age to extreme
old Age are daily decaying both in Quantity and Quality.

The visible Signs of a Redundancy of Blood in the Vessels, are the large or
frequent Evacuations of it by the Nose, or other parts of the Body, the
swelling or distension of the Veins, Boils, Pimples, or other Eruptions,
frequent Ebullitions or Flushings toward the Skin, Erysipela's, Inflammations
of the Eyes and Throat, a continual desire to Sleep, and a Weariness and
Heaviness of the whole Body, not occasioned by any Labor or violent Exercise.

When you perceive all, or most of those Symptoms, and when they continue for
some time, you must immediately open a Vein, and take away a large quantity of
Blood; for the superfluous Blood which is not employed in the Nourishment of
the Body if it be not evacuated, will soon putrefy, and occasion a Fever,
Obstructions in the small Passages of the Intestines, or an Accumulation of
Humors in some part of the Body.

In fine, that we may make right use of Bleeding, we ought to consider how the
Patient usually bears it; for those who undergo it easily, may be let Blood
oftener, and more plentifully than those who cannot bear it without trouble and
difficulty. Thus one who commonly finds himself weak or faint after Bleeding,
ought rather to Bleed twice, and in small quantities, than to put himself in
danger of fainting or swooning away, by a large Evacuation: For it is certain
that Fainting and Swooning do extremely disturb the whole Economy of the Body,
notwithstanding the ridiculous Opinion of those who imagine that Bleeding can
never be effectual, unless it be continued till the Patient faint away.

Bleeding without necessity, that is, when there is no Superfluity to be
voided, no excess of Heat to be allayed, and no Putrefaction to be corrected,
robs Nature of the pure Blood, which is necessary for the Nourishment of the
Body, and the production of Spirits, which are the principal Instruments of the
Soul in all its Actions. It Is plain from hence, that after such unnecessary
Evacuations, Nature acts slowly and feebly, that the Entrails are heated, and
that all the Parts are dried up, which makes way for a long Train of Diseases.
It is not therefore pertinent to use Remedies at all times for the preservation
of our Health: But it is necessary before we take 'em, that our Instinct shall
let us know the necessity of 'em by the presages of some future Distemper.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Signs by which Instinct makes every particular Person foresee most of
his Diseases.
THE most usual Symptoms of an approaching Distemper, are a Weariness and
Heaviness of all the Body, without having been fatigued by any violent
Exercises.

A Yellowness all over the Body.

An Erysipela, or Ulceration all over the Skin.

The Itch or Scab.

Boils or Inflammations in diverse parts.

A sudden pining away, or leanness of all the Body, and of the Face.

Wandering and frequent Rheumatical Pains, accompanied with irregular
Shiverings.

An almost continual desire to Sleep, but chiefly after Eating; or, on the
other hand want of Sleep, or an interruption of Sleep by frightful Dreams and
vain Fears.

An unaccountable Dullness and Melancholy, which will not give way to any sort
of Pleasure.

Nocturnal Sweating.

Frequent Pains of the Head, Vertigo's, and a Numness of the Part when one puts
on his Hat.

A Redness all over the Face.

A languishing and sinking, or an unusual shining of the Eyes, a Tincture of
Yellow or Black on the Eyelids.

Bleeding at the Nose, or any other Part of the Body.

A Singing or Hissing Noise in the Ears.

Redness or Dryness of the Cheeks and Lips.

Yawning, and involuntary Sighs.

Little Whitish Ulcers on the Palate, and in all the inside of the Mouth.

The Clamminess or Foulness of the Tongue.

Dryness of the Throat, especially in the Morning; unless the excess of the
foregoing Day be the cause of it.

Kernels about the Ears, Necks, and Armpits; and painful Tumors in the Groyne.

Stinking Breath, not proceeding from any Corruption of the Teeth, or from any
Ulcer or Impostume in the Mouth.

Loss of Appetite, or a rising of the Stomach against Meat.

Vomitting of sweet, bitter, or salt Water, especially in a Morning.

Rheums or Defluxions, a Cough and Difficulty of Breathing, without a sharp
Pain of the Breast, but rather proceeding from Oppression or Stoppage.

The Distension and Swelling of the Belly, with a Noise and Griping in the
Guts; and small Loosenesses which return frequently.

A Hardness and Heaviness in the Stomach, as if it were a great Stone; and a
troublesome Sensation, as if the Belly were squeezed with a Cross-Bar.

Piles or Emerods of long continuance and painful.

Great Heat in the Palms of the Hands.

A Swelling of the Veins in the Face, and in all the Extremities of the Body.

All these Symptoms, and many others, of which every one may have had
Experience, are so many signs to give us notice that our Health is in danger of
yielding to the Insults of a Disease, if we do not take care to support it.

The Inquiry would be more curious than necessary, to examine for what Reasons
those Symptoms give us notice of approaching Distempers; for as it is
sufficient for a Pilot to have a Needle touched with a Lodestone, and to know
that it turns always toward a certain Pole, without being obliged to know the
natural Cause of so surprising a Phenomenon, so it is also enough for any Body
to know that the signs of which we have spoken, are so many Forerunners of
Distempers, without troubling himself to examine particularly why every one of
these Symptoms is an effect of this general Cause; wherefore we are forewarned
sometimes by some of them, and sometimes by others; sometimes by one alone, and
sometimes by many: But it being generally known that one or many of 'em, or
this and that Symptom, are certain Marks of a Depravation of the Health, we may
choose either to wait till the Disease appears, and afterward cure it with
difficulty, or to prevent it easily before it is formed: Now it is most certain
that a Man should rather be his own Physician, while the Disease is yet
unformed, than to wait till it appear, that he may avoid fallling into those
Extremities to which it may reduce the stoutest Heart, by excess of Pain,
impatient uneasiness under the Cure, and perpetual fear of Death.

From this Principle we may infer that it is not only unnecessary, but even
dangerous to take Physic when we are not troubled with any of those Symptoms,
because nothing that is able to cause an Alteration in the Body can be taken
without making some Impression on it, either good or bad: For Example; the Food
which we take in too great a quantity, or which is of hard Digestion, engenders
a great quantity of Crudities and Excrements, which are, as we have already
intimated, the Cause of most Diseases.

Purgative Medicines taken without necessity, drive the useful Liquors or
Juices toward the places where they are expelled, and not finding any that are
superfluous or depraved, weakens the Fibers of the Intestines, Veins, and
Arteries, by unnecessary Irritations, and produces an unusual Heat in the whole
Body.

When we are forewarned of Diseases, either the Symptoms are many and pressing,
or few and inconsiderable: When they are many and our Instinct seems to
redouble its Admonitions, we must lose no time, but without having regard
either to the Season of the Year, the Age of the Moon, or the Temperature of
the Air, take such Physic as we think necessary to preserve us from falling
into any Disease. But if these Symptoms are but small, and few in Number, since
we know by Experience that Purgatives work more mildly and easily in a
Temperate Season, as in the Spring and Harvest, than during the excessive Heat
of the Summer, and great Cold of the Winter; when the Moon is in her Wane or
Declination, than during her Increase; in Dry rather than Moist Weather, and
that they weaken the Body much more in the Dog Days, the Solstices and
Equinoxes, than at other times; we may defer the use of Physic for some Days,
that we may take it at a time when all those Circumstances, or most of them
will be in a condition to make it succeed the better.

It Is commonly believed that only weak and sickly Persons ought to take care to
preserve their Health, that those who are of a strong or healthy Constitution,
ought not to trouble themselves about it, because Nature can in strong Bodies
remove and destroy, by its own Force, the Causes of all their Distempers; and
because Physic disturbs the Economy of our Body much more than it is of use
to support it; since we see by Experience that most of those imaginary sick
Persons, who spend all their time in the Preservation of their Health, die
sooner than those who never have recourse to Physic but when they are
absolutely forced thereto by some pressing Distemper. I know that it is
dangerous to be too fond of Medicines, that is, either to take too much, or too
often; but I may venture to affirm, that there is no Man, let him be never so
strong and healthy, but has sometimes need of the help of Physic; for as the
best Water in the World leaves always some Dregs in the Pipes through which it
passes, which gathering insensibly, Obliges those who stand in need of the
Water, to cleanse the Pipes, and to hinder their being quite stopped; so it is
certain that the best Blood that can be imagined to flow in a perfectly sound
Body, will leave some Dregs and Filth in the Vessels through which it passes to
all the Parts of the Body: And these Dregs gathering by degrees in the Vessels,
hinders the free Motion of the Blood, the interruption of which occasions those
premonitory Disorders which we call Presages of Instinct; and in this Case it is
plain we ought to take Physic to prevent Sickness: For it happens at last,
that most of those obstinate People, who despise all sorts of Remedies under
pretext of the healthiness of their Constitution, are attacked with Diseases
which are so much the more troublesome and dangerous, as their Health seemed to
be perfect; so that oftentimes their Aversion to Physic costs 'em their Life.
And though they escape, they must expect to suffer all the Incommodities of a
tedious languishing Distemper, and will never be able to recover what they have
lost.

CHAP. IX.
Of Clysters and Medicines.
AS for the way of purging by Clysters, it is certain that they may be used at
all times when we find any Symptoms of the Stoppage or retention of the
Excrements in the great Guts; for it being impossible to make these Injections
ascend higher than the Intestine called Caecum, because of the Obstacles they
meet with there, they cannot be supposed to occasion a great Irritation in that
Passage, whose Structure is not so sine as that of the small Guts, unless they
be impregnated with very violent Purgatives.

We must not make the taking of Clysters a settled Practice or Custom, as many
People do, who would fancy themselves sick if they should omit 'em two Days;
for the too frequent use of Clysters, makes Nature lazy, and the laziness of
Nature is the fatal Cause of many Diseases.

Yet I will not pretend to censure those who bleed and purge constantly in the
Spring and in Autumn, especially if they be young, vigorous, and of a full
Body, if they eat much, or live a sedentary Life, without Motion or Exercise,
or if they are already habituated to that Custom; for it is certain that many
Diseases may be prevented by this means, and that one exposes himself almost
infallibly to very dangerous Distempers, by interrupting this practice after he
has once accustomed himself thereto.

It may also be proper to take Physic after a long Journey, or extraordinary
Labor; and, to conclude, we ought always to purge once a Year, if our Instinct
discovers any Symptoms of a future Disease; for thereby we may prevent the
great Collection of Excrements in the great Guts, where they are always apt to
stick, unless they be expelled by the irritation occasioned by purging Remedies.

CHAP. X.
Of the way of using Medicines in Order to the Preservation of Health.
SINCE Health is no less preserved by the right use of Meat and Drink than by
Medicines that are able to remove the Causes of our Distempers, the Reader must
remember what we hinted about Diet, that we must avoid all manner of Excess,
and abstain from all sorts of crude Aliments, and such as are apt either to
make the Belly too loose or too costive; that every Man is able to make a right
choice and Judgment of the Medicines that are most proper for him, and that
after he has found some that are agreeable to those Rules, he ought to prefer
them before any Remedies that may be recommended to him by others.

I will not repeat what I have already said about Diet, or the use of Aliments,
which do not deserve the Name of Medicines, but briefly consider the two
general ways of attaining to Health, viz. Bleeding and Purging.

And since I have also delivered my Opinion concerning Bleeding, and the Rules
that ought to be observed in that case, I shall content my self with referring
the Reader to what I have already said on that Subject, and only treat of the
use of Laxatives, or Purging Medicines.

'Tho' the Purgatives of which Clysters are composed, cannot much disorder the
Body, yet there are some Measures to be taken in order to the right use of
these Remedies.

First, they ought to precede the use of such Purgatives as are to be taken by
the Mouth, because they facilitate their Operation by procuring the Expulsion
of the Excrements that are retained in the great Guts, which would oppose their
Passage, and that of the Excrementitious Humors which they draw from the
Stomach, small Guts, Veins and Arteries; for as in a Woodmonger's-Yard when
People come to buy Wood for Fuel, when one Pile is sold, and the Woodmonger
designs to sell another, since it would be a needless trouble to climb up to
the top of the Pile to serve every single Customer, he overturns the whole
Pile, by drawing out five or six pieces of Wood at the bottom; the same effect
is produced by Clysters, which, by voiding the greatest part of the Excrements
and Filth retained in the Cells of the Intestines, facilitate the Operation of
purging Potions, which finding the Passage free, are easily able to carry off
the Matter they have squeezed out of the Arteries, and the slimy and gross
Humors which they bring from the Stomach, and from the small Guts, and
besides, expel the rest of the Gross Excrements which they find lodged in the
Cells of the great Guts.

We must further observe, that the Operation of Clysters is very irregular; for
in some Persons a Clyster of Oxycrate will procure wonderful Evacuations, which
in others would be altogether unprofitable; and in some the strongest Clysters
will not produce the least effect: And that which operates well at one time,
will not work at all at another; wherefore we must learn to prepare several
sorts, observing, nevertheless, to choose always such as are mild and simple
rather than such as are violent, and hard to be prepared.

As for Purgatives that are taken by the Mouth, it is better to take them by way
of Infusion than in Substance, that we may spare the parts through which they
must pass, a double Labor; for besides, that they must suffer the Operation of
the Medicines that are taken in Substance, they must also unfold and
disentangle the Particles in which their Purgative Virtue consists, from many
others of which they are composed; whereas the Liquor in which they are
infused, imbibes only their Purgative Particles, and, by reason of its
fluidity, infinuates it self more easily into the small Passages of the Body,
than the gross Substance can be supposed to do.

In order to the right use of these Medicines, there are four Observations to
be made.

The First is, to take 'em by degrees, that is, to begin with the most Mild and
Simple: But if their Weakness hinder their Operation, we must augment the Dose,
or take a stronger Medicine, till such time as the Evacuation be made
proportionable to the Symptoms we perceive of a greater or smaller fullness or
redundancy of Humors.

The Second Observation concerns the quickness of their Passage, which is of
great importance, because they cannot remain long in the Body without
occasioning a violent Irritation of the parts they touch, which may be attended
with very dangerous Consequences; for a purging Medicine has almost the same
Operation on the parts of the Body through which it passes, as a Spur has upon a
Horse; because as the Horse goes faster when the Rider spurs him but once, and
kicks and winces when he keeps the Spur constantly in his Sides, so the
Purgative by its first Irritations, moves the Parts through which it is carried,
to expel the Excrements that are contained in 'em; but when it stays too long,
it enflames the Parts, and renders the Humors hot and dry, and consequently
unfit for Evacuation; so that its Operation is both inconsiderable, and
extremely troublesome to the Patient.

To avoid this Inconveniency in the use of Laxatives, they ought always to be
accompanied with some Vehicle, that is to say, a Substance fit to insinuate it
self into the closest parts of the Body, notwithstanding all the Obstructions
it may meet with in the Parts that are appropriated for separating the Humors,
as the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and all the Entrals.

These Vehicles may be made of Decoctions impregnated with the subtle Parts of
certain Plants that are proper to slip into the smallest Pores of the Capillary
Vessels, as are, for Example, the Decoctions of the Roots of wild Succory,
Strawberry-Leaves, Dog-Grass, Agrimony, Sorrel, Chervil, and many other Herbs
which are endu'd with the same Virtues.

Instead of these Decoctions, you may use the Juice of a Limon, or Orange,
Verjuice, White Wind, Whey, and many other Remedies, which every one may choose
from his own private Experience, to facilitate the Operation of Purgatives.

The Third Rule to be observed in the use of purging Medicines, is, to choose
such as do not make you costive after the use of 'em; for this is the surest
Mark that the Physic is proportionated to the Strength of the Patient on whom
it works, especially since it is but too frequently confirmed by Experience,
that the more violent the Medicines are, the Patient is the more costive after
the use of them. One might infer from hence, that the same thing happens on
these Occasions to the moving Fibers of the Intestines, as to Persons who being
forced to undergo involuntary Labor, are so wearied and jaded with their
forced Exercise, that they work no longer than while the Rod is over their
Heads; so the Fibers of the Intestines having been too roughly and frequently
shaken by the Operation of the Medicine, are so wearied with these forced
Contractions, that they cannot afterward perform the Motions that are
necessary for the Expulsion of the Excrements which gather daily in their
Cavities; so that we are obliged either to accustom our selves to Physic, or,
if we neglect to use it, must expect a new Accumulation of Excrements, which
will soon after be the Cause of a new Disease.

To conclude; The last Observation in the use of Purgatives relates
particularly to those weak Medicines that produce little or no Effect, when
they are often repeated in a little time; for the moving Fibers of the
Intestines are soon accustomed to the Impression of such Remedies, and become
perfectly insensible of such feeble Irritations: Just as the Organs of the
Senses are not sensible of the Impression of these Objects to which they are
accustomed. In this case we must change the Remedies, because even the weakest
Purgatives remaining in the Body, cannot but occasion some disturbance in it.

CHAP. XI.
Of Purgatives, and how they operate: Of the Time and Manner of using them.
IT is certain that the Operation of Purgatives destroys the most immediate
Causes of the greatest part of our Diseases, whether they be taken inwardly, or
injected by way of Clysters.

However, it must be acknowledged, that the way of administering 'em occasions
some difference in their Operation; for since Clysters reach no further than
the great Guts, they can only facilitate the Evacuation of the Excrements that
are retained in those Intestines; whereas, when they are taken inwardly, they
not only cause the same Irritations in all the Parts which they touch, and
consequently by augmenting their Natural Motion, hasten the expulsion of the
Matter which they contain; but many of their Particles mingle with the Chyle in
the Vessels which carry it to the Heart, in which, as well as in the Arteries,
they excite diverse Fermentations, that promote the separation of the different
Particles of the Blood, in the several Parts of the Body where they are usually
separated from its Mass, according to the disposition that each of those
Remedies has, to put certain parts of the Blood in Motion, rather than others.

Thus we may observe that a visible Fermentation or Ebullition is produced in
certain Liquors, when they are mixed with other Fluids that are disposed to put
'em in Motion, whereas they remain undisturbed when they are mixed with others.

And from the Operation of Purgatives on different parts of the Blood, there
arises a distinction of Names: For Example; some are called simply Purgatives,
which are again divided into Hydragogues, Cholagogues, Melanagogues, and
Phlegmagogues; or Medicines that purge Watery Humors, Choler, Melancholy, and
Phlegm: Others are called Emeties, Sudorifics, Errhines, etc. Now those Names
are very fitly imposed, either with respect to the Parts of the Body through
which they procure the Evacuations, or to the parts of the Blood which they are
particularly apt to put in Motion.

From hence we may observe, that all those Remedies are endu'd with one common
Property, that is, to excite a Motion in the Blood; and that their different
ways of Operating proceed only from the different Figure or Contexture of their
Parts; for by reason of their peculiar Configuration, they are more easily
admitted into certain parts of the Body than into others, and by the Irritation
they occasion in the Parts, they promote the Separation which is performed
there, of some particular Excrements from the Blood. And upon this Score we may
reasonably say, that they are proper to purge such and such Parts; as for
Example, such as are proper to purge the Liver, we call Hepatics; and those
that are peculiarly adapted to the Spleen, are termed Splenetics.

Besides, according to the various situation or contexture of their Parts, they
are disposed to agitate Certain Particles of the Blood, to which they unite
sooner than to others: And upon this account we may say that such a Medicine is
proper to purge such a Humor.

This Observation is confirmed by Experience, particularly what relates to
Hydragogues, or Medicines that purge Watery Humors; for the Evacuation of
Serosities is much more sensible than that of the other Particles which compose
the Blood, because that which the Purgative drives into the Intestines, whether
it be separated by the Glands of their inward Membrane, or squeezed out of the
Biliary and Pancreatic Ducts, being mixed with the Slime and Excrements which it
finds in the Intestines, it is very hard to determine what Humor has been
chiefly wrought upon or expelled by the Purgative Medicine.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Purgatives that ought to be used for the preventing of Diseases.
PVRGATION by Stool ought to be preferred before all other Evacuations, because
it is the most natural and ordinary way, and that which best answers the design
we ought to have in order to the removal of the Cause of Diseases, speedily to
expel the Excrements that are stopped in the great Guts, and to correct the ill
Quality of the Blood, which is the Consequence thereof.

Nevertheless Emetics or Vomits may be useful to some Persons when they are
troubled with an inclination to Vomit, such as those who have a strong and
large Breast. And others may profitably use Sudorifics, namely, those who are
Choleric, and whose Pores are very open. Diuretics, or Medicines that provoke
Urine, are proper for those who feel a heaviness and heat in their Kidneys,
such as are subject to the Gravel, live unmarried, and abstain from the use of
Women.

Some may make use of such as occasion Spitting, and others of those which
expel the Excrements by the Nose.

Those who have a weak Breast, and wet Brain, may find benefit by the use of
these Remedies, provided they have no Polypus, or other Impediment in the
Nostrils. In a Word, every Man ought to be directed by his own Experience, and
either have recourse to, or abstain from such sorts of Evacuations, according
to the good or bad Effects which he finds they produce upon him.

For Example; a Person who is apt to Vomit without any considerable trouble,
when he finds his Stomach over-charg'd, will receive greater benefit by a Vomit
than by ordinary Purgations; whereas those who cannot Vomit without an unusual
disturbance, ought rather to use Simple Laxatives, least the Fibers of the
Stomach be weakened by such over-violent Motions.

Others who labor under Faintness or Weariness, provided they be not naturally
too dry or lean, will find themselves eased if after Bleeding they take a
Medicine to procure a moderate Sweat. The People in the Levant by this means
prevent a great number of Diseases.

Those who are troubled with Pains in their Kidneys, and whose Urine is of a
high Color, or thick, may, after the use of cooling Remedies, have recourse to
Medicines that provoke Urine, either alone, or mixed with Laxatives.

Those who are naturally inclined to Spitting, and have a moist Brain, may both
prevent and cure their Distempers by raising a Salivation by the use of
Remedies that are proper to produce that Effect.

In fine, every Man ought to consult his own Experience, and study the
Constitution of his Body; and afterward use those Remedies which he finds to
be most useful and agreeable to him.

There is one important Rule to be observed in the administering of all those
Remedies, and that is, To begin always with the gentlest and most simple. It is
certain that when we use Remedies merely for prevention, we ought to be our own
Physicians; for since the bare Presages or Signs of a future Disease cannot be
supposed to have deprived us of the use of our Reason, we may choose those
Medicines which upon trial have formerly succeeded, and which cannot be so well
known by a Stranger as by our selves.

Besides, it ought to be observed, that there is nothing more various or
uncertain than the Operation of Purgatives on Humane Bodies.

Some Persons are violently purged by weak Medicines, when a stronger Remedy
would not produce the least effect upon 'em: There are others on whom mild
Physic will not work at all, and even the strongest Medicines are scarce
effectual: On the other hand, some are so easily purged, that a Decoction of
Herbs will suffice; and to others half an Hours Conversation in an Apothecary's
Shop: Some are purged by Strawberries, Cherries, Gooseberries, Peaches, Pears,
etc. Some by sour Milk, fresh Pork, etc. and others by a moderate Entertainment
with jovial Companions; for Mirth contributes as much to the Passage of the
Excrements, as Melancholy or Sadness does to their Stoppage in the Guts.

Some are purged by a simple cooling Decoction when they begin first to drink
it; and in others Clysters produce a plentiful Evacuation, though they are hardly
moved by internal Medicines.

To conclude; there is nothing less regular than the Operation of Purges on
different Bodies; and it is impossible for the most expert Physician in the
World to discover this variety in every particular Person: And therefore, as I
intimated before, we ought to study our selves, that we may be able to choose
out of so great a number of Remedies that have been often tried, those that are
most agreeable to our Bodies.

The gentlest Purges, and those that are most agreeable to our Constution, are
of two sorts, viz. some are brought to us from Foreign Countries, and others
grow in our own Climate.

The safest foreign Purgatives are Senna, Cassia, Tamarinds, Rubarb, Manna,
etc. and the mildest that grow in our own Climate are Roses, Peach-Flowers,
Violets, our Garden Ruburb, the great and small Centory, Briony, Asarabacca,
Mint, Bawm, Spanish Broom, Thyme, Polypody of the Oak, Black Maidenhair,
Ceterach, Wall Rue, Betony, Lettice, Purslane, Sorrel, Chervil, Black
Hellebore, the Tops of Hops, the Yellow-flower'd Flagg or Flowerde-Luce, the
Bark of Elder, the Black Plum or Prune, Wallwort, wild Cucumbers, and many
other Plants. You may press out the Juice of these Herbs, or infuse 'em, or
make 'em up into Powders, Syrups, Conserves, Tablets, Pills, Troches, or any
other Form whatsoever.

Besides, though I prefer simple Remedies before such as are compounded, I do not
pretend to blame the use of certain Mixtures that are common in Pharmacy; for
the Addition of Sugar, or some other such Ingredient, cannot take away the
Virtue of the Simples.

In the mean time, it is certain that we ought to abstain from all violent
Remedies, especially Chemical Preparations, when we only take Physic for
prevention.

I am persuaded that the most Simple Remedies are the best, and that all the
Secret lies in the right use of them; for as the Colors upon a Painter's
Pallet are of themselves only fit to make a confused and disagreeable Mixture,
so Medicines, especially Purgatives, are in their own Nature only fit to weaken
the Patient, and to cause a violent Motion in his Blood: But, on the other
hand, as the same Colors placed upon a Cloth by an Ingenious Painter, make a
very valuable and beautiful Picture, so the same Remedies, tho they are
contrary to Nature when misapplied, may assist her to overcome a Distemper when
they are rightly administered.

CHAP. XIII.
The Solution of certain Difficulties that deter most Persons from making use
of Purging Remedies for the preventing of Distempers.
THOSE who refuse to admit of Purgagatives, excuse their Obstinacy by one of
those three Reasons which shall be proposed and answered in this Chapter.

OBJECT. I.
Against Clysters and Purges:
YOU advise me, Sir, says one to his Physician, to take a Clyster, or a Purging
Medicine, but I have no occasion for such Remedies; I go daily and regularly to
stool, and why should I be tormented with Clysters and Purgatives?

I answer, That tho a Man goes daily and regularly to stool, yet it does not
follow that he ought to be exempted from Purgation either by Clysters and
Medicines, since it is frequently observed that those who go naturally to stool
every Day, do, notwithstanding, perceive by the abovementioned Symptoms, that
there are some Excrements left behind in those Passages which serve for their
Expulsion: Now it is plain that their Excrements must be evacuated, to prevent
the Diseases that proceed from the Corruption of these Impurities.

If any Person desire to be satisfied how when a Man goes daily and regularly
to stool, any Excrements can remain in the great Guts;

The Answer is easy, if we remember what has been already said of the
Structure of the great Intestines, the Parts of which are as it were so many
Bags or Cavities fastened at certain distances to those Intestines. Now it is
sufficient for the Passage of the greatest part of the Excrements which are
separated from our daily Nourishment that the middle Part of the Gut be open
and free; but in the mean time, some of the Excrements may slip into the bottom
of those Cells or Bags, and by degrees fill up their Cavity; so that at last
the middle Passage may be almost entirely stopped by those distended Bags; and
it is then that we perceive the Signs of an unusual Load and Obstruction in
those Parts.

This Doctrine may be further illustrated by comparing these Obstructions in
the great Gut to the Stoppages that happen frequently in the Conduits that are
made to convey the Filth from our Streets; for the Dirt sticks by degrees to
the sides of the Pipes, and fills up all the Holes and Cavities it meets with,
though it does not immediately hinder even some of the thickest Mud to slip away;
so that unless they be sometimes scoured by a pretty violent Shower, that may
force a great quantity of Water into the Cavities of the Pipes, and by the
Rapidity of its Current, carry off the Filth; they must be opened from time to
time, and the stagnant Dirt loosened, and driven forwards into the Common Sink,
by the help of Convenient Instruments.

The same Observation may be applied to the great Guts, both with respect to
the Excrements that are detained in its Cells, and which pass daily through its
Cavity; for when a great quantity of em is gathered in these Bags or Cells, and
begin to corrupt there, the pressure of these distended Cells upon the
neighboring Parts, and the corrupted Corpuscles which slip into the Vessels
that environ them, produce the Symptoms of an approaching Indisposition tho a
considerable part of our daily Nourishment having still a free Passage through
the Cavity of the Gut, may furnish sufficient Matter for Stools. It Is plain
then, that we have need of Clysters and purging Medicines, to draw the
Excrements out of the places where they are stopped; and that consequently though
we go to stool naturally every Day, we may sometimes stand in need of an
artificial Evacuation.

OBJECT. II.
ANother will perhaps be apt to say, You order me a Clyster, or a purging
Medicine, though I have not tasted any sort of Nourishment these four or five
Days: how can there be any Matter left to be evacuated in a Body so empty as
mine must be after so long an Abstinence?

But this seeming Difficulty may be very easily answered, for when a Man for
some Days has been troubled with a constant* Aversion to all sorts of
Nourishment, it is an evident sign that there is a great Collection of
Impurities in the place where we have made it appear that they are usually apt
to stop. Nor will it appear strange that a Person should lose his Appetite when
the bottom of the Stomach is drawn downwards by such a Load of Excrements, if
we consider that the unusual weight that hangs like a Clog upon the Stomach,
may be reasonably supposed to produce the same Effect upon it as if it were
filled with a hearty Meal.

So when we advise a Man in that condition to take Physic, our design is not
to evacuate the remainder of his Meat, since we suppose he has fasted for some
Days, but to procure the evacuation of those Impurities which being insensibly
stopped and gathered in those parts, would otherwise occasion those Disorders in
the Body, of which I have already discoursed.

OBJECT. III.
ONE that is troubled with a Looseness will perhaps be extremely surpised when
he is ordered to take a Clyster, or a purging Medicine, and will be ready to
look upon that advice as a sure way to increase his Distemper, which in his
opinion has purged him but too thoroughly already, without the assistance of
Physic.

This Objection will appear as groundless as either of the former, if it be
considered that a Looseness is usually either the effect of Indigestion, in
which case it ceases after some time, and hardly requires the use of Remedies;
or it is a sign that the Excrements are stopped in the great Guts, and then if
there be a copious Evacuation, we must recruit Nature, and repair her decayed
Vigor, by good Nourishment taken in small Quantities: On the other hand, if
the flux be inconsiderable, or if the Patient be frequently troubled with a
desire to go to Stool, without voiding any thing, since it is evident from
thence, that the Motion of the Intestines is not sufficient to expel those
Impurities that cause such frequent Irritations, we must in the first place by
the use of Clysters endeavor to dissolve that corrupt and biting Matter; and
afterward when the Irritation ceases, we must take some Purgative Medicine to
expel the remainder of that excrementitious Matter that may be lodged in some
places, which the Clysters could not reach.

OBJECT. IV.
Against Bleeding.
IT IS the usual Cant of those who are professed Enemies to Bleeding, that the
Blood is the Treasure of Life, and consequently that we ought rather to furnish
the enfeebl'd Patient with a fresh supply of that precious Liquor, than to rob
him of what he is already possessed of.

But I must beg those Gentlemen's leave to put 'em in mind, that the Blood can
never deserve so noble a Title if it be either depraved or redundant: For if it
exceeds either in Quantity or Quality, it is so far from preserving our Health,
that it exposes us to the most dangerous Distempers.

As our Life is manifestly endangered when too large a quantity of Blood is
lost, so it is secured and supported when a moderate quantity of impure and
corrupt Blood is taken away; however, it must be acknowledged that this
Evacuation ought always to be performed with a great deal of Caution, according
to the Age and Strength of the Patient, the Nature of his Disease, and the
Seasons of the Year.

And therefore those who are desirous to be their own Physicians, ought to try
seveveral Remedies, and to make choice of such as produce the same Effects upon
them which in the foregoing Chapters are ascribed to safe and useful Remedies.

A TREATISE OF Particular Remedies.

THE PREFACE.
WHen I formed the Design of publishing the preceding Treatise, I did not
intend to have added a Collection of particular Remedies, because I looked upon
that as a Subject that had been sufficiently handled, and even almost wholly
exhausted by so many Authors who have composed entire Volumes of this Nature.
But since I have been desired by several Persons whom I would not willingly
disoblige, to complete my Undertaking by subjoining an account of such Remedies
as I had observed to be most esteemed, and found to be most useful and
effectual, I could not deny 'em so small a Favor. And that I might render my
Performance in this kind more serviceable to the Public, I thought fit to add
some short Reflections, according to the variety of the Subject.

A TREATISE CONTAINING An Account of the most Simple Remedies, and such as are
most frequently used for the curing of several Diseases.
Of Medicines in General.
MEDICINES or Remedies are mixed Bodies, which, being taken by the Mouth, if
they are Internal, or applied outwardly, if External, serve to restore our
Health, by altering the bad Disposition of our Bodies. They differ both from
our usual Food, and from Poison; the first of which preserves and supports our
Health, and the latter destroys it.

We ought not to have recourse to Purgatives unless the Intestines be stuffed
with clammy and thick Humors, or the Mass of the Blood be full of salt or
bulky Particles, that hinder its Circulation, which may be known by a Hardness
or Swelling of the Belly, Drowsiness, Weariness, etc. It Is expedient to make
use of Clysters some Days before Purgation, that the purging Medicine not
meeting with any Obstacles, may operate more strongly and quickly, and occasion
less disturbance in the Body.

An Ounce, or an Ounce and a half of extracted Cassia dissolved in a Glass of
Whey, or mixed with an equal quantity of compound Syrup of Apples, moistens and
cools the Body, loosens the thick Humors that are lodged in the Breast, and
helps one to Spit freely.

Feeble and weak Persons, such as those who are extremely lean, whom we usually
call Phthisical or Consumptive, as also Women with Child, may be safely purged
with an Ounce or two of Manna, taken in Veal or Chicken-Broath. When we design
to purge, scour and wash away the slimy Matter that sticks in the Intestines,
we may profitably use the Juice of Roses, from one Ounce to two. And it is also
a good Remedy for a Looseness.

Rhubarb taken in Substance, from half a Dram to a Dram, purges Choler, helps
those that are troubled with a Looseness, and serves to kill Worms. It may be
also used by way of Infusion, from a Dram to half an Ounce, according to the
Age and Strength of the Patient.

To evacuate Hydropical Humors, or bring down Women's Monthly Courses, we may
use the Root of Briony, from half a Dram to a Dram, or its Juice to half an
Ounce.

I will not speak of Agaric, Scammony, Jalap, Mirabolans, and Mechoacan,
because they operate too violently; nor will I trouble the Reader with an
Account of Chemical Medicines, which ought not to be used but with a great deal
of Precaution, nor without the Advice of a Physician.

Of Diuretics.
Diuretics serve to augment the serosity or fluidity of the Blood, to agitate
the Serous, and coagulate the Fibrous Part, and to retard the Course of the
Humors.

We ought never to use them without an antecedent preparation of the Body by
Purgation, least the gross Particles which they agitate, and drive toward the
Reins, should breed an Obstruction in those Parts, and occasion a stoppage of
Urine.

River-Water, Mineral-Waters, and White Wind, are the mildest opening Medicines
we have.

The Five great opening Roots, viz. Asparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Smallage, and
Butcher's-Broom, provoke Urine, and even sometimes procure Sweating; but I
should rather choose to make use of those which are called the lesser opening
Roots, because they do not occasion so great an agitation in the Blood, and
consequently open a freer Passage to the Serous and Saline Particles. Those
Roots are Dogs-Grass, Capers, Eringo, Madder, and Restharrow. You may prepare a
Decoction of 'em, adding, if you please, a sufficient quantity of Sal Prunellae.

A Spoonful of the Juice of Roses in a little Spanish Wine, or in two or three
Spoonfuls of Brandy, is also a very good Remedy for the Colic, occasioned by
the Pain of the Kidneys.

A Simple Bath of lukewarm Water is Diuretical, because it dilates the Passages
of the Urine, and augments the Serosity of the Blood.

Of Emeticks or Vomits.
VOmitting is a contraction of the Fibers of the Stomach, by which the Matter
contained in that Part is forced upwards through the Oesophagus or Gullet.

Emeticks may be profitably used when the Stomach is burdened with ill-digested
Food, or full of corrupt Humors, in which case we are troubled with an
aversion to Meat, frequent Reachings, Bitterness in the Mouth, Dimness of
Sight, and sometimes with a Lienteria, that is, when we void what we eat or
Drink by Stool, without any signs of Digestion.

Melancholic or Phthisical Persons ought to abstain from the use of these
Remedies, and likewise Women with Child, unless in some cases to hasten their
Delivery.

A large Draught of warm Water proves Emetic to those who are naturally
inclined to Vomiting, because it slackens the Fibers of the Stomach, and
agitates the Saline Particles that are lodged in it.

Asarabacca taken in Substance, from half a Dram to a Dram, provokes Vomiting;
but if it be infused in Wine, you may take from one Dram to three. Black
Hellebore taken from four to eight Grains, purges upwards and downwards
somewhat violently; and, according to the Opinion of Paracelsus, cures the
Apoplexy, Gout, Dropsy, and Epilepsie.

Of Sudorifics and Diaphoretics.
WE call a Medicine Sudorific when it procures Sweating, and Diaphoretic, when
it works by insensible Transpiration. They are both endu'd with a power to
drive the Serosities outward, by putting the Mass of Blood in Motion.

Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, Butter-Burr, Carduus Benedictus, wild Marjoram,
Penyroyal, Thyme, Sage, Sweet Marjoram, Bay Berries, Corn Poppies, Treacle, and
Brandy, are Sudorifics. The Dose of the Roots is from half an Ounce to an Ounce
and a half to each Quart of the Decoction; and the Dose of the Leaves is a
handful.

The Shavings of Hartshorn, from one Dram to two, is both Sudorific and
Cordial; as are also those of Ivory, from a Dram to a Dram and a half. They
must be taken in two Ounces of Carduus and Baum-Water; and the Patient must be
kept very warm in Bed.

Of Sneezing Medicines and Errhina.
SNeezing being occasioned by the Irritation communicated from the inferior
Membrane to the Dura Matter, by the mediation of the Olfactory Nerves, causes a
Contraction by the reflux of the Spirit into the Carnous Fibers; so that the
Motion of the Spirits being almost entirely stopped for some time after the
Pressure is over, they run most impetuously into the freest and openest
Passages, which are those that are bestowed upon the Muscles of Respiration.
And therefore when one sneezes after the Contraction is over, he finds always
some difficulty in Breathing.

From hence it may be inferred, that such Remedies as provoke Sneezing are very
useful in the Obstructions of the Substance of the Brain, because the Dura
Matter pressing the Spirits, communicates to them a sufficient degree of Motion,
to make way for themselves.

The most common Sneezing Medicines are Betony, Tobacco, Pellitory of Spain,
Sage, Sweet Marjoram, Ginger, and all other Plants which abound with a sharp
Salt.

These Remedies must be avoided in the Epilepsie, Convulsions, and in the
Hysterical Passion, because they increase those Distempers which consist in a
disorderly Motion of the Spirits.

Errhina are Medicines which bring forth mucous and impure Humors from the
Nose without Sneezing. They may be made of the Juice or Decoctions of those
Plants which I have already recommended for Sneezing.

Of Incrassating or Thickening Medicines.
THey are such as fix and put a stop to the inordinate Motion in the Mass of
the Blood, occasioned by the eating of such things as are full of sharp and
volatile Salts.

Decoctions made of the Roots of Succory, Sorrel, Marshmallows, Water-Lily,
etc. are of this nature. The Dose of the Roots is an Ounce or an Ounce and a
half to each Quart of the Decoction.

The Leaves of Purslain, Lettice, Sorrel, and of wild and Garden Succory,
produce the same effect, if a handful of all together be added to each Quart of
the Ptisan or Decoction.

The four greater Cold Seeds, viz. Cucumbers, Gourds, Citruls, and Melons, and
the four lesser Cold Seeds, viz. Lettice, Purslan, and both sorts of Endive,
produce the same effect. The Dose of all together may amount to half an Ounce
in Emulsions. They are useful in heat of Urine.

The Juice of Limons, from half an Ounce to an Ounce, may also be reckoned an
Incrassating Remedy.

Of Narcotics, or Medicines that procure Sleep.
THey quiet the unusual and preternatural Motion of the Muscles, and the
violent Convulsions of the Nervous Parts, by Procuring a peaceable and quiet
Sleep.

When they reach the Mass of the Blood, they unite themselves to the Spirits,
and hinder both their Action and Separation; for these Medicines are composed
of Volatile Sulphurs mixed with Terrestrial and Oily Particles. They are
frequently given to those who are Delirious or Lightheaded; as also to such as
are troubled with violent and obstinate Evacuations.

The four Cold Seeds, either greater or lesser, taken from a Dram to half an
Ounce, in any convenient Liquor, may be used for this purpose.

The Roots of Henbane applied externally, by way of Cataplasm, may also serve
to procure Sleep.

Opium may be also taken, from half a Grain to two or three Grains.

Of Styptics or Astringents.
BInding or Astringent Medicines dissipate the Serous Particles of the Blood,
and render it less fluid. They must not be used in the beginning of Evacuations
that are set on foot by Nature, which must not be stopped for some Days,
according to the Age and Strength of the Patient.

Rhubarb may be profitably used in such cases, from a Scruple to a Dram. Nor
ought Claret to be omitted on such occasions.

Of Carminative Medicines.
THey are such as dissipate and expel Wind. The most Natural and most Common
Carminatives are Cloves, the Seeds of Anise, Fennel, and Coriander; and it is to
be observed, that they are more agreeable to the Stomach when they are
confected and crusted over with Sugar, or mixed with Comfits.

If you are troubled with Wind in the lower part of your Belly, you must
prepare a Clyster of a Decoction of those Seeds, with an Ounce of the Oil of
Walnuts.

Having given you a short Account of Medicines in general, I shall proceed in
the next place to mention some Specific and particular Medicines, which in the
Schools are called Topical Remedies.

It Is to be observed, that before the use of those particular Medicines, you
must evacuate the grosser Impurities by Clysters, and lessen the excessive
quantity of the Blood by Bleeding.

Of Particular Remedies.
A Remedy for the Headache.
WHEN the Headache proceeds from Phlegm, or from a Cold Cause, which is known
by a Drowsiness and Heaviness of the Head, the Brain must be purged thus:

Take the Leaves of Rosemary, Thyme, Betony, and Sweet Marjoram, of each a
handful; dry them in the Sun, or in an Oven, beat them to Powder, and sift 'em
through a Searce. Take a convenient Dose of this Powder every Morning and
Evening, about an Hour or two before you eat. It mitigates the Pain of the Head
by purging the Brain.

But when the Distemper proceeds from heated Choler, you must provoke Sleep
with some of the Remedies mentioned in the Chapter that treats of Narcotics.

Against the Apolexy.
YOU must immediately open the Patient's Teeth with a Spoon, and put into his
Mouth several large Corns of Salt; then Bleed him in the Arm, and apply
Cupping-Glasses with all convenient speed.

Against the Palsy.
TAke two Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine, three Ounces of Oil of Bays; mix
them with an Ounce of Balsam of Peru, and having incorporated 'em together,
make a Liniment, with which you must anoint the Part affected, and wrap it up
with a Linen-Cloth as hot as you can.

A Remedy for the Rheumatism, hard Swellings in the Joints, for all Cold
Swellings, and to strengthen the Nerves.
TAke four or five handfuls of Sage, beat it with a Pound of fresh Butter; then
boil all together for a Quarter of an Hour; after which strain it through a
course Cloth, and rub the Parts affected with the Straining* melting the
Ointment every time you use it.

To Purge Melancholy.
TAke Polypody of the Oak and Tops of Hops, of each half an Ounce, and boil 'em
with two or three Rennet-Apples cut in Slices, in a sufficient quantity of
Water. Then strain the Decoction through a Linen-Cloth, and infuse in it two or
three Drams of Sena, with as much beaten Anniseeds as you can take up between
your Fingers and your Thumb.

Take this Medicine in the Morning, and about two Hours after drink some Broth.

To Purge Choler.
MAke a Broth or Decoction of Lettice, Purslane, and Succory; infuse in it
according to the Season a handful of March Violets, Peach-Flowers, or Pale
Roses, and take it in the Morning fasting.

You may also take half an Ounce of Conserve of Pale Roses fasting, and a
little after take a Broth made of cooling Herbs.

To Purge Phlegm.
BOil fifteen Grains of Asarabacca-Leaves in a-sufficient quantity of Wine,
with a little Mint or Baum. Take three or four Spoonfuls of the strained Liquor
in the Morning fasting, and an Hour or two after drink a little Broth.

For the Itching of the Eyelids.
TAke an Ounce of White Wind, as much Rose Water, a Dram of Hepatic or
Liver-Aloes in Powder, mingle 'em together, and apply a piece of fine Linen
dipped in this Liquor to the Eyes.

For an Inflammation in the Eyes.
TAke a Spoonful of Rose, and of Plantain-Water; drop the Mixture into the
Corner of the Eye, and keep your Eye shut.

For Deafness.
TAke Juice of Onions, and Brandy, of each an Ounce and a half; mix them
together, and put some Drops of the Mixture lukewarm into the Ears, and
afterward stop 'em with Cotton.

To stop Bleeding at the Nose.
LAY a Key upon the Patient's Back, betwixt the Shirt and the Skin; or throw a
Glass of cold Water in his Face.

A Stone of Cyprus-Vitriol put into the Nostrils, stanches the Blood.

The same Vitriol is also good to cure Ulcers in the Mouth, by touching them
two or or three times with it; but you must not swallow your Spittle after it.

To Cure a Red Face, and take away the Pimples.
DIssolve a sufficient quantity of Cyprus-Vitriol in Plantain-Water; and when
you go to Bed, wash the Pimples with a little Cotton dipped in the Solution; and
in the Morning wash your Face with River or Fountain Water.

For Shortness of Breath.
DRink a Glass of Mead in the Morning for Eight Days; and if that be not
sufficient, put into it five or six Drops of Spirit of Tobacco.

For Obstructions of the Lungs.
TAke Jujubes, Sebestens, dried Figs, Damask-Raisins, and stoned Dates, of each
half a Pound; Dogs-Grass, Liver-Wort, Hyssop, the Leaves and Flowers of
Coltsfoot and Scolopendria, of each a handful; the four Capillary Herbs, of
each half a handful; Liquorice four Ounces; and three Pounds of Sugar. Make a
Syrup of all; use it often, and swallow it as slowly as you can.

For the Pleurisy.
TAke half an ordinary Glass-full of the Juice of Bugloss or Borage, and an
equal quantity of the Juice of Broom; Mix them together, and drink the Mixture
warm before you go to Bed; lying upon that side where you feel the Pain, or
upon your Back.

For a Cold.
TAke a Spoonful of Oil of Sweet Almonds, two Spoonfuls of Syrup of Violets,
and a Glass of Ptisan; mix them together, and drink off the whole when you go
to Bed.

To stop Vomitting.
TAke a Spoonful of the Juice of Pomegranates or of Limons, and half a Dram of
Salt of Wormwood; mix them for a Draught.

To Strengthen the Liver.
TAke a Pound of the Juice of Endive, and an Ounce of the Juice of Burnet; mix
them well together, and take half a Glass every Morning for eight or fifteen
Days.

For the Spleen.
TAke two handfuls of the Leaves of Hart's-tongue, chop them, and put them into
a strong Bottle, with two Pints of White Wind; cover the Bottle with a piece of
thick Cap-Paper, making several Holes with a Pin in it; then boil the Wine
softly till it sink a few Inches in the Bottle. Take half a Glass of this
Liquor in the Morning fasting, for eight Days.

For the Jaundice.
TAke the Dung of a young Goose, Chicken, or Hen, dry it in the Sun, and beat
it to Powder. Take from half a Dram to a Dram of this Powder every Morning in a
Glass of White Wind, with a little Sugar and Cinnamon, for eight Days.

For the Dropsy.
TAke half a Glass of Juice of Chervil, with an equal quantity of White Wind,
and about two Hours after drink a little Broth.

You must continue the use of this Medicine till the Swelling be abated; and in
the mean time drink very moderately. Infuse Burnet in Water, and mix it with an
equal quantity of White Wind for your ordinary Drink.

For the Nephritical Colic, or Stone in the Kidneys.
TAke two Ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds drawn without Fire, with a like
quantity of Juice of Limons, or Citrons; or, if you please, you may take the
Oil in two Ounces of White Wind.

For the Bilious Colic.
TAke Rose Water, and Oil of Sweet Almonds, drawn without Fire, of each two
Ounces; mix them for a Draught.

For the Wind Colic.
TAke a greasy Dishclout, and apply it pretty hot to the Belly, or where you
feel the Pain. Renew it often.

Another.
DRY a handful of common Salt, put it in a Linen Cloth, and apply it pretty
warm to the place affected.

For all sorts of Colics.
TAke a Dram of Walnut-Flowers in Powder, in a Glass of White Wind.

For a Looseness.
TAke every three Hours a Pint of Cow's-Milk boiled with the Yolk of an Egg,
about half an Ounce of Sugar, and as much White-Bread as you think fit: You
must neither eat nor drink any thing else; and besides you must keep your self
in Bed, or at least in a dry and warm place.

For a Dysentery.
TAke two Ounces of Oil of Sweet Almonds drawn without Fire; or, if that cannot
be had, take the like quantity of Sweet Oil-Olive, two Ounces of Rose Water,
and one Spoonful of Sugar. Mix them all together for a Draught to be taken in
the Morning fasting.

The Signs of a Dysentery are a Looseness accompanied with a griping Pain, and
the voiding of Blood, or Excrements mixed with Blood.

About two Hours after the taking of the abovementioned Medicine, you may
drink some Broth, and eat a new-laid Egg.

You may make your Broth with a Leg of Mutton, or a Cock.

So long as the Distemper lasts, you must take a Clyster every Day made only of
the Decoction of Barley and Bran; and when you are just ready to take it, add
the Yolks of two raw Eggs, with a little Sugar, and beat them well together.

You must be let Blood once or twice in the Arm, and must drink nothing but a
Ptisan made of the Decoction of Barley and Liquorice.

You must not take a purging Medicine till eight or ten Days after the Cure.

Then you may take half an Ounce of Catholicum dissolved in about four Ounces
of Rose Water.

For the Worms.
TAke two Spoonfuls of the Juice of Limons or Citrons, with the like quantity
of Sweet Oil, or of White Wind, and mix them for a Draught to be taken in the
Morning fasting.

For the Worms in little Children.
CHafe the Belly about the Navel with Oil of Bitter Almonds, and lay a Plaster
of Aloes over it.

For the Piles either Internal or External, whether they void Blood or not.
TAke small Male Sengreen, or Prick-Madam, and fresh Butter a sufficient
quantity, beat 'em together in a Mortar, and apply it to the Part, renewing it
three or four times a Day.

For the Pain of the Kidneys.
DIP a Linen Cloth in Oxycrate, and apply it to the Part affected.

Oxycrate is a Mixture of six parts of Water, and one of Vinegar.

For the Stoppage or Suppression of the Urine.
INfuse an Ounce of Linseed in a Pound of River or Fountain Water, for twenty
four Hours. If it be in the Summer, you must infuse it in a cool place; and if
in the Winter, in warm Ashes. Afterward strain it off, and put it into a Glass
Bottle. Drink a Glass of it every Morning, Noon, and Night.

FOR THE DISEASES OF WOMEN.
To bring down the Courses.
BEAT two or three Heads of Garlic, and make a Plaster of them, which must be
applied to the lower part of the Back, on the Right-Side.

To stop the immoderate Flux of Blood which happens to Women in Labor, or
after they are brought to Bed.
INject two or three Clysters of Oxycrate every Day.

For the Suffocation of the Womb.
Take an Ounce of Cinnamon cut into small Pieces, three Ounces of fine Sugar in
Powder; mix them, and add four Ounces of Rose Water, and six Ounces of strong
Brandy; let them stand twelve Hours in Infusion, strain it two or three times
through a Woollen Cloth, and keep the Liquor in a Glass-Vial.

The Patient may take two or three Spoonfuls of this Liquor, to prevent the
Return of a Paroxysm; and even during the Fit, that she may be the sooner
delivered from it.

For Fits of the Mother.
TAke a handful of the Herb called Avens, beat it, and infuse it for the space
of an Hour or two in a Pint of White Wind, and let the Patient drink a little
of it when she is thirsty.

For a Woman in Labor, to hasten her Delivery.
TAke the Liver and Gall of the fattest Eel you can procure, dry 'em in an Oven
after the Bread is drawn out, and beat 'em to Powder. The Dose is one Dram in
three or four Spoonfuls of the best Wine.

To expel a dead Child.
GIve the Sick Woman an Ounce of the Juice of Hyssop, in half a Glass of warm
Water, with a Spoonful of Brandy.

For the Colic, or griping Pain of the Belly, which frequently assaults Women
that are newly delivered.
TAke Orange-Flower-Water, and Syrup of Maidenhair, of each two Ounces; mix and
(...) a Draught.

To bring Milk into the Breasts of Women that are newly delivered.
GIve the Woman a Dram of the Powder of Fennel-seed in Cabbage-Broath, or in a
Glass of White Wind.

For those who have too much Milk.
TAke Rose Water and Verjuice, of each two Ounces; mix them together with five
or six Grains of Salt; heat the Mixture upon a Chafing Dish; then dip a Linen
Cloth four or five times doubled, in the Liquor, and apply it warm to the
Breast, laying over it two pieces of Linen well heated. You must renew the
Application twice a Day; and if the Distemper continue, you must apply it also
the Day following.

To dry up the Milk in those who are not willing to suckle their Children.
TAke a Bitter Orange, pierce it in several places with the Point of a Knife,
or with a Bodkin, squeeze out the Juice, and put the Orange into a little
Earthen-Pot, which you must fill with Oil-Olive; boil away two thirds of the
Oil, and then rub the Breasts with it very softly, and as warm as it can be
endured.

For the Inflammation of the Breasts.
TAke the Crum of a White-Loaf, boil it in a sufficient quantity of Milk; add
an Ounce of Oil of Lilies, and make a Pultiss, which must be applied to the
Breast.

For the Fits of a Tertian-Ague.
IN the beginning of the third and fourth Fit, take half a Glass of the Juice
of Borage, mixed with the like quantity of White Wind; but you must take a
Clyster, and be let Blood the Night before.

For an Intermitting Fever.
TAke a handful of the Leaves of Burnet, Infuse them twelve Hours in a Pint of
White Wind; then strain out the Wine through a Linen Cloth, and give the Patient
half a Glass of it at the beginning of the cold Fit, continuing after the same
in the three or four succeeding Fits.

For a Quartan Ague.
DIssolve the Yolk of a new-laid Egg in a Glass of Wine, and drink it at the
beginning of the cold Fit.

For a Purple Fever.
TAke the Leaves of Wood Sorrel, Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, and Queen of the
Meadows, of each one handful; boil them in a sufficient quantity of River or
Fountain Water. To the strained Liquor add four Drops of the Spirit of Vitriol,
and half an Ounce of sine Sugar.

Let the Patient take half a Glass of this Liquor before or during the Fit,
continuing after the same manner five or six Days.

Let him drink a Ptisan made with Barberries and Scorzonera-Roots.

Let him not take a purging Medicine till the Fever disappear.

For the Plague.
MElt an Ounce of old Hog's Grease, with a like quantity of Honey; then remove
the Vessel from the Fire, and add an Ounce of Rie-Meal, and two Yolks of Eggs,
stirring them all the while. Spread this Ointment upon Leather, and apply it to
the Bubo's, changing it twice a Day.

When a Carbuncle or Bubo is suppurated, and breaks, put into it a Tent dipped in
the same Ointment, and lay a Pultiss over it.

For Carbuncles or Plague-Sores.
TAke the Ointments Populeon and Basilicon, of each one Ounce; mix them, and
spreading a sufficient quantity upon a piece of Leather, apply it to the Sore
till the Scab or Eschar fall off.

A Remedy for Corns.
BOil a sufficient quantity of the Crum of Brown-Bread in Milk, to the
thickness of Broth; and after you take it off from the Fire, add to it a
proportionable quantity of Vnguentum Rosatum, spread it upon Linen, and apply
it to the Corn.

To preserve the Face from being marked by the Smallpox.
DIP a Feather in Oil of Sweet Almonds, drawn without Fire, and anoint the
Pocks as they come out for the space of Nine or Ten Days.

To preserve the Sight in the Smallpox.
PUT a little Saffron in Plantain-Water; mix them well together; then drop it
into the Patient's Eyes.

Another.
TAke a piece of Gold, heat it red-hot in the Fire, quench it several times in
Plantain-Water, and pour some Drops of the Water into the Eyes of the Patient.
You must continue in the use of this Remedy from the first appearance of the
Smallpox, ^or the space of three Weeks or a Month.

For the Sciatica.
TAke Mustard Seed and Figs, of each two Ounces; beat 'em to a Mash, which must
be applied like a Plaster to the Part ^ffected, and often renewed.

For the Itch.
AFter you have been let Blood in the Arm, and purged, according to your
Strength and Constitution, rub the Palms of your Hands, your Wrists, the Soles
of your Feet, and even your whole Body, with an Ointment made of two Ounces of
fresh Butter, and half an Ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, well mixed together:
warm it every time you use it: And that it may work more effectually, you may
anoint your self near the Fire.

For a Tetter or Ring-Worm.
TAke three Drams of new Wax, melt it with four Ounces of Oil of Roses, and two
Ounces of Honey of Roses. When it is all melted, take it off the Fire, and put
to it an Ounce of Soot, and half an Ounce of Ceruss in Powder; stirring it till
it be cold. When you have occasion to use it, spread it upon a Linen Cloth, and
apply it to the Part affected.

For a Cut or Wound.
TAke a red-hot Coal out of the Fire, beat it to Powder, and put some of it
into the Wound. It will immediately stanch the Blood.

For Burning.
TAke four Spoonfuls of Water, in which unslack'd Lime has been quenched, the
like quantity of Oil of Nuts, and beat them up to the thickness of a Liniment;
then anoint the burnt Part with a Feather, and cover it with brown Paper.

To open all sorts of Tumors without a Lance.
TAke fresh Butter and Verjuice, of each two Ounces, mix and boil them
together: Dip a fine Linen Rag, or piece of brown issue-Paper into the Liquor,
and apply it pretty hot to the Place affected.

For all sorts of Inflammations that happen either before or after the Breaking
of a Tumor.
TAke a fine Linen Rag, dip it in Oxycrate or Water; then spread a little of
Galen's Ceratum upon it, (which may be found at any Apothecary's Shop) and
apply it to the inflamed Part.

For Bruises.
TAke a quarter of a Pint of thick Red-Wine, two Ounces of fresh Butter, two
Pugils of Provence Roses, and one Pugil of Wheat-Bran; boil all together to the
thickness of Broth, spread it upon a Linen Cloth, and apply it to the Part
affected.

For all sorts of Wounds.
TAke a Pound of fresh Butter, a quarter of a Pint of the Juice of Sage, the
like quantity of the Juice of Wall-Wort, an Ounce of Bay Berries in Powder,
with a quarter of a Pint of good Wine.

Boil all together in a Vessel upon the Fire, to the thickness of an Ointment,
or till the Moisture be consumed, and reserve it for use.

For all Gunshot Wounds.
TAke two Ounces of Birth-Wort, either long or round, put it into an Earthen
Pipkin with three quarters of a Pint of Wine, and boil away one half; then take
the Pot from the Fire, and put in two Ounces of Sugar. Keep this Liquor for use
in a Glass-Bottle.

When the Wound is large, lay on the first Dressing with the Whites of two Eggs
beat up to a Froth, to which add a Dram or two of Bol^-Armenic in Powder; then
spread the whole upon the Tow of fine Hemp, and leave it upon the Wound till
the same Hour next Day. After twenty four Hours you must take away the first
Dressing, put some of this Water into a Spoon, heat it lukewarm, dip a Linen
Rag in it, and wash the Wound; and lay upon it another piece of Linen dipped in
the same Water: taking care to keep the Wound always Moist.

For all sorts of Ulcers.
TAke Burgundy-Pitch, Rosin, and new Wax, of each two Ounces; put them all into
an Earthen-Pipkin, and melt them on the Fire; then add six Ounces of fresh
Butter, with a Dram of Vardigr^ase in Powder, stirring 'em all the while. Put
this Balsam into an Earthen Pot, and keep it for use.

For a Gangrene.
INfuse half a Pound of Vnslak'd Lime for the space of six Hours, in a Pint of
Smith's-Water; then pour it off softly, without* removing the Vessel. In this
Water infuse a Dram of Sublimate for the space of a Night. Then add a sixth
part of rectified Spirit of Wine, and pour it all off without stirring the
Sediments. Wash the gangrened parts every Morning, Noon, and Night, with this
Water a little heated.

OF Ptisans or Decoctions.
THEY may be prepared several ways, according to the various Uses they are made
for. The most common are Purgative, Laxative, Cooling, and Pectoral; though many
other sorts may be made, according to the different Distempers that attack
Human Bodies. But I shall only mention those that are most frequently used, and
most easily prepared.

A Cooling, Opening, and Pectoral Ptisan.
TAke half a Peck of good Oats well cleans'd, wild Succory and Burnet, of each
one handful; boil them softly in a Gallon of River-Water, for a large half
Hour, or three quarters of an Hour; after which add half an Ounce of Sal
Prunellae, with a quarter of a Pound of the best Honey you can procure; and
boil it again softly for half an Hour: Then take it off the Fire, strain it
through a Linen Cloth, and pour the Liquor into an Earthen Pot. Take a Draught of
it two Hours before, and two Hours after Meals.

A Purgative and Laxative Ptisan.
POur two Quarts of River or Fountain Water, into a close Pot, and set it near
the Fire; put into it half an Ounce of Sena, four or five Roots of Wild
Succory, two little Sticks of Liquorice, more or less, according to the Palate
of the Patient; and a Dram of Green Fennel-seed; then tie a Dram of the
raspings of Ivory, and the like quantity of Hartshorn in a Linen Rag; boil 'em
a little longer with the rest of the Ingredients in the Pot, and afterward
strain out the Liquor. Drink a Glass of it every Morning fasting for Eight or
Ten Days.

A Pectoral Ptisan.
TAke Jujubes, Sebesten, and Damask Raisins, of each one Ounce; a Stick of
Liquorice beaten, and a quarter of a Pound of Honey; Boil them softly in two
Quarts of River-Water, for a quarter of an Hour; and afterward strain out the
Liquor through a Linen Cloth. You may drink a Glass of it every Morning, and
another at Night when you go to Bed; It must neither be too hot nor too cold
when you drink it.

OF SYRUPS, And their Virtues.
THE Syrups that are most frequently used, are the Syrup of Pale Roses, the
Syrup of Peach-Flowers, compound Syrup of Apples, compound Syrup of Succory.
Syrup of Violets, Syrup of Maidenhair, and the Syrup of Corn-Poppies.

The Syrup of Pale Roses serves to evacuate all sorts of Serosities, either
Phlegmatic, Bilious, or Melancholic; it strengthens the Stomach, and opens
Obstructions in the Capillary Vessels of the Liver, and of the rest of the
Entrals.

The Syrup of Peach-Flowers is good for those who are Hydropical, and is
particularly adapted for expelling Serous Humors.

Compound Syrup of Apples evacuates the Melancholic Humor which infects the
Mass of the Blood. It is also very good to purge the Spleen.

Compound Syrup of Succory, prepra'd with Rhubarb, purges the redundant Bile,
strengthens the Liver and Stomach, and opens Obstructions in other Parts of the
Body.

Syrup of Violets purges Choler, cools, and promotes Expectoration: You may
take an Ounce or a Spoonful of it in a Glass of Water; but you must have two
Glasses, and pour it out of one into the other several times, to dilute the
Syrup.

Syrup of Maidenhair is of excellent use in Diseases of the Breast; it frees
it from the corrupt Humors that are log'd in it, and helps the sick Person to
spit.

Syrup of Corn-Poppies procures Sleep: The Dose is from an Ounce to two Ounces
at Night.

FOR THE TOOTHACHE.
AFTER Eating, you must gargarize your Mouth, and wash your Gums with Wine and
Water; then take the Ashes of the second Bark of the Ash-Tree; mix 'em with a
Spoonful of Brandy, and make a Plaster, which must be applied to the Temples
on that side where you feel the Pain.

Another.
PUT a Clove or two upon the aching Tooth, then shut your Teeth, and hang your
Head on that side where the Pain lies; this will draw out abundance of Water,
and by that means give you ease.

If the Tooth be rotten or carious, you must pull it out, or else put a Drop of
Aquafortis into it.

OF CLYSTERS.
A Cooling Clyster.
MAKE a Clyster of Oxycrate, that is, mix a Pint of lukewarm Water with six
Spoonfuls of Vinegar.

A Clyster for one who is Costive.
TAke a quarter of a Pound of Oil of Nuts, and the like quantity of common
Honey, put them into a Pint of Water, and if you are troubled with Gripes, add
as much Powder of Anise or Fennel-seed as you can take up between your Fingers
and Thumb: If not, add half a quarter of a Pint of Vinegar, and boil it as
usually.

A Clyster to stop a Looseness.
MAke a Decoction with White Mullein, Provence Roses, and Plantain, of each one
handful; Lin-seed and Quince-seed, of each a Dram; half an Ounce of Starch, and
the Yolk of an Egg. In the beginning of a Looseness you ought not to make use
of Astringent Medicines, but must let Nature act without disturbance for some
Days, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF The Principal Matters contained in the TREATISE of REMEDIES.
OF Medicines in general, 73 Of Diuretics, or Medicines that provoke Urine, 75
Of Vomits, 76 Of Sudorifics and Diaphoretics, or Medicines that procure
Sweating and insensible Transpiration, 77 Of Sneezing Medicines, and Errhina,
74 Of Incrassating or Thickening Medicines, 79 Of Narcotics, or Medicines that
procure Sleep, 80 Of Styptics or Astringents, 81 Of Carminatives, or Medicines
that dispel Wind, Ibid.
Of Particular Remedies.
FOR the Headache, 82 For the Apoplexy, 83 For the Palsy, Ibid. A Remedy for
the Rheumatism, hard Swellings in the Joints, for all Cold Tumors, and to
strengthen the Nerves, Ibid. To Purge Melanch^ly, 84 To Purge Choler, Ibid. To
Purge Phlegm, Ibid. For the Itching of the Eyelids, 85 For an Inflammation of
the Eyes, Ibid. For Deafness, Ibid. To stop Bleeding at the Nose, Ibid. To cure
a Red Face, and take away Pimples, 86 For Shortness of Breath, Ibid. For
Obstructions of the Lungs, Ibid. For the Pleurisy, 87 For a Cold, Ibid. To
stop Vomiting, Ibid. To comfort and strengthen the Liver, Ibid. For the Spleen,
88 For the Jaundice, Ibid. For the Dropsy, Ibid. For the Nephritical Colic, or
Stone in the Kidneys, 86 For the Bilious Colic, Ibid. For the Wind Colic, Ibid.
Another, Ibid. For all sorts of Colics, Ibid. For a Looseness, 90 For the
Dysentery, Ibid. For Worms in the Belly 91 For the Worms in little Children,
Ibid. For the Piles, either internal or external, whether they void Blood or
not, Ibid. For a Pain in the Back or Kidneys, 92 For a Stoppage or Suppression
of Urine, Ibid.
Remedies for the Diseases of Women.
TO bring down the Courses, 93 To stop the immoderate Flux of Blood which
happens to Women in Labor, or after they are brought to Bed, Ibid. For the
Suffocation of the Womb, 94 For Fits of the Mother, Ibid. For a Woman in
Labor, to hasten her Delivery, Ibid. To expel a dead Child, 95 For the Colic,
or griping Pain of the Belly, which frequently assaults Women that are newly
delivered, Ibid. To bring Milk into the Breasts of Women that are newly
delivered, Ibid. For those who have too much Milk, Ibid. To dry up Milk in
those who are not willing to suckle their Children, 96 For an Inflammation of
the Breasts, Ibid. For the Fits of a Tertian-Ague, Ibid. For Intermitting
Fevers, 97 For a Quartan-Ague, Ibid. For a Purple Fever, Ibid. For the Plague,
98 For Carbuncles or Plague-Sores, Ibid. A Remedy for Corns, Ibid. To preserve
the Face from being marked by the Smallpox, 99 To preserve the Sight in the
Smallpox, Ibid. Another, Ibid. For the Sciatica, Ibid. For the Itch or Scab,
100 For a Tetter or Ring-Worm, Ibid. For a Cut or Wound, 101 For Burning, Ibid.
To open all sorts of Tumors without a Lance, Ibid. For all sorts of
Inflammations that happen either before or after the Breaking of a Tumor, 102
For Bruises, Ibid. For all sorts of Wounds, Ibid. For all Gunshot Wounds, 103
For all sorts of Ulcers, Ibid. For a Gangrene, 104
Of Ptisans or Decoctions.
A Cooling, Opening, and Pectoral Ptisan, 105 A Purging and Loosening Ptisan,
Ibid. A Pectoral Ptisan, 106
OF Syrups, and their Virtues, Ibid. Syrup of Pale Roses, 107 Syrup of
Peach-Flowers, Ibid. Compound Syrup of Apples, Ibid. Compound Syrup of Succory,
Ibid. Syrup of Violets, Ibid. Syrup of Maidenhair, Ibid. Syrup of Corn-Poppies,
Ibid. Remedies for the Toothache, 108
OF Clysters, 109 Cooling Clysters, Ibid. A Clyster for one that is Costive,
Ibid. A Clyster to stop a Looseness, Ibid.
The End of the Table.

