AN EXPOSITION OF THE Assemblies Catechism, WITH PRACTICAL INFERENCES From each
QUESTION: As it was carried on in the Lords Days Exercises in DARTMOUTH, In the
First Year of Liberty, 1688. By JOHN FLAVELL, Preacher of the Gospel in
DARTMOUTH.

2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, in
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry over
against Stocks-Market, 1692.

(...) And because the Answers therein are some of them pretty large, and Treat
of the most profound Mysteries of our Religion; therefore several Persons have
bestowed their good and laudable Pains, some in descanting more largely, and
proving by Scriptural Reasons the Particulars: and one has shown the harmony
thereof with the Articles and Homilies of the Church of England (designed, I
suppose, to remove the prejudice which some have taken against it). Others have
parted the Questions and Answers into several little ones, under each, to make
them more intelligible to younger ones, and more easy to be remembered.

Among whom, Worthy, Orthodox, and Excellent Mr. John Flavell may be ranked,
who among other of his many and most profitable Labors, applied himself to the
chewing of this Bread of Life, or crumbling it into smaller pieces, for the
Cenveniency of Children and (indeed) of all; wherein (as in all his other
Works) he has shown himself a Workman that needs not to be ashamed.

There needs no other recommendations to this Posthumus Piece, but the worthy
Author's Name; he was removed before he had completely finished it; he had
prepared his Questions and Answers upon the second Petition of the Lord's
Prayer; but lived not to propose them in the public Congregation. God then
translated him into his Kingdom of Glory above, while he was so industriously
endeavoring to promote the Kingdom of Grace below.

The other five remaining Questions and Answers (to complete the Work) were
done by a ruder hand; as may easily be discerned by any observant Reader, who
will find himself transferred from a plain, clear, and delightful Style, method,
and manner, into more rough, disorderly, and unpleasant ones; for who, indeed,
could equal this Divine Labourer? Not the Compleater: who would account himself
to have made very great Seize in Divinity and Usefulness, if he were left
but a few furlongs behind him.

Let the Reader use and peruse this Piece, and he will see cause to bless God
for the Author.

VALE.
TO THE READER.
THE Divine Providence having unexpectedly cast my Lot for a few Days in
Dartmouth, where that blessed man of God Mr. John Flavell did for many years
honor Christ, and was honored by him; I have been favored with a sight of
that most judicious Explication of the Assemblies Catechism, which is emitted
herewith.

Being desired to testify my Respect to the worthy Author, by Prefacing this
Excellent Labor of his with a few Lines; I can truly say (as sometimes Beza of
Calvin) Now Mr. Flavell is dead, Life will be less sweet, and Death less bitter
to me.

My heart bleeds to look on this desolate Place, and not to see him, that
whilst living, was the glory of it.

But neither the Author, nor his Writings stand in need of the commendation of
others, much less of mine.

His Works already published have made his Name precious in both Englands, and
it will be so as long as the Earth shall endure.

There are some considerations which may cause the Reader to expect (and he
will not find himself disappointed therein) that which is extraordinary in this
little Manuel: for the Author's Heart was very much engaged in doing this
Service for Christ, in thus feeding his Lambs. And he did himself design the
Publication of what is here committed to the Press; and was very desirous (with
an holy submission to the Will of God) to have perfected this Work before his
Decease; but had strange intimations that he should finish his Course, before
that could be done.

When he did viva voce deliver his Meditations, there were many Enlargements,
and lively Passages which are not here inserted: nevertheless here is as much
as he thought needful for public view, not being willing that his Book should
be Voluminous.

In his last Catechetical Exercise concerning Hallowing the Name of God, he was
exceedingly enlarged; but he must himself go into the Kingdom of Glory, when he
intended to have discoursed on that Petition, Thy Kingdom come.

He also began some Meditations on the Joys of Heaven: But before he had an
opportunity to express what had been in his Heart, the Lord Jesus said unto
him, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. And thus does it happen many times to
the eminent and holy Servants of God.

Another Consideration, recommending what comes herewith, is, that it was
amongst Mr. Flavell's last Works. The ((...)) Last Sayings of wise and great
Men have been esteemed Oraculous; and the Scripture puts an Emphasis on the
last Words of David, the sweet singer of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1. Not that those
were the last words that ever David spoke, only they were written not long
before his Death, when he was come near Heaven.

So was what is now put into the Reader's Hand, written by Mr. Flavell not long
before his translation to the World of Souls, where the Spirits of Just men are
made perfect.

There was a more than ordinary presence of God with him to his last; and in
his last Days, not the last Sermon that he preached (which was June 21. 1691.)
He did more than once surprise his Hearers with an Intimation that, that might
be the last time he should speak to them in the Name of the Lord. And was not
then the Secret of the Lord with him?

Dartmouth will know, and Devonshire will know, that there has been a Prophet
among them.

And now my Soul bleeds to Look on the dear Flock of God, which are as Sheep
without a Shepherd. The Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, bave
compassion on them, and give them a Shepherd like to his blessed Servant
Flavell, who did for many years feed them with Knowledge, and with
Understanding.

Dartmouth, March the 21th 1691/2. Increase Mather.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Assemblies Shorter Catechism.
1 Question. Of Man's Chief End.
WHat is the Chief End of Man?

A. Man's Chief End is to glorify God, and to enjoy him for ever.

Q. 1. Seeing a Chief supposes an inferior End; What is that inferior End for
which man was made?

A. It was prudently, soberly, and mercifully, to govern, use, and dispose of
other Creatures in the Earth, Sea, and Air, over which God gave man the
Dominion; Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make man in our Image, after our
likeness: and let them have domonion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Fowl of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over every
creeping thing that creeps upon the Earth. So Psalm. 8.6. Thou made him to
have dominion over the work^ of thy hands, thou have put all things under his
feet.

Q. 2. What then is to be thought of those men, who being wholly intent upon
inferior things, forget and neglect their principal End?

A. They are dead whilst they live, 1 Timothy 5.6. But she that lives in
pleasure, is dead whilst she lives. They have their Portion in this Life,
Psalm. 17.14. From men of the world which have their Portion in this Life, and
their end is destruction; Phil. 3.19. Whose end is destruction.

Q. 3. How can man glorify God, seeing he is perfectly glorious in himself?

A. Man cannot glorify God by adding any new degree of glory to him. Job.
35.7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? but by manifesting his glory
with the Lips; Psalm. 50.23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me; or with the
life, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Q. 4. Wherein consists the enjoyment of God?

A. It consists, first, In the facial vision of him in Heaven. Secondly, In
full conformity to him. 1 Ioh. 3.2. But we know that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Thirdly, In that full
satisfaction which results from both the former, Psalm. 17.15. I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness.

Q 5. Can none enjoy him in Heaven, who do not glorify him on Earth?

A. No adult person can Scripturally expect happiness in Heaven, without
holiness on Earth. Heb. 12.14. And holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Q. 6. How comes the glory and enjoyment of God our Chief End?

A. He is our Master, and rightful Owner, and Benefactor; we receive our Being
and Preservation from him; Of him, and through him, and therefore to him be all
Things; Romans 11.36.

Q. 7. Do all men make God their chief End?

A. No, they do not; some make their sensual Pleasure their chief End. Phil.
3.19. Whose God is their Belly; and some the World, Col. 3.5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the Earth, and Covetousness, which is
Idolatry.

Q. 8. What are the Signs of a man's making himself his chief End?

A. Those make themselves their chief End, who ascribe the glory of what they
have, or do, to themselves, and not to God, Dan. 4.30. The King spoke and said,
Is not this great Babylon which I have built? Isa. 10.18. For he says, By the
strength of my hand have I done it; and by my wisdom, for I am prudent;
therefore they sacrifice to their own net, and burn Incense unto their Drag.
Hab. 1.16.

Q. 9. Why are the glorifying and enjoying of God put together, as making up
our chief End?

A. Because no man can glorify God, that takes him not for his God; and none
takes him for his God, that takes him not for his Supreme Good; and both these
being essentially included in this Notion of the chief End, are therefore
justly put together.

Q. 10. What is the first Truth inferred from hence?

A. That God has dignified Man above all other Creatures on Earth, in giving
him a capacity of glorifying God here, and of enjoying him hereafter.

Q. 11. What is the second truth inferred hence?

A. That the Soul of man is not annihilated by Death, but advanced by it. Phil.
1.21. To die is gain. V. 23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better.

Q. 12. What is the third truth inferred hence?

A. That it is the duty and wisdom of every Christian to renounce, deny, and
forsake all inferior Interests and Enjoyments when they come in competition
with the glory of God, and our enjoyment of him. Luke 14.33. So likewise
whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my
Disciple.

Q. 13. What is the fourth Inferrence hence?

A. That we are to abhor and renounce all those Doctrines and Practices that
debase the glory of God, and exalt and magnify the Creature.

Of the Scriptures as our Rule.
Quest. 2. WHat Rule has God given ^o direct us, how we may glorify and enjoy
him?

A. The Word of God, which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, is the only rule to direct us, how we may glorify and enjoy him.

Q. 1. How can the Scriptures be called the Word of God, seeing the things
contained therein, were spoken and written by men?

A. They are truly and properly called the Word of God, because they came not
by the Will of Man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.

Q. 2. What are the principal Arguments to persuade us that the Scriptures are
of Divine Authority, and Inspiration?

A. Three things especially convince us. First The Holiness of the Doctrine
therein contained. Secondly, The awful efficacy thereof on the Soul. Thirdly,
The uncontrollable Miracles by which they are sealed, put it beyond all
rational doubt, that they are the very Word of God.

Q. 3. What is the Holiness of the Scriptures? and how does that prove them to
be God's Word?

A. The Holiness of the Scriptures does appear in two things. First, In
commanding and encouraging whatsoever is pure, and holy; Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever
things are pure. Secondly. In forbidding all unholiness, under pain of
Damnation, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, etc. This shows that they came not from Satan, being cross to
his design; nor from men, it being against his corrupt nature; and therefore
from God only.

Q. 4. What is their Authority and Efficacy on the Soul? and how does that
prove them Divine?

A. Their Authority and Efficacy on the Soul, consists in three Things: First,
In the power they have to search and discover the secrets of men. Heb. 4.12.
The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, of the Joints and
Marrow; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Secondly,
In their converting Efficacy, changing and renewing the Soul. Psalm. 19.7. The
Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. Thirdly, In their chearing and
restoring Efficacy, when the Soul is cast down under any inward or outward
trouble. Psalm. 19.8. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart.
No humane Power can do such things as these. John 17 17. Sanctify them through
thy truth, thy word is truth.

Q. 5. How do Miracles confirm it?

A. Because all proper Miracles are wrought only by the hand of God, John 3.2.
And no man can do these miracles that thou do, except God be with him; and
so are his seal to whatsoever he affixes them, and it consists not with his
truth and holiness to set it to a forgery.

Q. 6. What was the end of writing the word?

A. That the Church to the end of the world might have a sure, known, standing
Rule to try and judge all things by, and not to be left to the uncertainty of
Traditions: John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me.

Q. 7. Does not the Authority of the Scriptures depend on the Church* Fathers
and Councils?

A. No, the Scriptures are not built on the Authority of the Church, but the
Church on them. Ephesians 2.19, 20. And are built on the Foundations of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone. And
for Councils and Fathers, the Scriptures are not to be tried by them; but they
by the Scriptures. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Q. 8. What may be fairly inferred from this Proposition, That the Scriptures
are the word of God?

A. Three things may be thence inferred, First, The perfection of the
Scriptures, which being the only rule given by God, must therefore be perfect.
Secondly, That it is the right of common People to read them. John 5.39. Search
the Scriptures. Acts 17.11. These were more noble than those of Thessalonica,
in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and search the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Thirdly, That we owe no
obedience to the Injunctions of men, farther than they are sufficiently
warranted by the written Word. Mat. 15.9. But in vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men.

Of Faith and Obedience.
Quest. 3 What do the Scriptures principally teach?

A. The Scriptures principally teach what Man is to believe concerning God, and
what duty God requires of Man.

Q. 1. Why is Faith conjoined with Obedience, and put before it?

A. Because Faith is the principle from whence all Obedience flows, and no man
can perform any duty aright in the estate of unbelief. Heb. 11.6. But without
Faith it is impossible to please him; for he that comes to God, must believe
that he is.

Q. 2. Can there be no saving Faith where the Scriptures are not known and
preached?

A. No; for the Apostle says, Romans 10.14. How then shall they call on him, in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they
preach except they be sent? And v. 17. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God.

Q. 3. Are not we bound to believe what Learned men teach us, as Points of
Faith, though the things ^hey teach be not contained in the Word of God?

A. No, if the things they teach be not contained expressly, or by necessary
consequence in the Word of God, we are not obliged to believe them as points of
Faith. Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according
to this Word, it is because there is no light in them. Gal. 1.8. Though we, or
an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. And Christ has charged us, Mat. 23.10.
To call no man Master, for one is your Master, even Christ.

Q. 4. Are there some things in Scripture more excellent than others; Because
it is said, the Scriptures principally teach matters of Faith and Duty?

A. Every part of Scripture is alike pure; Prove. 30.5. Every word of God is
pure, and of equal authority, but not of equal weight; as several pieces of
Gold are alike pure, and of the same stamp, but not of equal value.

Q. 5. What may be inferred hence for Use?

A. First, Hence it is our duty to examine what we hear, by the Word; and not
receive any Doctrine, because men confidently affirm it, but because the
Scriptures require it. Acts 17.11. These were more noble than those of
Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so. Secondly, That
Christian Religion is not notional, but practical; and that impractical Faith
saves no man, Iam. 2.20. Faith without Works is dead.

God is a Spirit.
Quest. 4. WHat is God?

A. God is a Spirit, Infinite, Eternal and Unchangeable in his Being, Wisdom,
Power, Holiness, Iu^tice, Goodness and Truth.

Q. 1. Can the Nature of God be defined, so as men may express properly and
strictly what God is?

A No: Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection?

We do then conceive most rightly of God, when we acknowledge him to be
unconceiveable; and therefore one being asked the question, what God is?
answered rightly* If I fully knew that, I should be a God my self; for God only
knows his own Essence.

Q. 2. How many ways are there by which men may know and describe the Nature of
God, tho still with imperfect Knowledge?

A. There are two ways of knowing God in this Life. First, By way of
affirmation; affirming that of God by way of eminence, which is excellent in
the Creature; as when we affirm him to be Wise, Good, Merciful, etc. Secondly,
By way of Negation, when we remove from God in our Conceptions all that is
imperfect in the Creature: so we say God is Immense, Infinite, Immutable; and
in this sense we also call him a Spirit, (i. e.) he is not a gross corporeal
Substance.

Q. 3. How many sorts of Spirits are there? And of which sort is God?

A. There be two sorts of Spirits, created, and finite; as Angels, and the
Souls of Men are. Secondly, Uncreated, and Infinite; and such a Spirit God only
is, infinitely above all other Spirits.

Q. 4. If God be a Spirit, in what sense are we to understand all those
Scriptures, which speak of the Eyes of the Lord, the Ears and Hand of God?

A. We are to understand them as Expressions of God, in condescension to the
weakness of our understandings; even as the Glory of Heaven is expressed to us in
Scripture by a City, and the Royal Feast. These shadows are useful to us whilst
we are in the Body; but we shall know him in Heaven after a more perfect manner.

Q 5. What may be inferred from the Spiritual Nature of God?

A. Hence learn, that it is both sinful and dangerous to frame an Image or
Picture of God. Who can make an Image of his Soul? which yet is not so perfect
a Spirit as God is? And as it is sinful to attempt it, so it is impossible to
do it; Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves; for ye saw
no manner of Similitude, on the day that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb out of
the ^^ast of the Fire; lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven
Image, the similitude of any figure, etc.

Q. 6. What else may be inferred from thence?

A. That our Souls are the most noble and excellent part of us which most
resembles God; and therefore our chief regard and care should be for them,
whatever becomes of the vile Body, Mat. 16.26. For what is a man profited if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in
Exchange for his Soul?

Q. 7. What further Truth may be inferred hence?

A. That men should beware of spiritual Sins, as well as of gross and outward
Sins; for there is a filthiness of the Spirit, as well as of the Flesh. 2 Cor.
7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; and as
God sees them, so he greatly abhors them, as Sins that defile the noblest part
of man, on which he stamped his own Image.

Q. 8. What also may be inferred from hence?

A. Hence we learn, that spiritual Worship is most agreeable to his Nature and
Will; and the more spiritual it is, the more acceptable it will be to him. John
4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit
and in Truth. Externals in worship are of little regard with God; as places,
habits, gestures, etc.

Apply this, First, To Superstitious men, Isa. 66.1, 2, 3. Secondly, To
Children that say a Prayer, but mind not to whom, nor what they say.


Of God's Infinity.
Quest. 1. WHat is the sense and meaning of this Word [Infinity?]

A. It signifies that which has no bounds or limits, within which it is
contained, as all created things are.

Q. 2. In how many respects is God infinite?

A. God is infinite or boundless in three respects.

First, In respect of the perfection of his Nature; his Wisdom* Power, and
Holiness, exceed all measures and limits; as 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as
the Lord, etc. Secondly, In respect of time and place; no time can measure him,
Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, 1
Kings 8.27. Behold the Heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, how much less
this House which I have built? The Heaven of heavens contains all created
Beings; but not the Creator. Thirdly, In respect of his Incomprehensibleness,
by the understanding of all creatures. Job. 11.7. Can thou by searching find
out God? can thou find out the Almighty to perfection?

Q 3. If God be thus Infinite, and no understanding can comprehend him, How
then is it said in 1 John 3.2. We shall see him as he is?

A. The meaning is not, that glorified Saints shall comprehend God in their
understandings; but that they shall have a true apprehensive Knowledge, though
not a comprehensive Knowledge of God: and that we shall see him immediately,
and not as we do now through a glass darkly.

Q. 4. What is the first Lesson to be learnt from God's Infinity?

A. That therefore men should tremble to sin even in secret. Psalm. 139.11. If I
say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the Night shall be light about me.

Q. 5. What is the second Instruction from hence?

A. The second Instruction is, That there is an infinite evil in sin,
objectively considered, as it is committed against an Infinite God; and
therefore it deserves Eternal Punishment; and no satisfaction can possibly be
made for it, but by the Blood of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.18. Forasmuch as ye know that
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold -- but with
the precious Blood of Christ.

Q. 6. What is the third Instruction from God's Infinity?

A. The third Instruction is, That those who are reconciled to God in Christ,
need not fear his ability to perform any mercy for them; for he is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20, And those
that are not reconciled, are in a very miserable condition, having infinite
Power set on work to punish them. 2 These. 1.9. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power.

Q. 7. What is the fourth, Instruction from God's Infinity?

A. That no place can bar the access of gracious Souls to God. They are as near
him in a Dungeon, as when at Liberty; and that he knows their thoughts, when
their tongues cannot utter them.

[Eternal.]
Quest. 1. WHat is it to be Eternal, as God is?

A. The Eternity of God is, to be without beginning, and without end. Psalm.
90.2. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

Q. 2. How does God's Eternity differ from the Eternity of Angels, and Humane
Souls?

A. It differs in two respects; First, In this, That tho Angels, and the Souls
of men shall have no end; yet they had a beginning, which God had not.
Secondly, Our Eternity is by gift from God, or by his appointment; but his
Eternity is necessary, and from his own Nature.

Q. 3. In what sense is the Covenant called an everlasting Covenant?

A. The Covenant is called an Everlasting Covenant, 2 Samuel 23.5. because the
mercies of it, conveyed to believers, as pardon, peace, and salvation, are
mercies that shall have no end.

Q. 4. In what sense is the Gospel Everlasting?

A. The Gospel is called the Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6. because the effects
thereof upon the Souls it sanctifies, will abide in them for ever.

Q. 5. In what sense is the Redemption of Christ called the Eternal Redemption?

A. The Redemption of Christ is called Eternal Redemption in Heb. 9.12. because
those whom he redeems by his Blood, shall never more come into condemnation.
John 5.24. He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life.

Q. 6. Why is the last Judgment of the world by Christ, called Eternal
Judgment?

A. The last Judgment is called Eternal Judgment, not because God judged men
from Eternity, or because the Day of Judgment shall last to Eternity; but
because the consequences of it will be Everlasting Joy or Misery to the Souls
of Men; therefore it is called eternal judgment, Heb. 6.2.

Q 7. What may wicked men learn from the Eternity of God?

A. Hence wicked men may see their own misery in the perfection of it; that
they will have an eternal Enemy to avenge himself upon them for ever, in the
world to come. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord.

Q. 8. What may good men learn from it?

A. That their joy and happiness will be perfect and endless, who have the
Eternal God for their portion. Psalm 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy,
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Q. 9. What may all men good and had learn from it?

A. All men may learn three things from the Eternity of God. First, That their
life is a thing of naught, compared with God. Psalm. 39.5. Mine age is nothing
before thee. Secondly, That sins, or duties, long since committed, or
performed, are all present before God. Thirdly, That God can never want
opportunity to do his work, and carry on his designs in the world. All time is
in the hand of the Eternal God. Rev. 12.12. The devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath, because he ki^weth that he has but a short time.

Of God's Unchangeableness.
Quest. 1. WHAT Scriptures plainly assert this Attribute?

A. Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I AM, that I AM. Dan 6.26. For he is
the living God, and steadfast for ever. Iam. 1.17. With whom is no var^ableness,
neither shadow of turning.

Q. 2. Whence does God's Immutability flow?

A. The Immutability of God flows from the perfection of his Nature, to which
nothing can be added, and from which nothing can be taken away. If any thing
could be added to make him better than he is; or if any thing could be taken
away, to make him less good than he is, then he were not the chiefest Good, and
consequently not God.

Q 3. By what other Argument prove you his Immutability?

A. I prove it from the Eternity of God. If God be eternal, he must be
immutable; for if he change by addition of something to him he had not before,
then there is something in God which he had not from Eternity: And if he change
by diminution, then there was something in God from Eternity, which now is not;
but from everlasting to everlasting, he is the same God, and therefore changes
not.

Q. 4. Bus it is said, God repents, and Repentance is a change; How then is he
unchangeable, and yet repents?

A. In those Phrases God speaks to us, as we must speak of, and to him; not
properly, but after the manner of men; and it only notes a change in his
outward providence, not in his nature.

Q. 5. But how could God become man, and yet no change made on him?

A. There is a twofold change, one active, made by God, that we allow. He made
a change upon our nature by uniting it to Christ; but a passive change made
upon God, we deny. The nature of man was made more excellent; but the Divine
Nature was still the same.

Q 6. What is the first Instruction from God's Immutability?

A. That those that are most unchangeable in holiness, are most like God. Let
him that is holy, be holy still.

Q. 7. What is the second Instruction from hence?

A. That the happiness of God's people is firm, and sure, being still upon the
word of an unchangeable God. Mal. 3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not;
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Heb. 6.18.

Q. 8. What is the third Instruction from this Attribute?

A. That the hopes of all wicked men are vain, being built upon a presumption,
that God will not deal with them as he has threatened he will do.

Q. 9. What is the last Instruction from God's Immutability?

A. That Christians may take as much encouragement now from the nature, word,
and providence of God, as the Saints in any former Generation did, or might do;
for he is the same now, he was then.

Of God's Wisdom.
Quest. 1. How manifold is the wisdom of God?

A. There is a personal and essential wisdom of God; the personal wisdom is the
Son of God. 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. Col.
2.3. In whom are laid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The essential
wisdom of God, is the essence of God; of which this Question speaks.

Q. 2. What is the Essential wisdom of God?

A. The Essential wisdom of God, is his most exact and perfect knowledge of
Himself, and all his Creatures, and his ordering, and disposing them in the
most convenient manner, to the Glory of his own Name. Ephesians. 1.11. According to
the purpose of him who works all things after the council of his own will.

Q 3. What is the first property of God's wisdom?

A. The first property is, he is only wise. Romans 16.27. To God only wise be
glory. And whatsoever wisdom is in Angels, or Men, is all derived, and borrowed
from God; but his from none. Isa. 40.14. With whom took he counsel? and who
instruct^d him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding?

Q. 4. What is the second property of God's wisdom?

A. The second property is, That he is incomprehensible in his wisdom. Romans
11.33, 34. Oh the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God,
etc.

Q. 5. What is the third property of the wisdom of God?

A. The third property is, That God is perfectly wise, which no Creatures, no
not the very Angels in Heaven are. Job 4.18. And his Angels he charge with
folly.

Q. 6. What is the most glorious and eminent discovery of the wisdom of God?

A. The most glorious display of the wisdom of God was in the work of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ. Col. 2.3. In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the wisdom of God.

Q. 7. What is the first Instruction from God's wisdom?

A. The first Instruction is, That God is a fit object of our trust,
dependence, and resignation. Isa. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait, that
he may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of judgment; blessed are all they that
wait for him.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruction from hence?

A. The second Instruction is, That it is a dangerous arrogance in the
Creature, either to prescribe unto God, and direct his Maker. Job 21.22. Shall
any teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those that are high? Or to quarrel
with his providence, as not so fit and convenient as they should be. Job 40.2.
Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? He that reproves God,
let him answer it.

Q. 9. What is the third Instruction from it?

A. That the people of God have much reason to quiet, and encourage themselves,
when crafty and subtle Enemies surround them. For the foolishness of God is
wiser than man, 1 Cor. 1.25.

Q. 10. What is the fourth Instruction from God's wisdom?

A. The fourth Instruction is, That the true way to wisdom, is to be sensible
of our own folly. 1 Cor. 3.18. If any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. And to apply our selves by
prayer to God the fountain of it. Iam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask
it of God.

Q 11. What is the last Instruction from God's wisdom?

A. That the study of Christ, and of the Scriptures, is to be preferred to all
other studies in the world. Col. 2.3. In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom, and knowledge. And the Scriptures contain all that Wisdom which is for
our Salvation. 1 Cor. 2.7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even
the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world, unto our glory.

Of God's Power.
Quest. 1. WHat is the Power of God?

A. An Essential property of his Nature, whereby he can do all things that he
pleases to have done. Ier. 32.17. Ah Lord God, behold thou have made the
Heavens, and the Earth by thy great power, and stretched-out arm, and there is
nothing too hard for thee.

Q. 2. What evidences have we before our eyes of the Almighty Power of God?

A. It appears in the Creation of the World. Romans 1.20. For the invisible
things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. And its
Sustentation. Heb. 1.3. Who upholdeth all things by the word of his power.

Q. 3. Did God's power ever act its utmost?

A. No, he can do more than ever he did, or ever will do. Mat. 3.9. God is able
of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Mat. 26.53.

Q. 4. Are there not some things which God cannot do?

A. Yes, there are, but they are such things as are inconsistent with his truth
and holiness. Tit. 1.2. -- which God that cannot lie. 2 Timothy 2.13. He cannot
deny himself.

Q. 5. What is the first thing inferred from God's power?

A. That all the creatures necessarily depend on him for what ability they
have, and without the permission of the supreme Power they can do us no hurt.
Ioh. 19.11. Thou could have no power against me except it were given thee
from above.

Q 6. What is the second Inference from hence?

A. That the difficulties which lie in the way of the promises, need be no
stumbling blocks to our Faith. Romans 4.20, 21. He staggered not at the promises
through unbelief, being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able
also to perform.

Q. 7. What is the third Inference from this Attribute?

A. The Saints need not be scared at the greatness of their sufferings: their
God can carry them through. Dan. 3.17. Our God whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery furnace.

Q 8. What is the Fourth Inference?

A. That the salvation of God's people is certain, whatever their dangers be;
Being kept by this mighty power. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God
through faith to salvation.

Q. 9. What is the last Inference hence?

A. That the state of the damned is unconceiveably miserable. Their punishment
proceeding from the glory of the Almighty. 2 These. 1.9. Who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power.

Of God's Holiness.
Quest. 1 HOW manifold is the Holiness of God?

The Holiness of God is twofold; Communicable, or incommunicable; ^f his
communicable holiness the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.10. But he for our profit,
that we might be partakers of his holiness. Of his incommunicable holiness that
Scripture speaks, 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as the Lord.

Q. 2. What (...) the essential and incommunicable Holiness of God?

A. It is the Infinite purity of his Nature, whereby he delights in his own
holiness, and the resemblance of it in his creatures, and hates all impurity.
Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity.

Q. 3. What is the first property of God's Holiness?

A. He is essentially holy. Holiness is not a separable quality in God, as it
is in Angels and Men: but his Being and his Holiness are one thing.

Q. 4. What is the second property of God's Holiness?

A. God is essentially Holy, the author and fountain of all communicated
Holiness. Lev. 20.8. I am the Lord which sanctifies you.

Q. 5. What is ehe third property?

A. That the Holiness of God is the perfect rule and pattern of holiness to all
creatures. 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Q. 6. What is the first Instruction?

A. That the holiest of men have cause to be ashamed and humbled when they come
before God. Isa. 6.3, 5. And one cried unto another, saying, Holy, holy, holy,
is the Lord of Host, the whole earth is full of his glory. Then said I, VVoe is
me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, etc.

Q. 7. What is the second Instruction from God's Holiness?

A. That there is no coming near to God without a Mediator; for our God is a
consuming fire.

Q. 8. What is the third Instruction from God's Holiness?

A. That Holiness is indispensibly necessary, to all those which shall dwell
with him in Heaven. Heb. 12.14. And holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord.

Q. 9. What is the fourth Instruction from hence?

A. That the Gospel is of inestimable value, as it is the instrument of
conveighing the Holiness of God to us. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. Joh. 17.17. Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy word is truth.

Q. 10. What is the last Instruction from God's Holiness?

A. That all the despisers and scoffers of Holiness, are despisers of God: for
Holiness is the very nature of God; and in the creature it is his represented
Image.

Of God's Justice.
Quest. 1. WHat is the Justice of God?

A. The Justice of God is the perfect rectitude and equity of his Nature,
whereby he is just in himself, and in all his ways toward the Creatures. Deuteronomy.
32.4. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment; a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.

Q. 2. What is the first Property of God's Justice?

A. That it infinitely excels all humane Justice in the perfection of it. No
creature can compare in Justice with God. Job 9.2. How shall man be just with
God.

Q. 3. What is the second property of God's Justice?

A. That he is universally righteous in all his administrations in the world.
Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

Q. 4. What was the greatest demonstration of the Justice of God, that ever was
given to the world?

A. The greatest evidence that ever was given of the Justice of God, was in his
exacting full satisfaction for our sins upon Christ. Romans 3.25, 26. Whom God
has set forth, to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God. To declare, I say, at this time, his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Romans 8.32. He spared
uot his own Son, but delivered him up for us all.

Q. 5. What is the Second Discovery of God's Justice?

A. The Second Discovery of the Justice of God, is in the eternal punishment of
Sin in Hell, upon all that do not repent, and come to Christ by Faith in this
World; Romans 2.5. But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasureth up
unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God.

Q. 6. What is the Third Evidence of God's Justice?

A. The Third Evidence of the Justice of God is, in making good all the mercies
he has promised to believers, exactly to a tittle. 1 John 1.19. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me at
that day.

Q. 7. What is the First inference from God's Justice?

A. That sinners have no cause to complain of God's Judgments, though they be
never so terrible, or durable; Romans 2.5. But after thy hardness, and impenitent
heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Q. 8. What is the Second Inference from God's Justice?

A. That without doubt there is a Judgment to come in the next Life, otherwise
God would not have the glory of his Justice, Eccles. 3.16, 17. I saw under the
sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of
righteousness, that i^iquity was there: I said in mine heart, God shall judge
the righteous, and the wicked.

Q. 9. What is the Third Inference from God's Justice?

A. That penitent and believing sinners need not doubt of the forgiveness of
their sins, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Q. 10. What is the Last Inference from it?

A. The Last Inference is, That meekness and patience under afflictions, is our
unquestionable Duty; and murmuring against God, is a great sin and evil. Lam.
3.39. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his
sins?

Of G^d's Goodness.
Quest. 1. WHAT is the Goodness of God?

A. It is an Essential Property of his Nature, whereby he is absolutely and
perfectly good in himself, and the Fountain of all communicated Goodness to the
Creature. Psalm 119.68. Thou art good, and do good, teach me thy Statutes.

Q 2. How does the Goodness of God differ from the Mercy of God?

A. It differs in its Objects; for Misery is the Object of Mercy; but Goodness
extends to the Creatures that are happy, as well as miserable; as the Angels,
Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
works.

Q. 3. What is the First Property of God's Goodness?

A. That all his other Attributes flow out of it as their Fountain: The other
Acts of God are but the Effluxes of his Goodness. Exodus 33.19. And he said, I
will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the
Lord before thee, and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
show mercy unto whom I will show mercy. Exodus 34.6. And the Lord passed by
before him, and proclaimed The Lord, the Lord God. merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.

Q 4 What is the Second Property of the Divine Goodness?

A. That it is supreme, and perfect in it self, so as the goodness of no
Creature is, or can be. Luke 18.19. None is good save one, and that is God: And
consequently above all additions from the Creature. Psalm 16.2. O my soul, thou
have said unto the Lord -- my goodness extends not unto thee.

Q. 5. What is the Third Property of God's Goodness?

A. That it is communicative with pleasure and delight to the Creature: No
Mother draws out her Breast to an hungry Child with more pleasure than God does
his Goodness to the Saints. Psalm 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works.

Q. 6. In what Acts has God first manifested his Goodness?

A. He has manifested it in the creation and government of the World. Psalm
104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all.

Q 7. What was the principal Work in which God has manifested his Goodness to
men?

A. The principal manifestation of God's Goodness, was in the Work of
Redemption by Christ. Romans 5.8. God commended his love toward us, in that
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 1 John 4.8, 9. In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
son into the world, that we might live through him.

Q. 8. But are not the Judgments of God on the wicked, and his Afflictions on
the Saints, impeachments of his goodness?

A. No, It is the property of Goodness to hate and punish Evil in the
impenitent. Exodus 34.7. Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression, and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, etc. And
the Afflictions of the Saints flow from his Goodness, and end in their true and
eternal good. Heb 12.6. For whom the Lord loves, he chastneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives. Psalm 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes.

Q. 9. What may we infer from the Goodness of God?

A. The first thing is, that Sin has made our Natures base, and disingenuous,
in that we take no notice of his Goodness. Isa. 1.3. The ox knows his owner,
and the ass his masters crib; but Israel does not know, my people does not
consider; And answer not the design of it. Romans 2.4. Not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance.

Q. 10. What is the Second Inference from the Goodness of God?

A. That therefore God is the fittest Object of our delight, and love, and of
our trust and confidence (1.) Of our Delight and Love. Psalm. 116.1. I love the
Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplication. (2.) Of our Trust
and Confidence. Psalm 34 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good; blessed is
the man that trusts in him

Q. 11. What is the Third Inference from God's Goodness?

A. That Christians should imitate God in his Goodness, in charity to our
Enemies. Matt. 5.44, 45. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them which despitefully use
you, and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your father which is in
heaven.

Q. 12. What is the Last Inference from God's Goodness?

A. That Christians have great encouragement to go to God for pardon in case of
sin. Psalm 130.4. But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared; and for refuge of dangers. Nahum 1.7. The Lord is good, a strong hold
in the day of trouble; he knows them that trust in him.

Of God's Truth.
Quest. 1. WHAT is the Truth of God?

A. It is an Essential Property of his Nature, whereby he is perfectly faithful
in himself, and in all that he has spoken. Deuteronomy 32.4. He is the rock, his work
is perfect, for all his ways are judgment; a God of truth, and without
iniquity* just and right is he. Psalm 119.142. Thy righteousness is an
everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is the truth.

Q 2. What is the first Property of Divine Truth?

A. The first Property of it is, That it is essential and necessary to God; He
cannot lie, Tit. 1.2.

Q. 3. What is the Second Property of it?

A. The Second Property is, That it is everlasting, and abiding to all
Generations. Psalm 100.5. For the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting, and
his truth endures to all generations. Isa. 25.1. O Lord, thou art my God, I
will exalt thee -- thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth.

Q. 4. What is the Third Property of Divine Truth?

A. The Third Property is, that he is universally true in all his Words and
Works. (1.) In all his Words. John 17.17 Thy word is truth. (2.) In all his
Works. Psalm 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as
keep his covenant

Q. 5. What-is the First Lesson from God's Truth to be learnt?

A. That truth and sincerity of heart is that which is most suitable, and
pleasing to God. Psalm 51.6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts.

Q. 6. What is the Second Lesson from God's Truth?

A. That whatever God has foretold, shall assuredly come to pass, and be
fulfilled in his time. Josh. 23.14. Not one thing has failed of all the good
things which the Lord our God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto
you, and not one thing has failed thereof.

Q. 7. What is the Third Lesson from the Truth of God?

A. That a Promise from God is full security to the Faith of his People and
they may look upon it as good as a mercy in hand. Heb. 10.23. For he is
faithful that promised.

Q. 8. What is the Fourth Lesson from God's Truth?

A. That whatever God has threatened in his Word against sinners, shall surely
come upon them, except they repent, Zech. 1.6. But my word, and my statutes,
which I commanded my servants, the prophets, did they not take hold of your
fathers? and they returned, and said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do
unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he dealt
with us. Ezekiel. 12.27, 28. The word which I have spoken, shall be done, says
the Lord God.

Q. 9. What is the Fifth Lesson from God's Truth?

A. That falsehood in Words and Actions is contrary to God's Nature, and
abhorred by him. John 8.44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lust of
your father ye will do; he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, because there is no truth in him; when he speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.

Q. 10. What is the Last Lesson from God's Truth?

A. The day of judgment will rightly and justly state every man's condition.
Romans 2.2. But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against them which commit such things.

Of One God.
Quest. 5. ARE there more Gods than one?

A. There is but one only, the living and true God.

Q. 1. How does it appear that there is but one God?

A. It is evident from Scripture there is but one God. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Jer. 10.10. But the Lord is the true God,
he is the living God, and an everlasting King; and as Scripture reveals no
more, so Reason will allow no more.

Q. 2. Why will Reason allow no more but one God?

A. Because God is the First Being, Revel. 1.11. Saying, I am alpha and omega,
the first and the last; and there can be but one First Being, and God is the
most perfect, and excellent Being. Psalm 71.19. Thy righteousness also, O God,
is very high, who has done great things: O God, who is like unto thee? And
there can be but one most Perfect and Excellent Being.

Q. 3. But does not the Scripture say in 1 Cor. 8.5. That there are Gods many,
and Lords many?

A. Yes, there are many in Title, and many in opinion; but one only in Truth.
Jer. 10.10. But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an
everlasting King.

Q. 4. Why is he called the true God?

A. To distinguish him from the Idols and false Gods of the Heathens. 1 These.
1.9. How ye turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God. Acts
14.15. We preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vanities unto the
living God, which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are
therein.

Q. 5. Why is he called the living God?

A. Because all life, natural, spiritual, and eternal, is in him, and from him
only. First, Natural Life. Acts 17.28. For in him we live, and move, and have
our being. Secondly, Spiritual Life. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were
dead in trespasses and sins. Thirdly, Eternal life in glory. Col. 3.4. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory.

Q. 6. What is the first Instruction from hence?

A. If but one God, then all his Children should be of one heart, having one
and the same Father. Ephesians. 4.5, 6. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

Q. 7. What is the second Inference from hence?

A. That it is Idolatry to perform worship to any other but God only. Psalm
86.9, 10. All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee,
O Lord, and shall glorify thy name, for thou art great, and do wondrous
things, thou art God alone.

Q. 8. What is the Third Inference from it?

A. That our supreme love is due to God only, and it is very sin^ul to place it
on any other. Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord; and
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might.

Q. 9. What is the Fourth Inference from God's Unity?

A. That God only must have the reliance and dependence of our Souls. Ier.
17.5, 7. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, that
makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. Blessed is the
man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

Q. 10. What is the last Inference from it?

A. That we have great cause to be thankful for the Gospel, which discovers the
only true God to us, and that we are not as the Heathens, worshipping many and
false Gods. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. For though there be that are called gods, whether in
heaven, or in earth, as there be Gods many, and Lords many; but to us there is
but one God, the father of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Of three Persons in the Godhead.
Quest. 6. HOW many Persons are there in the Godhead?

A. There are three Persons in the Godhead, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one God, the same in substance, equal in Power and
Glory.

Q. 1. What mean you by the word Godhead?

A. It is the Nature, Essence, or Being of God, as the Apostle speaks; Acts
17.29. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think
that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art, and
man's device.

Q. 2. What is a Person in the Godhead?

A. It is the Godhead distinguished by personal Properties; each person having
his distinct personal Properties. Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his
glory, and the express image of his person, upholding all things by the word of
his power.

Q. 3. How does it appear there are three persons, and no more?

A. First, From Christ's Baptism. Matt. 3.16, 17. And Jesus when he was
baptized, went up straitway out of the water, and Io, the heavens were opened
unto him, and he saw the spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting
upon him, and lo a voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I
am well pleased.

Q. 4. How else, in the second place, does it appear?

A. From the Institution of our Baptism. Mat. 28.19. Go ye therefore, teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, of the son, and of the holy
ghost.

Q. 5. What is the third Proof from Scripture?

A. From the Apostolical Benediction. 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you
all, Amen. Where three distinct blessings are wished, from the three divine
persons in the Godhead; Grace from Christ, Love from the Father, and Communion
with the Spirit.

Q. 7. What farther evidence is there of it in the Scripture?

A. From plain, positive assertions of the Scripture, asserting, First, A
Trinity of Persons. Secondly, A Unity of Essence. 1 Ioh. 5.7. For there are
three that bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy Ghost, and
these three are one.

Q. 7. What is the first Instruction from the Trinity?

A. That the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ, is fully confirmed and
ratified by three witnesses from Heaven, who are above all exceptions. 1 Ioh.
5.7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and
the Holy Ghost.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruction from the Trinity?

A. Hence we learn the true order and manner of worshipping God in the Son.
Ioh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you.
And by the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always, with all prayer and supplication
in the spirit.

Q. 9. What is the third Instruction from the Trinity?

A. That the Covenant of Grace conveys a rich portion to Believers, in making
over all three persons to them. Ier. 31.33. But this shall be the covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I will
put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people.

Q. 10. What is the fourth Instruction from the Trinity?

A. That as it is the duty of all the Saints to give distinct glory to the
three persons in the Godhead; so it will be a special part of their blessedness
in Heaven, to contemplate the distinct benefits received from them all. Rev.
1.5. And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, and the first begotten
of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; unto him that loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Of God's Decrees.
Quest. 7. WHat are the Decrees of God?

A. The Decrees of God are his eternal purpose, according to the counsel of his
will, whereby for his own glory he has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass.

Q. 1. What things are Decreed of God?

A. All things whatsoever come to pass, even the smallest. Ephesians. 1.11. In whom
also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him who works all thing* after the counsel of his own will.

Q. 2. What is the End of God's Decrees?

A. The Glory of his own Name. Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Who works all things according
to the counsel of his own will, that we should be to the praise of his glory
who first trusted in Christ.

Q. 3. But there are some evil things done in the World, do they fall under
God's Decree?

A. Though God does neither approve them, nor necessitate men to commit them,
yet he does permit and suffer them to be done, and will turn them to his own
Glory. Acts 4.27, 28. For of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou
have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel are gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy
counsel determined before to be done.

Q. 4. Who are the Objects of God's Special Decrees?

A. Angels and Men are the Objects of God's Special Decrees. 1 Timothy 5.21. I
charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that
thou observe these things, etc. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's elect?

Q. 5. What is the First Property of God's Decrees?

A. That they are most wise Acts of God laid in the depth of Wisdom and Counsel
Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Q. 6. What is the Second Property of God's Decrees?

A. The Decrees of God are most free, all flowing from the mere pleasure of his
Will. Romans 9.18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom
he will he hardens.

Q 7. What is the Third Property of God's Decrees?

A. They are most firm and stable. 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless, the foundation of
God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, Zech.
6.1.

Q. 8. What is the fourth Property of God's Decrees?

A. They are eternal, and before all time, Acts 15.18. Known unto God are all
his works, from the beginning of the world.

Q. 9. What is th Fifth Property of God's Decrees?

A. They are most pure, and altogether unspotted of sin, 1 John 1.5. This is
the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, That God ie
light, and in him is no darkness at all.

Q. 10. What is the First Instruction from God's Decrees?

A. That we ought to ascribe nothing to Chance, but to the appointment or
providence of God. Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposing thereof is of the Lord.

Q. 11. What is the Second Instruction from God's Decrees?

A. That God's hand is to be acknowledged in the greatest Afflictions that
befalls us. 2 Samuel 16.11. And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants,
Behold, my son which came forth of my bowels seeks my life, how much more now
may this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has
bidden him.

Q. 12. What is the last Instruction from God's Decrees?

A. That we ought to be thankful to God for all the good, and patient under all
the evils that befall us. Job 2.10. Shall we receive good at the hand of God,
and shall we not receive evil?

Of the Creation.
Quest. 9. WHAT are the Works of Creation?

A. The Work of Creation is, God's making all things of nothing, by the Word of
his Power, in the space of Six Days, and all very good.

Q 1. What is it to create?

A. To create, is to give a Being to that which had no Being; or to bring
something out of nothing. Heb. 11.3. Through Faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen, were not
made of things that do appear.

Q. 2. How did God create the world?

A. By his infinite Power, executed in his Word of Command. Psalm 33.6.9. By
the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth; for he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood
fast.

Q. 3. What Attributes of God shine forth in the Creation?

A. The Wisdom of God shines forth gloriously, not only in their formation, but
dependence one upon another. Psalm 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works!
in wisdom have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches.

Q. 4. What may we learn from the Creation?

A. That God perfectly knows all that is in the Creature, be it never so
secret. Psalm 94.8, 9. Understand, O ye brutish among the people; and ye fools,
when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that
formed the eye, shall he not see?

Q. 2. What Is the Second Instruction from the Creation?

A. That God is the rightful owner of us all, and may do what he will with us.
Romans 9.20. Nay, but O man, who art thou that reply against God! Shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not
the porter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel to honor,
and another to dishonor?

Q. 6. What is the Third Instruction from the Creation?

A. That God only is the proper Object of Worship. Ier. 10. 11. Thus shall he
say unto them, The Gods that have not made the heavens, and the earth, even
they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens.

Q. 7. What is the Fourth Instruction from hence?

A. That Christians should not fear the power of Creatures, since they derive
their Being and Power from God. Isa. 54.16, 17. Behold I have created the Smith
that blows the coals in the fire, that brings forth an instrument for his
work; and I have created the waster to destroy, no weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper.

Q. 8. What is the Fifth Instruction hence?

A. That Atheism is a sin against Natural Light and Reason. Romans 1.20. For the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and godhead; so
that they are without excuse.

Q 9. What is the Sixth Instruction hence?

A. That God's Glory is the end of all Being. Col. 1.16. For by him were all
things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers,
all things were created by him and for him.

Q. 10. What is the Seventh Instruction hence?

A. That there is an unnatural rebellion in sin, smiting at him that made and
preserves our Being. Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, and
they have rebelled against me.

Q. 11. What is the Eighth Instruction from hence?

A. That God can in a moment revive and save the Church, when at the lowest
ebb. Isa. 65.18. Behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

Q 12 What is the last Instruction from hence?

A. That it is easy with God to revive a dejected Soul. Isa. 57.19. I create
the fruit of the lips; Peace peace to him that is far off, and t^ him that is
near, says the Lord, and I will heal him.

Of Man's Creation.
Quest. 10. HOW did God create Man?

A. God created Man Male and Female, after his own Image, in Knowledge,
Righteousness, and Holiness, wi^h dominion over the Creatures.

Q. 1. How did God create Man?

A. God created man in his own Image. Genesis 1.27. So God created man in his own
image, in the image of God created he him, male and female created he them,

Q. 2. What is meant by the Image of God?

A. Not a resemblance of God in any bodily Shape or Figure, but in holiness.
Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on that new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness.

Q. 3. In what Graces did Man resemble God?

A. In such a knowledge of God himself, and the Creatures, which made him
happy. Col. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that created him.

Q. 4. In what other Graces did this Image consist?

A. In Righteousness as well as Holiness. Ephesians. 4.24. And that ye put on that
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

Q. 5. What is the First Inference from hence?

A. The deplorable misery of the Fall. Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned.

Q 6. What is the Second Instruction hence?

A. The beauty of Holiness, which is the Image of God, and the Excellency of
Man. Psalm 16.3. But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent,
in whom is all my delight.

Q 7. What is the Third Instruction from hence?

A. We have infinite cause to bless God for Christ, who repairs this lost Image
in his people. Ephesians. 4.23. And be renewed in the spirit of your mind.

Q 8. What is the Fourth Instruction from hence?

A. That the despisers of Holiness are the despisers of God; for Holiness is
God's Image.

Q 9 What Is the Fifth Instruction from hence?

A The excellency of Sanctification, which defaces the Image of Satan, and
draws the Image of God upon the Soul of man.

Of Divine Providence.
Qest. 1 WHAT are God's Works of Providence?

A. God's Works of Providence, are his just, holy, wise, and powerful
preserving and governing all his Creatures, and all their Actions.

Q 1 How does it appear there is a Divine Providence?

A. It appears by plain Scripture Testimonies. Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things
by the word of his power. Col. 1.17. By him all things consist. Luke 12.6, 7.
Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten
before God; but even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

Q 2 How else is Providence evidenced?

A. By Scripture Emblems as Jacob 's Ladder. Genesis 28.12, 13. Ana he dreamed,
and behold a ladder set upon the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven;
behold the Angels of God ascended, and descended on it: And Ezekiel 's wheels,
Ezekiel 1.20. VVhithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
spirit to go, and the wheels were lifted up over against them, for the spirit
of the livi^g creature was in the wheels.

Q. 3. What further Scripture evidence is there?

A The sure accomplishment of Scripture Predictions, as Israel 's Captivity,
and Deliverance from Egypt and Babylon, Christ's Incarnation, the Rise and Ruin
of the Four Monarchies. Dan. 2.31. Thou, O King, saw, and behold a great
Image, whose brightnest was excellent, stood before thee, and the form thereof
was terrible. Dan. 7.3. And four great beasts came up from the Sea, diverse one
from the other.

Q 4. What is it is first Act about the Creatures?

A. It sustains, preserves, provides for them. Psalm 145.15, 16. The eyes of
all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season; thou openest
thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing, and defendest them
from danger. Psalm 36. 6. Thy righteousness is like the great mountains, thy
judgments are a great deep, O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.

Q. 5. What is the Second Act of Providence about the Creatures?

A. It rules and governs the Creatures and their Actions. Psalm 66.7. He rules
by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations; let not the rebellions
exalt themselves.

Q. 6. How manifold is Divine Providence?

A. It is common and general over all, or special and peculiar to some men. 1 Timothy 4.10. Who is the savior of all men, especially of those that believe.

Q. 7. How is Providence exercised about sinful Actions?

A. In permitting them. Acts 4.16. In restraining them. Psalm 76.10. Surely the
wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.
And overruling them to good. Genesis 50.20. But as for you, ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to
save much people alive.

Q. 8. What are the Properties of Providence?

A. It is (1) holy. Psalm 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works. (2) Wise. Psalm 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all. (3.) Powerful. Dan. 4.35. And all the
inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his
will, in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none
can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou?

Q. 9. What is the First Instruction from it?

A. That God's people are safe amidst all their enemies and dangers. 2 Chronicles.
16.9. For the eyes of the Lords run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to
show himself strong in the behalf of them whose hearts are perfect toward him.

Q. 10. What is the Second Instruction?

A. That Prayer is the best expedient to prosperity, and success of our lawful
affairs. Psalm 145.18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to
all that call upon him in truth.

Q. 11. What is the Third Instruction from it?

A. That God's people should rest quietly in the care of his providence for
them in all their straits. Matt. 6.26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they
sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet our heavenly father
feeds them; are ye not much better than they?

Q. 12. What is the last Instruction from it?

A. That it is no small privilege to be adopted Children of God, and the
Members of Christ, for all is ordered for their eternal Good. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things
to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him, that fills all in all.

Of the Covenant of Works.
Quest. 12. WHAT special Art of Providence did God exercise toward Man, in the
estate wherein he was created?

A. When God had created Man, he entered into a Covenant of Life with him, upon
condition of perfect obedience, forbidding him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil upon pain of Death.

Q. 1. What was God's Covenant with Adam before the Fall?

A. It was to give Life and Happiness upon condition of perfect personal
Obedience. Gal. 3.12. The law is not of faith; but the man that does them,
shall live in them.

Q. 2. Was this Covenant made only with Adam, or with him and his Posterity?

A. It was made with him, and all his natural Posterity, descending in the
ordinary way of Generation from him. Romans 4.12. Wherefore as by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. v. 14 and 18. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to
Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come: Therefore as by the
offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life.

Q. 3. Was Adam able to preform the obedience required of him in that Covenant?

A. Yes; for he was made upright. Eccles. 7.29. God made man upright, but they
have sought out themselves many inventions.

Q. 4. Had this Covenant any Mediator?

A. No, he neither had, nor needed any Mediator for satisfaction; because no
sin was in him; nor intercession, for he wanted nothing.

Q. 5. Did this Covenant admit of no repentance, nor accept any short
Endeavors?

A. No, it did not; but sentenceth and curses the Transgressors of it, for the
least breach. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the law to do them.

Q. 6. How was the threatening fulfilled, of dying in the day he eat, seeing he
lived 930 years?

A. He died spiritually, that day; and though the sentence on his body was
respited in order to posterity, yet then his body received the death wound, of
which afterward he died.

Q. 7. What is the first Inference from Adam's Covenant?

A. Miserable are all they that grow on the natural root of the first Adam.
Gal. 4.21.22. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law. Do ye not hear the
law? for it is wrrtten, That Abraham had two sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the
other by a Freewoman.

Q. 8. What is the second Inference?

A. That God is just in all the punishments and miseries that came upon Man,
yea, Infants, that never sinned after his similitude. Romans 5.14. Nevertheless
death reigned from Adam, to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression.

Q. 9. What is the third Inference?

A. The glorious privilege of believers, who are under a better covenant,
established upon better promises. Heb. 8.6. But now has he obtained a more
excellent ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better covenant,
which is established upon better promises.

Q. 10. What is the last Inference?

A. That we should pity the unregenerate, especially our own among them; and
labor to plant them in the second Adam.

Of the Fall of Man.
Quest. 13. DID our first Parents continue in the estate wherein they were
created?

A. Our first Parents being left to the freeedom of their own w^ll, fell from
thee estate wherein they were created, by sinning against God.

Q. 1. How does it appear that man is fallen?

A. By the Scripture History, an account of it in Genesis 3.6, 7. And when the
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof,
and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat. And the
eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked, and they
sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves Aprons, and they heard the voice
of the Lord God walking in the garden, in the cool of the day, and Adam and his
wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God, amongst the trees if the
garden. And the sad experience we all have of it in our own selves. Romans 5.12.
Therefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Q. 2. How could man fall, since he was made upright?

A. Though he was upright, yet his will was mutable; and by abusing that
liberty, he fell. Eccles. 7.29. Lo this only have I found, that God has made
man upright, but they have sought out many inventions.

Q. 3. How did God leave him to abuse the freedom of will?

A. Not by inclining him to abuse it; but by withholding that further grace
which he was no way obliged to continue to him.

Q. 4. Did the will of man lose its liberty to good, by the Fall?

A. Yes, it did, and is so wounded, that it cannot without preventing and
regenerating grace put forth one spiritual and saving act. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. For
by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the
gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast; for we are all his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc.

Q. 5. What was the aggravation of Adam's Sin?

A. It was aggravated in his being a public innocent person, so newly placed
in a State of Happiness and Liberty.

Q, 6. What is the first inference from the Fall?

A. That the best Creature left to himself, cannot be long safe; as the Angels,
and Adam. Psalm. 49.12. Nevertheless man being in honor abides not, he is like
the beast that perish.

Q. 7. What is the second Inference?

A. That since man could not be his own keeper, he can be much less his own
Savior. 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our s^lves; but our sufficiency is of God.

Q. 8. What is the third Inference?

A. That it is impossible for the covenant of works to justify any one. Romans
3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight. Romans 8.3. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through
the flesh; God sending his own son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh.

Q. 9. What is the last Inference?

A. What cause have we to bless God for Christ, who recovered us when the Fall
left us helpless? Romans 5.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly.

Of Sin.
Quest. 14. WHAT is Sin?

A. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the law of God.

Q. 1. What is meant by the Law?

A. The Commands and Rules flowing from God's Sovereignty, whereby his will is
manifested, and the Creature bound to obedience.

Q. 2. Where is this Law written?

A. It is written either in the heart, Romans 2.15. Which shows the work of the
law written in their hearts, which we call the law of nature. Or in the Bible,
which we call the written Moral Law.

Q. 3. What conformity is due to this Law of God?

A. A two fold conformity is due to it. First, Internal, in our hearts.
Secondly; External, in our lives; and the want of either is sin, 1 Ioh. 3.4.
Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law; for sin is the
transgression of the law.

Q 4. How does it appear that the want of internal conformity is sin?

A. Because the Law requires it. Mark 12.30. And thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength; for this is the first commandment. And condemns the want
of it, Romans 7.7. What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid; nay, I had
not known sin but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not covet.

Q 5. Is nothing a sin but what is against God's Law?

A No, nothing can be a sin but what God has either expressly, or by
consequence forbidden in his word.

Q 6 Wherein lies the evil of transgressing God's Laws?

A. The evil of sin principally lies in offense and wrong done to God, whose
sovereignty it labors to shake off, and despises his will. Psalm. 31.4. Against
thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.

Q. 7. What further evil is in sin?

A. It highly wrongs the Sinner's Soul, by defacing, defiling, and damning it.
Prove. 8.36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: all they
that hate me, love death.

Q. 8. Wherein is the evil of sin manifested?

A. It Is manifested in the death of Christ, the terrors of Conscience, and
torments of Hell.

Q. 9. What course must the Sinner take to recover himself out of his misery?

A. Repentance toward God, faith toward Christ; and both evidenced by new
obedienc^. Acts 20.21. Testifying both to the Jew, and also to the Greeks,
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 10. What may we infer from hence?

A. That we have infinite cause to bless God for Christ's satisfaction of the
Law for our Sins.

Of the Tree of Knowledge.
Quest. 15. WHat is the sin whereby our first Parents fell from the Estate
wherein they were created?

A. The sin whereby our first Parents fell from the Estate wherein they were
created, was their eating the forbidden fruit.

Q. 1 Why was this Tree called the Tree of Knowledge?

A. Not from any natural efficacy it had to give knowledge; but the Knowledge
he should have by eating, or not eating, was experimental Knowledge, (i. ^.)
Knowledge to his Sorrow.

Q. 2. Why did God forbid him this Tree?

A. First, For the discovery of his dominion over man. Secondly, For the trial
of his subjection and obedience. Thirdly, For the aggravation of his sin, if he
should eat.

Q. 3. What evil was there in eating of it?

A. There was a twofold Evil, the evil of Sin, and the evil of Punishment, both
very great.

Q. 4. What was the Evil of Sin?

A. A threefold Evil of Sin. First, Against God, called disobedience. Romans
5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners. Secondly,
Against himself, Soul, Body, and Estate. Thirdly, Against his Posterity. Romans
5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and
so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Q 5. What was the Evil of Punishment?

First, Loss of God's Image. Secondly, Horror of Conscience. Thirdly, Sorrow on
the Female Sex. Fourthly, Curse on the Creature. Fifthly, Expulsion from
Paradise. Sixthly, Death both of Body and Soul.

Q 6. What is the first Instruction from it?

A. To take heed of small beginnings of Temptations, and resist it in the first
motions. Iam. 3.5. Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles.

Q. 6. What is the second Inference?

A. Not to hold a parley with the tempter. See 2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by
any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty; so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

Q. 8. What is the third Inference?

A. That Satan's policy lies much in the choice of his tempting instruments; as
Eve and Peter, etc.

Q. 9. What is the fourth Inference?

A. A necessity of keeping strong-guards on our Senses. Isa. 33.15. That
stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing
evil, he shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munition of
rocks.

Q. 10. What is the fifth Inference?

A That Covenant Breaking is a heinous sin, which God will punish. Hos. 8.1. He
shall come as an Eagle against the house of the Lord, because they have
transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my laws.

Q. 11. What is the last Inference?

A. That the corruption of our nature is much seen in desiring forbidden
things. Romans 7.7. What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid: Nay, I
had not known sin, but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not covet.

Of the Fall of Adam, and ours in him.
Quest. 16. DId all Mankind fall in Adam's first transgression?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but for his
posterity; all mankind descending from him by ordinary Generation, sinned in
him, and fell with him in his first transgression.

Q. 1. Did no man ever escape the Sin of Adam?

A. Yes, The man Christ Jesus did, and he only. Heb. 7.26. For such an high
priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.

Q. 2. Why was not Christ tainted with it?

A. Because he came into the world in an extraordinary way. Mat. 1.18. Now the
birth of Christ was on this wise, when as his mother Mary was espoused to
Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.

Q. 3. How does it appear all others are tainted with it?

A. It appears by Scripture-Testimony. Romans 5.12. Wherefore as by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. And experience of the best men. Romans 7.21. I find then a
law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

Q. 4. How came all men to fall with Adam?

A. Because all were included in Adam 's Covenant, as a Man's Covenant includes
his Children before they be born; or the treason of the father affects his
posterity.

Q. 5. What infer you from hence?

A. The stupendous wisdom of God in sending Christ in our nature, and yet
without the sin and taint of it. 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the wisdom of God.

Q. 6. What is the second Inference?

A. Hence we learn the admirable love of Christ in taking our nature, with all
the sinless Infirmities thereof. Romans 8.3. For what the law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

Q. 7. What is the third Inference?

A. The necessity of our Union with Christ, in order to our participation of
his Righteousness and Redemption. 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all die, so in
Christ shall all be made alive.

Q. 8. What is the fourth Inference?

A. Hence we learn the malignant and mortal nature of sin, in as much as our
sin defiled and destroyed a whole world.

Q. 9. What is the fifth Inference?

A. That though all be not equally sensible of their need, yet one sinner needs
Christ as much as another.

Q. 10. What is the last Inference?

A. That no man has any cause or reason to boast of the goodness of his
nature, since the best were by nature under the same sin and misery as the
worst. Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in
the lust of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind,
and were by nature the children of wrath even as others.

Of Original Sin.
Quest. 17. INto what Estate did the Fall bring Mankind?

A. The Fall brought Mankind into an Estate of Sin and Misery.

Q. 18. Wherein consists the sinfulness of that Estat^ whereinto Man fell?

A. The fullness of that Estate whereinto man fell, consists in the guilt of
Adam^s first Sin, the want of original Righteousness, and corruption of his
^^ole Nature, which is commonly called original Sin; together with all actual
Transgressions which proceed from sin.

Q. 1. How many sorts of Sin are all men under?

A. All men are guilty before God of two sorts of Sin; of Original, and Actual.
Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me. Eccles. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and
sins not

Q. 2. How can we be guilty of Adam's first Sin?

A. We are guilty of it, because Adam sinned not only as a single, but also as
a public Person, and representative of all Mankind. Romans 5.15, 16, 17. But not
as the offense; so also (...) the free gift; for if through the offense of one,
many be dead: much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by
one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many, and not as it was by one that
sinned, so is the gift; for the judgment was by one to condemnation.

Q 3. How else came we under his guilt?

A. We are guilty of his Sin by Generation, for we were in his loins; as
treason stains the blood of the posterity, or the parents Leprosy the
Children. Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shape^ in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me.

Q 4. Wherein does it consist?

A. It consists in two things. First, In our aversation and enmity to that
which is good. Romans 7.18. In me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good
thing. Secondly, In proneness to that which is evil. Romans 7.14. But I am
carnal, sold under sin.

Q 5. Is this corruption of Nature in all Men?

A. Yes, In all mere men and women, none exempted. Romans 3.10. and 23. As it is
written, There is none righteous, no not one, for all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God.

Q. 6. In what part of our Nature does this Sin abide?

A. It abides in the whole man, in every part of man, both Soul and Body. Genesis
6.5. God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. 1 These.
5.23. Now the God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole
spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Q. 7. How is the Body infected by it?

A. In the readiness of the bodily members to further sin, and its temptations
in the Soul. Romans 3.13, 14, 15. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their
tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips, whose
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shedblood.

Q. 8. What learn we from Original Sin?

A. To bear patiently the miseries we see on our Children, and their death also
without murmuring. Romans 5.14. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses,
even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression.

Q. 9. What is the second Instruction?

A. It teaches us humility, and should be matter of confession and humiliation,
when we sin actually. Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me.

Q. 10. What is the third Instruction?

A. It should provoke parents to use their utmost diligence for the conversion
of their Children, who draw sin from them.

Q 11. What is the last Instruction?

A. It teaches us the necessity of Regeneration, and should provoke us greatly
to desire it.

Of Man's Misery.
Quest. 19. WHat is the Misery of that Estate whereinto Man fell?

A. All Mankind by their Fall lost communion with God, are under his wrath and
curse; and so made liable to all miseries in this life, to death it self, and
to the pains of Hell for ever.

Q. 1. What communion had God with Man before the Fall?

A. Man then enjoyed the gracious presence and favor of God with him, which
was better than life.

Q. 2. How does it appear this was lest by the Fall?

A. It appears by Scripture-Testimony, That Adam lost it as to himself. Genesis
3.8 And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God,
among the trees of the garden. And we in him. Ephesians. 2.12. At that time ye were
without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.

Q. 3. Was this the only misery that came by the Fall?

A. No; Man did not only lose communion with God, but fell under his wrath and
curse. Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature children of wrath, even as others.

Q. 4. Does the wrath and curse of God then lie on all Men?

A. It lies on all the unregenerate in the world. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which is written in the book of the law,
to do them. But believers are delivered from it by Christ. 1 These. 1.10. Even
Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.

Q. 5. How are the miseries of Man by the Fall divided?

A. They are divided into the miseries of this world, and of the world to come.

Q 6. What are the miseries that come on them in thss world?

A. The miseries of life; as Sickness, Pain, Poverty on the Body, Fear,
Trouble, Sorrow on the Mind, and at last Death it self Romans 6. ult. The wages
of sin is death.

Q. 7. What are the Miseries after this Life?

A. The Pains and Torments of Hell for ever. Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be
turned into hell.

Q. 8. What are the Torments of Hell?

A. Pain of Loss, and Pain of Sense. Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire.

Q. 9. What learn you from hence?

A. The woeful State of the unconverted. Miserable here, and miserable to
Eternity.

Q. 10. What else learn we hence?

A. The great salvation Believers have by Christ from all this misery. Heb.
2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him.

Of the Salvation of God's Elect, and of the Covenant of Grace.
Quest. 20. DID God leave all Mankind to perish in the State of Sin and Misery?

A. God having out of his mere good pleasure from all eternity, elected some to
everlasting life, di^ enter into a covenant of grace, to deliver them out of
the estate of sin and misery; and to bring them into an estate of salvation by
a redeemer.

Q. 1. Are some Persons chosen to salvation, and others left?

A. Yes: God has chosen some to salvation, and passed by others; as the
Scriptures speak. See Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he
also called. And Jude v. 4. For there are certian men crept in unawares, who
were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, etc.

Q 2. Did God choose some because he foresaw they would be better than others?

A. No: God's choice was not on foreseen works; but merely of his grace, and
good pleasure of his will. Ephesians. 1.5.6. Having predestined us into the
adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace.

Q. 3. Is this Election of God made in time, and that according as men use
their free will, or from Eternity?

A. Election is an Eternal act of God before the world was, and depends not on
Man's using his free will; as appears from Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has
chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in love.

Q. 4. Shall all that be Elected, be called, and saved?

A. Yes, the Scripture is full and plain for it. Acts 13.48. And when the
Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and as
many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom he
did predestinate, them he also called, etc.

Q. 5. By whom are the Elect saved?

A. By Christ the only Redeemer. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. But after that the kindness,
and love of God our Savior toward man appeared not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy, he saved us, by washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

Q. 6. Is there no other way of Salvation but by Christ?

A. No, no other way is revealed in Scripture. Acts 4.12. Neither is there
salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved.

Q 7. What learn you from God's Election?

A. What cause we have to admire Free Grace in our choice, who were no better
than others. Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature children of wrath, even as others.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruct^on?

A It teaches us humility, we made not our selves to differ; but the free grace
of God made the difference. 1 Cor. 4.7. For who makes thee to differ from
another?

Q. 9. What is the third Instruction?

A. It teaches us diligence to make our Election sure to our selves, by our
calling. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make
your calling and election sure.

Q. 10. What is the fourth Instruction?

A. It is matter of comfort to God's Elect, amidst all dangers in the world. 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal,
The Lord knows them that are his.

Of the Covenant of Grace.
Quest. 1. WHat is the Covenant of Grace?

A. It is a new compact or agreement made with Sinners, out of mere grace,
wherein God promises to be our God, and that we shall be his people, and to
give everlasting life to all that believe in Christ. Ier. 31.33. But this shall
be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days,
says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Q 2. How does this covenant differ from the Covenant of works?

A. They differ many ways; but principally in three things. First, The Covenant
of works had no Mediator; the Covenant of Grace has a Mediator. Heb. 12.24 And
to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant. Secondly, In the former, no place
was found for repentance. In the Second, God admits it. Heb. 8.10. For this is
the covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my laws in their minds, and write them in their hearts,
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. Ver. 12. For I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins will I remember no
more. Thirdly, In their condition* the former requires exact Obedience, the
latter Faith, and sincere Obedience. Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved.

Q. 3. May a Sinner that has no worthiness at all of his own, be taken into
the Covenant of Grace?

A. Yes, he may. Isa. 43 25. I, even I, am he, that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. This Covenant
is not of Works, but of Grace. Romans 11.5, 6. And if by grace, then it is no
more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works then it
is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work.

Q 4. Is this Covenant changeable, or an unchangeable Covenant?

A. No, it is not changeable, but everlasting and unchangeable forever. Isa.
54.10. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee.

Q. 5. What are the principal things bestowed in this Covenant?

A. God himself, and in and with him pardon and salvation. Ier. 31.33. I will
be their God, and they shall be my people.

Q. 6. Can no Sin be forgiven out of this Covenant?

A. No, God pardons none out of this Covenant. Job 3.18. But he that believes
not, is condemned already.

Q. 7. What is the first Instruction hence?

A. Humbled and believing Sinners have singular support from this New Covenant.
1 John 2.12. I write unto you little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his name sake.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruction from hence?

A. That it is the great concern of all men to examine whether they be in this
Covenant, or no. 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith,
prove your own selves; know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in
you, except y^ be reprobates.

Q. 9. What is the third Instruction?

A. See here the miserable State of the wicked, which have no interest in it.
Psalm. 50.16. But unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth?

Q. 10. What is the last Instruction?

A. That Christians are obliged to walk as people in Covenant with God 1 Pet.
2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light.

Of the only Redeemer.
Quest. 21. WHo is the Redeemer of God's Elect?

A. The only Redeemer of God's Elect, is the Lord Jesus Christ, who being the
Eternal Son of God, became man, and so was, and continues to be God and Man,
in two distinct natures, and one person for ever.

Q. 1. What does the name Redeemer signify?

A. It signifies one that frees another out of Captivity and Bondage, as Christ
did. Matt. 20.28. And to give his life a ransom for many.

Q. 2. What was the misery from which Christ delivered us?

A. A twofold misery, vis. Sin and Hell. First, Sin. Mat. 1.21. Thou shall call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. Secondly, Hell. 1
These. 1.10. Even Jesus, who delivered us from the wrath to come.

Q. 3. How did Christ deliver us from this Misery?

A. First, By Price. Sec^udly, By Power. By Price. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Ye are not
redeemed with silver and gold from your vain conversation, received by
tradition from your fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish, and without spot. By power. Col. 1.13. Who has delivered
us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his
dear son.

Q. 4. When was the Redemption wrought by Christ?

A. It was decreed from Eternity; it was actually wrought on the Cross. Col.
1.20. And having made peace through the blood of his cross* by him to reconcile
all things unto him self, by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven.

Q. 5. How then could they be redeemed that died before?

A. Though Christ's Blood was actually shed after the Old Testament believers
died; yet the virtue of Christ's Death extends to them, as well as us. Heb.
11.39, 40. And these all having obtained a good report through faith, received
not the promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that they
without us should not be made perfect.

Q. 6. Why would not God deliver us without such a Redeemer?

A Because it was not so much for the honor of his Justice. Romans ^.25. Whom
God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare
his righteousness, for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Q. 7. What is the first Instruction hence?

A. That all that are out of Christ are in a miserable Bondage, and Captivity.
John 8.36. If the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruction?

A. Hence see the heinous nature of Sin, which required such a price to satisfy
for it. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without
blemish, and without spot.

Q. 9. What is the third Iustruction hence?

A. The wonderful love of Christ in redeeming us at such a rate. Rev. 1.5. Who
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Q. 10. What is the last Instruction?

A. This strongly obliges us to an universal holiness. 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are
bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit,
which are Gods.

Of Christ's Incarnation.
Quest. 22. HOw did Christ being the Son of God become man?

A. Christ the Son of God became man, by taking to himself a true Body, and a
reasonable Soul, being conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of
the Uirgin Mary, and born of her, yet without Sin.

Q. 1* Who is the only Redeemer of God's Elect?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ is their only Redeemer, and there is no other
Redeemer besides him. Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

Q. 2. How is he the Son of God, or can be, as no other is so?

A. He is the Son of God by Nature, from all Eternity, and so no Angel or Saint
is. Heb. 1.5. For unto which of the Angels said he, at any time, Thou art my
son, this day have I begotten thee?

Q. 3 Why was it necessary he should become man?

A. That he might be capable to suffer Death in our room. Heb. 2.15, 16, 17.
For verily he took not on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham; wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

Q. 4. Why must the Redeemer be God as well as Man?

A. Because the blood of a mere man could not satisfy and redeem us. Acts
20.28. Feed the church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Q. 5. Do these two Natures make two Persons?

A. No, The Humane Nature is united to the second Person, and subsists in union
with it. John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the father, full of
grace and truth.

Q 6. Was the Union only for a time?

A. No, It continues and abides for ever. Heb. 7.24. But this man, because he
continues ever has an unchangeable (...)

Q. 7. What is the first Instruction hence?

A Hence we learn the transcendent love of God to poor Sinners. John 3.16. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Q 8. What is the second Instruction?

A. Hence we learn the matchless love of Christ, that he should stoop to such a
condition for us. 2 Cor. 8.9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
poverty might be made rich.

Q. 9 What is the third Instruction?

A. That the greatest Sins are capable of remission to Believers. John 1.29.
Behold, the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.

Q 10. What is the fourth Instruction?

A. That those that be in Christ need not fear the denial or want of an^ other
mercy. Rom 8.32. He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

Q. 11. What is the fifth Instruction?

A. Hence we learn how impious it is to ascribe any part of the glory of
redemption to any other besides Christ

Q. 12. What is the sixth Instruction?

A. This teaches us the miserable condition of all that are out of Christ, and
the necessity of their damnation, he being the only Redeemer.

Of the Manner of Christ's Incarnation.
Quest. 1. WAS Christ's Incarnation a voluntary act in him?

A. Yes, it was; for though he had a command to die for us, John 10.18. No man
takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again; Yet he came willingly. Psalm 40.6, 7.
Sacrifice and offerings thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened;
burnt offerrings, and sin offerings have thou not required; lo, I come, in the
volume of thy book, it is written of me, V. 8. I delight to do thy (...)

Q. 2. Was the Body of Christ a real and true Humane Body?

A. Yes, it was a true and real Body, not the appearance and shape of a Body
only. Luke 24.38. And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled, and why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? Ver. 29. Behold my hands, and my feet, that it
is I my self; handle me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye
see me have.

Q. 3. Had he a true Humane Soul as well as a Body?

A. Yes, he had, a real Humane Soul also, and all the natural faculties and
powers thereof. Mat. 26.38. Then says he unto them* My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death.

Q. 4. Was he then in all respects like to other men?

A. No; his conception was not like others. Isa. 7.14. Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Emanuel. And he had no sin in
him as others have. Heb. 7.26. For such an high priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners.

Q. 5. Did Christ put off the Humane Nature at his Ascension?

A. No, he did not, but carried it up to glory, and now is in our Nature in
Heaven. 1 Timothy 3.6. Received up into glory.

Q. 6. Why did he assume our Nature?

A. That he might die in it for our Salvation. Heb. 2.15. And delivered them
who through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

Q 7. Why did he rise in it after Death?

A. He raised it from the dead, for our Justification. Romans 4.25. Who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our Justification.

Q 8. Why did he ascend in our Nature into Heaven?

A. To be a Mediator of intercession in our Nature: Heb 7.25. Wherefore he is
able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them.

Q 9. What is the first Instruction from hence?

A. That the Body of Christ is not every where, but is contained in Heaven.
Acts 3.21. Whom the heaven must receive till the times of restitution of all
things.

Q. 10. What is the second Iustruction?

A. That Christ is full of tender compassions to his peoples infirmities. Heb.
4.15. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin.

Q. 11. What is the third Instruction?

A. That great and admirable is the glory designed for the bodies of Believers.
Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to
subdue all things unto himself.

Q. 12. What is the last Instruction?

A. That the bodily Eyes of Believers after the Resurrection, shall see Christ
in glory. Job 19.26, 27. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet
in my flesh shall I see God. Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another.

Of Christ's Offices.
Quest. 23. WHat Offices does Christ execute as our Redeemer?

A. Christ as our Redeemer does execute the Office of a Prophet, of a Priest,
and of a King, both in his Estate of Humiliation and Exaltation.

Q. 1. What are the States and Conditions of our Redeemer?

A. Christ's States are twofold, namely, his State of Humiliation, and his
State of Exaltation. Phil. 2.8, 9. And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name.

Q. 2. How many Offices belongs to Christ in these States?

A. Christ has a threefold Office; namely, of a Prophet, of a Priest, and of a
King.

Q. 3 Why does Christ take all these three Offices?

A. Because they are all necessary for our salvation, and we have the benefit
of them all. 1 Cor. 1.30. Who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption.

Q. 4. Can no man take Christ in one Office, and not in another?

A. No; whoever will have the benefit of any one, must receive him in all. Acts
5.31. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a prince, and a savior,
for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of Sins.

Q. 5. What respect have the Offices of Christ to the Promises?

A. The Promises flow out of them as out of their Fountain. 2 Cor. 1.20. For
all the promises of God in him, are Yea, and in him, Amen.

Q. 6. What Promises flow out of the Prophetical Office?

A. All the Promises of Illumination, Guidance and Direction flow out of
Christ's Prophetical Office.

Q. 7. What Promises flow out of the Priestly Office?

A. All the Promises of Pardon and Peace flow out of it.

Q. 8. What Promises flow out of the Kingly Office?

A. All the Prom^ses of Defense, Protection and Deliverances.

Q 2. What is the first instruction?

A. Hence we learn the compleatness of Christ for all the wants of his people.
Col. 2.10. And ye are complete in him.

Q. 10. What is the second Instruction?

A. Hence we learn the folly and misery of all Hypocrites that close partially
with Christ.

Q 11 What is the third Instruction?

A. Hence we learn the singular dignity of the Lord Jesus. None ever have all
those Offices but Christ.

Q. 12. What is the last Instruction?

A. That Faith is a considerate act; and requires much deliberation.

Of C^rist's Prophetical Office.
Quest. 24. HOW does Christ execute the Office of a Prophet?

A. Christ executes the Office of a Prophet, in revealing to us by his word
and spirit, the will of God for our salvation.

Q. 1. What does Christ's Prophetical Office imply?

A. It implies man's natural blindness and ignorance. 1 Cor. 2.14. But the
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned.

Q. 2. What ^lse does it imply?

A. That Christ is the original and fountain of all that light, which guides us
to salvation. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. For God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

Q. 3. How does Christ teach men the will of God.

A. He does it by external Revelation of it. Acts 3.22. For Moses truly said
unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall
say unto you. And by internal illumination. Luke 24.45. Then opened he their
understanding, that they might understand the Scripture.

Q. 4 What need then of man's ministry?

A. Very much; for Christ has instituted Ministers as instruments, by whom he
will teach us. Ephesians. 4 11, 12. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins.

Q. 5. Can no man savingly know the will of God without the teachings of Christ?

A. No; though common knowledge may be obtained in a natural way, yet not
saving. Mat. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered, and said, I thank thee, O
father, Lord of heaven and earth; because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.

Q. 6. How appears it that Christ is appointed to this office?

A. We have the written word for it. Acts 3.22. A prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all
things, whatsoever he shall say unto you.

Q. 7. What is the first Instruction hence?

A. None need be discouraged at their natural weakness, if Christ be their
Teacher. Mat. 11.25. At that time Jesus answered, and said, I thank thee, O
father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Psalm. 19.7. The
testimonies of the Lord are sure, making wise the simple.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruction?

A. That it is a dreadful judgment to be spiritually blinded under the Gospel. 2
Cor. 4.3, 4. But if our Gospel be kid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom
the God of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine
into them.

Q. 9. What is the third Instruction?

A. That Prayer is the best Expedient to obtain saving Knowledge. Iam. 1.5. If
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

Q 10. What is the last Instruction?

A. Learn hence the transcendent excellency of the Knowledge of Christ above
all other knowledge. Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea doubtless, I count all things but loss,
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

Of Christ's Priesthood.
Quest. 25. HOW does Christ execute the Office of a Priest?

A. Christ executes the Office of a Priest, in his once offering up of himself
a sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice, and reconciling us to God, and in making
continual intercession for us.

Q. 1. What is the Priesthood of Christ in general?

A. It is his expiation of our Sins by the sacrifice of himself* and obtaining
God's favor for us. Col. 1.20. And having made peace through the blood of his
cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they
be things in heaven, (...) things in earth.

Q. 2. What are the parts of Christ's Priestly Office?

A. It has two parts. First, Oblation, or offering of himself. Heb. 9.14. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God. Secondly, Intercession for us. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able
also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them.

Q 3. What is the end of Christ's Oblation?

A. The end of it as to God, it was to satisfy his Incensed Justice. Romans 3.25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation (...)mission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God. And as to men, to put away their sins.
Heb. 9.26. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
world, but now once in the end of the world, he has appeared to put away sin
by the sacrifice of himself.

Q. 4. What is the first difference between Christ and other Priests?

A. Other Priests offered the Blood of Beasts; Christ his own Blood. Heb. 9.12.
Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he entered in
once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.

Q. 5. What is the second difference?

A. They offered many Sacrifices; Christ perfected all by one offering. Heb.
10.14. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Q. 6. What was the sacrifice Christ offered to God?

A. His Body. Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. And his Soul. Isa. 53.10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin.

Q. 7. Whence is the efficacy of this Sacrifice?

A. From the Divine Person to whom that Soul and Body was united. Acts 20.28.
Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Q. 8. What is the first Inference from it?

A. That Believers are discharged by Christ from all their sins and debts. Acts
13.36. And by him all that believe are justified from all things.

Q. 9. What is the second Inference?

A. That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of an absolute God. Luke
23.31. For if they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the
dry?

Q. 10. What is the third Inference?

A. That it is impossible for man to satisfy God for his own Sins. Psalm. 130.3.
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?

Q. 11. What is the last Inference?

A. That the Christian Religion only settles the conscience in peace. Heb.
9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to
serve the living God?

Of Christ's Kingly Office.
Quest. 26. HOW does Christ execute the Office of a King?

A. Christ executes the Office of a King in subduing us to himself, in ruling
and defending us, and restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies.

Q. 1. How manifold is Christ's Kingdom?

A. Twofold. First, Internal in men's Souls. Luke 17.20. Behold the kingdom of
God is within you. Secondly, External over the world. Ephesians. 1.22. And has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the
Church.

Q. 2. What is the End of Christ's providential Kingdom?

A. The good and salvation of the Church. John 17.2. At thou have given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have
given him.

Q. 3. Wherein does he exercise his Kingly Power?

A. In restraining his, and his peoples enemies. Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath
of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

Q. 4. How else is it Exercised?

A. In protecting his Church amidst all Enemies. Exodus 3.3. And Moses said, I
will now turn aside, and see this gre^^ sight, why the bush is not burnt.

Q. 5. What Instruments does Christ use?

A. Angels are ministering Spirit to him. Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? And
men, yea the worst of men. Rev. 12.16. And the earth helped the woman, and the
earth opened her mouth and swallowed up the Flood which the dragon cast out of
his mouth.

Q. 6. In what manner does Christ rule the world?

A. By Supreme power. Rev. 9 16. He has on his vesture and on his thigh a name
written, King of kings, Lord of lords. And perfect Wisdom. Ephesians. 1.11. In whom
also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will.

Q 7. What learn we from hence?

A. That the Church is saved amidst all dangers. Ier. 30.11. For I am with
thee, says the Lord, to save thee; though I make a full end of all nations,
whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee.

Q. 8. What is the second Instruction?

A. That the godly may safely trust to Christ's care. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. For the
eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.

Q. 9. What is the third Instruction?

A. That all plots against the Church shall surely be defeated Isa. 54.17. No
weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper.

Q 10. What is the fourth Instruction?

A. It gives the Saints full satisfaction in all conditions. Romans 8.28. And we
know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them that
^re called according to his purpose.

Q. 11. What is the last Inference?

A. We should not stand in a slavish fear of men. Isa. 51.12. I, even I am he
that comfort you; who art thou that hou should be afraid of a man, that
shall die and of the son of man which shall be made as grass?

Of Christ's Humiliation.
Quest. 27. WHerein did Christ's Humiliation consist?

A. Christ's Humiliation consists in his being born, and that in a low
condition, made under the Law, undergoing the miseries of this life, the wrath
of God, and the cursed death of the cross; in being buried, and continuing
under the power of death for a time.

Q. 1. What does Christ's humbling of himself import?

A. His voluntariness in the deepest point of Self-denial. Psalm. 40.7. Then
said I, lo I come, in the volume of the book it i^ written of me.

Q 2. What was the first act of Christ's Humiliation?

A. His taking man's Nature on him, with all its sinless Infirmities. Romans 8.3.
God sending his own son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh.

Q. 3. What is the second part of his Humiliation?

A. That mean life he lived in this world, which obscured his Divine Glory.
Mark 6.3. Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary?

Q 4. What was the first thing in Christ's Life that humbled him?

A. The poverty of it. Mat. 8.20. And Jesus says unto him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the son of man has not where
to lay his head.

Q 5. What was the second thing in his life that humbled him?

A. The Temptations of Satan, to which he was subject. Mat. 4.1. Then was Jesus
led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil, and that
for our sakes. Heb. 2.17. Wherefore in all things it behooves him to be made
like unto his brethren. v. 18. For in that he himself has s^ffered, being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

Q 6. What is the third thing in Christ that humbled him?

A. His subjection to the Law. Gal. 4.4. But when the fullness of the time was
come, God sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the law.

Q 7. What was the fourth thing in Christ's life that humbled him?

A. The Reviling and Contradictions of Sinners. Heb. 12.3. For consider him
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself.

Q. 8. Wherein was Christ humbled in his death?

A. His death was painful and ignominious. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. For it is written, Cursed
is every one that hangs o^ a tree. Made a curse for us* and deserted in it.
Mat. 27.46. And about the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying;
Eli, Eli, Lamasabachthani, that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

Q 9. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That lowliness and humility becomes Christ's Followers. Mat. 11.29. Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart.

Q. 10. What is the second Inference?

A. That Christ's love to Sinners is astonishingly great. 2 Cor. 8.9. For ye
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your
sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be made rich.

Q. 11. What is the third Inference?

A. Christians should be ready to suffer for Christ. 1 Pet. 4.1. Forasmuch as
Christ has suffered for us in the flesh; arm your selves likewise with the
same mind; for he that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin

Q. 12. What is the last Inference?

A. That Humiliation is the true way to Exaltation. Mat. 23.12. And whosoever
shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall
be exalted.

Of Christ's Exaltation.
Quest. 28. WHerein consists Christ's Exaltation?

A. Christ's Exaltation consists in his rising again from the dead on the third
day; in ascending up into heaven, in sitting at the right hand of God the
Father, and in coming to judge the World at the last day.

Q. 1. What is the first step of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His Resurrection from the dead.

Q. 2. How does his Resurrection appear?

A. By the Scripture Prophesies accomplished in him. 1 Cor. 15.4. And that he
was buried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the scriptures.

Q 3. Why did Christ rise again?

A. To establish our Faith, and abolish our Sins. 1 Cor. 15.17. And if Christ
be not risen, your faith is vain, you are yet in your sins.

Q. 4. What other end was there of Christ's Resurrection?

A. To declare his Divine Power. Romans 1.4. And declare^ to be the son of God
with power, according to the spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the
dead. And to evidence the fullness of his satisfaction. John 16.10. Of
rihgteousness, because I go to my father, and ye see me no more.

Q. 5. Did Christ rise in the same Body he laid down?

A. It was substantially the same. John 20.27. Then says he to Thomas, Reach
hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust
it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing.

Q. 6. What does Christ's Resurrection teach us?

A. The certainty of Resurrection after death. 1 Cor. 15.20. But now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept.

Q. 7. What was the second step of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His Ascension after forty days into Heaven. Acts 1.2, 3. Until the day in
which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given
commandments unto the Apostles, whom he had ^hosen, to whom also he showed
himself alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs, being seen of them
forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.

Q. 8. Why did Christ stay so long on Earth?

A. To assure the truth of his Resurrection, and to settle the due Government
of his Church. Acts 1.2, 3.

Q. 9. For what end did he ascend?

A. To take possession of his glory. John 17.5. And now, O father, glorify thou
me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world
was. And that as our forerunner. Heb. 6.20. VVhither the forerunner is for us
entered, even Jesus, etc.

Q. 10. In what manner did Christ ascend?

A. Triumphantly, and magnificently. Psalm. 47.5. God is gone up with a shout,
the Lord with a sound of a trumpet.

Q. 11. What does his ascension teach us?

A. Heavenly-mindedness. Col. 3.1, 2. If ye them be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God;
set your affections on things above, and not o^ things on the earth. And an
encouragement in our Christian race. Heb. 12.1, 2. Wherefore seeing we also
are compas^ed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every
^eight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with ^atience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the au^hor and finisher of
our faith. Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame, and is sat down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

The Second Part of the 28th Question of Christ's Exaltation.
Quest. 1. WHat was the Third degree of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His sitting at God's right hand in Heaven. Heb. 1.3. When he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high.

Q. 2. What does God's right hand signify?

A. A State of Honor. Heb. 1.13. But to which of the angels said he at any
time, Sit on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool? And Power.
Mat. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the son of man sitting on the right hand of
power.

Q. 3. What is implied in Christ's sitting there?

A. That his work on earth is finished. Heb. 10.11, 12. But this man after he
had offered one sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down on the right hand of God.

Q. 4. What else does it signify?

A. Christ's power over all enemies. Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall send the rod
of thy strength out of Sion; rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.

Q. 5. What learn we from Christ's sitting there?

A. The high honor Believers are advanced to by Christ. Ephesians. 2.6. And has
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus.

Q. 6. What is the last step of Christ's Exaltation?

A. His coming to Judgment. Acts 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the
people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God, to be judge of
quick and dead.

Q. 7. It is certain there shall be a Iudgment-day?

A. Yes, the Scripture assures it. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ. And every man's conscience witnesses to it. Romans
2.16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel.

Q. 8. What is the first property of Christ's Judgment?

A. It will be awful and solemn. 1 These. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the Tr^mp of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first.

Q. 9. What is the second Property of it?

A. It will be exact and critical. Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. Mat. 12.36. But I
say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of Judgment.

Q. 10. What is the third Property of it?

A. It will be an universal Judgment. Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead, small and
great, stand before God, and the books were opened.

Q. 11. How is this a part of Christ's Exaltation?

A. He now acts in the fullness of his Kingly Power. Mat. 25.34. Then shall the
King say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And this will roll
away the reproach of his enemies. Rev. 1.7. Behold he comes with clouds, and
every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him.

Q. 12. What learn we from Christ's being Judge?

A. That Believers shall not be cast in Judgment. Romans 8.1. There is therefore
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.

Q. 13. What learn we hence?

A. The deplorable State of Christless Persons. Luke 19.27. But those mine
en^mies that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay
them before me.

Q. 14. What else learn we from Christ's Judgment?

A To give all diligence to be found of him in peace. 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore
beloved, seeing that ye lock for such things, ^e diligent, that ye may be sound
of him in peace.

Of the Application of Christ.
Quest. 29. HOW are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Christ?

A. We are made par^akers of the Redemption purchased by Christ, by the
effectual Application of it to us by his Holy Spirit.

Q. 1. What did our Redemption cost Christ?

A. It cost him his own Blood to obtain it. Heb. 9.12. Neither by the blood of
Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he entered once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us.

Q. 2. Can none have the benefit of it, exceept it be applied to them?

A. No; if Christ be not applied, we cannot be saved. John 1.12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the^ Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name.

Q. 3 Whose work or office is it to apply Christ to us;

A. It Is the office and work of God's Spirit. Tit. 3.45. But after that the
kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by works of
righteousness which we have done; but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Q. 4. What Means does the Spirit use in applying Christ?

A. The external means he makes use of, is the Ministry of the Gospel. 1 Cor.
3.5. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed?

Q. 5. Is this s^fficient of it self?

A. No; the Blessing and Power of the Spirit must accompany it, or Christ
cannot be applied. 1 These. 1.5, 6. For our Gospel came not unto you in word
only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye
know what manner of men we were among you for your sake. And ye became
followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction,
with joy of the Holy Ghost.

Q. 6. To whom does the Spirit apply Christ?

A. To those that were given him of the Father before the world was. Acts
13.48. And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. John 14.17. Even
the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you.

Q. 7. Is the Application of Christ to a Soul finished at once?

A. Tho the first act of Faith unites the Soul to Christ, yet it is a continued
act. 1 Pet. 2.4. To whom coming as unto a living stone.

Q. 8. What learn you from hence?

A. What a destitute thing the Soul is that is out of Christ. Rev. 3.17, 18.
Because thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

Q. 9. What els^ does it teach us?

A. The riches and dignity of Believers. Christ, and all his purchases are
theirs. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or C^phas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Q. 10. What else does it teach us?

A. The Righteousness of God in the destruction of all unbelievers. John 5.40.
Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned.

Of our Union with Christ.
Quest. 30. HOW does the Spirit apply to us the Redemption pu^chased by Christ?

A. By working faith in us, thereby uniting us to Christ in our effectual
Calling.

Q. 1. Can none have saving benefit by Christ, but such as are united to him?

A. No; for as Adam 's Sin could not hurt us, except we had been in hin; so
Christ's Redemption cannot profit us, except we are in him. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of
him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption.

Q 2. What are the Bonds of this Union?

A. The Spirit on God's part. 1 John 3.24. And he that keeps his commandments
dwells in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, by
the spirit which he has given us. And Faith on our part. Ephesians 3.17. That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith.

Q. 3. What is the first Property of this Union?

A. It is an intimate Union. Ephesians. 5.30. For we are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones.

Q. 4. What is the second Property?

A. It is an Union never to be dissolved. Romans 8.35, 38. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? for I am persuaded, that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Q. 5. What is the third Propety of this Union?

A. It makes Christ, and all that he has purchased, become ours. 1 Cor. 3.23.
All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Q. 6. What is the fourth property of this Union?

A. It is the foundation and root of all our spiritual and acceptable
Obedience. John 15.4 Abide in me, and I in you; as the branch cannot bear fruit
of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.

Q. 7. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That saving Grace in the Saints is immortal, being sec^^red to them in and
by Christ. Col. 3.3. Your life is hid with (...) in God.

Q. 8. What is the second Inference?

A. That the relation between Christ and Believers is ver^ dear and intimate.
Ephesians. 5.30. For we are members of his (...) of his flesh, and of his bones.

Q. 9. What is the third Inference?

A. That Believers need not be afraid to go down to (...) Grave. Romans 8.38. For
I am persuaded, that neither death (...) life, -- nor any other creature shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
And this Unio^ holds after death. Mat. 22.31, 32. But as touching the
res^rection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto y^^ by
God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God (...) Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? God is not a God of the dead, but (...) the living.

Q 10. What is the fourth Inference?

A. That in wronging and persecuting the Saints, (...) wrong and persecute
Christ himself. Acts 9.4. And he fell t^ the earth, and heard a voice saying
unto him, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me?

Q. 11. What is the fifth Inference?

A. That in relieving and refreshing the Saints, we relieve and refresh Christ
himself. Mat. 25.34, 35. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, and I was
thirsty, and ye gave (...) drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in, naked
and ye cloath^^ me. I was sick, and ye visited me. I was in prison, and ye came
(...) me. Ver. 40. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the leaf of these
my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference?

A. That there is a sympathy in Christ under all the pressure^ and grievances
of his people Heb. 4.15. We have not an high priest which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, (...) was in all points tempted like as we
are, yet without sin.

Of Effectual Calling:
Quest. 31. WHAT is effectual Calling?

A. Effectual Calling is the work of God's Spirit, whereby convincing us of our
sin and misery, enlightening our minds in the knowledge of Christ, and renewing
one wills, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, freely
offered to us in the Gospel.

Q. 1. What makes the difference between effectual and ineffectual Calling?

A. Ineffectual calling is when men have nothing but the external sound of the
Gospel. Mat. 20.16. For many be called, and few chosen. Effectual is, when the
Spirit works in conjunction with the Word. John 6.45. It is written in the
prophets, And they shall be all taught of God; every man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the father, comes unto me.

Q. 2. What is the First act of the Spirit in Effectual Calling?

A. Conviction of Sin. John 16.8. And when he is come, he will reprove the
world of sin.

Q. 3. Do the Called of God hear any voice from Heaven?

A. Ordinarily it is a call without sound, yet as efficacious as an audible
Voice from Heaven.

Q. 4. What is the Second act of the Spirit in our Effectual calling?

A. The illumination of the mind in the knowledge of Christ. Acts 26.18. To
open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God.

Q. 5. In what things does it enlighten them?

A. In this, That Christ is their only remedy. Acts 4.12. Neither is there
salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we must be saved. And their all-sufficient remedy. Heb. 7.25.
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him.

Q. 6. What is the Third Act?

A. His renewing of the Sinner's will, and making it flexible. Psalm. 110.3. Thy
people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away
the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.

Q 7. Can no man come to Christ till thus enabled?

A. No, it is not in the power of man's nature or will, till thus renewed and
enabled. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us
ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him on his own
right hand in the heavenly places. John 6.44. No man can come to me except the
father which has sent me draw him.

Q 8. What sort of men are most ordinarily called?

A. The poor and mean ones in the world. 1 Cor. 1.26. For ye see your calling
brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble, are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the things which are mighty.

Q. 9. What is the first Instruction from it?

A. Souls effectually called are never lost. Romans 11.29. For the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance.

Q. 10. What is the second Instruction?

A. All things co-operare to their good. Romans 8.28. For we know that all things
work together for good to them that love God, to them who are called according
to his purpose.

Q. 11. What is the third Instruction?

A. It is dangerous to refuse God's call. Prove. 1.24. Because I have called,
and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded.

Q 12. What is the last Instruction?

A. That Christians are obliged to walk suitable to their heavenly calling. 1
These. 2.12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
kingdom and glory.

Of the Concomitants of Vocation.
Quest. 32. WHAT benefits do they that are effectually called partake of in
this Life?

A. They that are effectually called do in this life partake of Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification, and the several benefi^s which in this life do either
accompany, or flow from them.

Q. 1. Are all that be effectually called, justified?

A. Yes, God justifies all, and every Soul that obeys and answers his call.
Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them he also justified.

Q. 2. What other benefits have the called in this Life?

A. They are all the adopted Children of God. Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us
unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the
good pleasure of his will.

Q. 3. Are those all the benefits the called receive?

A. No, they are not only justified and adopted, but also sanctified. 1 Cor.
1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

Q. 4. Do these three blessings come singly to the called?

A. No, they are all accompanied with multitudes of other blessings flowing
from them. Ephesians 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all spriritual blessings, in heavenly places in Christ.

Q. 5. What are the mercies flowing from Justification?

A. They are great and manifold. Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Therefore being
justified by faith, we have p^ace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice
in the hope of the glory of God.

Q. 6. What are the benefits flowing from Adoption?

A. Free access to God. Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with
confidence by the says of him. And a Title to Heaven. Romans 8.17. If children,
then heirs.

Q. 7. What Blessings accompany Sanctification?

A. Union with Christ. Heb. 2.11. For both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified, are all of one. And Right to the Inheritance. Acts 20.32. And
now, brethren, I commend y^^ to God, and to the word of his grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
s^^ctified.

Q. 8. What is the first Lesson from hence?

A. That they are Enemies to their own Souls, who obey not the Gospel Call. 2
These. 1.8. In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 9. What is the second Lesson from hence?

A. That the Estate of Believers abounds with spiritual privileges. 1 Cor.
3.22, 23. Whether Paul, (...) Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Q. 10. What is the third Lesson from hence?

A. That all the Believer's privileges are not in hope, but some in hand. 1
John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the sons of God.

Q 11. What is the fourth Lesson?

A. The greatest sufferers for Christ have no reason to repent their call. Romans
8.18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

Q 12. What is the last Lesson from hence?

A. That we have infinite reason to bless God for the Gospel, by which we are
called. 2 These. 2.14. Whereunto he calle^ you by our Gospel.

Of Justification.
Quest. 33. WHAT is Justification?

A. Justification is an Act of God's Free Grace, wherein he pardons all our
Sins, and accepts us as righteous in his sight, only for the righteousness of
Christ imputed to us, and receivedly faith alone.

Q 1. What are the parts of Justification?

A. It consists of two Parts. First, The pardon of Sin. Acts 13.39. And by him
all that believe are justified from all things from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. Secondly, The acceptance of our persons as
righteous. Romans 5.1, 2, 3. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by faith
into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Q. 2. Whose act is it to justify Sinners?

A. It is the act of God alone. Romans 8.33. It is God that justifies. Man's
justifying of himself is nothing. Luke 16.15. And he said unto them, Ye are
they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts; for
that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God.
Nor other men's justifying of us. Rev. 3.1. I know thy works, that thou have a
name to live, and art dead.

Q. 3. Is there any thing in man to merit his Justification?

A. No, it is an act of Free Grace in God. Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by
his grace, through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ.

Q. 4. If it be not for any inherent righteousness, how then?

A. It is for the righteousness of Christ imputed to us. Romans 4.6. Even as
David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works.

Q. 5. How is Christ's righteousness made ours?

A. By Application of it to us by Faith. Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the law; for by the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified.

Q. 6. Is it not partly by Christ's Righteousness, and partly our own?

A. No: by Christ's Righteousness, without any mixture of ours. Romans 3.28.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the law.

Q. 7. But does not James says otherwise. Jam. 2.14. What does it profit, my
brethren, though a man say he, has faith, and have not works, Can faith save
him?

A. The two Apostles contradict not one another. Paul speaks of Justification
before God; and James of justifying our Faith before men.

Q. 8. Is no regard then to be had to good works?

A. Yes, very great; they that believe, must be careful to maintain good works.
Tit. 3.8. That they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works. These things are good and profitable unto men.

Q. 9. Why can none be justified by works?

A. Because all are guilty before God. Romans 3.29. Is he the God of the Jews
only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also. And the Law
curses all that are under guilt. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them.

Q. 10. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. The happy State of Believers who are now at peace with God. Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. And whom he justifies he glorifieth. Romans 8.30. Whom he
justified, them he also golrified.

Q. 11. What is the second Inference hence?

A. The excellency and necessity of Faith. Romans 3.30. The circumcision is
justified by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith.

Q. 12. What is the third Inference?

A. That the greatness of sin is no bar to faith, since it is the Righteousness
of Christ that justifies. 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we may be made the righteousness of God in him.

Q. 13. What is the last Inference?

A. That Believers ought to be exceeding humble, and far from boasting. The Law
of Faith excludes boasting. Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded;
by what law? Of works? nay, but by the law of faith.

Of Adoption.
Quest. 34. WHAT is Adoption?

A. Adoption is an act of God's Free Grace, whereby we are received into the
number, and have a Right to all the Privileges of the Sons of God.

Q. 1. How many sorts of Sons be there?

A. There is one by Generation, and another by Adoption. John 1.12, 13. But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to
them that believe in his name; which were born not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Q. 2. What moves God to adopt any man?

A. Nothing but his Free-love. John 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father
has bestowed on us, that we should be called the Son of God.

Q. 3. Is this privilege common to all men?

A. No; it is peculiar to them that receive him. John 1.12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God.

Q. 4. What is the first property of Adoption?

A. It is a costly Relation. Gal. 4.45. When the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his S^n, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law* that we might receive the adoption of sons.

Q. 5. What is the second property of Adoption?

A. It is an high and honorable relation. 1 John 3.1^^ Behold what manner of
love the father has bestowed upon us, tha^ we should be called the Sons of God.

Q. 6. What is the third property of Adoption?

A. It is a free relation on God's part. Ephesians. 1.45. Accord^ing as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love. Hav^ing predestined us unto the adoption of
children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will. And (...) makes us free. John 8.36. If the son therefore shall make you
free, ye shall be free indeed.

Q. 7. What is the fourth property of Adoption?

A. It is a permanent relation. John 8.35. The son abides in the house for
ever.

Q. 8. What is the first privilege of the adopted?

A. They have an interest in God as Children in a Father* 2 Cor. 6.18. And will
be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.

Q. 9. What is the second Privilege?

A. Being God's Sons, they are Heirs of God, and joy^^ Heirs with Christ. Romans
8.17. And if children, then heirs, Heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ.

Q. 10. What is the third Privilege?

A. Seasonable and sanctified afflictions. Heb. 12.6. (...) scourges every son
whom he receives.

Q. 11. What is their fourth Privilege?

A. The Attendance and Ministry of Angels. Heb. 1.1^ Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for th^^ who shall be heirs of
salvation?

Q. 12. What is their fifth Privilege?

A. The assistance of the Spirit in Prayer. Romans 8.15. For we have not received
the spirit of bondage again to fear, but y^^ have received the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba father^ And God's audience of their Prayers. 1
John 5.14. A^^ this is the confidence that we have in him, That if we ask any
t^ing according to his will, he hears us.

Q. 13. What use should we make of this?

A. It teachech us to carry our selves as Children to our ^eavenly Father.
First, In our imitation of him. Ephesians. 5. ^. Be ye therefore followers of God as
dear children. Secondly, In ^ur submission to him. Heb. 12.9. Furthermore, we
have had ^athers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence*
shall we not much rather be in subjection to the father of spirits, and live?
Thirdly, In our dependence on him. Mat. 6.32* ^or your heavenly father knows
that you have need of all ^hese things.

Of Sanctification.
Quest. 35. WHAT is Sanctification?

A. Sanctifitation is the work of God's Free Grace, whereby we are renewed in
the whole man, after the Image of God, and are enabled more and more to die
unto sin, and live unto righteousness.

Q. 1. What are the parts of Sanctification?

A. Dying unto Sin, and living unto God. Romans 6.11. Likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, througe Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Q. 2. Who is the Author of Sanctification?

A. God only. Jude ver. 1. To them that are sanctified by God the Father.

Q. 3. What is the instrument of it?

A. The Word of God. John 17.17. Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is
truth.

Q. 4 What part of man is sanctified?

A. Every part, both of the Soul and Body. 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of
peace sanct^^y you w^olly, and I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body, be
pr^served blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ

Q. 5. Is Sanctification perfected at once?

A. No; but by degrees. 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Q. 6. When will it be made perfect?

A. When we come to Heaven, and not before. 1 Cor. 13.10, 11. But when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.

Q. 7. What are the signs of true Sanctification?

A. When it runs into all parts of our Conversation. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.
Secondly, And continues to the end. Rev. 22.11. Let him that is holy, be holy
still.

Q. 8. What is the inseparable companion of Sanctification?

A. Righteousness toward men. Luke 1.74, 75. That he would grant unto us, that
we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without
fear, in holiness, and righteousness before him all the days of our life.

Q. 9. What is opposite to Sanctification?

A. All filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit.

Q. 10. What is the privilege of the sanctified?

A. They are all elected, and shall be glorified. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 4* Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the father, through sanctification of
the spirit -- to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades
not away, reserved in heaven for you.

Q. 11. What is the case of them who live and die unsanctified?

A. They shall never see God. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and
boliness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Q. 12. What differenceth true, from pretended Sanctification?

A. True Sanctification purges the heart from the love of sin. Romans 7.15. For
that which I do* I allow not. And the life from the dominion of sin. ^om. ^^
19. As ye have yielded your members servants to (...), and to iniquity, unto
iniquity; even so now yield you^ members servants to righteousness, unto
holiness.

Q. 13. May great sinners be sanct^fied?

A. Yes, the Spirit of God can sanctify the vilest heart. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified.

Of Assurance, the fruit of Justification
Quest. 36. WHAT are the benefits which in this life do either accompany, or
^low from Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification?

A. The benefits which in this life do either accompany, or flow from
Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification, are assurance of God's love, peace
of Conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, increase of Grace, and perseverance
therein to the end.

Q. 1. Is Assurance possible to be attained in this Life?

A. Yes; for foam have had it. Cant. 6.3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is
mine. And all Christians are commanded to strive for it. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore
the rather, ^rethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

Q. 2. How many sorts of assurance are there?

A. There is an objective Assurance. 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the foundation
of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his. And
a subjective or personal Assurance. Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself
for me.

Q. 3. Is personal Assurance perfect in this Life?

A. No, it admits of doubts and fears, which interrupts it, and it is not
always at one height. 1 Cor. 13.10. When that which is psrfect is come, then
that which is in part shall be done away.

Q. 4. On what Testimony is personal Assurance built?

A. Upon the Testimony of God's Spirit, witnessing with ours. Romans ^.16. The
spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.

Q. 5. Does the Spirit make use of signs in us to (...) us.

A. Yes, Ordinarily he does. 1 John 3.14. We know th^^ we are passed from death
to life, because we love the brethren. A^ ver. 24. Hereby we know that he
abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us.

Q. 6. How is true assurance discerned from presumption?

A. True assurance humbles the Soul. Gal. 2.20. I (...) crucified with Christ;
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And makes the Soul
afraid of Sin. 2 Cor. 7.1* Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let
us cleanse (...) selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness i^ the fear of God.

Q. 7. What is the usual season of Assurance?

A. The time of greatest sufferings for Christ. 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be
reproached* for the name of Christ, happy (...) ye; for the spirit of glory and
of God rests upon you.

Q. 8. Is personal Assurance absolutely necessary to Salvation?

A. No; a man may be saved, and in Christ, without it. Isa. 50.10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks
in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God.

Q. 9. What is the fruit of Assurance?

A. Joy unspeakable amidst outward Troubles. Romans 5.11. And not only so, but we
also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement.

Q. 10. What sins usually eclipse our Assurance?

A. Negligence in duty starves it. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your
calling and election sure. For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. And
sinning against light stabs it. Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness,
that the bon^ which thou have broken may rejoice.

Q. 11. What is the first Inference from this Doctrine?

A. That no unregenerate Person can have any Assurance, for it is the fruit of
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification.

Q. 12. What is the second inference?

A. That all the Joys of Heaven are not to come; bu^ ^ome communicated in this
life. 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen ye love; in whom though now ye see him
not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Q. 13. What is the third inference?

A. That assured Believers need to be circumspect persons, that they grieve not
the Spirit. Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are
sealed unto the day of redemption.

Of Peace of Conscience.
Quest. 1. WHat does the word Peace signify in Scripture?

A. In the Language of the Old Testament it signifies all temporal good. 1 Samuel
25.6. Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all
that thou have. And in the New Testament all special good; as 2 These. 3.16. Now
the Lord of peace give you peace always.

Q. 2. What are the kinds of special Peace?

A. There is a twofold special peace; One without us, by reconciliation. Romans
5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God. And peace
within us by way of consolation. Col. 3.15. And let the peace of God rule in
your hearts.

Q. 3. What did our peace cost Christ?

A. It cost him bloody Stripes and Sufferings. Isa. 53.5. The chastisement of
our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed.

Q. 4. Can none have true peace but such as are in him?

A. No; others may have false Peace. Luke 11.21. When a strong man armed
keeps his palace, his goods are in peace. But Believers only have true peace.
Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 5. Have all Believers peace in their consciences at al^ times?

A. No, they are always in a state of peace, but have not always the sense of
peace. Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

Q. 6. What is that which hinders the sense of peace in Believers?

A. Their Sins against the Lord, and grieving of his Spirit. Isa. 59.2. But
your iniquities have separated between you and your God; and your sins have hid
his face from you, that he will not hear.

Q. 7. What maintains the state of peace when the sense of peace is lost?

A. Christ's continual and potent Intercession with the F^ther for us. 1 John
2.12. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; and
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Q. 8. What is the best way to maintain our peace with God?

A. Strict walking by Gospel-Rules. Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to
this rule, peace be on them.

Q. 9. Does this Peace come and go with outward Peace?

A. No, we may enjoy this when no peace is to be had in the World. John 16.33.
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace; in the
world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

Q. 10. What is the first Instruction from hence?

A. That the wicked are in a sad case at all times, but especially in evil
times. Isa. 57.20, 21. But the wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot
rest, whose waters cast up ^nire and dirt; There is no peace, says my God, to
the wicked.

Q. 11. What is the second Instruction from hence?

A. That the chief Care of a Christian should be to keep his peace with God.
Ier. 17.17. Be not a terror to me, Thou art my hope in the day of evil.

Q. 12. What is the last Instruction?

A. Let the Saints long to be in Heaven; the State of full and perfect Peace.
Isa. 57.2. He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their beds, each one
walking in his uprightness.

Of Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Quest 1. HOW many sorts of Joy are there among men?

A. There is a Sensitive Joy. Acts 14.17. Nevertheless he left not himself
without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and
fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. A sinful Joy.
Prove. 15.21. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom. And a spiritual
Joy. Romans 5.11. And not only so, but we also joy in God though our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Q. 2. Why is spiritual Joy called Joy in the Holy Ghost?

A. Because the Holy Ghost is the Author of it. Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the
spirit is love, joy, peace, etc.

Q. 3. What is the First thing begets joy in the Saints?

A. The First thing they joy in is, their Justification before God. Isa. 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he
has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with the
robes of righteousness.

Q. 4. What is the Second thing that breeds this Joy?

A. Hopes of Glory breeds Joy in the Saints. Romans 5.2. And rejoice in hopes of
the glory of God.

Q. 5. What is the instrument by which the spirit conveys this Joy?

A. Faith is the instrument of it. Phil. 1.25. And baving this confidence, I
know that I shall abide and continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy
of faith.

Q. 6. What is the first Property of this Joy?

A. It Is Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Q. 7. What is the second Property of it?

A. That it is not in the power of men to deprive the Saints of it. John 16.22.
And your joy no man takes from you.

Q. 8. What is the third Property of it?

A. It makes the Soul free and cheerful in the ways of Obedience. Psalm. 119.32.
I will run the ways of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

Q. 9. What is most destructive to a Christian's Joy?

A. Sin, especially sin against light. Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.

Q. 10. What should be the main Care of a Christian in this World?

A. To maintain his joy in God to the last. Acts 20.24. But none of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might
finish my course with joy.

Q. 11. Have not Hypocrites their joys as well as real Christians?

A. Yes, but the Joy of the Hypocrite is not grounded upon Scripture-warrant,
and will vanish away, and will come to nothing at last. John 5.35. He was a
burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
light.

Q. 12. Whas is the first Inference from hence?

A. Let all that expect joy in the Holy Ghost, see that they preserve purity of
Conscience and Conversation. 2 Cor. 1.12. Grace be to you, and peace from God
our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. 13. What is the last Inference?

A. That Religion is no melancholy thing, but the fountain of all Joy and
Pleasure. Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace.

Of the Increase of Grace.
Quest. 1. DOES all true Grace increase and grow?

A. Yes, it does, like the Morning light. Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is
as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. And for
that end God has appointed Ministers and Ordinances. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ.

Q. 2. Cannot false or seeming Grace grow?

A. It may spring up and seem to flourish for a time; but comes not to
perfection. Luke 8.14 And that which fell among thorns are they which when they
have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of
this tife, and bring no fruit to perfection.

Q. 3. What is the first respect in which Grace grows?

A. It grows by deeper rooting it self in the Soul. Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may
dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may
be able, etc.

Q. 4. What is the manner of its growth?

A. It grows in respect of its greater fitness and readiness for acts of
Obedience. Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious
power, unto all patience, and long-suffering* with joyfulness.

Q. 5. What is the third respect or manner of its growth?

A. It grows in respect of its abilities to fix the mind more steadily on
spiritual things. Hence grown Christians are called spiritual men. Gal. 6.1. Ye
which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness.

Q. 6. Why must all true Grace grow?

A. Because there is a Stature to which Christians are appointed. Ephesians. 4.12,
13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.

Q. 7. What are the causes of a Christians growth?

A. Union with Christ. John 15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. And his
Blessings on the Ordinances. Isa. 55.10, 11. For as the rain comes down, and
the snow from heaven* and returns not thither* but waters the earth, and
makes it bring forth and bud* that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to
the eater; So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return
unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper
in the thing whereto I sent it. And Providence. Phil. 1 19. For I know that
this shall turn to my salvation through your prayers, and the supply of the
spirit of Jesus Christ.

Q 8. May not true Grace sometimes decay?

A. Yes, it may. Rev. 2.4. Neversheless I have somewhat against thee, Because
thou have left thy first love. But not utterly. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born
of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him.

Q. 9. What is the first In^erence from hence?

A. To bless God for Gospel Ordinances. Psalm. 92.13, 14. Those that be planted
in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God, they shall
still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing.

Q. 10. What is the second Inference?

A. Hence we see the miserable state of them that grow worse and worse. Jude,
Verse 12 These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feas^ with you,
feeding themselves without fear. Clouds they are without water, carried about
of winds. Trees whose fruit withers; without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by
the root.

Q. 11. What is the third Inference?

A. Christians should not be discouraged at their weakness in Grace, for they
have a merciful Christ. Isa. 42.3. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the
smoking flax shall he not quench, he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.
And a sure Promise. Job 17.9. The righteous also shall hold on his way; and he
that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference?

A. That all true Christians draw daily nearer and nearer to the heavenly and
perfect State. 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not; but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. Romans 13.11. Now
is our salvation nearer than when we believed.

Of Perseverance.
Quest. 1. WHAT is Perseverance to the End?

A. It is the steady and constant continuance of Christians in the ways of Duty
and Obedience, amidst all Temptations and Discouragements to the contrary. Col.
1.23. If ye continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to
every creature which is under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a minister.

Q. 2. Do all that profess Christ, continue in him?

A. No; many that at first zealously profess him, afterward fall away. John
6.66. From that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with
him.

Q. 3. Why do not all Persevere?

A. Because all Professors have not a good root and foundation. Matt. 13.20,
21. But he that received the seed in stony places, the same is he that hears
the word, and anon with joy receives it, yet has he not root in himself, but
endures for a while; for when tribulation, or persecution arises because of
the word, by and by he is offended.

Q. 4. What is the First ground of the Saints Perseverance?

A. God's electing love, in which they are given to Christ. John 10.29. My
father which gave them me, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck
them out of my father's hand.

Q 5. What is the second ground of Perseverance?

A. The immortal nature of Sanctifying grace. John 4.14. But whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting
life. 1 John 3.9. For is seed remains in him.

Q. 6. What is the third ground of it?

A. The Covenant of Grace. Ier. 32.40. I will make an everlasting covenant with
them, That I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depar^ from me.

Q. 7. What is the fourth ground of it?

A. Christ's effectual Intercession. Luke 22.32. But I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith may fail not.

Q. 8. Are there no declinings of grace in the saints?

A. Yes, there are. Rev. 2.4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee,
because thou have left thy first love. Yet Grace cannot be totally or finally
lost. For the seed of God remains in the sanctified. 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is
born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him; and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God.

Q 9. Is there no hope of Salvation for final Ap^states?

A No; the Gospel gives none. Heb. 10.38. But if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him.

Q. 10. What is the first Instruction hence?

A. It warns all men to lay a good foundation, lest the buildings of hope be
overturned when the storm comes. Mat. 7.24, 25. Therefore whosoever hears
these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man which
built his house upon a rock, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not; for it was founded
upon a rock.

Q. 11. What is the second Instruction?

A. That all men should look to themselves lest they lose the things which they
have wrought. 2 Epist. of John, Ver. 8. Look to your selves, that ye lose not
those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.

Q. 12. What is the last Instruction?

A. Let no true Christian be discouraged, how weak soever, for God is able to
make him stand. Romans 14.4. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to
his own master he stands or falls, yea, he shall be holden up; for God is
able to make him stand.

Of perfection at Death.
Quest. 37. WHAT benefits do Believers receive from Christ at their Death?

A. The Souls of Believers are at their death made perfect in holiness, and do
immediately pass in^o glory; their bodies being still united to Christ, do re^t
in their Graves till the Resurrection.

Q 1. What is the state of perfect holiness?

A. It consists in a perfect freedom from sin, or any of the least inclination
to sin. Ephesians. 5.27. That he may present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish.

Q. 2. Wherein else does perfection consist?

A. It consists in the attainment of the highest measures and degrees of
holiness the creature is capable of. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. For the perfecting of the
Saints, -- till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

Q. 3. Cannot this be attained whilst in the body?

A. No; for here all our graces are imperfect. 1 Cor. 13.12. For now we see
through a glass darkly, but then face to face. And we live at a distance from
God. 2 Cor. 5, 6. Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord.

Q. 4. How is this attained at Death.

A. At Death the roots of Sin are pulled up out of the Believer's Nature. Heb.
12.23. And to the spirits of just men made perfect.

Q. 5. Why must the Soul be m^de perfect at death?

A. Because the purity of the heavenly State admits no sin or imperfection.
Rev. 21.27. And there shall in no wise enter into it; any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but they which are
written in the lambs book of life.

Q. 6. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That Death should be lovely and desirable in the eyes of Believers. Phil.
1.23. having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better.

Q. 7. What is the second Inference?

A. That God has provided singular relief for his people that now groan under
their Sins, and many Imperfections. 1 Cor. 13.12, 13. And now we see through a
glass darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in part; but then shall I know,
even as also I am known.

Q. 8. What is the third Inference?

A. That the heavenly State is infinitely above and beyond whatever we enjoy
here. 1 Cor. 29. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love hiem.

Q. 9. What is the fourth Inference?

A. That Believers are but at a small distance from the Satisfaction of all
their desires. Romans 13.11. Now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.

Q. 10. What is the fifth Inference?

A. That the Saints should earnestly pursue that perfection, even in this
imperfect state. Phil. 3.13, 14. Brethren, I count not my self to have
apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind,
and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press toward the mark,
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Q. 11. What is the sixth Inference?

A. That death to the Saints is better than life. Phil. 1.21. For to me to live
is Christ, and to die is gain.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference?

A. That Faith is absolutely necessary to entitle us to this perfect state.

Of immediate Glorificacion.
Quest. 1. DO all that die in Christ immediately pass into glory?

A. Yes, they do. Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Phil.
1.23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.

Q. 2. What is the First reason for their immediate Glorification?

A. Because Heaven is pepared and ready for them. Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.

Q. 3. What is the Second reason for it?

A. Because at Death they are as ready for Heaven as ever they shall be. John
9.4. I must work the work of him that sent me while it is day, the night
comes, when no man can work.

Q. 4. What is the Third reason for it?

A. Because Death else could not be gain, as it is. Phil. 1.21. For to me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain.

Q. 5. What is the Fourth reason for it?

A. Because there is the same reason for all, as for any one: but some are
immediately glorified. Luke 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Q. 6. What is the Fifth reason for it?

A. Because Christ longs for their coming to him, and they for his Enjoyment;
and these longings are in vain, if not satisfied. Rev. 22.17, 20. And the
spirit and the bride say, Come, and let him that hears say, Come; and let him
that is a thirst say, Come; and whosoever will, let him take of the water of
life freely; he which testifies these thidgs, says, Surely, I come quickly,
Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus.

Q. 7. What is the First instruction from hence?

A. That the Apparitions of departed Saints ordinarily are but Fables. They
wander not. Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple
of my God, and he shall go no more out.

Q. 8. What is the Second Inference?

A. That Purgatory is a groundless Fable, and invention of men; and the
Scriptures alleged to countenance it, grossly abused. 1 Pet. 3.19. By the which
also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison.

Q. 9. What is the Third inference from it?

A. That Heaven must needs be a mavelous surprise to Believers, how long
soever they have conversed with it here.

Q. 10. What is the Fourth inference?

A. The consideration of this should provoke Saints to work hard to finish all
they have to do on Earth. Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do
it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave whither thou go.

Q. 11. What is the Fifth inference?

A. That there is no reason to grieve excessively for departed Saints. 1 These.
4.13. Even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference.

A. That Christless ones are immediately in Hell. Luke 16.22, 23. The rich man
also died, and was buried, and in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in torment.

Of rest in the Grave.
Quest. 1. WHY must Believers come to the Grave?

A. Because where Sin has been. Death by the Law must follow. Romans 5.12.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Q. 2. What is the First privilege of their Bodies there?

A. It Is the privilege of their Bodies to be there in union with Christ. 1
These. 4.14. Them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

Q. 3. What is their Second privilege?

A. Their Graves are places of Rest; not Prisons, but Beds of Rest. Isa. 57.2.
He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in
his uprightness.

Q. 4. What is the First evil they rest from?

A. All the toils, and troubles, and afflictions of this life. Rev. 14.13. They
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

Q. 5. What is the Second evil they rest from?

A. They rest from all persecutions from men. Job 13.17. There the wiked cease
from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.

Q. 6. What is the Third evil they rest from?

A. They rest from Sin, never to feel temptation or inclination to sin. Heb.
12.23. And to the spirits of just men made perfect.

Q. 7. How long shall the Bodies rest in the Grave?

A. Not for ever, but till the Day of the Resurrection. Job 19.26. For though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.

Q. 8. What is the First inference from hence?

A. That union with Christ redounds to the singular advantage of the Body as
well as the Soul. Romans 8.11. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from
the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you.

Q. 9. What is the Second inference?

A. That Death dissolves not the union betwixt Christ and the Souls or Bodies
of his. Mat. 22.33. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob; God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Q. 10. What is the Third inference?

A. That seeing our Bodies are to have so long and so sweet rest in the Grave,
we should not spare them in God's Service now. 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. Yea, I think it
meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in
remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as
our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.

Q. 11. What is the Fourth inference?

A. That Christians should neither too much fear their own, nor sorrow for
others death. Romans 8.38. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, -- nor any other creature shall be able
to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 1 These.
4.13. I would not have you to be ignorant concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope.

Of the Resurrection.
Quest. 1. IS the Resurrection a credible Doctrine?

A. Yes, it is. Acts 26.8. Why should it be ^^ought a thing incredible with
you, that God should raise the ^ead?

Q 2. Why then does it seem incredible to man?

A. Because they err, not knowing the Scriptures, and ^he Power of God. Mark.
12.24. Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the
power of God? The Power of God assures us it may be so, and the word of God
tells us it must be so.

Q. 3. Is it sinful to doubt of the Doctrine of the Resurrection?

A. It Is not only a sin to doubt it, but an heresy to deny it, it being a
fundamental Article. Heb. 6.2. And of the resurrection of the dead. 1 Cor.
15.13, 14. But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not
risen; and if Christ be ^^t risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith
is also ^^in.

Q. 4. Who must rise again at the Resurrection?

A. All men, good and bad, must rise again. Acts 24.15. And have hope toward
God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and the unjust. Rev. 20.12, 13, 14. And I saw the
dead ^^all and great, stand before God, etc.

Q. 5. What is the first difference betwixt the Resurrection of the just and
unjust?

A. Saints rise by virtue of their union with Christ. Romans ^.11. But if the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead well in you; he that raised up
Christ from the dead, shall also ^uicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that
dwells in you. But (...) wicked by his power.

Q 6. What is the second difference?

A. The second and main difference will be in the contra^y ends to which they
rise, some to life, and some to condemnation. Dan. 12.2. And many of them that
sleep in the ^ast of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some
(...) shame, and everlasting contempt.

Q. 7. What is the glory to which Saints bodies shall (...) raised?

A. In the likeness of Christ's glorious Body. Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like to (...) glorious body.

Q. 8. What is the First inference from hence?

A. That every man should strive to the uttermost to attain to the Resurrection
of the just. Phil. 3.10, 11. That I may know him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of the sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death, if by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead.

Q. 9. What is the second Inference?

A. Comfort to them that now groan under manifold Distempers, and Deformities
of Body; they being made equal to Angels. Mark 12.25. For when they shall rise
from the dead they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the
Angels which are in heaven.

Q. 10. What is the third inference?

A. Get union with Christ by Faith, as you expect a joyful Resurrection. John
11.25. Jesus said unto her, I a^ the resurrection, und the life; he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.

Q. 11. What is the fourth Inference?

A. Saints should not fear Death. Genesis 46.3. Fear not to go down into Egypt.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference?

A. Employ your Bodies for good now.

Of Christ's acknowledging Believers.
Quest. 38. WHAT benefit do Believers recieve from Christ at the Resurrection?

A. At the Resurrection Believers being raised up in glory, shall be openly
acknowledged, and acquitted in the Day of Judgment, and made perfecth blessed
in the full enjoying of God to all Eternity.

Q. 1. What is it to be acknowledged by Christ?

A. It is Christ's owning of the special relation betwixt hi^ and them. Mat.
25.34. Come ye blessed of my father, inher^^ the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the worl^

Q. 2. Whom will Christ acknowledge for his?

A. Such as confess Christ now. Mat. 10.32. Whosoever therefore shall confess
me before men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven.

Q. 3. Before whom will Christ confess them?

A. Before his Father, Angels and Men. Rev. 3.5. He that overcomes, the same
shall be clothed in white Raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the
book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before Angels.

Q. 4. Who shall be denied by Christ in that Day?

A. All that now deny Christ, shall be denied by him. 2 Timothy 2.12. If we deny
him, he also will deny us.

Q. 5. Why will Christ openly acknowledge them?

A. To wipe off all Aspersions and Censures that now are cast upon them Isa.
66.5. Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said,
Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be
ashamed.

Q. 6. What will be the effect of Christ's Acknowledgment?

A. 'Twill put a full end to all Doubts, Fears, and Jealousies of themselves. 1
Cor. 4.3, 4. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment; yea, I judge not my own self, for I know nothing by
my self; yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges me is the Lord.

Q. 7. What other effect will it produce in them?

A. Joy unspeakable and transcendent: hence called time of refreshing. Acts
3.19. When the time refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Q. 8. Is this the only time Christ acknowledges them?

A. No, he acknowledges them by his Spirit's Testimony now; but that is private
in their Bosoms. Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the children of God.

Q. 9. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. To warn all how they pass rash Censures on Christ's Servants. Psalm. 73.15.
If I say, I will speak this, Behold I should offend against the generation of
thy children.

Q. 10. What is the second Inference?

A. Let none be a^raid or ashamed to confess the Person, Office, or any truth
of Christ, for any loss or danger, that may threaten them. Luke 12.8, 9. Also I
say unto you Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the son of man
also confess before the Angels of God. But he that denies me before men, shall
be denied before the Angels of God.

Q. 11. What is the third Inference?

A. Let Christians abound in good works. Every act of Charity for Christ, shall
be acknowledged by him in the Day of Judgment. Mat. 25.35. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye took me in.

Q. 12. What is the last inference?

A. Let all Christians love and long for the day of Christ's appearing. 2 Timothy
4.8. Hence forth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
unto them also that love his appearing.

Of Christ's acquitting Believers.
Quest. 1. WHat is it to be acquitted by Christ?

A. It is to be discharged and cleared from all the guilt of Sin, and punishent
due to it by the Law, upon the account of Christ's Righteousness imputed by
God, and received by Faith. Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 8.1. There is therefore
now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.

Q. 2. How many ways are Believers acquitted?

A. They are acquitted now in the Court of Heaven. Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any
thing to the change of God's Elect? It is God that justifies. In the court of
their own Consciences. 1 John 3.21. Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God. And in the Day of Judgment. Both particular;
Heb. 9.27. As it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
judgment. And general. Acts 3.19. Repeat ye therefore and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out. Their Sins are then blotted out.

Q. 3. How does Christ's acquittance now, differ from that at Judgment?

A. They differ in respect of publickness; this is secret in the Believer's
bosom, and that open before Men and Angels. Rev. 3.5. I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels.

Q. 4. What is the second Difference?

A. They differ in respect of subjective certainty and assurance. A Believer
may doubt of this, but not of that. 1 Cor. 4.4, 5. For I know nothing of my
self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord;
therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come.

Q. 5. What is the third Difference betwixt them?

A. They differ in point of consolation. This always bears proportion to the
certainty of it. Hence that day is called the time of refreshing; when Christ
blots out their Sins by Sentencial Justification. Acts 3.19. Repent ye
therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Q. 6. Do Believers then lie under condemnation till that Day?

A. No, they are truly and fully justified now. John 5.24. He that hears my
word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. But this Sentence
is not yet published by Christ's own mouth, as it shall be then.

Q. 7. On what account shall they be acquitted in that Day?

A. On the very same account and score they are now, viz. For the imputed
Righteousness of Christ in the way of Free Grace. Ephesians. 1.7. In wham we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace.

Q. 8. Must the Saints be summoned to Christ's Bar in that Day?

A. Yes, they must appear as well as others. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ. But not to the same end. John 5.29.
And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life:
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.

Q 9. What is the first Inference hence?

A. How sure is a Believer's Justification, being so ratified privately and
publicly, in this World, and that to come!

Q. 10. What is the second Inference?

A. Though the Day of Judgment be awfully solemn, it should not be dreadful to
Believers. They should look for, and hasten to the coming of the Day of God. 2
Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God, etc.

Q. 11. What is the third Inference?

A. That Faith is a Grace of absolute necessity, and unspeakable excellency.
Romans 5.1, 2. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace
wherein we stand.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference?

A. All unbelievers are in a miserable State now. John 3.18. He that believes
not, is condemned already. And worse in the world to come. Mat. 25.41. Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Of the full Enjoyment of God.
Quest. 1. WHAT does perfect Blessedness suppose and imply?

A. It supposes the total Freedom of Believers from all the moral evil of Sin.
Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present you to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot nor wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without
blemish. And from all the penal evils of suffering. Rev. 21.4. And God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things
are passed away.

Q. 2 What else is implied in perfect Blessedness?

A. It implies the full and perfect enjoyment of God. 1 Cor. 15.28. And when
all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.

Q 3. What is it for God to be all in all?

A. It implies three things in it. First, That all the Saints shall be filled
and satisfied from God alone. Secondly, That there shall be no need of other
things out of which they were wont to fetch comfort. Thirdly, That all other
things, as Heaven, Angels, Saints, should be loved and enjoyed in God.

Q. 4 In what respect shall they Enjoy God in Heaven?

A They shall have the glorious and immediate presence of God with them. Rev.
21.3. God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

Q 5. In what other respects shall they Enjoy God?

A They shall see him as he is. 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him; for we shall
see him as he is.

Q 6. What will such a vision of God produce?

A It will produce perfect conformity in them to God. 1 John 3.2. When he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And perfect joy
will result from hence. Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Q. 7. Do not the Saints enjoy God here?

A. Yes, they do; but not so as they shall enjoy him in Heaven. 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part;
but then shall I know even as also I am known.

Q. 8. What are the special differences between the Saints Communion with God
here, and that in Heaven?

A. Their Communion with God here is clogged with Sin. Romans 7.21. I find then a
law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. Here it is not
constant. Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Nor is it
satisfying: but in Heaven it will be pure, constant and satisfying.

Q. 9. How long shall they there enjoy God?

A. Not for days, years, ages, but for ever and ever. 1 These. 4.17. And so
shall we be ever with the Lord.

Q 10. What is the first Instruction from hence?

A. That the World is not the place of the Saints rest and satisfaction. Heb.
4.9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God. 2 Cor. 5.2, 6. For
in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house which
is from heaven; therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are
at home in the body, we we are absent from the Lord.

Q. 11. What is the second Instruction from hence?

A. That Death is a singular benefit to the Saints; and though it be an enemy
to Nature, yet it is the medium to Glory. 2 Cor. 5.4. For we that are in this
Tabernacle do groan, being burdened, not for that we would be uncleathed, but
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.

Q. 12. What is the third Instruction hence?

A. The necessity of Faith and Regeneration in this World. None shall be raised
up in glory, acknowledged, acquitted, and made perfectly blessed in the full
enjoyment of God, but Believers. Romans 8.30. Moreover whom he did predestinate,
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

Of Man's Duty to God.
Quest. 39. WHAT is the Duty that God requires of Man?

A. The Duty which God requires of Man, is Obedience to his revealed will.

Q 1. Is Obedience to God's will the Duty of every Man?

A. It is unquestionably the Duty of every man to obey the will of God, so far
as he has made it known to him. Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is
good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

Q. 2. On what a^count is Man's Obedience due to God?

A. It Is due to him, First, As he is Creator, In whom we live, and move, and
have our being, Acts 17.27, 28. Secondly, As he is our Benefactor, from whom we
receive all our Mercies. Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou servest not the Lord thy God
with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;
Therefore shall thou serve thine enemies, which the Lord shall send against
thee, in hunger* thirst and nakedness, and in want of all things. Thirdly, As
he is our Lord, and Lawgiver. Iam 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to
save, and to destroy.

Q. 3. Is Obedience due to none but God only?

A. Yes, subjects must obey their lawful Magistrates. Romans 13.1. Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God. The powers
that be are ordained of God. People their Ministers. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls,
as they that must give an account. Children their Parents. Ephesians. 6.1. Children
obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. But not as they are to obey
God.

Q. 4. What is the difference betwixt our obedienc^ to God's Commands, and
Men's?

A. We are to obey God chiefly and supreamly, for his own sake. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selve to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake. And Ephesians. 6.1.
Children obey your parents [in the Lord] for this is right.

Q 5. What must we do when the Commands of God and Men fall cross to one
another?

A. In that case we must yield our obedience to God, and not to man, whatever
we suffer for it. Acts. 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

Q. 6. Why must we obey God rather than Man?

A. Because God is the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of our Consciences, and no
Creature has power to command our Obedience, but in, and from him. Isa. 33.22.
For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he
will save us.

Q. 7. Have the People Liberty to compare the Laws of God and Men, and judge
how they agree, or differ?

A. Yes, their Judgment of Discretion is both commanded; 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak
as to wise men, judge ye what I say. And commended. Acts 17.11. These were more
noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were
so.

Q. 8. What is the only Rule for our Obedience to God?

A. The will of God revealed in the Scriptures, is our only Rule of Obedience.
Isa. 8.20. To the law, and to the testimony; if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Q. 9. But if a man have a voice, a vision, or a dream, seeming to hint the
secret will of God, may he not obey it?

A. Yes; if it be consonant to the revealed will of God in the word, otherwise
not. Deuteronomy 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those
things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we
may do all the words of this law.

Q 10. What is the first Instruction hence?

A. That it is highly sinful and dangerous to disobey the known will of God in
any thing. Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
Luke 12.47. And that servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Q. 11. What is the second Instruction?

A. That Is a blessed man, who conscienciously labou^s to obey the will of God
so far as he can discover it. John 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them. Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be
on them, and mercy.

Q. 12. What is the third Inference?

A. It is highly sinful and dangerous to command others, or obey commands from
others, which are not according to God's Command. Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is
oppressed, and broken in judgment, because he wilingly walks after the
commandments. Jer. 7.31. And they have built the high places of Tophet, which
is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters
in the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.

Of the Moral Law.
Quest. 40. WHAT did God at first reveal to Man for the Rule of his Obedience?

A. The Rule which God at first revealed to Man for his Obedience, was the
Moral Law.

Q. Where is the Moral Law summarily comprehended?

A. The Moral Law is summarily comprehended in the Ten Commandments.

Q. 1. Is every man under the Direction and Obligation of a Law?

A. Yes; being a reasonable Creature is capable of, and fitted for Government
by Law, which other Creatures are not; and being an accountable Creature to
God, must needs be under a Law. Romans 2.15. Which show the works of the Law
written in their hearts; their consciences also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another?

Q. 2. How could man be under a Law before the Law was given by Moses?

A. Before ever the Law was given at Sinai, all the race of Adam had a Law
written in their Hearts, viz. the Light of Reason, and Dictates of natural
Conscience. Romans 2.14. For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the law, are a law
unto themselves. And besides this, the Church had the revealed will of God to
direct them. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. We have also a more sure word of Prophesy,
whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place
until the day down, and the day star arise in your hearts. Knowing this first,
that no prophesy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation.

Q. 3. What is the meaning of the Moral Law?

A. It Is not a Law to direct and order our Manners; but a Law that binds
universally and perpetually, as the Ten Commandments do those to whom they are
promulged, and the Light of Nature does all others. Romans 2.14. For when the
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law,
these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. Luke 16.17. It is easier
for Heaven and Earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to fall.

Q. 4. Why is it said to be summarily comprehended in the Ten Commandments?

A. Because much more is included in every Command, than is expressed, as our
Savior shows in his Exposition of it Mat. 22.40. On these two Commandments
hang all the law and the prophets.

Q. 6. Does the Moral Law bind Christians under the Gospel?

A. Yes, it does, as a Rule to order their Conversations by. Iam. 2.8, 9, 10.
If ye fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self; ye do well, but if ye have respect to persons, ye commit
sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors; for whosoever shall keep
the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all?

Q. 6. Is the Moral Law the same thing with the Covenant of Works, and imposed
for the same end?

A. God never designed the Law to be the way of Man's Justification since the
Fall. Gal. 3.21, 22. Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid!
for if there had been a lawgiver which could have given life, verily,
righteousness should have been by the law; but the Scripture has concluded all
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ night be given to them
that believe. But it was promulged to convince Men of Sin. Romans 7 7 What shall
we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid! Nay, I had not known sin, but by the
law; for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet.
And bring them to Christ. Gal. 3.24. Wherefore the law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ* that we might be justified by faith.

Q. 7. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. Hence we learn the abominable Nature of Popery. The Pope being that lawless
One, who will not be bound to the Laws of God himself. 2 These. 2.8. Then shall
that wicked one be revealed whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. But assumes Power
to dispense with God's Laws to others.

Q. 8. What is the second Inference hence?

A. That man dies not as Beasts die; which are under no Moral Law, and
therefore capable of no sin, but must come to Judgment after Death. Eccles.
3.21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of the
beast that goes downward to the earth? Heb. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto
men once to die, but after this the Judgment.

Q. 9. What is the third Inference hence?

A. That though the actions of men naturally considered, are transcient, yet
their consequences and effects are permanent; An act is soon done, a word soon
spoken, a thought soon thought; but when done, spoken or thought, they are
placed to account. Gal. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap; for he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh rea^ corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

Q. 10. What is the fourth Inference from hence?

A. That God will proceed with man by different rules in the Day of Judgment,
according to the different Law; they lived under in this World. Romans 2.12. For
as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law; and as many
as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law.

Q. 11. What is the fifth Inference from hence?

A. That those who have sinned against the clearest Light, and best Helps,
will, if they die impenitent, be judged to the greatest Misery. Matt. 11.23.
And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to
hell; for if the mighey works which have been done in thee, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained until this day. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great salvation?

Q. 12. What is the sixth Inference from hence?

A. That as we are to prize the Moral Law highly, as a Rule of Life; Psalm.
119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. So are we
to bless God for the Gospel Dispensation, by which only we can attain to
Justification and Salvation. Heb. 12.22. But we are come to Mount Sion, and
unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable
company of Angels.

Of Love to God and Men.
Quest. 42. WHAT is the sum of the Ten Commandments?

A. The sum of the Ten Commandments is to love the Lord our God with all our
hearts, with all our soul, with all our strength, and with all our mind; and
our Neighbor as our selves.

Q. 1. What is the sum of the Ten Commandments?

A. To love the Lord our God with a Supreme love, and Men with a Sincere love,
in and for him. Matt. 22.37, 38. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This
is the First and Great Commandment; The Second is like unto it, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self.

Q. 2. What is the first thing contained in our supreme Love to God?

A. It implies the loving of God purely and absolutely for himself. The
Excellencies that are in him. Cant. 1.3. Thy name is as ointment poured forth;
therefore the virgins love thee. And the benefits we receive from him. Psalm
116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice and my supplication.

Q. 3. What is the Second Property of this Supreme Love?

A Supreme love devotes the whole man to God and Christ: So that in life and
death that man designs the Glory of God as his main end. Romans 14.7, 8. For none
of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; for whether we live, we
live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lord's.

Q. 4. What is the third Property of Supreme Love?

A. It causes the Soul to depreciate and slight all other things in comparison
of God's Glory, and an Interest in Christ. Acts 20.24. But none of these things
move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my
course with joy. Phil. 3.8, 9. I count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

Q. 5. What is the fourth Property of Supreme Love?

A. It centers the Soul in God as its only rest. Psalm. 116.7. Return unto thy
rest, O my soul. And cannot be satisfied till it come to the full enjoyment of
him. 2 These. 3.5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and patient
waiting for Christ.

Q. 6. Why must we love God with a supreme Love?

A. Because such a love only suits the transcendent Excellency of God. Commands
all we are and have for God, and is the only love that will continue to the
end. Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

Q. 7. What is it to love our Neighbor as our selves?

A. It is the exact Observation and Practice of the golden Rule of Christ.
Matt. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets.

Q. 8. Are all men to be loved alike, and with the same degree of Love?

A. No; tho we must love all men with the love of Benevolence; yet the Saints
only with the love of Complacency. Psalm. 16.3. But to the saints that are in
the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. And to such we must
especially do good. Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good
unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

Q. 9. What is the first Instruction from hence?

A. Hence we learn the excellency of Divine love. Moses expresses the Whole
Duty of Man in Ten Commandments. Christ hangs the Whole Law upon these Two,
Love to God, and our Neighbor. Mark 12.30, 31. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. This is the first Commandment. And the Second is like,
namely, this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; there is none other
Commandment greater than these. And the Apostle reduces these Two into One.
Gal. 5.14. For all the law is fulfilled in one word, ^uen in this, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Q. 10. What is the second Inference from hence?

A. It convinces the holiest of men how far short they come in their Obedience
to the rule of duty, and therein the law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ. Gal. 3.24.

Q. 11. What is the third Inference from hence?

A. It discovers the excellency and perfection of the Law of God. Psalm. 19.7.
The law of the Lord is pefect* converting the soul. And that we are highly to
honor and magnify it as a rule of duty, though we must utterly renounce it as
the way of our Justification.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference from hence?

A. That there is nothing too dear for a Christian in this world, but he must
give it up by self-denial, when it comes in competition with his supreme love
to God. Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother,
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple. (i. e.) Love them less than me.

Of the Preface to the Commandments.
Quest. 43. and 44. WHAT is the Preface to the Ten Commandments?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments is in these words, I a^ the Lord thy
God which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of
Bondage.

What does the Preface to the Ten Commandments teach us?

A. The Preface to the Ten Commandments teach us, that because God is the Lord,
and our God, and Redeemer, therefore we are bound to keep all his Commandments.

Q. 1. Why does God use arguments and inducements to win men to the obedience
of his laws?

A. Because he loves to work on man as a rational Creature, according to the
principles of his Nature. Hos. 11.4. I dre^ them with cords of a man, with
bands of love. And because he delights in none but free and cheerful Obedience.
Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.

Q 2. What is the first argument in this Preface?

A. It is the sovereignty of the Lawgiver [I am the Lord] which should awe the
heart of every man to obedience. Iam. 4.12. There is one lawgiver, who is able
to save and to destroy.

Q 3. What is the second argument to Obedience?

A. Our propriety in God by Covenant [I am the Lord thy God] This obliges to
Obedience, and aggravateth disobedience. Psalm. 50.7. Hear, O my people, and I
will speak; O Israel, and I will testify against thee; I am God, even thy God.
Hos. 9.1. Thou have gone a whoring from thy God.

Q. 4. What is the third argument unto Obedience?

A. The benefits of Redemption that they receive from God. Benefits persuade to
duty; and the goodness of God leads to repentance. Romans 2.4.

Q. 5. How can deliverance out of Egypt, be an argument to them that never were
in Egypt?

A. As that Deliverance was a Type of our Deliverance, so it is an argument to
us, and an argument from the less to the greater; so it obliges us more than
them. Luke 1.74* 75. That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out
of the hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness an^
righteousness before him all the days of our life.

Q 6. What is that deliverance we have? and how does it (...) us to Obedience?

A. Our Deliverance is not from Egypt, but from Hell. Who has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear
Son. Col. 1.13. And our persons are bought by the Redeemer to glorify God. 1
Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
which is in you; for ye are bought with a price; wherefore glorify God in your
body, and in your spirits which are Gods.

Q. 7. Is it not mercenary to serve God upon the account of benefits received,
or to be received?

A. He that makes religious Duties Mediums to attain carnal Advantages only, is
of a worse than mercenary Spirit. Hos. 7.14. And they have not cried unto me
with their hearts, when they howled upon their beds; they assembled themselves
for corn and wine, and they rebelled against me But to be quickened by Mercy to
Duty is not mercenary, but Evangelical. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and
his goodness.

Q. 8. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That great is the condescension of God to Man, that he will use arguments
to induce him to obedience, who might exact it only by his Sovereignty, and
justly damn us for our disobedience. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God.

Q. 9* What is the second Inference from hence?

A. That the more mercy any receive from God, the more obligations are laid on
them to obey him. Psalm. 116.1* 2. I love the Lord because he has heard my
voice, and my supplication; because he has inclined his ear unto me, therefore
will I call upon him as long as I live.

Q. 10. What is the third Inference from hence?

A. The more mercies and favors any man sins against, the greater is that
man's sin, and the sorer will be his punishment. Amos 3 1, 2. You only have I
known of all the families of the earth; wherefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities.

Q. 11. What is the fourth Inference from hence?

A. That God's expectations are greater, where his mercies and favors have
been so. Isa. 5.4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have
not done in it? wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes,
brought it forth wild grapes.

Q. 12. What is the last Inference from hence?

A. That memorials of God's Mercies are to be kept by us, to provoke us to
constant and cheerful duties of obedience Exodus 17.14. And the Lord said unto
Moses, Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of
Joshua. Psalm. 103.2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my soul, forget not all his benefits.

Of the First Commandment.
Quest. 45. WHich is the First Commandment?

A. The First Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

Q. 1. What is the first duty enjoined in the first Commandment?

A. It is to know and acknowledge the Existence or Being of God, and
consequently condemns all Atheism, both in judgment and practice. Heb. 11.6. He
that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there
is no God.

Q. 2. What is the second duty of the First Commandment?

A. It requires all men to know and acknowledge the unity of God. Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And condemns Polytheism, or
plurality of Gods. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. For though there be that are called Gods,
whether in heaven or in earth, as there be Gods many, and Lords many; but to us
there is but one God.

Q. 3. Whence sprang the Opinion of more Gods than one at first in the world?

A. It sprang from ignorance of God's Omnipresence and Omnipotence. Hence came
their vain imaginations. Romans 1.21. Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. They thought the presence
and power of God might reach one place, and not another. 1 Kings 20.23. And the
servants of the King of Assyria said unto him, Their gods are gods of the
hills, therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in
the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.

Q. 4. What were the first Creatures worshipped as Gods?

A. Probably the heavenly Bodies, Sun, Moon and Stars, because of their
splendour and influence,; th^se as Heralds, do proclaim God to the World. Psalm.
19.1, 2. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows
knowledge. And these messengers of God were mistaken for God himself; Job
31.26, 27. If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in
brightness, and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my
hand; This also were an iniquity, for I should have denied the God that is
above.

Q. 5. What do these words [before me] import?

A. It notes God's perfect knowledge and abhorrence of all Idolatry, or
worshipping of another God, as what he cannot endu^e to behold. Ier. 44.3, 4.
Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger,
in that they went to burn incense to serve other Gods, whom they knew not,
neither they, you, nor your fathers; howbeit I sent unto you all my servants
the prophets, rising early, and sending them, saying, O do not this abominable
thing that I hate.

Q. 6. Are none guilty of this sin but heathenish Idolaters?

A. Yes, all that place their supreme love or trust in any creature, make that
creature their God, and in Scripture are called Idolaters. Col. 3.5. And
covetousness which is Idolatry.

Q. 7. How does the Idolatry forbidden in the first, differ from that forbidden
in the second Commandment?

A. The Idolatry forbidden in the first Commandment is a sin respecting the
object of worship, when we set up any thing in the place of God, which by
nature is not God. Gal. 4.8. Howbeit then when ye knew not God, ye did service
unto them which by nature are no gods. But that against the second Commandment
is, when we pretend to worship the true God, but do it by such means, and in
such a manner as he has not required, or has forbidden* Exodus 32.4, 5. And he
received them at their hands, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he
had made a molten calf, and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which
brought thee up out of the house of Egypt.

Q. 8. What is the first inference from the first Commandment?

A. That it is a special mercy to be brought forth in a land where the true God
is known and worshipped. Psalm. 147.20. He has not dealt so with any nation;
and as for his judgments they have not known them; praise ye the Lord.

Q. 9. What is the second inference from the 1st. Commandment?

A. That it is a great and dreadful sin to live without the worship of God in
the world. Ephesians. 2.12. That at that time ye were without Christ, -- and without
God in the world.

Q. 10. What Is the third inference from the 1st Commandment?

A. That Christians must not comply with Idolatrous or Superstitious worship,
when they are cast into Idolatrous places, how great soever the danger be.
Psalm. 16.4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another God;
their drink offering of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my
lips.

Q. 11. What is the fourth inference from hence?

A. That the supreme love, fear, and trust of the Soul is God's peculiar right
and due. Whosoever places them on any other besides God, is guilty of a very
heinous and great sin against him. 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world; if any man love the world, the love of the father
is not in him. Compared with Job 31.24, 28. If I have made gold my hope, or
have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence; this also were an iniquity
to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God that is above.

Q. 12. What is the fifth inference hence?

A. That God's eye discovers the closest Idolatry in the world, whether it be
in secret actions; Ezekiel. 8.12. Have thou seen what the ancients of the house of
Israel do in the dark? Every man in the chambers of his imaginary; for they
say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the earth. Or inward
affections. Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry.

Q 13. What is the sixth inference from hence?

A. That an high and full condition in the world, is a dangerous condition, and
lies most exposed to the danger of Heart-idolatry. Prove. 30.9. Lest I be full,
and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? Mark 10.24 How hard is it for them
that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of heaven?

Q. 14. What is the last Inference?

A. That in covenanting with God, and avouching him for our God, we must wholly
renounce all others, and take God alone for our portion; and the object of our
love and dependence. Hos. 3.3. Thou shall not be for another man. So will I
also be for thee. Luke 14 33. So likewise whosoever he be of you, that
forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple.

Of the second Commandment.
Qust. 49. WHich is the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment is, [Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image,
or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth
beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth; thou shall not bow down thy
self to them, nor serve them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting
the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth
generation, of them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that
love me, and keep my Commandments]

Quest. 50. What is required in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment requires, the receiving, observing, and keeping
pure and entire all such Religious Worship and Ordinances, as God has
appointed in his Word.

Quest. 51. What is forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The second Commandment forbids the worshipping of God by Images, or any
other way, not appointed in his word.

Quest. 52. What are the Reasons annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the second Commandment are, Gods Sovereignty over
us, his propriety in us, and his zeal he has to his own Worship?

Q. 1. What is the Sin especially forbidden in the second Commandment?

A. The Sin here forbidden is the corruption of Gods Worship, by making any
similitude of any Person in the Godhead, and performing Divine Worship before
it, or to it, Exodus 32.8. They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I
commanded them: they have made them a molten cal^, and have worshipped, and
have sacrificed thereunto* and said* these be thy Gods, O Israel, which have
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take ye therefore
good heed unto your selves* (for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that
the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire*) lest ye
corrupt your selves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure,
the likeness of male or female.

Q. 2. What is the second Sin forbidden in this Commandment?

A. The second Sin against this Commandment is Will Worship, consisting in the
addition of man's inventions to the Worship of God as a part thereof, Matthew.
15.9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men. Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the
rudiments of the world; why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to
ordinances, (Touch not, taste not, bandle not: Which all are to perish with the
using) after the commandments and doctrines of men: which things have indeed a
show of wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in
any honor to the satisfying of the flesh.

Q. 3. But if those additions be for the more decent worshipping of God, is it
not allowed by 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order?

A. No; That Scripture commands that Gods Institutions be regularly and
decently performed, but not that we invent Ceremonies that are symbolical, to
make them more decent than Christ left them.

Q. 4. Why is the second Commandment left out in all the public Offices of the
Popish Church?

A. Because it expressly condemns their Idolatrous Images, kneeling at the
Sacrament, Prayers to Saints, and all their Superstitious Crosses, Surplices,
Chrisme, as sinful.

Q. 5. Do they not clear themse^ves from Idolatry, by telling us they only
worship God before, or by them, but not the Images themselves?

A. No* they do not; for the use of Images in Gods Worship is expressly
condemned in this Commandment; and if this would excuse the Papists, it had
also excused the Israelites in worshipping the Cal^. Exodus 32.4. -- And they
said, these (...) thy Gods, O Israel, that brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt.

Q. 6. What Is the first Reason annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The first Reason annexed is Gods Sovereignty, I the Lord; which shows that
it belongs to God only to institute his own Worship, and make it effectual; and
therefore to do that in his Worship which he never commanded, is sinful and
dangerous; Ier. 7.31. And they have built the high places of Toph^t, which is
in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in
the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.

Q. 7. What Is the second Reason annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The second Reason is Gods Propriety in us; he is our God, and we belong to
him; and therefore to corrupt his Worship, greatly aggravates our Sin, Hos.
9.1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other people; for thou have gone a
whoring from thy God, etc.

Q. 8. What Is the third Reason annexed to the second Commandment?

A. The jealousy of God over his Worship and Worshippers; so that this sin of
corrupting his Worship, will dreadfully incense his wrath, as it did, Levit.
10.1, 2. And Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer,
and put fire thereon. and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded them not. And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them,
and they dyed before the Lord.

Q. 9. What Is the first Instruction from the second Commandment?

A. That it is an heinous sin to neglect the Worship of God, in that manner he
has appointed us to Worship him, as in Prayer, Ier. 10.25. Pour out thy fury
upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy
name. -- Hearing the Word, Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from
hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.

Q. 10. What Is the second Instruction from the second Commandment?

A. That those that suffer for endeavoring to preserve the purity of Gods
Ordinances, and nonconformity to the contrary injunctions of men, have a good
warrant to bear them out in all such Sufferings; Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add
unto the word which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it,
that ye may keep the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you,
etc.

Q. 11. What Is the third Instruction from the second Commandment?

A. That it is highly sinful and dangerous to innovate and prescribe by Humane
Authority, such symbolical Rites in the Worship of God, as he never appointed
or allowed in his Word, Matthew. 15.9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men.

Q. 12. What Is the fourth Instruction hence?

A. Hence we learn how much Parents and Children are obliged to worship God
constantly, spir^tually, and agreeably to his Will revealed in his Word,
otherwise the jealousy of God will visit them both in the way of Judgment. For
as Obedience entails a Blessing; so Disobedience entails a Curse on Posterity,
Exodus 34, 14. For thou shall worship no other God; for the Lord, whose name is
jealous, is a jealous God.

Of the third Commandment.
Quest. 53. WHich is the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment is, [Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in
vain.]

Quest. 54. What is required in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment requires the holy and reverend use of Gods Names,
Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word and Works.

Quest. 55. What is forbidden in the third Commandment?

A. The third Commandment forbids all profaning or abusing of any thing,
whereby God makes himself known.

Quest. 56. What is the Reason annexed to the third Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the third Commandment is, that however the breakers
of this Commandment may escape punishment from men, yet the Lord our God will
not suffer them to escape his Righteous Judgment.

Q. 1. How does this Commandment differ from the first and second?

A. The first has respect to the object of Worship, forbidding us to worship
any other but God. The second respects the means of Worship, forbidding us to
worship God by any other means than what he has prescribed. But the third
respects the manner of his Worship, ^orbidding all careless or profane use of
his Name, and commanding an holy reverence from us in all our solemn addresses
to him, or ordinary mention of his Name. Man. 1.6. A son honors his father,
and a servant his master: If I then be a father, where is mine honor? and if I
be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of hosts unto you, O Priests,
that despise my name: And ye say, wherein have we despised thy name?

Q. 2. What is the first thing especially required in the third Commandment?

A. It requires the most aweful and reverential frame of our hearts in all our
approaches to God; Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of
the saints; and to he had in reverence of all them that are about him. And in
his Worship, Ioh. 4.24. God is a spirit; and they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and in truth.

Q. 3. What Is the second thing required in this Commandment?

A, It requires truth in our witness-bearing, as knowing God sees our hearts,
and is witness to all that we think or speak; Zech. 5.4. I will bring it forth,
says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and
into the house of him that swears ^alsly by my name, etc.

Q. 4. What Is the third thing required in this Commandment?

A. That in all our Appeals to God in secret or doubtful matters, we be sure
that the Appeal be necessary, aweful and true: Ier 17.16. As for me, I have not
hastened from being a pastor to follow thee, neither have I desired the woeful
day, thou know: that which came out of my lips was right before thee. Psalm.
139.23, 24 Search me* O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts.
And set if there be any wicked way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting.

Q. 5. What does this Commandment especially forbid?

A. It forbids and condemns all profane Oaths as most injurious to the Name of
God. Matthew. 5.34, 37. -- Swear not at all, neither by heaven for it is Go^s
throne, etc. but let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever
is more than these, comes of evil.

Q. 6. What is the danger of profane or false Swearing*

A. Such are reckoned Enemies to God, Psalm. 139.20. -- Thine enemies take thy
name in vain. The Curse of God enters into such Families, Zech. 5.4. I will
bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into the horse of
the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my name, etc. And
the Lord will not hold them guiltless.

Q. 7. What else is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. It forbids and condemns all heedless wandering, and drowsy performance of
Gods Worship: Isa. 29.13, 14. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this
people drew near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, b^t
have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by
the precept of men: Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work
amongst this people, even a mavelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of
their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall
be hid. And 2 Kings 10.31. But Iehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord
God of Israel, with all his heart: for he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin.

Q. 8. What other sin is forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids all light and irreverent use of the Scriptures, especially in
our jests, or by way of scoffing. Ier. 17.15. Behold, they say unto me, where
is the word of the Lord? let it come now, Jer. 6.10. -- Behold the word of the
Lord is unto them a reproach: they have no delight in it.

Q. 9. By what Argument does God enforce the third Commandment on men?

A. That the breakers of this Command shall surely be punished by the Lord,
either in this life, Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. If thou will not observe to do all the
words of this law, that are written in this book, that thou may fear this
glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God: Then the Lord will make thy
plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and sore sickness, and of long continuance: Or in that to come,
Romans 2.5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment
of God: Except they repent and reform.

Q. 10. What Is the first Instruction from the third Commandment?

A. That great and infinite is the Patience of God in forbearing provoking
Sinners so long as he does; Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his
wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction?

Q. 11. What Is the second Instruction from hence?

A. That God is to be justified in the severest of his Judgments, by which at
any time he manifests his displeasure against the profaneness of the World.
Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord
has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. By swearing, and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood
touches blood. Therefore shall the land ^ourn, and every one that dwells
therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of
heaven, yea the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.

Q. 12. What Is the third Instruction from hence?

A. That God takes special notice of, and greatly delights in them that fear
and reverence his Name; Isa. 66.5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble
at his word: Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake,
said, let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appea^ to your joy, and they
shall be ashamed. Mal. 3.16. -- And a book of remembrance was written before
him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.

Q. 13. What Is the last Inference from hence?

A. That those Parents have much to answer for, that by their Examples teach,
or by their Negligence encourage their Children to profane Gods Name. Ier. 5 7.
How shall I pardon thee for this? Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by
them that are no Gods, etc.

Of the Sabbath.
Quest. 57. WHich is the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment is, [Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: Six
days shall thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy Son, nor
thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy
Stranger which is within thy Gates: For in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.]

Quest. 58. What is required in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment requires the keeping holy to God, such set time as
he has appointed in his Word, expressly one whole day in seven, to be an holy
Sabbath unto the Lord.

Quest. 59. Which day of the seven has God appointed to be the weekly Sabbath?

A. From the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, God has
appointed the seventh day of the week to be the weekly Sabbath; and the first
day of the week ever since, to continue to the end of the World, which is the
Christian Sabbath.

Q. 1. What special marks of honor has God set upon this fourth Commandment?

A. God has set four peculiar marks of honor on it.

(1.) It is the largest of all the Commands. (2.) It has a solemn Memento
prefixed to it. (3.) It is delivered both positively and negatively, which the
rest are not. And, (4.) It is enforced with more Arguments to strengthen the
Command on us, than any other.
Q. 2. W^y will God have a Sabbath observed on Earth?

A. God will have a Sabbath on Earth, to give us therein an Emblem of that
Eternal Sabbath in Heaven, wherein his people shall be serving him, and
praising him without interruption, or mixture of any other business throughout
Eternity; H^b. 4.9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God.

Q 3. For what other Reasons will God have a Sabbath?

A. He will have a Sabbath for the honor of his name, Isa. 58.13. If thou turn
away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy p^easure on my holy day, and
call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words. For the good of Men's Souls; Mark 2.27. And he said unto them,
the sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath. And in mercy to the
Bodies of Men and Beasts.

Q. 4. Is this Commandment Moral and Perpetual, or Ceremonial and Temporary?

A. It is, and must needs be Moral, and not Ceremonial; because all the Reasons
that enforce it, are perpetual, and the Sabbath continued, when the Ceremonial
Law ceased, and was vanished; Matthew. 24.20. But pray ye, that your flight be
not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day.

Q. 5. What day of the seven is the Christian Sabbath?

A. The first day of the Week is our Sabbath, since the Resurrection of Christ.
This is the day which was foretold to be our Sabbath; Psalm. 118.24. This is the
day which the Lord has made; we will rejoice and be glad in it. The Lord has
marked it for himself by setting his own Name on it; Rev. 1.10. I was in the
Spirit on the Lords day. And the Apostles and Primitive Church constantly set
it apart to Religious uses and ends; Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of the
week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them,
etc. 1 Cor. 16.2. Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by
him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come.

Q. 6. When does the Christian Sabbath begin?

A. It appears that this day is not to be reckoned from evening to evening, but
from morning to morning; because the Christian Sabbath must begin, when the
Jewish Sabbath ended, but that ended toward the morning; Matthew. 28.1. In the
end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn, toward the first day of the week,
came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary to see the sepulcher.

Q. 7. What is the ground of changing the day?

A. The solemn commemoration of our Redemption by the Resurrection of Christ
from the dead, is the ground of translating the Sabbath from the seventh to the
first day of the Week; Psalm. 118.24. This is the day which the Lord has made;
we will rejoice, and be glad in it. Mark 16.9. Now when Jesus was risen early
the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he
had cast seven devils.

Q. 8. Is it the whole day, or only some hours of the day that are set apart
for God?

A. Not a part, but the whole day is the Lords; and it is as dangerous to halve
it with God in point of time, as it was for Annanias and Sapphira to halve
their dedicated Goods, and bring in but a part. Remember that thou keep holy
the sabbath day, is the Command.

Q. 9. Is there any other day holy besides this?

A. No day but this is holy by Institution of the Lord; yet days of
Humiliation and Thanksgiving may be lawfully set apart by men on a Call of
Providence; but Popish Holy Days are not warrantable, nor to be observed; Gal.
4.10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.

Q. 10. But seeing every day should be a Sabbath to a Christian, what needs any
other set time?

A. Though Christians must walk every day with God, yet every day cannot be a
Sabbath, because God calls us to other Duties on those days, but will have
this to be a solemn and entire day to himself.

Q. 11. But if a man scruple the change of the Sabbath, may he not keep both
days weekly?

A. No; for then by doing more than God requires, he breaks a plain Command,
Six days shall thou labor.

Q. 12. At what time should Christians be up, and at their Duties on the Lords
day?

A. As early in the morning as their strength will permit, to prepare by
private for public Duties; yet the public are not to be entrenched on by
private Duties; Acts 10.33. -- Now therefore are we all here present before
God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.

Of the Sabbath.
Quest. 60. HOw is the Sabbath to be Sanctified?

A. The Sabbath is to be Sanctified by an holy re^ting all that day, even from
such worldly employments and recreations as are lawful on other days, and
spending the whole time in the public and private exercises of Gods Worship,
except so much as is to be taken up in the works of necessity and mercy.

Quest. 61. What are the Sins forbidden in the fourth Commandment?

A. The fourth Commandment forbids the omission or careless performance of
the Duties required, and the profaning the day by Idleness, or doing that which
is in it self sinful, or by unnecessary thoughts, words or works, about our
worldly employments or recreations.

Quest. 62. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment?

A. The Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment are, Gods allowing us six
days of the week for our own employment, his challenging a special propriety in
the seventh, his own example, and his blessing the Sabbath day.

Q. 1. What is the Rest which God requires on the Sabbath?

A. It is not a mere natural or civil, but an holy rest, resembling the rest in
Heaven. wherein the Mind is most active and busy in the work of God, though
the Body be at rest, and the Spirit not wearied with its work; Rev. 4.8. And
the four bea^^s had each of them six wings about him, and they were full of
eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord
God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

Q. 2. May not any works of our civil Calling be ordinarily done on that day?

A. No; it is sinful to put our hands ordinarily to our Callings on that day,
and God usually punishes it: Neh. 13.15, 16, 17, 18. In those days saw I in
Judah, some treading wine-presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and
lading asses, as also wine, grapes and figs, and all manner of burdens, which
they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and I testified against them in
the day wherein they sold victuals. There dwelt men of Tire also therein, which
brought fish and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath, unto the children
of Judah, and in Jerusalem. Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said
unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day? Did
not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and
upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.

Q. 3. May we not refresh our Bodies by Recreations or our Minds by thoughts of
Earthly Business or Discourses on that day?

A. Recreations of the Body which are lawful on other days, are sinful on this
day; and all the Recreations of the Mind allowed on this day, are Spiritual and
Heavenly; Isa. 58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from
doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of
the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor
finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: Then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high
places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father; for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Q. 4. What works may lawfully be done on that day?

A. Christ's example warrants works of necessity, and works of mercy, but no
other, Matthew. 12.3, 4. But he said unto them, have ye not read what David did,
when he was an hungered, and they that were with him, How he entered into the
house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat,
neither for them which were with him, but only for the priests. And ver. 7. But
if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, etc.

Q. 5. What are the holy Duties of the Sabbath?

A. The public Worship of God in reading and hearing the Word preached; Isa.
66.23. And it shall come to pass that from one new moon to another, and from
one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the
Lord. Luke 4.16. -- And as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the
sabbath day* and stood up for to read. And Prayer; Acts 16.13, 14. And on the
sabbath day we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to
be made, etc. And receiving the Sacrament; Acts 20.7. And upon the first day of
the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto
them, etc.

Q. 6. At private Duties in our Families required, as well as public on the
Sabbath?

A. Yes; it is not enough to sanctify the Sabbath in public Ordinances, but
God requires it to be sanctified in Family and private Duties; Lev. 23.3. --
But the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation, ye shall do no
work therein: it is the sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.

Q. 7. With what frame of Spirit are all Sabbath duties, both public and
private to be performed?

A. They are to be performed with Spiritual delight; Isa. 58.13. If thou turn
away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and
call the sabbath a delight, etc. And all grudging at, and weariness of
Spiritual exercises is a sin forbidden; Mal. 1.13. Ye said also, behold what a
weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it says the Lord of hosts, and ye
brought that which was torn, and the lame* and the sick: thus ye brought an
offering; should I accept this of your hand says the Lord? Amos 8.5. When will
the new moon be gone that we may sell corn? and the sabbath that we may set
fo^th wheat? etc.

Q. 8. What is the first Reason annexed to this Command?

A. The first Reason is the sufficient and large allowance of time God has
given us for our civil Callings and earthly business. Six days in the week is a
large allowance.

Q. 9. What is the second Reason annexed to this fourth Command?

A. The second Reason is Gods sanctifying and separating this day by a special
Command and Institution for his service; so that to profane this time is to sin
against an express Divine Statute.

Q. 10. What Is the third Reason annexed to this Command?

A. The third Reason is Gods own Example, who rested the seventh day from all
his works, and blessed this day, by virtue of which Blessing we are encouraged
to sanctify it.

Q. 11. Is it not enough to sanctify this day in our own persons?

A. No; if God has put any under our Authority, their profaning the Sabbath
will become our sin, though we be never so strict in the observation of it our
selves.

Q. 12. May we continue our civil Employments to the last moment of our common
time?

A. Except Necessity or Mercy urge us, we ought to break off before, and allow
some time to prepare for the Sabbath; Luke 23.54. And that day was the
preparation, and the sabbath drew on.

Q. 13. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That we have all great cause to be humbled for our Sabbath transgressions,
either in our unpreparedness for it, our want of delight and spirituality in
it, or the due government of our Families, as God requires.

Q. 14. What is the second Inference from hence?

A. That Christians on the Sabbath day have a fair occasion and help to
real^ize to themselves the Heavenly state, in which they are to live abstract
from the World, and God is to be all in all to them.

Of the fifth Commandment.
Quest. 63. WHich is the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment is, [Honour thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days
may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.]

Quest. 64. What is required in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment requires the preserving the Honor, and performing
the Duties belonging to every one in their several places and relations, as
superiors, inferiors or equals.

Quest. 65. What is forbidden in the fifth Commandment?

A. The fifth Commandment forbids the neglecting of, or doing any thing
against the honor and duty which belongs to every one in their several
places and relations.

Quest. 66. What is the Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment?

A. The Reason annexed to the fifth Commandment is, a promise of long life and
prosperity (as far as it shall serve for Gods glory, and their own good) to all
such as keep this Commandment.

Q 1. What Relatives are directly and more especially concerned in this fi^th
Commandment?

A. All Superiors and Inferiors are concerned in it: Especially (1.)
Political Fathers and their Children; that is, Kings and Subjects: Mark 11.10.
Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, etc. (2.) Spiritual Fathers and
their Children; that is, Ministers and their People: 1 Cor. 4 15. For though
you have ten thousand instr^cters in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for
in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel. (3.) Natural Parents
and their Children; Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your parents in the Lord. (4.)
All Civil Superiors and Inferiors, as Husbands and Wives, Masters and
Servants; Ephesians. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto
the Lord. And Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to them that are your masters
according to the flesh. etc.

Q. 2. What is the Duty of Political Fathers or Magistrates, to their Political
Children or Subjects?

A. It is to rule and govern the people over whom God has set them with
Wisdom; 2 Chronicles. 1.10. Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and
come in before this people. Justice, 2 Chronicles. 19.5.6, 7. And ^e sit judges in
the land, throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city. And he said
to the judges, Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord, who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord
be upon you, take heed and do it, etc. And Piety, 2 Samuel 23.3. -- He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Carefully providing
for their Souls in every place of their dominion; 2 Chronicles. 17.9. And they
taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the Lord with them, and went
about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people. And for their
common outward peace and safety; 2 Chronicles. 17.12. And Iehoshaphat waxed great
exceedingly, and ^e built in Judah castles and cities of store.

Q. 3. What are the Duties of Subjects to their Rulers?

A. It is to pray for them; 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first of
all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men: For kings, and for all that are in authority, etc. To honor them, 1 Pet.
2.17. -- Fear God, honor the King. To obey their just Laws, Romans 13.1. Let
every soul be subject unto the higher powers, etc. And to pay them the Tribute
that is due to them, Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their d^es, tribute to
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, etc.

Q. 4. What are the Duties of Ministers to their people?

A. Their Duty is, (1.) To feed their flock constantly with wholesome food, 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, rebuke,
reprove, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine. (2.) To be full of
bowels of tender Affection to them, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. But we were gentle among
you, even as a nurse cheri^heth her children: So being affectionately desirous
of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only,
but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us. (3.) To pray for them,
Ephesians. 1.15, 16. Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus,
and love unto all the saints, Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention
of you in my prayers. (4.) To watch over them, 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock of
God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, but
willingly, etc. And (5.) To walk as an Example of Godliness before them, Tit.
2.7. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works, etc. All which
Duties require their residence among them, 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed the flock of God
which is among you, etc.

Q. 5. What are the peoples Duties toward their Ministers?

A. Their Duty is, (1.) To esteem and love them dearly for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish you; and to esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake. (2.) To attend on the Word preached by
them, as the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. For this cause also thank we God
without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of
God. (3.) To pray for them and the success of their labors, Heb. 13.18. Pray
for us, etc. (4.) Not to receive light and malicious reports against them* 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an elder receive not an accusation but before two or three
witnesses. (5.) To make a competent and comfortable provision for them, Gal.
6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches* in
all good things.

Q. 6. What are the Duties of Natural Parents to their Children?

A. It is their Duty, (1.) To be tenderly, but not fondly affectionate to, and
tender over them, Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? (2) To educate them for God,
Ephesians. 6.4. And ye fathers provoke not your chi^dren to wrath, but bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. (3) To restrain their Sins by
Correction, Prove. 29.15. The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to
himself, brings his mother to shame. (4.) To provide for their livelihood, 1 Timothy 5.8. But if any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his
own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. (5.) To pray
daily for them, Job 1.5. And it was so when the days of their feasting were
gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them* and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of them all: For
Job said, it may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts:
Thus did Job continually. (6.) To encourage them with endearing language in the
way of Godliness, Prove. 31.1, 2, 3. The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy
that his mother taught him. What, my son! and what the son of my womb! and what
the son of my vows! Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that
which destroys kings.

Q. 7. What are the Duties of Children to Parents?

A. Their Duty is, (1.) To obey them only in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey
your parents in the Lord. (2) To reverence and honor them, Levit. 19.3. Ye
shall fear every man his mother and his father, etc. (3.) To submit to their
Reproofs and Corrections, Hebr. 12.9. Furthermore we have had fathers of our
^flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence. (4.) To provide for
them, if they be poor and needy, and we have ability, Genesis 47.12. And Joseph
nourished his father and his brethren, and all his fathers household with bread,
according to their families.

Q. 8. What shall Children do, when Parents abuse their Authority, by
forbidding Duty or commanding Sin?

A. In such cases Children are to obey God rather than their Parents, Acts
4.19. But Peter and John answered* and said unto them, Whether it be right in
the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye. But yet to
manage their refusals of Obedience with all Meekness and Humility.

Q. 9. What is the first duty of Husbands to their Wives?

A. The first ^uty, on which all other Duties depend, is cohabitation with
them. 1 Pet. 3.7. Likewise ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge,
etc. And nothing can make this Duty void, but a lawful divorce for Adultery,
Matthew. 5.31, 32. -- But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife,
saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery, etc.

Q. 10. What Is the Husbands second Duty to his Wife?

A. True and hearty love to Soul and Body, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives,
even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it. Evidencing it
self in careful provision for them, 1 Cor. 7.33. But he that is married, cares
for the things of the world, how he may please his wife. But especially to
their Souls in winning them to Christ, 1 Cor: 7.16. -- Or how know thou, O
man, whether thou shall save thy wife? And building them up in Christ, 1 Pet.
3.7. Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.

Q. 11. What are the Duties of Wives to their Husbands?

A. It Is their Duty, (1.) To be in subjection to their own Husbands; Ephesians. 5.22,
23. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord: For the
husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church. (2)
To reverence them; Ephesians. 5.33. -- And the wife see that she reverence her
husband. (3.) To express their Reverence in suitable Words and Actions; 1 Pet.
3.6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him, Lord, etc. (4.) To be faithful
to them; Prove. 31.12. She will do him good and not evil, all the days of her
life. (5.) To adorn their Relation with meekness and quietness of Spirit; 1
Pet. 3.4: But let it be the hidden man of the heart in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.

Q. 12. What are the Duties of Servants to their Masters?

A. It Is their Duty, (1.) To be faithful in all things committed to their
charge; Tit. 2.10. Not purloining, but showing all good fidelity, etc. (2.) To
honor them in all respectful Words and Carriages; 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many
servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters worthy of all honor,
etc. (3.) To bear patiently their rebukes; 1 Pet. 2.18, 19. Servants, be
subject to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

Q. 13. What is the first Duty of Masters to their Servants?

A. Their first Duty is to rule over them with gentleness, and not with terror
and rigor; Ephesians. 6.9. And ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing
^oreatning: Knowing that your master also is in heaven* neither is there
respect of persons with him.

Q. 14. What Is the second Duty of Masters to their Servants?

A. To pay them their Wages fully and without delay* Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. Thou
shall not oppress an hired servant that is peer and needy, whether he be of thy
brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates. At his day
thou shall give him ^is hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it, f^r he is
poor, and sets his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee unto the Lord,
and it be sin unto thee. And to provide Food for them convenient; Prove. 27.27.
And thou shall have goats-milk enough for thy ^^od, for the food of thy
household, and for the maintenance for thy maidens.

Q. 15. What Is the third Duty of Masters to their Servants?

A. The third and principal Duty is to engage them as much as in them lies, to
the ways of God, and Duties of Religion, as Abraham did, Genesis 18.19. For I
know him that he will command his children, and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. And Joshua, Josh. 24.15. -- But as
for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

Of the sixth Commandment.
Quest. 67. WHich is the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment is, [Thou shall not kill.]

Quest. 68. What is required in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment requires all lawful endeavors to preserve our own
life, and the life of others.

Quest. 69. What is forbidden in the sixth Commandment?

A. The sixth Commandment forbids the taking away of our own life, or the
life of our Neighbor unjustly, or whatsoever tends thereunto.

Q. 1. What is the natural order of these Commandments in the second Table?

A. In these Commands God begins with the nearest concern of Man, which is
Life, Job 2.4. -- Skin for skin, yea all that a man has, will he give for his
life. Next to that his Command guards his nearest Relative, from whom the best
outward comfort is to rise, his Wife* Mark 10.8. And they twain shall be one
flesh, etc. After that his good Name, which is very precious to him* Eccles.
7.1. A good name is better than precious ointment. And then his Goods, which
support his life, Isa. 3.1. For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hasts, does take
away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the ^^ay and the staff, the whole stay of
bread, and the whole stay of water.

Q. 2. How far does this Command extend it self?

A. It prohibits all Cruelt^, and commands all Help, Care, and Pity, so far as
Men's hearts and hands can go, for the relief and preservation of others, Psalm.
119.96. -- But thy commandment is exceeding broad.

Q 3. Does this Command respect only the outward action, or also the inward
passion of the Soul?

A. It respects and bridles the inward Passion of the Soul, as well as outward
Actions; as Hatred, 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer,
etc. And causless Anger, Matthew. 5.22. But I say unto you, that whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, etc.

Q. 4. Does this Command only respect the lives of others?

A. No, it primarily respects our own lives, and forbids us all things that
tend to the shortening and ruin of them, Ephesians. 5.29. For no man ever yet hated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the church.

Q. 5. How many ways may men sin against this Command, with respect to their
own lives?

A. A Man sins against his own Life, not only by destroying himself, as the
Jaylour would have done. Acts 16.27. And the keeper of the prison awaking out
of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his sword, and
would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been fled; But by
refusing Food or Physic to preserve Life, or macerating our Bodies with
excessive Sorrows. 2 Cor. 7.10. -- But the sorrow of the world works death,
or envy at others felicity: Prove. 14.30. -- But envy the rottenness of the
bones.

Q. 6. How are men guilty of murder with respect to others?

A. Murder with respect to others, may be either with relation to their
Bodies; Numb. 35.30. Whosoever kills any person, the murderer shall be put to
death, etc. Or to their Souls, which is the most heinous murder in the World;
Ezekiel. 3.18. When I say unto the wicked, thou shall sure^y dye, and thou give
him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save
his life; the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thine hand.

Q. 7. Is all destruction of another Life, murder in the account of God?

A. No, it is not, if the Life of a Person be taken away in the course of
Justice* Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
Or in a just and necessary War, Judges 5.23. Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of
the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to
the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Or by pure
Accident, Deuteronomy. 19.5. As when a man goes into the wood with his neighbor to
hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and
the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his neighbor that he dye,
he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live. Or in self defense, Ex^d.
22.2. If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he dye, there shall
no blood be shed for him.

Q. 8. Is there no other way of breaking this Command?

A. Yes, there is: Innocents may be murdered under the forms and solemnities
both of Justice and Religion. So Naboth was murdered by Iezebel, 1 Kings 21.12,
13. They proclaimed a fast, and sit Naboth on high among the people. And there
came in two men children of Belia^, and sat before him: And the men of Belial
witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people,
saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the King. Then they carried him forth out
of the city, and stoned him with stones that he dyed. And the Martyrs by bloody
Papists. And this strongly proves a day of Judgment* Eccles. 3.16, 17. And
moreover, I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there;
and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there. I said in mine heart,
God shall judge the righteous and the wicked: for there is a time there for
every purpose, and for every work.

Q. 9. Are Duels forbidden in this Commandment?

A. Yes* they are, for whatever point of Honor be touched, or whatever
Provocation be given, we are not to be our own avengers; Romans 12.19. Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves, etc.

Q. 1^. What Is the first Inference hence?

A. That we have great cause to bless God for his protecting Law, and for
Humane Laws grounded upon his Law for the protection of our Lives; Romans 13.4.
-- For he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath, upon him that
does evil.

Q. 11. What Is the second Inference hence?

A. That all that are guilty of this Sin, have great cause to be humbled and
afflicted: For it is a crying Sin, Genesis 4.10. -- The voice of thy brothers blood
cries unto me from the ground. Yet not to despair of Mercy upon true
Repentance. Manasseth shed innocent blood, and yet was pardoned upon
Repentance, 2 Kin. 21.16. Moreover Manasseth shed innocent blood very much,
till he had f^^^ed Jerusalem from one end to another, etc.

Q. 12. What^s the third Inference hence?

A. Let all Men watch against Pride, Passion, Malice and Revenge, the Sins of
the Heart, from which this horrid Sin proceeds* Matthew. 15.18, 19. -- For out of
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, etc.

Of the seventh Commandment.
Quest. 70. WHich is the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment is, [Thou shall not commit Adultery]*

Quest. 71. What is required in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment requires the preservation of our own and our
Neighbors chastity in heart, speech, and behavior.

Quest. 72. What is forbidden in the seventh Commandment?

A. The seventh Commandment forbids all unchaste thoughts, words and actions.

Q. 1. What is the first Duty required in this Commandment?

A. The first Duty required in this Commandment is* the preservation of our own
Chastity in heart, lip, and life; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.4. For this is the will of God,
even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication. That every
one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor.
And Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, etc.

Q. 2. Why must we preserve our own Chastity?

A. Because our Bodies are, or ought to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost; 1
Cor. 6.15, 19. Know ye not that your bodies are the membe^s of Christ? Shall I
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God
forbid. What know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which
is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? And it is the express
charge of God that they be kept pure and clean, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. For this is
the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication. That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor.

Q. 3. What is the second Reason?

A. The second Reason is, because of the evil of it to our selves: As (1.) It
injures the Body, 1 Cor. 6.18. -- He that commits fornication, sins
against his own body. (2.) It levels us with the Heathen, Ephesians. 4.17, 19. This I
say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other
Gentiles walk, -- Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. (3.) Dishonours our
Names; Prove. 6.32, 33. But whosoever commits adultery with a woman, -- a wound
and dishonor shall he get, etc. (4.) Scatters our Estates, Prove. 5.10. Lest
strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house of
strangers. (5.) Destroys the Soul; Prove. 6.32. -- He that does it, destroys
his own soul.

Q. 4. What Age is most incident to this Sin?

A. The Youthful Age is most apt to be drawn into this Sin; Prove. 7.7. And
behold among the simple ones* I discerned among the youths, a young man void of
understanding. And 2 Timothy 2.22. Flu also youthful lusts, etc.

Q. 5. How far does this Command extend it self?

A. It extends it self to the Heart, Mind and Fancy, as well as to the Body and
external Actions, Matthew. 5.28. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a
woman, to lu^t after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Q. 6. What are the usual inducements to this Sin?

A. The usual inducements to this Sin are, (1.) Idleness and fullness of the
Creatures, Ez^k. 16.49, 50. Behold, this was the iniquity of thy si^er Sodom;
Pride, fuln^ss of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her
daughters, etc. (2.) Wanton Gestures, Isa. 3.16. More^ver, the Lord says,
because the daughters of Zion are ha^ghty, and walk with s^retched ^orth necks,
and wanton e^es, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with
their feet. (3.) Filthy Communication, Ephesians. 5.4. Neither filthin^ss, nor
foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient, etc.

Q. 7. What Is the first Remedy against this sin?

A. The first Remedy and the most effectual is, to get the Spirit of God within
us, to sanctify and rule us, Gal. 5.16. -- Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

Q. 8. What is the second Remedy?

A. The keeping of a strict wa^ch over the Heart, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart
with all diligence, etc. And over the external Senses. Job 31.1. I made a
covenant with mine eyes: why then should I think upon a maid?

Q. 9. What^s the third Remedy against it?

A. Deep and serious consideration of the danger of this Sin, and what God
threatens against Adulterers, Hebr. 13.4. -- Who^emongers and adulterers God
will judge. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. -- Be not deceived, n^i^her fornic^tors, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminat^ -- shall inherit the kingdom of God.
And how he describes them, Prove. 22.14. The mouth of strange women is a deep
pit; ^e that is abhorred of the Lord shall fact therein.

Q. 16. What Is the fourth Remedy against it?

A. Prayer, Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, etc. And
to evidence our sincerity in Prayer, we must study to shun all occasions of
this Sin, Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before him: and I kept my self from
mine iniquity.

Q. 11. What Is the first Inference hence?

A. What cause those have to bless God, that have been kept from this Sin;
though the best ought to be humbled for their heart pollutions.

Q. 12. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. Let it warn Parents to do what in them lies to prevent the ruin of their
Children by this Sin, (1.) By filling their heads and hands with lawful
business. (2.) By serious Admonitions and Prayers for them. (3.) By keeping
them from vain and tempting Company. (4.) By disposing them seasonably in
suitable Marriage.

Q. 13. What Is the third Inference from hence?

A. Let those that are defiled with this Sin, repent seriously of it, as David
did, Psalm. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which tho^
have broken may rejoice. And apply the Blood of Christ by Faith; for in so
doing, it may be pardoned, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you: but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and by the spirit of our God.

Of the eighth Commandment.
Quest. 73. WHich is the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment is, [Thou shall not steal.]

Quest. 74. What is required in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment requires the lawful procuring and furthering the
Wealth, and outward Estate of our selves, and others.

Quest. 75. What is forbidden in the eighth Commandment?

A. The eighth Commandment forbids whatsoever does or may, unjustly hinder
our own, or our Neighbors Wealth, or outward Estate.

Q. 1. What is presupposed in this Commandment?

A. It presupposes that God has given every Man a propriety in his Estate,
and that no Man's Goods are common to others, except by his consent in times and
cases extraordinary, Acts 2.44. And all that believed were together, and had
all things common.

Q. 2. What is required in this Commandment?

A. It requires of every Man diligence in a lawful Calling, to get and preserve
an Estate for his own and others good, Prove. 13.11. -- He that gathers by
labor, shall increase. Ephesians. 4.28. -- But rather let him labor, working with
his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to give to him that needs.

Q. 3. What else is required in this Commandment?

A. It requires us not only to get and keep the things of the World in a lawful
manner, but to distribute and communicate them to those that are in want, and
not cast them into temptations of sin or inevitable ruin, Isa. 58.10. And if
thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul: then
shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday. 1 John
3.17. But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?

Q. 4. What else is required in this Commandment?

A. It requires in every Man a public Spirit to procure and promote the good
and prosperity of others, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own; but every man
another wealth.

Q. 5. What e^se is required in this Command?

A It requires restitution of all Goods unjustly gotten, or taken from others,
Levit. 6.4. Then it shall be because he has sinned and is guilty, that he
shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he has
deceitfully gotten, etc. And the restoring of Pawns and Pledges, when it is due,
Ezekiel. 18.7. And has not oppressed any, but has restored to the debtor his
pledge, etc. Or things lost, if we can discover the true Owners.

Q. 6. What Is the first Sin forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids all couzening and cheating of others in our dealings and civil
commerce with them, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. That no man go beyond and defraud his brother
in any matter, etc. Prove. 26.28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted
by it, and a flattering mouth works ruin.

Q. 7. What Is the second thing forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids all exaction and oppression of our Neighbor, by going beyond
them, or working on their necessities, or detaining their dues; Lev. 25.14. And
if thou sell ought unto thy neighbor, or burest ought of thy neighbors hand,
ye shall not oppress one another. Prove. 24.28, 29. Be not a witness against thy
neighbor without cause: and deceive not with thy lips. Say not, I will do so
to him, as he has done to me. I will render to the man according to his work.

Q. 8. What Is the third thing forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids all unlawful Weights and Measures, which is no better than Theft
in Gods account, Mic. 6.10, 11. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in
the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable? Shall I
count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful
weights?

Q. 9. What Is the fourth Sin forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids all Family frauds by Children, Prove. 28.24. Whosoever robs his
father, or his mother, and says, it is no transgression, the same is the
companion of a destroyer. Or Servants, Tit. 2.9, 10. Exhort servants to be
obedient unto their own masters, -- Not purloining, but showing all good
fidelity, etc.

Q. 10. What Is the fifth thing forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids all tempting of, or encouraging others to defraud those who have
any trust committed to them, Psalm. 50.18. When thou saw a thief, then thou
consentedst with him. Prove. 29.24. Whosoever is partner with a thief, hates his
own soul, etc.

Q. 11. What Is the sixth thing forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids the taking away of another Goods by open Robbery by Sea or
Land, Job 5.5 -- And the robber swalloweth up their sub^tance. Or clandestinely
and privately, 1 Pet. 4.15. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a
thief, etc.

Q. 12. What is the danger of this sin?

A. It brings Men's Souls, Bodies and Estates under the Curse of God, Zech. 5.^,
4. Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goes forth over the face of
the whole earth: for every one that steals shall be cut off, as on this side,
according to it: -- I will bring it ^orth says the Lord of hosts, and it shall
enter into the house of the thief, etc.

Q. 13. What Is the first Instruction hence?

A. Let all that are guilty of this sin repent, and restore, as they expect
Mercy from God, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more, etc. Luke 19.8.
And Z^cheus stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I
give to the poor, and if I have taken away any thing from any man by false
accusation, I restore him four fold.

Q 14. What Is the last Inference from hence?

A. To excite all to whom God has given a competency of the things of the
World, that they bless God for keeping them from the temptations of this sin,
Prove. 30.8, 9. -- Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food
convenient for me: lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.

Of the ninth Commandment.
Quest. 76. WHich is the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment is, [Thou shall not bear false witne^s against thy
Neighbor.]

Quest. 77. What is required in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment requires, the maintaining and promoting of Truth
between man and man, and of our own and our Neighbors good names, especially
in witness-bearing.

Quest. 78. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Commandment forbids whatsoever is prejudicial to truth, or
injurious to our own, or our Neighbors good name.

Q. 1. What is the general scope and aim of the ninth Commandment?

A. The ninth Command aims chiefly at the preservation and promoting of Truth
amongst Men, Zech. 8.16. -- Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor, etc.
This being of indispensable necessity to the subsistence and welfare of Humane
Society, Ephesians. 4.25. Wherefore p^tting away lying, speak every man truth with
his neig^b^ur, for we are members one of another.

Q. 2. What is the first thing required particularly in this Command?

A. This Command requires every Man to take care of preserving his own good
Name, by ordering his Conversation in universal Integrity, 1 Pet. 3.15, 16. But
sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness
and fear: Having a good conscience* that whereas they speak evil of you as of
evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in
Christ.

Q. 3. What Is the second thing required in this Commandment?

A. It requires all due care to preserve the good Name and Honor of other Men,
as well as our own; for Christians are not to be of narrow and private Spirits,
which center only in their own interests and concernments, Phil. 2.4. Look not
every man on his own things; but every man also on the things of others.

Q. 4. How are we to preserve the good Names of others?

A. We are to preserve the good Names of oaths by an inward esteem of all the
good that is in them, Phil. 2.3. -- In lowliness of mi^d let each esteem other
better than themselves. And manifesting our inward esteem of them by a wise and
seasonable expression thereof for their encouragement in the ways of
Godliness, Romans 1.8. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all,
that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.

Q. 5. How else are we to defend other Men's Names?

A. By our readiness to receive with joy the reports of that good that is in
them, 3 Epist. John 3. For I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came and
testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walk in the truth. And
discountenancing all reproaches maliciously vented against them, Psalm. 15.3. --
Nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.

Q. 6. But what if the report be evidently true?

A. In that case we are to grieve for their miscarriages, as the effect and
fruit of our love to their Souls, 2 Cor. 2.4. For out of much affliction and
anguish of heart, I wrote unto you with many tears, not that ye should be
grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you.
And to discharge our Duties privately and faithfully in order to their
recovery, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against
thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, etc. Winking at and
concealing in love their lesser and common infirmities; 1 Pet. 4.8. And above
all things have fervent cha^ity among your selves: for charity shall cover the
multitude of sins.

Q. 7. What is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. It forbids us to injure others, by raising or receiving Lies and false
Reports, which are highly injurious to their good Names, Col. 3.9. Lie not one
to another, etc.

Q. 8. What else is forbidden in the ninth Commandment?

A. It especially forbids Perjury or false Swearing, whereby not only the
Names, but Estates and Lives of the innocent are injured and ruined, Psalm.
35.11. False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew
not. Prove. 19.5. A false witness shall not be unpunished: and he that speaks
lies shall not escape. A sin which God will punish, Mal. 3.5. And I will come
near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers,
and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, etc.

Q. 9. What else is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. It forbids all whisperings and back-bitings of others secretly, 2 Cor.
12.20. -- Lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, back-bitings,
whisperings, etc. And all Tale-carrying from one to another to our Neighbors
injury, Levit. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy
people, etc. And 1 Timothy 5.13. -- And not only idle, but ta^lers also and
busiebodies, speaking things which they ought not.

Q. 10. What else does the ninth Commandment forbid?

A. It forbids all rash and unwarrantable judging of other Men's Hearts and
final Estates, which is usually accompanied with ignorance of our own, Matthew.
7.1, 3. Judge not that ye be not judged. -- And why beholdest thou the mote
that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own
eye?

Q. 11. What else is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. It forbids the eclipsing of the true worth and honor of others, by a proud
exalting of our selves, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. -- Charity envieth not, charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, etc. Or by crying up one to the
disparagement of another good Man, 1 Cor. 3.4, 5. For while one says, I am of
Paul, and another I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? etc.

Q. 12. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That the best Christians have cause to be humbled for the sins of the
Tongue, whereby God is dishonored, and others are injured, Iam. 3.2. -- If any
man offend not in word, the same is a per^ect man, and able also to bridle the
whole body. And ver. 5.6. Even so the tongue is a little member, and boasts
great things: behold how great a matter a little fire kindles. And the tongue
is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue amongst our members, that it
defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and it is
set on fire of hell.

Q. 13. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. It Is our great concernment to walk with that Piety and Justice toward God
and Men, as to cut off all just occasions of reproach from our own Names, 2
Cor. 11.12. But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from
them which desire occasion, etc. 1 Timothy 5.14, I will therefore that the younger
women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion to the
adversary to speak reproachfully.

Q. 14. What Is the third Inference from this Commandment?

A. To bless God that our Names are kept sweet and honorable in the World
among good Men, 3 Epis: John 12. Demetrius has a good report of all men, etc.
Or if we be reproached, it is by none but* wicked Men, and that for our Duty to
God, Dan. 6.5. Then said th^se men, we shall not find any occasion against this
Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.

Of the tenth Commandment.
Quest. 79. WHich is the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment is, [Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou
shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant,
nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.]

Quest. 80. What is required in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment requires full contentment with our own condition,
with a right and charitable frame of Spirit toward our Neighbor, and all that
is his.

Quest. 81. What is forbidden in the tenth Commandment?

A. The tenth Commandment forbids all coffeehouse with our own estate,
envying or grieving at the good of our Neighbor, and all inordinate motions
and affections to any thing that is his.

Q. 1. What is the principal scope and aim of the tenth Commandment?

A. It is to prevent all occasions of transgressing the other Precepts of the
second Table, by restraining this sin of Covetousness in the heart, Psalm.
119.35, 36. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments: for therein do I
delight. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies; and not to covetousness.

Q. 2. What does this tenth Command require of us in reference to our selves?

A. It requires of us perfect contentment and satisfaction with that estate and
condition, wherein God has placed us in the World, Hebr. 13.5 Let your
conversation be without covetousness: and be content with such things as ye
have, etc. Reckoning it to be good for us, to be in that state we are, though
never so low or afflicted, Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray;
but now have I kept thy word. And ver. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Q. 3. Is contentment with Gods appointments attainable in this life?

A: Some Christians have attained to a very great measure and eminent degree of
Contentment in the midst of changeable and afflictive Providence, Phil. 4.11.
-- I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. Psalm. 16.5,
6. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest
my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly
heritage.

Q. 4. Is there no danger of the sin of discontent in a full and prosperous
condition?

A. Fullness of the World secures no Man from the sin of Coffeehouse with his
own, or coveting that which is another; because the desires enlarge as the
E^tate does, Psalm. 62.10. -- If riches increase, set ^^t your hearts upon them.
An instance whereof we have in Ahab, 1 Kings 21.4. And Ahab came into his house
heavy and displeased, because of the word, which Naboth the Iezreelite had
spoken to him: for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my
fathers, and he laid him d^wn upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would
eat no bread.

Q. 5. Whence does Discontent with our condition spring?

A. It springs partly from our ignorance of Gods wisdom and love in ordering
all for our good, Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good
to them that love God, etc. Partly from our inconsiderateness of the vanity of
the Creature, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8. For we bro^ght nothing into this world: and it is
certain we can carry nothing out. And having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content. And partly from our Unbelief, Matthew. 6.31, 32. Therefore
take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or where
withal shall we be clothed? (for after all these things do the Gentiles seek)
for your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these things.

Q. 6. Is contentment with our own estate all that this Commandment requires?

A. No, it requires a charitable frame of Spirit toward our Neighbors also,
Romans 12.10, 15. Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in
honor pre^e^^ing one another. Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with
them that weep.

Q. 7. What Is the first Sin forbidden in this Commandment?

A. It directly and especially forbids all sinful and inordinate desires and
motions after other Men's enjoyments, Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members
which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence and covetousness, which is idolatry.

Q. 8. What Is the second Sin forbidden in this Commandment?

A. It forbids all cruelty and incompassionateness to others in necessity, and
keeping back from them that relief which is made theirs by Gods command, Prove.
11.24. -- There is that withholds more than is meet, but it tends to
poverty. Lev. 19.9, 10. And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall
not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shall thou gather the
gleanings of thy harvest. And thou shall not glean thy vineyard, neither shall
thou gather every grape of thy vineyard: thou shall leave them for the poor and
stranger: I am the Lord your God.

Q. 9. What is the third Sin forbidden in this Command?

A. It forbids the detaining of the Hirelings Wages, when it is due, Hab. 2.9,
10, 11. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house that he may
set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou
have consulted shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned
against thy soul. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of
the timber shall answer it.

Q. 10. What Is the fourth Sin forbidden in this Commandment?

A. It forbids all inward grudgings at, and envyings of the enjoyments of
others, whether they be inward Goods of the Mind, or outward belonging to the
Body; 1 Cor. 13.4. -- Charity envieth not, etc.

Q. 11. What Is the mischief of Covetousness?

A. It distracts the Heart in Duties, Ezekiel. 33.31. And they come unto thee as
the people comes, and they sit before thee, as my people, and they hear thy
words, but they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but
their heart goes after their covetousness. Provokes the wrath of God, Isa.
57.17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him, etc.
And where it reigns, it becomes Idolatry, Col. 3.5. -- And covetousness which
is Idolatry.

Q. 12. What Is the first Inference hence?

A. It calls all men to humiliation for the inordinacy of their Affections
toward the World, their discontent with their own, and envyings of others
conditions.

Q. 13. What Is the second Inference hence?

A. As ever we would keep clear from this sin, let us make God our portion,
Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou
maintainest my lot. And labor to get the Soul-satisfying comforts of his
Spirit, John 4.14. But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst, etc. 2 Cor. 6.10. -- As having nothing, and yet possessing
all things.

Q. 14. What Is the last Inference hence?

A. If God have given us a sufficiency of the things of this life for our
necessity, let us be satisfied, though we want other things for our delight, 1 Timothy 6.8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content. And relieve
our selves by an expectation of those better things laid up in Heaven for us,
if we be believers, Iam. 2.5. -- Has not God chosen the poor of this world,
rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that
love him.

Of keeping the Law.
Quest. 82. IS any man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God?

A. No mere man, since the fall, is able in this life perfectly to keep the
Commandments of God, but does daily break them in Thought, Word, and Deed.

Q. 1. Wherein does the perfect keeping of Gods Law consist?

A. It consists in the perfect and constant conformity of the internal and
external Actions of Heart and Life, to every Command of God, Gal. 3.10. --
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the
book of the law to do them. Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39. Jesus said unto him, thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind. This is the first and great Commandment. And the second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Q. 2. But if a man commit no external act against the Law, may he not be said
perfectly to keep it, although in mind or thought he should transgress?

A. No, for an inward motion of sin in the Heart, that never breaks forth into
act, is a violation of the Law, and brings the Soul under the curse of it,
Matthew. 5.21, 22. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall
not kill: and wh^soever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment, But I
say unto you, that whosoever is angry with h^s brother without a cause, shall
be in danger of the judgment, etc. And ver. 27, 28. Ye have heard that it was
said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit adultery. But I say unto you,
that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
with her already in his heart.

Q. 3. May not a man keep the Law, if he keep some of its Commands, though he
cannot keep every one of them punctually?

A. No he cannot; for the transgression of any one Command in the least degree,
is a breach of all, and brings the curse of the whole upon a Man's Soul, Iam.
2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he
is guilty of all.

Q. 4. Was the Law never kept by any since it was made?

A. Yes, Adam in his innocent state kept it, for he was made upright, Eccles.
7.29. God made man upright, etc. And Christ perfectly kept it, Matthew. 5.17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill.

Q. 5. What Is the first Reason why no mere man in this life can fulfill and keep
the law of God perfectly?

A. It is because the Law of God is perfect, and the best of Men in this life
are imperfect, Psalm. 19.7. The law of the Lord is perfect, etc. Eccles. 7.20.
For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not.

Q. 6. But may not Men perfectly keep it, when regenerate, and born of God?

A. No, because even in the regenerate there is a Law of Sin which wars against
the Law of God, Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, etc. Romans 7.22, 23. For I delight in the law of God
after the inward man. But I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind, etc. And though they are said not to sin, 1 John 3.9.
(Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, etc.) that is not to be taken
absolutely; but comparatively, as they once did, and others still do.

Q. 7. But did not Christ command the young man to keep the Law?

A. It Is true that Christ did put the young man upon this task, Matthew. 19.17.
-- If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: But it was not on a
supposition that he was able to do it, but to convince him of the impossibility
of Justification that way.

Q. 8. But does not the Apostle say that the righteousness of the la^^ is
fulfilled in Believers?

A. It Is true that the Apostle does say so, Romans 8.4. but the meaning is not,
that we fulfill it in our own persons by our complete obedience to it, but it is
fulfilled in us by our union with Christ, who perfectly kept it; and that
Righteousness of the Law which is in Christ, becomes ours by Gods imputation of
it to us, Romans 4.23, 24. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was
imputed to him. But for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on
him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.

Q 9. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That Justification by our own Works is utterly impossible to the holiest of
Men, Gal. 2.16. -- For by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord, should mark iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand?

Q. 10. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. Hence we learn what an infinite Mercy it is, that God sent Jesus Christ
made under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his son made of a woman, made under the law, etc. To do that for us
we could never do for our selves, Romans 8.3, 4. For what the law could not do,
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness
of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit.

Q. 11. What Is the third Inference from hence?

A. That the dreadful Curse must needs lie on all Unbelievers that are out of
Christ, John 3.36. -- He that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but
the wrath of God abides on him. And seek their Justification by the deeds of
the Law, Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the law, are under the
curse, etc.

Q. 12. What Is the fourth Inference from hence?

A. What a deluge of sin and misery brake in upon the whole World by the fall
of Adam, and all his Posterity being by him plunged under both, Romans 5.12.
Wherefore, as by one man si^ entered into the world, and death by sin: and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Q. 13. What Is the fifth Inference from hence?

A. That the Popish Doctrines of Merits, and Works of Supererogation are false
and groundless Doctrines, springing out of the ignorance and pride of man's
heart.

Q. 14. What Is the last Inference from hence?

A. That all Gods people should sigh under their unhappy necessity of sinning,
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! And long to be with Christ in the perfect state, Hebr. 12.23. -- And to
the spirits of just men made perfect.

Of the inequality of Sin.
Quest. 83. ARe all Transgressions of the Law equally heinous?

A. Some Sins in themselves, and by reason of several Aggravations, are more
heinous in the sight of God than others.

Q. 1, Whence arises the first difference of sin?

A. The first difference betwixt one sin and another, arises from the
immediate object, against which the sin is committed; on this account sins
immediately committed against God, are more heinous than sins committed
immediately against Man; 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against another, the Judge
shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
And all sins of the First Table are greater than those of the Second; yet there
are crying sins against the Second.

Q. 2. What Is the first sin noted for an heinous sin?

A. The sin of Murder is in Scripture set down for an heinous and crying sin in
its own nature, Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from
the earth.

Q. 3. What other sin is noted for a crying sin?

A. The sin of Oppression is noted in Scripture for a crying sin, Hab. 2.11.
For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the o^am out of the timber shall
answer it. Especially the oppression of the Widow and Fatherless, Exodus 22.22,
23. Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. If thou afflict them in
any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry.

Q. 4. What is reckoned in Scripture an heinous sin against the First Table.

A. The sin of Atheism, or denying the Being of God, is a sin of the first
magnitude, Job 31.28. This also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge:
for I should have denied the God that is above. This was the sin of Pharaoh,
Exodus 5.2. And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to
let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go.

Q. 5. What other sin is heinous in Gods account?

A. The sin of Idolatry is a most heinous sin, and goes nearer to the heart of
God than other sins do, Ezekiel. 6.9. And they that escape of you, shall remember
me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I am
broken with their wh^rish heart, which has departed from me, and with their
eyes, which go a whoring after their idols, and they shall loath themselves for
the evils which they have committed in all their abominations. Jer. 44.4. Oh do
not this abominable thing that I hate.

Q. 6. What Is the most heinous of all the sins in the world?

A. The sin against the Holy Ghost is the most heinous of all other sins, and
shall never be forgiven by Him, Matthew. 12.31. -- All manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven unto men.

Q. 7. From whence does this Scripture aggravate sin?

A The Spirit of God in Scripture aggravates and estimates sin from the degree
of light and knowledge Men sin against, Luke 12.47. And that servant which knew
his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many stripes. John 15.22. If I had not come, and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin.

Q. 8. What Is the second thing that aggravates sin?

A. The more Mercies any man sins against, the greater is his sin, Romans 2.4. Or
despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? And especially
when it is against Spiritual Mercies and Means of Salvation, Heb. 2.3. How shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation. etc.

Q. 9. Are heinous and crying sins capable of forgiveness?

A. Yes, great and heinous sins are capable of forgiveness upon true
Repentance, Isa. 1.18. -- Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white
as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shallbe as wool.

Q. 10. From what fountains does the pardon of all sins both great and small
flow?

A. They all flow from the Free Grace of God, Luke 7.41, 42. -- And when they
had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. And through the Meritorious
satisfying Blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.

Q. 11. What Is the first Inference hence?

A. Though some sins are more heinous than others, yet no Sinner should
absolutely despair of Mercy; for the vilest have been pardoned, 1 Cor. 6.11.
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, etc.

Q. 12. What Is the second inference hence?

A. That there are different degrees of torments in Hell, proportioned to the
different degrees of sins on earth, Matthew. 11.21, 22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe
unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
ashes. But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at
the day of judgment than for you.

Q. 13. What Is the third Inference hence?

A. That great Sinners when pardoned and received to Mercy, should excel all
others in love to Christ, Luke 7.42, 43. -- Which of them will love him most?
Simon answered and said* I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he said
unto him thou have rightly judged.

Q. 14. What Is the last Inference hence?

A. Let no Man neglect Christ, because his Sins are not so heinous as others,
because the least Sin without Christ is damning, Romans 6.23. For the wages of
sin is death, etc. And greater Sinners are often called, when lesser are not,
Matthew. 21.31, 32. -- The publicans and harlots go into the kingdom of God
before you.

Of the demerit of Sin.
Quest. 84. WHat does every Sin deserve?

A. Every Sin deserves Gods Wrath and Curse, both in this Life, and that which
is to come.

Q. 1. Wherein does the evil of Sin principal^y consist?

A. It consists principally in the offense it gives, and the wrong it does to
God, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight.

Q. 2. What Is the first offense and wrong Sin does to God?

A. It consists in its enmity to God, Romans 8.7. Because the carnal mind is
enmity against God, etc. Expressed in Scripture by walking contrary to him,
Levit. 26.40. -- They have also walked contrary to me. Fighting against God,
Acts 5.39. Lest happily ye be even found to fight against God. And resisting his
Spirit, Acts 7.51. -- Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost.

Q. 3. Wherein is its enmity to God ^urther discovered in Scripture?

A. It Is discovered under the names and notions of hatred of God, Romans 1.30.
Back-biters, haters of God, etc. Rebellion against God, 1 Samuel 15.23. For
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, etc. And despising the Commandment of
God, 2 Samuel 12.9. Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord?

Q. 4. What are the Attributes of God that Sin wrongs?

A. It wrongs all his Attributes, for it slights his Sovereignty, Exodus 5.2.
And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let Israel
go? Resists his Power, 1 Cor. 10.22. -- Are we stranger than be? Despises his
Goodness, Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, etc. Taxes
his Justice, Ezekiel. 18.25. Yet ye say the way of the Lord is not equal, etc. And
clouds his Holiness, Jam. 2.7. Do not they blaspheme that worthy name, by the
which ye are called?

Q. 5. What does Sin deserve in the course of Justice from God?

A. It deserves all temporal and eternal effects of Gods Wrath, on the Souls
and Bodies of Sinners, all which in Scripture go under the name of Death, Romans
6.23. For the wages of sin is death, etc.

Q. 6. Can these sufferings satisfy God for all this wrong?

A. No, they cannot, and therefore they must, and shall be eternal on the
damned, Matthew. 5.26. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shall by no means come out
thence till thou have paid the uttermost farthing. Mark 9.44. Where their worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

Q. 7. Shall all Sinners hear the desert of their Sins?

A No, all that are out of Christ shall, but Christ has freed Believers from
it, John 3.18. He that believes on him is not condemned, etc.

Q. 8. But is it not hard that Sinners should suffer eternally for the sins of
a few years?

A. No, it is not; for the evil of Sin is not to be measured by the time in
which, but by the object against which it is committed, Psalm. 51.4, 5. --
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, etc.

Q. 9. What learn we from hence?

A. Hence in the first place we learn the impossibility of satisfying Gods
Justice for the least Sin that ever we committed, Job 7.20. I have sinned, what
shall I do unto thee, etc. Psalm. 130.3. If thou Lord should mark iniquity, O
Lord, who shall stand?

Q. 10. What Is the second Instruction hence?

A. Hence we see the necessity of a Mediator betwixt God and us, Psalm. 40.6,
7. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, etc. -- Then said I, lo, I
come in the volume of the book it is written of me.

Q. 11. What Is the third Instruction hence?

A. That the greatest suffering is rather to be chosen than the least sin, Heb.
11.25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

Q. 12. What Is the fourth Instruction hence:

A. It teaches us what an invaluable Mercy the full, free and fi^al remission
of Sin is, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered, etc.

Q. 13. What Is the fifth Instruction hence?

A. It vindicates God in his severest strokes on Sinners, Hos. 6.5. Therefore
have I hewed them by the prophets: I have slain them by the words of my mouth,
and thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.

Q. 14. What Is the last Instruction?

A. Hence we learn the infinite nature of Christ's sufferings, Romans 8.32. He
that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things?

Of what God requires of us.
Quest 85. WHat does God require of us that we may escape his Wrath and Curse
due to us for Sin?

A. To escape the Wrath and Curse of God due to us for Sin, God requires of us
Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance unto Life, with the diligent use of all the
outward means, whereby Christ communicates to us the benefits of Redemption.

Q. 1. What are the things required of us to escape Gods Wrath and Curse due to
us for Sin?

A. The things required of us, are, (1.) Faith in Jesus Christ, Acts 16.31. And
they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine
house. (2.) Repentance from Sin, Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out, etc. (3.) Diligent striving in
the use of all Gods appointed means, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate: for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be
able.

Q. 2. Are these things in Man's power to perform that God requires of him?

A. Though they are our Duties, yet we have no power in our selves by Nature to
perform them, but the power is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient
of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God.

Q. 3. But if Men be in Christ, and justified from Eternity, what need of this?

A. Though God from Eternity decreed, and Christ long since purchased the
Salvation of the Elect; yet have they no union with Christ, till they believe,
Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being
rooted and grounded in love. Nor remission of Sin, Acts 3.19. -- That your sins
may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord; but lie under wrath as others do, Ephesians. 2.3, 12. -- And were by
nature the children of wrath even as others. Ver. 12. That at that time ye were
without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.

Q. 4: If it be God that can only work these Graces in us, to what purpose is
our striving?

A. Gods working does not exclude Man's striving, but more excites and obliges
us to it, Phil. 2.12, 13. -- Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling: For it is God which works in you both to will and to do, of his
own good pleasure.

Q. 5. To what purpose is it to strive in the use of means, except we knew we
were elected?

A. The knowledge of our Election is not antecedent to our diligence, but our
diligence is required antecedently to that knowledge, 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore
the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure,
etc.

Q. 6. Is it not legal to put Natural Men upon striving in the use of means.?

A. No, it is not; for Christ himself enjoins it, Luke 13*24. Strive to enter
in at the strait gate, etc. And so did the Apostles after him, Acts 8.22.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

Q. 7. Is there no escaping Gods Wrath and (...) without Faith and Repentance?

A. No, it is impossible to escape them, John 3.18. -- He that believes not,
is condemned already. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape it we neglect so great
salvation.

Q. 8. But if a man reform his life, and live soberly and justly for time to
come, may he not that way escape Gods Wrath and Curse?

A. No, Sobriety and Reformation are Duties, but it is Faith and Regeneration
that puts men into Christ, and out of danger, Matthew. 5.20. -- Except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. Titus 3.5. Not by works of
righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Q. 9. Do all believing and penitent Sinners escape Gods Wrath and Curse?

A. Yes, they do, and shall for ever escape it, Romans 8.1. There is therefore
now no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, etc. Col. 1.12, 13.
Giving thanks unto God the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the saints in light; who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear son. Joh. 5.24.
-- He that bears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from death unto life.

Q. 10. What is the first Inference hence?

A. Hence it appears how false and dangerous the Antinomian Doctrine is, which
teaches that our Sins are pardoned before they are committed, or we either
believe or repent, contrary to Acts 26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them, which are sanctified
by faith, that is, in me. James 5.20. -- He which converteth the sinner from
the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, etc. Acts 10.43. To him
give all the prophets witness, that through his name whoseover believes in him
shall receive remission of sins.

Q. 11. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. Hence it follows that it is dangerous on the one side not to strive in all
the ways of Duty for Christ and Salvation, contrary to Luke 13.24. Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you, will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able. And as dangerous on the other side to rest in, and
depend on our own Works and Duties. Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness which is of the law; but that which is through the faith
of Christ: the righteousness which is of God by faith.

Q. 12. What Is the third Inference hence?

A. Hence we learn the miserable stare of all unbelievers, and impenitent
persons; the Curse and Wrath of God lies upon them, Gal. 3.10. For as many as
are of the works of the law are under the curse, etc. And their Mittimus for
Hell is already made, John 3.18: -- He that believes not, is condemned already.

Q. 13. What Is the fourth Inference hence?

A. Hence we learn the happy state into which Faith and Repentance brings the
Souls of Men, Acts 13.38, 39. -- By him all that believe are justified from all
things from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.

Of Saving Faith.
Quest. 86. WHat is Faith in Jesus Christ?

A. Faith in Jesus Christ is a saving Grace, whereby we receive and rest upon
him alone for Salvation* as he is offered to us in the Gospel.

Q. 1. What Is the root or cause of Faith?

A. Not the power of Man's will. Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace ye are saved through
^aith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. But the Spirit of
God, Gal. 5.22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith. John 1.12, 13. But as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
name; which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.

Q. 2. How does the Spirit of God ordinarily produce Faith?

A. By the preaching of the Word he ordinarily begets it, Romans 10.17. -- Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; though sometimes he does it
immediately.

Q. 3. Who are the proper subjects of Faith?

A. Convinced and sensible Sinners are the proper subjects of Faith, John 16.8,
9, 10. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness,
and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not on me: of righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more: of judgment, because the
prince of this world is judged.

Q. 4. What is the seat or habitation of Faith?

A. Not only the Head or Understanding, but principally the Heart and Will,
Romans 10.10. -- With the heart man believes unto righteousness, etc. Acts 8.37.
And Philip said, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may.

Q. 5. But is not the assent of the understanding true Faith?

A. The mere assent of the Understanding to the Truths of Scripture, is not
such a Faith as will save the Soul, Jam. 2.19. Thou believe that there is one
God, thou do well; the devils also believe and tremble.

Q. 6. What Is the act of Faith that justifies a Sinner?

A. It Is the receiving of Christ by the full and hearty consent of the heart
that justifies us; John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.

Q. 7. What is the object of Faith?

A. The primary object of Faith is the Person of Christ, and the secondary are
his benefits, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and ^e saved, all the ends of the
earth, etc. Phil. 3.8, 9. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ: the righteousness which is
of God by faith.

Q. 8. May not a man look partly to Christ, and partly to his own Works and
Duties for Righteousness?

A. No, he must eye Christ only, and exclude all others, or he cannot be
justified, Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ: the
righteouness which is of God by faith. Romans 4.5. But to him that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness.

Q. 9. Is it enough to eye the person of Christ only in believing?

A. No, we must eye the Person of Christ, as clothed with all his Offices,
Acts 16.31. And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thine house. Our ignorance needs him, as a Prophet, our guilt as a
Priest, our sins and enemies as a King.

Q. 10. Is true Faith exclusive of all fears and doubts?

A. No, it is not, but true Believers are troubled with many fears and
doubtings, Isa. 50.10. Who is he among you that fears the Lord, that obeys
the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light, etc.
Mark 9.24. And straitway the father of the child cried out with tears, Lord, I
believe, help thou mine unbelief.

Q. 11. Is no man actually justified till he believe?

A. No, he cannot be justified actually till he believe actually, Gal. 3.22.
But the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. John 3.18. He that believes
on him, is not condemned: but he that believes not is condemned already,
because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten son of God.

Q. 12. Is every man that believes justified immediately and fully upon his
believing?

A. Yes, he is, Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ. John 5.24. -- He that hears my words, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation: but is passed from death unto life.

Q. 13. What Is the true character or description of a Believer?

A. He is one that having been convinced of his sin and misery, and of his own
and all other Creatures inability to save him, and of the ability and
willingness of Christ to save him, lets go all hold, and dependence on
Creatures, and his own Righteousness, and casts himself entirely upon Christ
for Righteousness and Life.

Of the Properties, Signs and Means of Faith.
Q. 1. WHat is the first property of Faith?

A. It Is a most precious Grace, 2 Pet. 1.1. -- To them that have obtained like
precious faith with us, etc. And must needs be so, seeing it is the bond of our
union with Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith,
that ye being rooted and grounded in love. That by which we are justified, Romans
5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, etc. And that by which our Souls do
live, Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his faith.

Q. 2. What Is the second property of Saving Faith?

A. The second property of Faith is this, that it is the most useful Grace in
this World to a Believer, it being the Souls eve, Heb. 11:27. By faith he
forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured as seeing him,
who is invisible, etc. Its ^a^d to apprehend Christ, Phil. 3.12. -- That I may
apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. It Is Cordial in
a fainting season, Psalm. 27.3. I had fainted, unless I had believed, etc.

Q. 3. What are the foundations that support Faith?

A. The first foundation or prop of Faith is the power of God, Romans 4.20, 21.
He staggered not at the promise through unbelief: but was strong in faith,
giving glory to God. And being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he
was able also to perform. Heb. 7.25. -- He is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, etc.

Q. 4. What Is the second prop of Faith?

A. The truth and faithfulness of God in his promises, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold
fast the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that has
promised, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it was impossib^e
for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to
lay hold upon the hope set before us.

Q. 5. What encourages the Faith of the Saints?

A. The manifold sweet and sensible experiences of others, Psalm. 74.14. Thou
brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat for the
people inhabiting the wilderness. And especially their own experiences, Joshua
23.14. -- Ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing
has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning
you: all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed thereof.

Q. 6. What Is the first sign of a weak Faith?

A. Staggerings in our assent to Divine Truths argue the weakness of Faith,
Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in faith, etc.

Q. 7. What Is the second sign of weak Faith?

A. Inability to trust God in time of danger, evidenced by sinful haste to
avoid it, Isa. 28.16. -- He that believes shall not make haste.

Q. 8. What Is the third sign of a weak Faith?

A. When we cannot live purely by Faith, except we have some sensible
encouragement, John 20.25. -- Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into
his side, I will not believe.

Q. 9. What Is the fourth sign of a weak Faith?

A. When a new temptation makes us easily let go our former confidence, Luke
24.21. But we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel:
and besides all this, to day is the third day since these things were done.

Q. 10. What Is the fifth sign of a weak Faith?

A. The prevalence of carnal fears in times of trouble argues weak Faith,
Matthew. 8.26. And he faith unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?
etc.

Q. 11. What Is the sixth sign of a weak Faith?

A. Too much carefulness and anxiety about the things of this Life, Matthew.
6.30. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and
to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of
little faith?

Q. 12. What Is the first benefit of a strong Faith?

A. A strong Faith gives much Glory to God, Romans 4.19, 20. And being not weak
in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred
years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs womb: He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in faith, giving glory to God.

Q. 13. What Is the second benefit of a strong Faith?

A. It gives the Soul the ravishing foresight and foretasts of Heaven upon
Earth, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom though now ye see him
not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Q. 14. What Is the last office Faith does for a Believer in this World?

A. It supports and encourages him at Death by the Promises, when all other
Comforts fail, Heb. 11.13. These all dyed in faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them a^ar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.

Of Saving Repentance.
Quest. 87. WHat is Repentance unto Life?

A. Repentance unto Life is a saving Grace, whereby a Sinner out of a true
sense of his sin, and apprehension of the Mercy of God in Christ does with
grief and hatred of his sin, turn from it unto God with full purpose of, and
endeavor after new obedience.

Q. 1. Who is the Author of saving Repentance?

A. The Spirit of God is the Author of it; the Heart by Nature is so hard, that
none but the Spirit can break it, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. A new heart also will I
give, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put
my spirit within you, etc.

Q. 2. In what act does all true Repentance begin?

A. It begins in a true sight and sense of sin, and the danger and misery we
are in by sin, Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their
hearts, etc.

Q. 3. Why does God work such a sense of sin and misery?

A. He does it to make Christ desirable in the sinners eyes, that he may fly to
him, Matthew. 9.12, 13. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, they that
^e whole need not a Physician, ^ut they that are sick. But go ye and learn what
that means. I will have mercy and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Q. 4. Is the ^ight of sin sufficient to Repentance?

A. No; there must be apprehension of Mercy and forgiveness with God, or else
no man can sincerely repent, Romans 2.4. -- Not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance. And this Mercy must be discerned in and through
Christ, -- Zech. 12.10. -- And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.

Q. 5. Wherein does Repentance chiefly consist?

A. It consists in real inward sorrow for sin, as committed against God, Psalm.
51.3, 4. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, etc. A
loathing of our selves for it, Ezekiel. 36.31. -- And shall loath your selves in
your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations. And of our best
Duties as sinful and insufficient things, Isa. 64.5, 6. -- We are all as an
unclean thing; and all our righteousness are as filthy rags, etc.

Q. 6. Wherein else does it consist?

A. In turning from sin as well as grieving for it, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, etc. Prove. 28.13. He
that covers his sins, shall not prosper, but whosoever confesses and forsakes
them, shall have mercy.

Q. 7. Is turning from sin sufficient?

A. No, that is but the negative part of Religion, there must be also a sincere
turning to God, Psalm. 119.59. I thought ^n my ways, and turned my feet unto
thy testimonies. Acts 11.23. -- And exhorted them all that with purpose of
heart, they would cleave unto the Lord.

Q. 8. Is all sorrow for sin saving?

A. No, there is a Repentance that does no good, Matthew. 27.3. Then Judas, which
had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, etc. And
a Repentance unto Life, Acts 11.18. -- Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life.

Q. 9. What are the signs of true repentance?

A. Fear of sin, care to preserve our selves from it, and zeal to honor God by
new obedience, 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed
after a godly sort, what carefulness is wrought it you, yea, what clearing of
your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire,
yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge? in all things you have approved your selves
to be clear in this matter.

Q. 10. Is there a necessity of Repentance in order to forgiveness?

A. Yes, there is, and they are therefore conjoined in Scripture, Acts 5.31. --
For to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And destruction
threatened to the impenitent, Luke 13.3. -- Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

Q. 11. What Is the first Inference hence?

A. That it is a false Doctrine, which teaches us that sins are actually
forgiven from Eternity, and therefore no need either of Repentance or Prayer,
save only for the manifestation of Pardon.

Q. 12. What Is the second Inference hence?

A. That an hard Heart is a dreadful sign of a lost state of Soul, Romans 2.5.
But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Q. 13. What Is the last Inference hence?

A. That there is no cause to despair of the vilest sinner, seeing there is
power enough in the Spirit of God to break the hardest heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. -- I
will take away the sto^y heart o^^ of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh.

Of Christ's Ordinances.
Quest. 88. WHat are the outward means whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption?

A. The outward and ordinary means whereby Christ communicates to us the
benefits of Redemption, are his Ordinances, especially the Word, Sacraments and
Prayer, all which are made effectual to the elect for Salvation.

Q. 1. What makes any thing become a Divine Ordinance?

A. The institution or appointment of God, is that alone which makes a Divine
Ordinance, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, etc.

Q. 2. Are the institutions of all Ordinances alike clear in Scripture.

A. No, some are more explicitly and clearly revealed in Scripture than others;
as the Lords Supper more clear than Baptism, but whatever has Scripture
warrant in the words or consequence, is of divine appointment.

Q. 3. May not men institute Ordinances of Divine Worship?

A. No, this in Scripture is condemned as Will Worship, Col. 2.20, 22, 23.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as
though living in the world are ye subject to ordinances? etc. Which things
indeed have a show of wisdom in will worship, etc.

Q. 4. Why cannot man institute a Divine Ordinance?

A. He cannot do it, because it is the prerogative belonging to Christ's Kingly
Office, Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you.

Q. 5. For what other reason cannot man do it?

A. Because he cannot bless them, and make them effectual to their ends, but
they will be in vain, Matthew. 15.9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines, the commandments of men.

Q. 6. Why are the Ordinances called means of Salvation?

A. Because by and through them, the Spirit of the Lord conveys Spiritual
Graces into Men's Souls, 1 Cor. 1.21. -- It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. 1 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God.

Q. 7. Whence is the virtue of Ordinances?

A. It Is not in and from themselves, or the gifts and abilities of him that
administers them, but from the Blessing and Spirit of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3.7. --
Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God that
gives the increase.

Q. 8. Do all Gods Ordinances attain their end?

A. Yes, there is none of them in vain, but do attain their end, in the
Salvation or Damnation of all that come under them, Isa. 55.10, 11. For as the
rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither, but
waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and b^d, that it may give seed to
the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my word be that goes forth out of
my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which
I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I send it. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.
For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them that perish: To the one we are the savor of death unto death, and to the
other the savor of life unto life, etc.

Q. 9. Are instituted Ordinances the only means of Salvation?

A. They are not the only means; for God can convert Men to Christ without
them, Acts 9.4, 5. And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice, saying unto
him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou, Lord! and
the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: It is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks. But they are the ordinary standing means, Romans 10.14, 15.
How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? etc.

Q. 10. To whom are the Ordinances made effectual to Salvation?

A. To all Gods elect they are effectual to Salvation, and to them only, Acts
13.48. -- As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. John 10.26. But
ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, etc.

Q. 11. What Is the first instruction from hence?

A. That great preparation is due to all the Ordinances before we engage in
them, Job 11.13, 14. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hand
toward him. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles; 1 Chronicles. 29.18. -- And prepare their heart
unto thee.

Q. 12. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. That great Reverence is due to Gods Ordinances, when we are actually
engaged in the use of them, Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the
assembly of the saints: and to be had in reverence of all them that are about
him.

Q. 13. What Is the third Inference from hence?

A. That those people that want Ordinances, are in a sad and deplorable
condition, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. Wherefore remember that ye being in time passed
Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called
the circumcision in the flesh made by hands; that at that time ye were without
Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.

Q. 14. What ^s the last Instruction hence?

A. That those that perish in the midst of Ordinances, and means of Salvation,
will perish with aggravated perdition, Matthew. 11.23. And thou Capernaum, which
art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to hell; for if the mighty
works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day.

Of the Word read and heard.
Quest. 89. HOw is the Word made effectual to Salvation?

A. The Spirit of God makes the reading, but especially the preaching of the
Word, an effectual means of convincing and converting sinners; and building
them up in holiness and comfort, through Faith unto Salvation.

Q. 1. What mean you by the Word?

A. By the Word is meant the Word of God, consigned to writing in the Books of
the Old and New Testament, which though it be ministered by men, yet it is no
other than the very Word of God, and as such to be received, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. For
this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word
of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men: but (as it
is in truth) the word of God, etc.

Q. 2. Whence is the efficacy of this Word?

A. It is wholly from the Spirit of God that it becomes effectual to any man's
Salvation, 1 Cor. 3 6, 7. I have planted, and Apollo watered, but God gave the
increase. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters; but God that gives the increase.

Q. 3. Is the reading of the Scripture an Ordinance of God for men's Salvation?

A. Yes, it is, Deuteronomy. 17.19. And it shall be with him, and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God,
to keep all the words of this law, and these statutes to do them. And in
reading of it, God sometimes comes in by his Spirit to men's conversion, Acts
8.27, 28, 29. And he arose and went, and behold a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of
great authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of
all her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship, was returning, and
sitting in his chariot, read Isaias the prophet. Then the spirit said to
Philip, go near, and join thy self to his chariot, etc.

Q. 4. Is the hearing of the Word a means of Salvation?

A. Yes, it is, Isa. 55.3. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your
soul shall live, etc. 1 Cor. 1.21. -- It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe?

Q. 5. To what end is the Word useful to men?

A. The first end and use of the Word is to convince men of their sin and
misery out of Christ, 1 Cor 14.24, 25. But if all prophecy, and there come in
one that believes not, or one unlearned: he is convinced of all, he is judged
of all. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, etc.

Q. 6. What is it useful for besides conviction?

A. It Is useful for conversion, as well as conviction, Psalm. 19.7. The law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the soul, etc. Acts 26.18. -- To turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, etc

Q. 7. Does the Word convince and convert all that hear it?

A. No, but those only that are ordained to Eternal Life, Acts 13.48. -- As
many as were ordained to eternal life believed.

Q. 8. What else is the Word useful for?

A. To build up the Saints to perfection in Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And he
gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors
and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man; unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness in Christ. Acts 20.32. And now brethren,
I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you
up, and give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified.

Q. 9. May the common people read the Scriptures?

A. Yes, it is a duty commanded by Christ, Ioh. 5.39. Search the scriptures,
etc. and commended by the Apostle, Acts 17.11. These were more noble than those
in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so.

Q. 10. Is it their duty or liberty also to preach it?

A. No, it is not, for besides abilities for that work, there must be a call,
Romans 10.14, 15. -- How shall they hear without a preacher, and how shall they
preach except they be sent? etc.

Q. 11. What Is the first Instruction from hence?

A. That the enjoyments of the Scripture, and an able faithful Ministry to
expound and apply them, is a special Mercy to any people, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and judgments unto Israel, he has
not dealt so with any nation, and as for his judgments they have not knows them.

Q. 12. What Is the second Instruction?

A. That men cannot expect Special and Spiritual Blessings from God in the
wilful neglect of the Ordinances, Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from
hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.

Q. 13. What Is the third Inference?

A. That sad is their condition, who sit all their days under the Word to no
purpose at all, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost: In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine into them.

Q. 14. What Is the last Inference?

A. That Christ's Ordinances and Ministers should be most welcome to the people
to whom God sends them, Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that publishes
salvation, that says unto Zion, thy God reigns.

Of the manner of Hearing.
Quest. 90. HOw is the Word to be read and heard, that it may become effectual
to Salvation?

A. That the Word may become effectual to Salvation, we must attend thereunto
with Diligence, Preparation and Prayer, receive it with Faith and Love, lay it
up in our Hearts, and practice it in our Lives.

Q. 1. If the matter we read or hear be good, is not that enough for our
salvation?

A. No, God requires that the Word be read and heard in a due manner, and the
manner of hearing is of special regard with God, Luke 8.18. Take ^eed therefore
how ye hear, etc.

Q. 2. How many things belong to the due manner of hearing?

A. Three sorts of Duties belong to it; some antecedent, as, preparation and
prayer; some concomitant, as due diligence and retention; and some subsequent,
as practice.

Q. 3. What is due preparation ^or hearing?

A. It consists in serious consideration of the greatness and holiness of that
God, whom we approach in hearing the Word, Acts 10.33. -- Now therefore we are
all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.
And awing the heart even to a degree of holy trembling thereby, Isa. 66.2. --
To him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word.

Q. 4. What Is the principal consideration thus to awe the heart?

A. The Word is in its own nature an heart-searching Word, Heb. 4.12. For the
word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And that
eventually 'twill be the savor of Life or Death to us, 2 Cor. 2.16. To the one
we are the savor of death unto death; and to the other the savor of life unto
life, etc.

Q. 5. What else belongs to due preparation to hear?

A. The discharging of the heart from worldly cares, Matthew. 13.7. And some fell
among thorns, and the thorns sprang up and choked them. And carnal lusts, Iam.
1.21. Wherefore lay apart, all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the engraffed word, which is able to save your souls.

Q. 6. What Is the third act of due preparation?

A. Longing after the Word for further communications of Grace by it, 1 Pet.
2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby. Isa. 2.3. And many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up
to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go
forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

Q. 7. What Is the second antecedent duty of hearing?

A. Prayer is an antecedent duty to hearing the Word, and that both for the
assistance of the Minister, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that
the word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with
you: And our own illumination, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes, that I may
behold wondrous things out of thy law.

Q. 8. What else should we pray for?

A. That God would pour out his Spirit with the Word according to that promise,
Prove. 1.23. -- I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words
unto you.

Q. 9. Does unpreparedness for the Word always hinder its efficacy on the
heart?

A. No, God sometimes is found of them that sought him not, Isa. 65.1. -- I was
found of them that sought me not, etc. But it is a sin to neglect it, and needs
a pardon of God.

Q. 10. What Is the first motive to prepare for solemn duties?

A. That it argues the sincerity of the heart, and in that case God will be
merciful to infirmities, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. For a multitude of the people,
even a multitude of Ephraim and Manasseth, Issachar and Zebulu^ had not
cleansed themselves, yet did eat the passover, but not as it is written:
Wherefore Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, the good Lord be merciful toward
him, that prepares his whole heart to seek the Lord God, the God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary.

Q. 11. What Is the second motive?

A. It Is a sweet sign that God will make that duty successful for which the
heart is prepared, Psalm. 10.17. -- Thou preparest their heart: thou bendest
thine ear to them.

Q. 12. What Is the third motive to preparation?

A. The majesty and jealousy of God, to whom we approach, obliges us to solemn
preparation, Heb. 12.28, 29. -- Whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire.

Q. 13. But must a man neglect the duty if his heart be not duly prepared for
it?

A. No, for that would be to add a new sin to a former, and aggravate it the
more.

Q. 14. In what manner must the prepared heart go to the word?

A. Not in dependence on its own preparations, but upon the Spirits assistance,
Psalm. 71.16. I will go forward in the strength of the Lord God, etc.

Q. 15. What Is the first act of Faith due to the Word?

A. The assenting act of Faith is required to the Word read or preached,
whereby we acknowledge it to be of Divine Authority, 2 Timothy 3.16. And without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory. 2 Pet. 1.21. For the prophecy came
not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.

Q. 16. What Is the second act of Faith required of us?

A. An applying act of Faith is also required of us, Romans 15.4. For whatsoever
things were written afore-time, were written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.

Q. 17. What Is the first end in applying the Word?

A. It is first to be applied to our conviction both of sin and misery, Acts
2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto
Peter, and to the rest of the apostles, men and brethren, what shall we do?

Q. 18. What Is the second end, or use of applying it?

A. It must be applied for our guidance and direction to Christ, John 6.4, 5.
-- Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the father, comes
unto me.

Q. 19. What Is the third use to which it must be applied?

A. We must apply it for our direction through the whole course of Christian
Duties, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye
do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

Q. 20. What other use must we apply it to?

A. It must be applied for our comfort in all inward and outward troubles, Romans
15.4. For whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have
hope.

Q. 21. On what account are we to receive it with love?

A. We are to love it for its Authors sake, because it is the Word of God, Psalm
119.159. Consider how I love thy precepts, etc.

Q. 22. What Is the second motive of love to the Word?

A. The holiness and purity of it deserves and engages our love to it, Psalm.
119.140. Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loves it.

Q. 23. What Is the third motive to engage our love to it?

A. The great and constant usefulness of it to our Souls, as that we cannot
subsist without, Job 23.12. -- I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than
my necessary food.

Q. 24. How does this love to the Word manifest it self?

A. Our love manifests it self in our longing after it, Psalm. 119.20. My soul
breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times. Our
diligent attendance on it, Acts 10.33. Immediately therefore I sent unto thee,
and thou have well done that thou art come. Now therefore are we all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.

Q. 25. How is Faith and Love evidenced to the Word after hearing it?

A. By preserving it carefully in our hearts and memories, Psalm. 119.11. Thy
word have I hid in my heart: that I might not sin against thee.

Q. 26. What Is the best cure for a bad memory?

A. Labor to get an high esteem of it, and an experimental feeling of it, and
frequently meditate on it, Psalm. 119.16. I will delight my self in thy
statutes: I will not forget thy word, Psalm. 119.93. I will never forget thy
precepts; for with them thou have quickened me, Psalm. 119.99. -- Thy
testimonies are my meditation.

Q. 26. How is Faith and Love principally manifested to the word after hearing?

A. It Is principally manifested by bringing forth the fruits of it in our
lives, Col. 1.5, 6. For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye
heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel, which is come unto you, as
it is in all the world, and brings forth fruit, as it does also in you, since
the day ye bear a of it, and knew the grace of God in truth.

Q. 28. What Is the use of all this?

A. This serves to reprove our formal and dead hearing the Word, and excites us
all to evidence and exercise more Faith, Love and Obedience in hearing it.

Of Sacraments as means of Salvation.
Quest. 91. HOw do the Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation?

A. The Sacraments become effectual means of Salvation, not from any virtue in
them, or in him that does administer them, but only by the blessing of Christ,
and the working of his Spirit in them, that by Faith receive them.

Q. 1. What Is the first proper sense of this word Sacrament?

A. It primarily signifies a solemn Oath taken by Soldiers when they List
themselves under a Prince or General; and this Oath was mutual.

Q. 2. Why do we use it seeing it is not a Scripture word?

A. Though the Word be not found in Scripture, yet the thing intended by it is,
and that brings the word in use, for in the Sacraments God obliges himself to
us by confirming his Covenant by it, Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also.
And we oblige our selves to God, Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as
were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are
buried with him in baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from
the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life.

Q. 3. What is here meant by Salvation?

A. By Salvation is meant our complete and final deliverance from sin and
misery, both temporal and eternal. From sin, Matthew. 1.21. -- For he shall save
his people from their sins. From misery, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. -- Even Jesus which
delivers us from the wrath to come.

Q. 4. What is a mean of Salvation?

A. A mean of Salvation signifies any appointment of God, whereby he promotes
and accomplishes his design of saving our Souls, so the word is a mean, Romans
1.16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes.

Q. 5. How does the Word and Sacraments differ as means of Salvation?

A. The Word is appointed to be the first means of begeting Faith; 1 Cor. 3.5.
Who then is Paul? or who is Apollo? but ministers by whom ye believed, etc.
Sacraments are to seal and confirm it, Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, etc.

Q. 6. What is meant by an effectual mean of Salvation?

A. By an effectual mean, is meant such a mean as fully obtains and
accomplishes the end it was appointed for, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. -- Because when ye
received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word
of men; but (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also
in you that believe.

Q. 7. Don't all the means of Salvation prove effectual to men?

A. Though the means of Salvation prove effectual to all Gods Elect, yet they
are so to no others, Acts 28.23, 24. And when they had appointed him a day,
there came many to him into his lodging, to whom he expounded and testified the
kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses,
and out of the prophets from morning till evening. And some believed the things
which were spoken, and some believed not.

Q. 8. Do not the Sacraments save all that partake of them?

A. No, they do not; Baptism may pass on a castaway, Acts 8.23. For I perceive
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And the
Lords Supper may be received unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.27. Wherefore whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Q. 9. What Is the reason they prove not effectual to all?

A. Because their virtue and efficacy is not in themselves, but in God; for we
see they work as Gods Spirit concurs, or not concurs with them, as in the
instance before given.

Q. 10. But is not that for want of wisdom, holiness or zeal in the Minister,
that they have no more efficacy?

A. No, it is not principally, or only from thence; for it is not in the power
of the holiest Minister in the World to make them effectual, 1 Cor. 3.7. --
Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but God that
gives the increase.

Q. 11. Whence is it that Sacraments become effectual?

A. It Is only from the Spirit of Christ working in them, and by them, on the
souls of men, 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one
body, -- and have been all made to drink into one spirit.

Q. 12. What Is the first Instruction hence?

A. That men enjoying all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and partaking of the
Sacraments annexed to the Covenant of Grace, may yet perish for ever, 1 Cor.
10.3, 4, 5. And did all eat the same spiritual meat: and did all drink the same
spiritual drink: (for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them: and
that rock was Christ) but with many of them God was not well pleased: for they
were overthrown in the wilderness. Luke 13.26, 27. Then shall ye begin to say,
we have eaten, and drank in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets.
But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are; depart from me all
ye workers of iniquity.

Q. 13. What Is the second Inference?

A. That men should not idolize some Ministers for the excellency of their
gifts, and despise others, seeing it is not in them to make the means effectual.

Q. 14. What Is the last Inference?

A. That in all our attendance upon the means of Salvation, we should be
careful to beg the Spirit and Blessing of Christ, without which they cannot be
effectual to our Salvation.

Of the nature of Sacraments.
Quest. 92. WHat is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an holy Ordinance instituted by Christ; wherein by sensible
signs, Christ and the benefits of the New Covenant are represented, sealed and
applied to Believers.

Q. 1. How many sorts of Sacraments are found in Scripture?

A. Of Sacraments there are two sorts, some extraordinary and transient, as the
Fiery Pillar, Manna, and Water out of the Rock, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Moreover,
brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were
under the cloud, and all passed through the sea: and were all baptized unto
Moses in the cloud, and in the sea: And did all eat the same spiritual meat:
And did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of that spiritual
rock that followed them; and that rock was Christ). And some ordinary and
standing, as Circumcision and the Passover, before Christ; and Baptism and the
Lords Supper since Christ's death.

Q. 2. How many things are to be considered in every Sacrament?

A. In every Sacrament five things must be considered, (1.) The Author, (2.)
The Parts, (^.) The Union of those parts, (4.) The Subjects, (5) The ends and
uses of it.

Q. 3. Who is the Author of the Sacraments?

A. The Lord Jesus Christ as King of the Church, by whose sole authority
Baptism was instituted, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you, etc. And the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. For I have received of the
Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night
in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake
it, and said, Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you: This do in
remembrance of me.

Q. 4. Are the old Sacraments yet in being and use in the Church?

A. No, they are past away, and the new come in their room. Baptism takes place
of Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh by the circumcision of Christ: buried with him in baptism, etc. And the
Lords Supper of the Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old leaven,
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened, for even Christ our passover
is sacrificed for us.

Q. 5. Of what parts does every Sacrament consist?

A. Every Sacrament consists of two parts, one external and earthly; another
internal and Heavenly, or Spiritual. Bread, Wine and Water, are the external,
Christ's Blood and Spirit the internal parts, Romans 6.3. Know ye not that so many
of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? 1 Cor.
11.25. -- This cup is the new testament in my blood, etc.

Q. 6. Wherein consists the Sacramental union of these parts?

A. It consists by virtue of Christ's institution in three things, (1.) In apt
signification. (2.) Firm obsignation. And (3.) Real exhibition of the Blessings
signified and sealed.

Q. 7. What are the Blessings signified by Water in Baptism?

A. It signifies our implantation into Christ, and communion with him in his
Death and Resurrection, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism
into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father; even so we also should walk in newness of life. And our solemn
admission into the visible Church, Gal. 3.26, 27, 28, 29. For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. There is neither Jew, nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise.

Q. 8. What are the Blessings signified by Bread and Wine?

A. They signify Christ's Body and Blood, broken and poured out for us, with
all the Blessings of Remission, Peace and Salvation purchased by his Blood, 1
Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? for we being many, are one bread, and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread.

Q. 9. Do the Sacraments seal, as well as signify these things?

A. Yes, they do, Romans 4.11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal
of the righteousness of the faith, etc. Their use is to confirm Gods Covenant
with Believers.

Q. 10. Who are the proper subjects of the Sacraments?

A. Believers and their Seed are the subjects of Baptism, but adult Christians
only of the Lords Supper, Acts 2.38, 39. -- Repent and be baptized every one of
you, -- for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

Q. 11. What is the main use and end of Sacraments?

A. It is to ratify and confirm Gods Covenant with Believers, Romans 4.21. And
he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the says,
that he had yet being uncircumcised, etc. 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come.

Q. 12. What Is the first Instruction from hence?

A. That the abuse of such holy and solemn mysteries, is a sin of dreadful
aggravation, and such as God will punish, 1 Cor. 11.27. Wherefore whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Q. 13. What Is the second Instruction?

A. Hence we learn the tender care and love of Christ over the Church in
instituting such useful and comfortable Ordinances for us.

Of the number of Sacraments.
Quest. 93. WHich are the Sacraments of the New Testament?

A. The Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism, and the Lords Supper?

Q. 1. How many Sacraments has Christ appointed in the New Testament?

A. Christ has appointed two and no more, these being sufficient for our
initiation and confirmation.

Q. 2. How many have the Papists added to them?

A. They have added five more, viz. Confirmation, Penance, Ordination,
Marriage, and Extreme Unction.

Q. 3. What is their Sacrament of Confirmation?

A. It is the anointing of the Baptized with Chrism in the Forehead, with this
Form of Words, I sign thee with the sign of the Cross, and confirm thee with
the Chrism of Salvation, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Q. 4. What Is their ground for this practice?

A. The abuse of that Scripture, Heb. 6.2. Of the doctrine of baptisms, and
laying on of hands, etc. which by a figurative speech, expresses the whole
standing Ministry in the Church by laying on of Hands.

Q. 5. What Is their Sacrament of Penance?

A. It is Repentance manifested by outward signs, to which the word of
Absolution coming, makes it a Sacrament misgrounded on, John 20.23. Whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain,
they are retained.

Q. 6. What is their Sacrament of Orders or Ordination?

A. It is the laying on of Hands in Ordination of Ministers, by which they
conceive Spiritual Grace is given by mistake of, 2 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore I put
thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by the
putting on of my hands.

Q. 7. What Is their fourth superadded Sacrament?

A. It is Marriage, grounded upon those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.32. This
is a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the church. Which only
shows a similitude of our union with Christ, not an instituted sign to that end.

Q. 8. What is their fifth superadded Sacrament?

A. Extreme Unction, or anointing the Sick near Death with consecrated Oil,
grounded on Mark 6.13. -- And anointed with oil many that were sick and healed
them. And Iam. 5.14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the
church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the
Lord. Which are neither Sacramental-Rites, nor of ordinary standing use in the
Church, but extraordinary and temporary for that Age.

Q. 9. What learn we hence?

A. Hence we learn how apt men are to corrupt Gods Ordinances by their
superstitious additions, Matthew. 15.9. -- Teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.

Q. 10. What Is the second Instruction hence?

A. How just and necessary our separation from Rome is, who have grossly
corrupted Gods Ordinances, and left men no other remedy, Rev. 13.6. And he
opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and his
tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heaven.

Q. 11. What Is the third Instruction?

A. That the reformation of Religion is an invaluable Mercy, a great
deliverance from Spiritual Bondage, Rev. 11.19. And the temple of God was
opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of this testament,
and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and
great hail.

Q. 12. What Is the fourth Instruction?

A. That Rome shall certainly fall, and all her Adherents, for the horrid
injury done by them to Christ, and the Souls of men, Rev. 18.20, 21. Rejoice
over her thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has avenged
you on her. And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast
it into the Sea, saying thus with violence, shall that great city Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

What is Baptism?
Quest. 94. WHat is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the washing of Water, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, does signify and seal our
ingrafting into Christ, and partaking of the benefits of the Covenant of Grace,
and our engagement to be the Lords.

Q. 1. What is the external part of Baptism?

A. It is pure unmixed Water, Heb. 10.22. -- And our bodies washed with pure
water. And therefore it is a vile practice of Papists to add Oil, Salt and
Spittle to Water in Baptism.

Q. 2. What does Water in Baptism signify?

A. It signifies the Blood of Christ, Rev. 1.5. -- Unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Q. 3. What Is the first resemblance it has to Christ's Blood?

A. In the freeness of it to all, it represents the unpurchased Blood of
Christ, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he
that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money, and without price.

Q. 4. What Is the second resemblance to Christ's Blood?

A. It resembles it in its refreshing quality; Water refreshes the thirsty; so
does Christ's Blood, John 6.35. -- He that believes on me, shall never thirst.

Q. What Is the third resemblance it has to Christ's Blood?

A. The cleansing property of Water shows the purifying virtue of Christ's
Blood, Heb. ^.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God.

Q 6. What Is the fourth resemblance it has to Christ's Blood?

A. It resembles it in the necessity of it; for as the Body cannot live without
Water, so neither can the Soul without Christ's Blood, Heb. 9.23. It was
therefore necessary, that the patterns of things in the heavens should be
purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with bitter sacrifices
than these.

Q. 7. What Is the fifth resemblance of Water to the Blood of Christ?

A. As Water neither refreshes, nor purifies the Body without application; so
neither does Christ's Blood refresh or purify the Soul till applied, 1 Cor.
1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption.

Q. 8. Is it necessary to plunge the whole body under water in Baptizing every
person?

A. The word [Baptize] signifying as well to wash, as to plunge: A person may
be truly Baptized that is not plunged* And we cannot think by the circumstances
of time and place, that the Iaylor in the night was carried to a River out of
the City, Acts 16.33. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed
their stripes, and was baptized, he, and all his, straightway.

Q. 9. But is it not said, John 3.23. That John was baptizing in Aenon near to
Salim, because there was much water there; and they came and were baptized?

A. The word signifies many waters (that is) springs of waters there, which are
known by Travelers to be small, not capable of plunging into.

Q. 10. What are the benefits accruing to us by Baptism?

A. The benefits are twofold; some external, called the fatness of the
Olive Tree, (i. e.) Ordinances and visible Membership, Romans 11.17. -- And thou
being a wild olive tree, were grafted in amongst them, and with them, partakest
of the root and fatness of the olive tree. And some spiritual and saving, 1
Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us (not
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Q. 11. What engagements are said on the Baptized?

A. They are engaged to be the Lords people and walk suitable to that
engagement, Romans 6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of life.

Q. 12. Is Baptism to be reiterated as the Lords Supper?

A. No; for the Lords Supper is a Sacrament for nourishing, but this for
implantation* Rom 6.4, 5. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection.

Q. 13. Does Baptism regenerate men, and confer saving Grace?

A. No, it does not in its own virtue convey Grace, no more than the Lords
Supper; but the Spirit of God is the Author of Grace, and works it as he
pleases before, or after Baptism.

Of the subjects of Baptism.
Quest. 95. TO whom is Baptism to be administered?

A. Baptism is not to be administered to any that are out of the visible Church,
till they profess their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him, but the infants
of such as are members of the visible Church are to be Baptized.

Q. 1. Who are to be Baptized?

A. Believers and their insane offspring, Acts 2.39. For the promise is to
you, and your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call.

Q. 2. How does it appear that the infant seed of Believers ought to be
Baptized?

A. It appears by this, that they being Abraham's Seed, were taken into Covenant
with God, and ordered to have the sign of the Covenant applied to them, and
that Grant was never reversed, Genesis 17.7, 10. And I will establish my covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations for an
everlasting covenant to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. This is
my covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee,
every man-child among you shall be circumcised.

Q. 3. But was not that the Covenant of Works, and so will not ^old to infer
their privilege under the Covenant of Grace?

A. No, it was not; for God never did, nor will become a God by way of special
interest to any people, by virtue of the Covenant of Works, since the breach of
it by the fall.

Q. 4. But if it were the Covenant of Grace, how does it appear the right of
Believers Infants is still the same it was before in Abraham's time?

A. It appears plainly from the Apostles own words and arguments, Acts 2.39.
For the promise is to you, and to your children, etc.

Q. 5. But though Infants then were members of Gods visible Church among the
Jews, how does it appear they are so now when God has vast them off?

A. It appears the membership and privileges are as sure and ample to them
now, that are the Children of Gentile-believers, as ever they were to the
Jewish Infants, Romans 11.17. And if some of the branches be broken off, and then
being a wild olive tree were grafted in amongst them, and with them partakest
of the root and fatness of the olive tree.

Q. 6. How else does it appear they are within the Covenant?

A. It appears by this, that they are pronounced holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. -- Else
were your children unclean, but now are they holy. Which is a foederal
holiness; and none out of Covenant can be holy by Covenant.

Q. 7. But may not that place mean only their legitimacy?

A. No, it cannot; for then the Apostle must pronounce all the Infants in the
World bastards, that descend not at least from one believing Parent.

Q. 8. But Infants are not capable to Covenant with God, or perform Covenant
Duties, and therefore why should they be admitted to Covenant Privileges?

A. A Child now of eight days old is as capable of being admitted into
Covenant with God, as Children of the same age were in Abraham's days; and then
it is manifest they were admitted.

Q. 9. Though they were admitted by Circumcision then, will it follow they may
be so by Baptism now, seeing that Ordinance is abolished?

A. Yes, it will; for though Circumcision cease, yet Baptism is come into its
place, Col. 2.10, 11, 12. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all
principality and power. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ buried with him in baptism, etc.

Q. 10. But Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant of Works, and the argument
will not hold from a Seal of the Covenant of Works, to a Seal of the Covenant
of Grace?

A. Circumcision never was, nor was intended to be a Seal of the Covenant of
Works, but of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. And he received the sign
of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith that he had, yet
being uncircumcised, etc.

Q. 11. But have we no express command in the New Testament to baptize Infants?

A. There needed no new command; their privilege had been settled many ages
before upon them, and never reversed by Christ, or his Apostles, but their
former right declared to continue still to them, Acts 2.39. For the promise is
to you and your children, etc.

Q. 12. But if they have a right, we might expect to find some examples of
their baptizing?

A. It Is manifest that Believers households were baptized with them, Acts 16.15,
33. And when she was baptized, and her household, etc. Ver. 33. And he took them
the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was baptized, he, and
all his straightway. And if Infants are not named, so neither are any of Age,
born of Christian Parents.

Q. 13. But many trust to their Infant Baptism, as to their Regeneration, and
so much mischief's done?

A. They do so; yet the Duty is not therefore to be neglected. The preaching of
Christ is to some a stumbling block, yet Christ must be preached for all that.

Q. 14. But many baptized Infants prove naught?

A. And so do many baptized at Age too. Duties are not to be measured by events.

What is the Lords Supper?
Quest. 96. WHat is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherein by giving and receiving Bread and
Wine according to Christ's appointment, his Death is showed forth; and the
worthy receivers are, not after a corporal and carnal manner, but by Faith made
partakers of his Body and Blood, with all his benefits to their spiritual
nourishment, and growth in Grace.

Q. 1. By whose authority is the Lords Supper instituted and appointed?

A. By the sovereign authority of Christ the King of the Church, and not by the
pleasure of man, 1 Cor. 11.23. For I have received of the Lord that which also
I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread.

Q. 2. Of what parts does this Sacrament consist?

A. It consists of two parts, one earthly and visible; to wit, Bread and Wine,
the other spiritual and invisible, the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

Q. 3. How do these earthly and heavenly things become a Sacrament?

A. By the word of institution and blessing coming from Christ upon them, 1
Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered
unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took
bread. And when he had given thanks, he brake it; and said, Take, eat, this is
my body which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same
manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new
testament in my blood: this do as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

Q. 4. When did Christ ordain and institute this Sacrament?

A. He instituted it in the same night he was betrayed, 1 Cor. 11.23. -- The
Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread. It could not be
sooner, because the Passover must be first celebrated, and by the institution
of this abrogated. Nor later, for soon after he was apprehended.

Q. 5. What does the time of its institution teach us?

A. It teaches us how great Christ's care and love to his people is, that he
makes in his Ordinance such provision for our comfort, though he knew his own
bitter agony was just at hand.

Q. 6. What is the general use and end of this Sacrament?

A. It is to confirm, seal and ratify the New Covenant to Believers, 1 Cor.
11.35. -- This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye as often as ye
drink it, in remembrance of me.

Q. 7. What are the particular ends and uses of it?

A. The first particular end and use of it is, to bring Christ and his
Sufferings afresh to our remembrance, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. -- This do in
remembrance of me.

Q. 8. What kind of remembrance of Christ is here intended?

A. Not a mere speculative, but an affectionate heart-melting remembrance of
him, like that of Peter, Matthew. 26.75. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus
which said unto him, before the cock shall crow, thou shall deny me thrice. And
he went out and wept bitterly. Or of Joseph, Genesis 43.29, 30. -- And Joseph made
haste: for his bowels did yern upon his brother, and he sought where to weep,
and he entered into his chamber, and wept there.

Q. 9. What does this end of the Sacrament imply?

A. It implies this, that the best of Gods people are too apt to forget Christ,
and what he has endured and suffered for them.

Q. 10. What else does it imply?

A. It implies this, that none but those that have the saving knowledge of
Christ, and have had former acquaintance with Christ, are fit for this
Ordinance; for no man can remember what he never knew, 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

Q. 11. What Is the second particular use and end of this Sacrament?

A. It is to represent Christ to Believers, as an apt sign of him, and of his
Death; and that both memorative, significative, and instructive.

Q. 12. How is it a memorative sign of Christ?

A. It brings Christ to our remembrance, as his Death and bitter Sufferings are
therein represented to us, by the breaking of Bread, and pouring forth of Wine,
1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show
forth the Lords death till he come.

Q. 13. How is it a significative Ordinance?

A. It is a significative Ordinance, not only as it represents Christ's
sufferings, but the Believers union with him as the head, and with each other
as members of his body, 1 Cor. 10.61, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many, are one bread, and
one body, etc.

Q. 14. In what respect is it an instructive sign?

A. It is an instructive sign in diverse respects; namely, First, As it teaches
us that Christ is the only nutritive bread by which our Souls live, John 6.51.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven: If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I shall give is my flesh,
which I shall give for the life of the world. And Secondly, As it instructs us
that the New Testament is now in its full force by the death of Christ the
Testator* Heb. 9.16, 17. For where a testament is, there must also of necessity
be the death of the testator. For a testament is of force after men are dead;
otherwise it is of no force at all, whilst the testator lives.

Thus much of the Author, Nature and Ends of the Lords Supper.

Of the Elements, Actions and Subjects of it.
Q. 1. ARe not Bread and Wine too small and common things to represent the body
and blood of Christ?

A. Though a bit of Bread, and a draught of Wine, be things of small value in
themselves, yet they are great in respect of their use and end. A pennyworth
of Wax is a small thing in its self; but being applied to the Label of a Deed,
may be advanced to the worth of thousands of pounds, as it receives the seal to
a great inheritance.

Q. 2. Is not the bread in the Sacrament turned into the very body of Christ it
self by Transubstantiation?

A. No, it is not; but the Elements retain still their own proper Nature of
Bread and Wine after the words of Consecration, and are so called, 1 Cor.
11.26. For as often as ye eat this bread, etc. Matthew. 26.29. But I say unto
you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the vine, until that day when
I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.

Q. 3. What is the first argument by which Protestants confute the Popish
Doctrine of Transubstantiation?

A. The first Argument against it, is taken from the end of the Sacrament,
which is to bring Christ's Body and Blood to our remembrance, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
-- This do in remembrance of me. Now signs for remembrance are of things
absent, not present.

Q. 4. What Is the second Argument?

A. Because the language in which our Savior spoke, had no other property of
expression, there being no other word for signify but is, in stead thereof, as
is manifest in both Testaments, Genesis 41.27. And the seven ill-favored kine
that came up after them, are seven years of famine. Rev. 1.20. -- The seven
stars are the angels of the seven churches; and the seven candlesticks which
thou saw are the seven churches.

Q. 5. What Is the third Argument against Transubstantiation?

A. The manifold gross absurdities that naturally and necessarily follow on
this Doctrine, show the falseness of it, and that it is justly rejected and
abhorred by all sound Christians.

Q. 6. What Is the first absurdity that follows it?

A. This Doctrine allows that to a silly Priest, which is not to be allowed to
all the Angels in Heaven. It allows him power to make his Maker, and eat his
God. And in justifying this by the Omnipotency of God, they say no more than
what a Turk may say to justify the most ridiculous fooleries of the Alcoran.

Q. 7. What Is the second absurdity of Transubstantiation?

A. The second absurdity is this, that it denies the truth of the testimony
given by the senses of all men, that it is real Bread and real Wine after
Consecration, and not Flesh and Blood. And if the testimony of sense be not
certain, then the being of God cannot be proved by the things that are made,
contrary to Romans 1.20. For the invisible things of him, from the creation of
the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even
his eternal power and godhead, etc. Nor the truth of Christ's Resurrection, by
seeing and feeling, contrary to Luke 24.39. Behold my hands and my feet, that
it is I my self; handle me and see, etc.

Q. 8. What Is the third absurdity of Transubstantiation?

A. The third absurdity is this, that in affirming the accidents of Bread and
Wine to remain, and their substance to vanish, they affirm that there is
length, breadth, thickness, moisture and sweetness, and yet nothing long,
broad, thick, moist or sweet, which is a perfect contradiction.

Q. 9. What Is the fourth absurdity of Transubstantiation?

A. It implies that the entire living body of Christ sat at the Table, and at
the same time was dead, and in the Disciples mouths and stomachs in the first
Sacrament; and that in all after Sacraments it is wholly in Heaven, and wholly
in as many thousand places in the World, as there are Sacraments administered.

Q. 10. What does the breaking of this bread, and pouring out of wine in the
Sacrament signify?

A. It signifies the violent painful death, and bitter sufferings of Christ for
us, 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come.

Q. 11. What does the giving and taking of the Sacramental bread and wine
signify?

A. These actions signify Gods exhibiting, and the Believers applying of
Christ and all his benefits to their Souls.

Q. 12. Who are fit subjects to receive the Lords Supper?

A. None that are grossly ignorant, scandalous, or unbelievers in their Natural
state, for such cannot examine themselves as the Word requires, 1 Cor. 11.28.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. But do eat and drink Judgment to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.29. For he
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself,
not discerning the Lords body.

Q. 13. Are morally honest and sober persons qualified for this Sacrament?

A. No; Civility and Morality do not qualify persons, they are not the
Wedding Garment; but regenerating Grace and Faith does in the smallest measure,
Matthew. 22.12. And he says unto him, friend, how came thou in hither, not
having a wedding garment, etc. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood Christ? the bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we being many are one bread,
and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.

Of the Duties of Communicants.
Quest. 97. WHat is required to the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper?

A. It is required of them that would worthily partake of the Lords Supper,
that they examine themselves, of their knowledge to discern the Lords Body, of
their Faith to feed upon him, of their Repentance, Love and new Obedience, lest
coming unworthily, they eat and drink judgment to themselves.

Q. 1. What are the Duties of worthy receivers?

A. There are three sorts of Duties incumbent on them, some antecedent to it,
some concomitants of it, and some subsequent to it

Q. 2. What are the antecedent Duties to it?

A. They are two, (1.) Examination of their Graces. (2.) Preparation of their
Souls. Examination of their Graces. 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. But let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
discerning the Lords body. And preparation of their Souls, 1 Cor. 5.8.
Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven
of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

Q. 3. What Is the first Grace to be tried?

A. Our saving knowledge of God in Christ, without which we cannot discern the
Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

Q. 4. What are we to enquire of touching our knowledge of God in Christ?

A. We are to examine whether it be competent for quantity, and savingly
operative and influential on the Heart and Life for quality, Hos. 4.6. My
people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, etc. 1 Cor. 13.1. Though I speak
with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as a
sounding brass or tinkling cymbal.

Q. 5. When is knowledge competent and influential?

A. When we truly understand by the teachings of the Father, the sin and misery
of the Fall, the nature and necessity of Christ, and under these convictions
come to him in the way of Faith, John 6.45. -- Every man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me. And subject our selves
to him in sincere obedience, Matthew. 11.28, 29. Come unto me, all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me: for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Q. 6. What are we to examine our selves about besides knowledge?

A. We are obliged to examine our selves about our Faith, whether we have it in
any saving degree, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the
faith: prove your selves, etc. For without Faith we cannot please God, Heb.
11.6. But without faith it is impossible to please God, etc. Nor enjoy
Spiritual Communion with Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love.

Q. 7. What other Grace must be examined and sought for?

A. We must examine our Love to Christ and all that are his, because no gifts
signify any thing without Love, 1 Cor. 13.2. And though I have the gift of
prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing.

Q. 8. What else must worthy receivers examine themselves about?

A. The sincerity of their hearts evidenced by their Obedience, without which
they cannot worthily approach the Table, 1 Cor. 5.8. Therefore let us keep the
feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness;
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

Q. 9. But if upon examination we are in doubts about our Faith and Sincerity,
must we forbear?

A. If our doubts arise from the weakness, and not the total want of Grace,
such doubts should not hinder us, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith
receive you, etc.

Q. 10. What is the danger of coming to the Lords Table without these Graces?

A. The danger is exceeding great to Soul and Body. (1.) To the Soul, 1 Cor.
11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, etc. And to the Body, 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause many
are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

Q. 11. What are the Duties of worthy receivers at the Lords Table.

A. Their Duties at the Table are to discern Christ by the eye of Faith, under
those signs of his Body and Blood, 1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lords body. On the discovery of him to mourn bitterly for sin, Zech. 12.10.
-- And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as
one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. And to excite all their Graces
into vigorous acts for the applying Christ to themselves, Cant. 4.16. Awake, O
north wind, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof
may flow out, etc.

Q. 12. What is the Duty of worthy receivers after the Sacrament?

A. Their Duty is heartily to bless God for Christ, and the benefits of his
Blood, Matthew. 26.30. And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the
mount of Olives. To double their care and watchfulness against sin, Ephesians.
4.30. And grieve not the holy spirit, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
redemption. And to grow more fruitful in all spiritual obedience, Col. 1.10.
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

Q. 13. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That the abuse and profanation of this Ordinance, either by coming to it
for carnal ends, or being forced upon it by fear of sufferings, or approaching
to it without due qualifications, is a dreadful sin, which God will terribly
avenge, Matthew. 22.11, 12, 13. And when the king came in to see the guests, he
saw there a man, which had not on a wedding garment. And he says unto him,
friend, how came thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? and he was
speechless. Then said the king unto the servants, bind him hand and foot, and
take him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

Q. 14. What Is the second Inference from it?

A. That great and manifold are the blessings and advantages, which Christians
duly prepared may reap by this Ordinance.

Of Prayer.
Quest. 98. WHat is Prayer?

A. Prayer is an offering up of our desires unto God for things agreeable to
his Will, in the name of Christ, with confession of our sins and thankful
acknowledgment of his mercies.

Q. 1. Who is the proper and only object of Prayer?

A. God only is the proper object of Prayer; it is a part of his Natural
Worship: therefore it is peculiarly his Honor and Prerogative, and none else
can hear and answer them, but God, Psalm. 65.2. O thou that bear Prayer, unto
thee shall all flesh come.

Q. 2. Through whom, or in whose name are our Prayers to be directed to God?

A. Our Prayers are to be directed to God only through Christ, and his Name,
and not by the mediation of Angels or Saints, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you
of your reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of angels. For the merit
and satisfaction of Christ alone give success and acceptance to our Prayers,
Rev. 8.3, 4. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden
censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with
the prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar, which was before the
throne. And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the saints
ascended up before God out of the angels hand. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one
God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

Q. 3. What Is the first property or quality of acceptable Prayer?

A. No Prayer can be acceptable to God, except the matter of it be agreeable to
his Will, Iam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may
consume it upon your lusts. 1 John 5.14, 15. And this is the confidence that we
have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he bears us. And
if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions that we desired of him.

Q. 4. Is it enough to make Prayer acceptable, that the matter is agreeable to
Gods will?

A. No, it is not; for the manner as well as the matter, must be so too, Psalm.
66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Q. 5. What Is the first qualification of an acceptable Prayer, respecting the
manner of it?

A. That it be sincere, and flowing from the heart of a regenerate person,
Prove. 15.29. The Lord is far from the wicked; but he hears the prayer of the
righteous. Jer. 29.13. And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search
for me with all your heart.

Q. 6. What Is the second qualification of Prayer, respecting the manner?

A. It must be performed in the heart of a Child of God by the Spirit of
Adoption, Gal. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of
his Son in our hearts: crying, Abba, Father. Romans 8.26. Likewise the spirit
also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought: but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings, which
cannot be uttered.

Q. 7. What Is the third qualification of an acceptable Prayer, respecting the
manner?

A. It must be servent and importunate, not cold and formal, Iam. 5.16. -- The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Matthew. 7.7. Ask, and
it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened
unto you.

Q. 8. Wherein does true importunity with God in Prayer consist?

A. Not in the multitude of words, Matthew. 6.7. But when ye pray, use not vain
repetitions as the heathen do: for they think they shall be heard for their
much speaking. But in an holy earnestness of Spirit to be heard, Psalm 143.7.
Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails; hide not thy face from me, lest I
be like unto them that go down into the pit. A prudent choice of prevalent
Arguments, Job 23.4. I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth with
arguments. And a resolute persistance in our requests till they be granted*
Isa. 62.7. And give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem
a praise in the earth.

Q. 9. Do not Prayers thus qualified sometimes miscarry?

A. God may delay and suspend the answer of them for a time, Psalm. 22. 2. O my
God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear^^ not, etc. But sooner or latter, God
will always answer them, either in the very thing we ask, 1 John 5.15. -- We
know that we have the petitions that we desired of him. Or in that which is
equivalent or better, Genesis 17.18, 19. And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael
might live before thee. And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son
indeed, and thou shalt-call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant
with him, for an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

Q. 10. Is there no Prayer but what is stated and fixed?

A. Yes, there is sudden occasional Prayer, which we call ejaculatory: Such was
Jacobs, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. And this is
exceeding useful to maintain constant communion with God, and keep the heart in
a spiritual frame.

Q. 11. Is all stated and fixed Prayer public in the Congregation or Church?

A. No, stated Prayer ought to be in our Families with those under our charge;
and in our Closets betwixt God and us alone, Josh. 24.15. -- But as for me and
my house, we will serve the Lord. And Matthew. 6.6. But when thou prayest, enter
into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy father which is
in secret, and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.

Q. 12. What infer you from hence?

A. The restraint of Prayer is not only a great fin, but an ill sign of a
graceless heart. Job 15.4. Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer
before God. And that which entails a judgment and curse upon men, and their
Families, Ier. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not;
and upon the families that call not upon ^hy name.

Q. 13. What Is the second Inference from the Ordinance of Prayer?

A. That the true reason why we enjoy not the Mercies we pray for, is not
because God is unwilling to grant Mercies, but because we either neglect
Prayer, or miscarry in the manner of Prayer, Jam. 4.2, 3 Ye lust, and have not;
ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have
not; because y^ ask not. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye
may consume it upon your lusts.

Of Direction in Prayer.
Quest. 99. WHat Rule has God given for our dir^ction in the Duty of Prayer?

A. The whole Word of God is of use to direct us (...) Prayer; but the special
Rule of Direction is that form of Prayer, which Christ taught his Disciples,
commonly called the Lords-Prayer.

Q. 1. Do men need directions, rules and helps in Prayer?

A. They do greatly need them; for in and of our selves we know not what to
pray for as we ought, Romans 8.26. Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities: for we know not what we shall pray for as we ought, etc. Nor how
to pray in a right manner, and for right ends, and a mistake in either
frustrates our Prayer, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
that ye may consume it upon your lusts.

Q. 2. When do men mistake in the matter of their Prayer?

A. They mistake in the matter of Prayer, when they ask of God things that are
not l^wful, good and agreeable to his Will. So the Disciples were ready to do
in calling for fire from Heaven on the Samaritanes, Luke 9.54, 55. And when his
disciples, James and John saw this, they said, Lord, will thou that we command
fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? But he
turned and rebuked them, and said, ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of.

Q. 3. When do men mistake in the manner of Prayer?

A. They mistake in the manner when they ask Mercies of God for carnal ends, to
satisfy their lusts, Jam. 4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss,
that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Or in a drowsy and careless manner,
Isa. 64.7. And there is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee, etc.

Q. 4. What helps has God afforded us to furnish us to Prayer both in respect
of the matter and manner?

A. The Scriptures abudantly furnish us with all sorts of helps and directions
for the matter of Prayer. It directs us both in confession of sins original and
actual, Psalm. 51.4, 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil
in thy sight, etc. Petition and Thanksgiving, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let
your request be made known unto God.

Q. 5. Does it afford us any help or direction as to the manner of Prayer also?

A. Yes* it does; and that both as to (1.) our sincerity in P^ayer, (...).
10.22. Let us draw near with a tra^ heart in full assurance of faith, having
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, all our bodies washed pure water.
(2.) As to our humility in Prayer, Psalm. 10.17. Lord thou have heard the desire
of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to
hear* (3.) As to our faith in Prayer, Jam. 1.6. But let him ask in faith,
nothing wavering, etc. (4.) As to our fervency in Prayer, Jam. 5.16. -- The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

Q. 6. Are these external rules and directions sufficient in themselves to
enable us to pray acceptably?

A. In respect of external direction they are sufficient, and we need no other
outward rules, than what the Scriptures furnish, but besides that the internal
helps and assistances of the Spirit are necessary to the offering up acceptable
Prayer, Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities; for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us, etc.

Q. 7. But does the Scripture only furnish us with general rules of direction
for Prayer?

A. No, it furnishes us also with an excellent pattern and example of Prayer,
composed by Christ for our direction, Matt^. 6.9. After this manner therefore
pray ye: Our Father which art i^ heaven, etc.

Q. 8. Are Christians tied by a necessity to use that form of words, or was it
only intended for a directory to them?

A. That form of words may be lawfully used; but it is plain its intention was
to regulate our Petitions by it; and therefore they that use it in spells and
charms, as the Papists, or tho^ that think nothing is Prayer, but that form of
words, (...) Christ's intention in it.

Q. 9. How does it appear it was not Christ's intention, strictly (...) ^ind us
to that very form of words in our Prayers?

A. Divines give us these reasons against it; (1.) Because thi^ Prayer is set
down diversely by the Evangelist, Matthew* 6. 1^^ 12. Thy kingdom come, thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven^^ And forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors. And Luke 11.3, 4. Give us day by day our daily bread, and forgive
us (...) sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us: and lead
(...) not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. (2.) Christ and (...)
Apostles did not always use this form of words afterward, as appears by his
Prayer at Lazarus his grave, John 11. and that for his Apostles, John 17. (3.)
Because these words Matthew. 6.9. After this manner, etc. plainly show its use
wa^ (...) tended for a directory to us.

Q. 10: What Is the first Inference from hence?

A. Hence we learn the fullness and compleatness of the Scri^^tures, not only
for the guiding and settling of our Faith in things that are to be believed, but
also of our whole practice in every Duty we are to perform.

Q. 11. What Is the second Inference hence?

A. Hence we are informed how necessary it is to acquaint our selves with the
mind of God, revealed in his Word, that we may guide our selves in Prayer, both
for matter and manner thereby, and not utter to God words without knowledge.

Q. 12. What Is the last Inference from hence?

A. That those who neglect all Prayer, and those that satisfy themselves with
a form of Prayer, which they utter without knowledge or affection, do greatly
sin against God. And that it is the duty of all Christians, from a sense of
their own sins, wants and mercies to be often with God in prayer, guiding
themselves in that spiritual duty, by such inward and outward helps as his word
and spirit are able to furnish them with.

Of the Preface to the Lords Prayer.
Quest. 100. WHat does the Preface of the Lords Prayer teach us?

A. The Preface of the Lords Prayer [which is, our Father, which art in Heaven]
teaches us to draw near to God with all holy reverence, and confidence, as
Children to a Father ready to help us, and that we should pray with and for
others.

Q. 1. What does the word Father import in this Preface?

A. It imports the Spirit of Adoption to be the principle of all acceptable
prayers, Gal. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God has given forth the spirit of
his son into our hearts: crying; Abba, Father.

Q. 2. What Is the first benefit or he^p we have in Prayer from the Spirit of
Adoption?

A. He excites our Spirits to seek God in prayer, Psalm. 27.8. when thou
saidest, seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face, Lord, will I seek.

Q. 3. What Is the second Assistance he gives us in prayer?

A. He indites and suggests suitable and acceptable matter to us in prayer. Romans
8.26. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: but the spirit it self makes intercession for us.
etc.

Q. 4. What Is the third Benefit we have by him in prayer?

A. He fills our Souls with spiritual and Holy affections in prayer, and helps
us to act his Graces in our Duties, Romans 8.26. Likewise the spirit also helps
our infirmities: for we know not what we should ask as we ought: but the spirit
it self makes intercession ^or us, with groanings, which cannot be uttered.

Q. 5. What else does this word Father import.

A. It imports that Holy confidence which Believers may and ought to draw near
to God with all, as Children to a Father, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness
and access, with confidence by the faith of him.

Q. 6. Does it only Signify our relation and Confidence?

A. No, it also signifies the reverential fear of God, which ought at all times
to be on our hearts, especially in Prayer* Mal. 1.6. A son honors his
father, and a servant his master: If then I be a Father, where is my honor?
and if I be a Master, where is my fear?

Q. 7. What is further imported in this word Father?

A. It imports Gods willingness and readiness to grant the best Mercies to his
people, that seek them duly at his hand, Matthew. 7.11. If ye then being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children how much more shall your father
which is in Heaven give good things to them that ask him.

Q. 8. Why is he here called our Father?

A. To signify to us that it is not only our duty to pray secretly by and for
our selves, but also with and for others, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all
prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints.

Q. Why is God said here to be in Heaven?

A. It is to note his Sovereign power and dominion over all, as a groundwork
of faith in prayer.

Q. 9.10. What else does it import?

A. The great distance between God and us, which should fill our hearts with an
holy awe of him. Eccles. 5.2. -- God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth;
therefore let thy words be few.

Q. 11. What Is the first Inference from hence?

A. It shows us what a sad case all those are in, that have no special interest
in God as a Father.

Q. 12. What Is the second Inference?

A. It shows us what a glorious Privilege the Lord Jesus Christ has purchased
for and settled on his people. Heb. 4.15, 16. For we have not an high Priest,
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly
unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find gracec to help in
time of need.

Q. 13. What Is the last Inference from hence?

A. That the seeing Believers have a Father in Heaven, they should never fear
wants whilst they live, nor be afraid to die, since Death brings them to
Heaven, their Fathers house.

Of Sanctifying Gods Name.
Quest. 101. WHat do we pray for in the first Petition?

A. In the first Petition [ which is hallowed be thy Name] we pray that God
would enable us and others, to gloryfy him in all that, whereby he makes
himself known, and that he would dispose all things to his own glory.

Q. 1. Is there any word full enough perfectly to express what God is?

A. No; his Name is secret, Judge. 13.18. And the Angel of the Lord said unto
him, why ask thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret? A Name which none
can tell, Prove. 30.4. -- what is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou
can tell? A Name above every Name, Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God also has highly
exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name. But the Name by
which he more especially manifests himself, is the name I am. Exodus 3.14. And
God said unto Moses, I am that I am. And he said, thus shall thou say unto the
Children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you.

Q. 2. What does the Name of God I am signify to us?

A. It signifies to us, first, the reality of his being in opposition to Idols,
which are but imaginary and Fantastic things, 1 Cor. 8.4. -- We know that an
Idol is nothing in the world, etc. God is not only the most perfect being, but
the root of all other beings.

Q. 3. What else does this Name I am import?

A. It imports both the perfection and eternity of Gods being I am implies he
has not that now which he had not formerly; and that he shall not afterward
have what he has not now: And that there is neither beginning, End, or
succession with God, whose name is I am.

Q. 4. But what are we here to understand by the name of God?

A. All those things are here intended, by which he manifests himself to the
Creature; as his Word, Works, and Ordinances, but especially his glorious
Attributes, Exodus 34.5, 6. -- The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.

Q. 5. What is it to Hallow or Sanctify his Name?

A. Not to infuse any holiness into him, which he had not before; so he
Sanctifies us; but to manifest and acknowledge the holiness of God, Isa. 29.23.
But when he sees his Children, the work of my hands in the midst of him, they
shall sanctify my name and sanctify the holy one of Jacob, and shall fear the
God of Israel.

Q. 6 Why Hallwed or Sanctified rather than Glorified? Why that word rather
than this?

Because his Holiness is the beauty and luster of his other Attributes. His
Greatness appears in his Holiness, Isa. 12.6. -- great is the holy one of
Israel in the midst of thee. So does his Power, Luke 1.49. For ^e that is
mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his name. And therefore his
Holiness is that Attribute, which Angels single out especially to celebrate,
Isa. 6.3. And one cried unto another, and said, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord
of Hosts, etc. And so do men also, as it is the cause why they should glorify
him, Exodus 15.11. -- Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, etc.

Q. 7. What Is the first thing we are to intend in this Petition?

A. The meaning is, that God would so dispose and order all things in the
World, as may best promote and advance the glory of his Name; on which account
we may Pray for the defeat of Gods Enemies, Psalm. 83.16, 17, 18. Fill their
faces with shame: that they may seek thy name, O Lord. Let them be confounded
and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame and perish: That men may
know that thou, whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the
Earth. And the deliverance of his Church and people, Psalm. 79.9. Help us, O God
of our Salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge away our
sins for thy names sake.

Q. 8. What Is the second Thing we are to intend in it?

A. That God would fit us for, and use us in the most serviceable capacity for
the glorifying of his Name, Psalm. 67.1, 2, 3. God be merciful unto us, and
bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us. That thy way may be known upon
earth, thy saving health among all nations. Let the people praise thee, O God,
let all the people praise thee.

Q. 9. What Is the third Thing intended in this Petition?

A. That God may not only glorify his own Name, and use us to glorify it, but
that it should be our endeavor and joy to have it glorfied by others all the
World over, Psalm. 145.4, 5, 6. One generation shall praise thy works to
another, and shall declare thy mighty acts. I will speak of the glorious honor
of thy majesty; and of thy wondrous works. And men shall speak of the might of
thy terrible acts: and I will declare thy greatness.

Q. 10. Why must our Hearts be so intently set upon the Sanctification of Gods
Name?

A. Because this is the ultimate end of our own, and every other being, Romans
11.36. for of him, and through him, and to him ar^ all things; to whom be glory
for ever, Amen. And the particular end of God in our Effectual calling, 1 Pet.
2.9. But ye are a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called
you out of darkness into his mavelous light.

Q. 11. What Is the first Inference from hence?

A. That the dishonor of Gods Name must needs be a cutting Affliction to a
gracious Soul, Psalm. 42.10. As with a sword in my bones my enemies reproach me;
while they say daily unto me, where is their God?

Q. 12. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. That it is a dreadful infatuation and spiritual judgment upon those men,
that think they glorify God in doing those things, which his Soul hates, Isa.
66.5. Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word: your brethren
that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be
glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. And John
16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea, the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think, that he does God service.

Q. 13. What is the third Inference from hence?

A. That it should be indifferent to a Christian what condition God puts him
into, so that he may but be useful to Sanctify and exalt the name of God
therein, Phil. 1.20. -- as always so now also Christ shall be magnified in my
body, whether it be by life, or by death.

Q. 14. What Is the last Inference hence?

A. That it is an high and dreadful provocation of God to profane and abuse his
worship, whereon his Name is called, and wherein it is to be Sanctified, Levit.
10.1, 2, 3. And Nadab and Abihu, the Sons of Araon, took either of them his
Censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire
before the Lord, which he commanded them not. And there went out fire from the
Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord. Then Moses said unto
Aaron, This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them
that come nigh me, and before all the people will I be glorified.

Of Gods Kingdom.
Quest. 102 WHat do we pray for in the Second petition?

A. In the second Petition which is, [Thy Kingdom come] we pray that Satan's
Kingdom may be destroyed, and that the Kingdom of Grace may he advanced, our
selves and others brought into it, and kept in it, and that the Kingdom of
Glory may be hastened.

Q. 1. What is the first Thing Signified by the Kingdom of God here?

A. The Gospel is here intended by the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 13.47. -- Again,
the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and
gathered of every kind.

Q. 2. What Is the thing Signified by the coming of this Kingdom of God?

A. It signifies the removal of all impediments, that hinder its propagation in
the world, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the
Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you.

Q. 3. Who, and what hinders the propagation of it?

A. Antichrist that man of sin hinders it externally, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he as God, sits in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. The Devil and Men's Lusts internally, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. Wherefore
we would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again; but Satan hindered.
Luke 19.14. But his citizens hated him, and sent a messenger after him, saying,
We will not have this man to reign over us.

Q. 4. What then is the desire of all good men with respect to the coming of
the Gospel-Kingdom?

A. That all Nations may be brought to Christ by the preaching of it, and so
Christ's Kingdom be greatly exalted and enlarged, Isa. 2.2. And it shall come to
pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be
established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills:
and all nations shall flow unto it.

Q. 5. What Is the second thing here meant by the Kingdom of God?

A. It signifies and intends the work of saving Grace wrought in Men's Souls,
Luke 17.21. -- Behold the kingdom of God is within you.

Q. 6. Why is this work of Grace called the Kingdom of God?

A. Because wherever saving Grace comes, it subdues the Soul to Christ's
Scepter, 2 Cor. 10.5. Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Q. 7. Wherein consists the Kingdom of Grace?

A. It consists not in external Rites and Observances, but in Righteousness,
and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. For the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Q. 8. What do we ask of God in this Petition with respect to this Kingdom of
Grace?

A. Herein we desire not only our own personal progressive Sanctification, but
the Sanctification of others all the World over, Acts 26.29. And Paul said, I
would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both
almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds.

Q. 9. What Is the third thing here meant by the Kingdom of God?

A. By it is here meant the future state of Glory and Blessedness, 1 Cor.
15.50. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, etc.

Q. 10. Why is the Heavenly state called the Kingdom of God?

A. This is called the Kingdom of God, because in that state God reigns over
his people gloriously, there being no rebellion in them in the least degree,
Luke 20.36. -- For they are equal unto the angels, and are the children of God,
being the children of the resurrection. And they reign with Christ. Rev. 3.21.
To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, etc.

Q. 11. What do we desire in Prayer for the coming of this Kingdom?

A. We desire not only our preservation in our passage to that state of Glory,
1 Pet. 5.10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you. But the hastening of it to our selves and
others, Rev. 22.20. -- Amen, even so, come, Lord Jesus.

Q 12. What Is the first Instruction hence?

A. That the Gospel is an invaluable Mercy, as it is the instrument of bringing
us into Christ's Gracious and Glorious Kingdom, Asts 26.18. To open their eyes,
and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith, that is in me.

Q. 13. What Is the second Inference from hence?

A. That many men really hate and oppose the very thing they pray for.

Q. 14. What Is the last Instruction hence?

A. That how firmly soever Satan's and Antichrists Kingdom seem to be founded in
the World, they must and shall fall before the daily Prayers of the Saints.

Concerning the doing of Gods Will.
Quest. 103. WHat do we pray for in the third Petition?

A. In the third Petition, which is [Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven] we pray, that God by his Grace would make us able and willing to know,
obey, and submit to his Will in all things, as the Angels do in Heaven.

Q. 1. What Will of God is here intended?

A. Not the Will of his Decree, for that is in himself alone, 1 Cor. 2.11. The
things of God knows no man but the spirit of God.

Q. 2. What Will then is here meant?

A. The Will of his Providence may be here meant, Psalm. 125.6. Whatsoever the
Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep
places. And Psalm. 119.89. For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven. Ver.
91. They continue this day according to t^^ne ordinances: for all are thy
servants.

Q 3. How are we to understand the doing of this Will of Providence in Heaven?

A. (1.) As it is done by the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Psalm. 119.89. Thy word is
settled in heaven. Verse 91. They continue this day according to thine
ordinances. Psalm. 19.6. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his
circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
(2.) As it is done by Angels, Psalm. 104.4. Who makes the angels spirits: his
ministers a flaming fire. Heb. 1. ult. Are they not all ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?

Q. 4. How do these perform the Will of Gods Providence?

A. (1.) The Heavenly bodies do it evenly, constantly and unweariedly, Psalm.
104.19. He appoints the moon for seasons, the sun knows his going down.
(2.) The Angels do speedily, voluntarily, cheerfully, and so knowingly, Psalm.
103.21. Ye ministers of his that do his pleasure.

Q. 5. Must we be agents in this Providential Will?

A. Yes, we must, Acts 13.36. For David after he had served his generation by
the will of God, fell on sleep.

Q. 6. How must we do it?

A. By employing our abilities, faculties and interests, in the Duties of our
particular Callings, and by moving constantly, prudently and vigorously in our
own sphere, and so imitate those in Heaven.

Q. 7. Why do we pray that Gods Will of Providence may be done by us?

A. Because we are his Creatures, and the most noble instruments of the
inferior World; and therefore we should be willing to be acted by him, and
active for him; and because this Will of Providence is always just, good and
true, and for his own Glory, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works. Psalm. 119.89. For ever, O Lord, thy word is
settled in heaven. Ver. 91. They continue this day according to thine
ordinances; for all are thy servants.

Q. 8. What other Will of God is here meant?

A. The Will of his Precepts; and this is chiefly intended.

Q. 9. And how is this Will of God done in Heaven?

A. By the Angels it is done universally, cheerfully, constantly, humbly,
thankfully, loyally, readily, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye his angels that
excel in strength, that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his
word. And so it is done by the Saints in Heaven, Rev. 7.15. Therefore are they
before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple. And 22.3.
And his servants shall serve him.

Q. 10. Do we pray then that we may thus do the Will of God?

A. Yes; for though we cannot perfectly without sin do it, yet that is our
Duty, Matthew. 5. ult. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father which is in
heaven is perfect. And in all other particulars we may, and we must imitate
them herein, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto
all thy commandments. Ver. 14. I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies,
as much as in all riches. Ver. 60. I made has^e, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. Ver. 112. etc. I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes,
always even unto the end.

Q. 11. How must we know Gods Will?

A. Not notionally and rationally only, but spiritually also, 1 Cor. 2.14. They
are spiritually discerned.

Q. 12. Why is knowing Gods will placed here before doing it, etc.?

A. Because the Understanding is the leading Faculty, without which it is
impossible there should be any Obedience, Prove. 19.2. Also that the soul be
without knowledge it is not good. Jer. 5.4. Therefore I said, surely these are
poor, they are foolish: for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment
of their God.

Q. 13. Why pray we to God for this knowledge, can we not know it of our selves?

A. No, it is the special gift and grace of God, Gal. 1.15* 16. But when it
pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace,
to reveal his son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen, immediate^y
I conferred not with flesh and blood. Ephesians. 1.17, 19. That the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the father of glory may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him. -- And what is the exceeding greatness of
his power to us ward, who believe according to the working of his mighty power.
Ephesians. 5.8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.

Q. 14. Why do we pray that we may obey, can we not do it of our own free will
when we know it?

A. No; for our Wills are stubborn and rebellious against Gods Commands, as
well as our Minds ignorant of them, Romans 8.7. Because the carnal mind is enmity
against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh. Phil. 2.13. For it is God which works in you, both to will and to
do of his good pleasure.

Q. 15. What is meant by submitting to Gods Will?

A. (1.) Either a voluntary subjection of Soul, and a preparedness actually to
do his Will. Or (2.) a voluntary and silent submission to his Will of
Providence in affliction; but in this particular we cannot imitate those in
Heaven, because no cross ever befalls them.

Q. 16. Why is Will added in all things?

A. Because partial Obedience, is no Obedience; he that does not obey God in
every thing obeys him in nothing. Iam. 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.

Q. 17. Why do we pray that God by his Grace would work this Will in us and by
us?

A. Because it is Free Grace that determines it, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the
world began. And efficacious Grace that works it in us, and enables us to do
it, Ephesians. 5.8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.
Ver. 10. Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord.

Q. 18. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That it is Man's glory and felicity to be conformed to the Will of God, Prove.
12.26. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor. Psalm. 19.10, 11.
More to be desired are they than gold, yea then much fine gold; sweeter also
then honey, and the honeycomb. Moreover by them is thy servant warned; and in
keeping of them there is great reward.

Q. 19. What is the second Inference?

A. That we must mortify in our selves every lust that contradicts Gods Will,
and renounce without our selves, every thing that comes in competition
therewith, 1 Cor. 9. ult. But I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection: least that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a cast away. Gal. 6.14. But God forbid that I should glory, save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and
I unto the world.

Q. 20. What is the third Inference?

A. That it is in vain, yea a provocation to pray, if we be not obedient to
Gods, Will, Prove. 2.8, 9. He keeps the paths of judgment, and preserves the
way of his saints. Then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity; yea every good path.

Q. 21. What is the fourth Inference?

A. That the Law still has the authority of a Rule to Believers; because it
reveals Gods Will, which they must do.

Concerning our Daily Bread.
Quest. 14. WHat do we pray for in the fourth Petition?

A. In the fourth Petition, which is [Give us this day our daily Bread] we
pray, that of Gods free gift we may receive a competent portion of the good
things of this life; and enjoy his Blessing with them.

Q. 1. Why is this Petition placed after the three former?

A. Because those concern immediately and generally Gods Glory, in the
advancement of his Name, Kingdom and Will, which ought to be preferred to all
our personal concerns, Psalm. 69.9. For the zeal of thine house has eaten me
up. Acts 21.13. For I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Q. 2. Why is it put before the two following Petitions?

A. Not for its worth, but for its order; for we can have no Spiritual
Blessings unless we have a Natural Being in this Life.

Q. 3. What kind of Bread is here meant?

A. Not Spiritual Bread, or our Lord Christ, (as some) but Corporal and
Temporal.

Q. 4. What is included in this word Bread?

A. Not that only which we call strictly B^^ad, but all the good things of this
present Life.

Q. 5. Do we hereby beg pure necessities only?

A. No, we pray for conveniences for our comfort; as well as necessaries for
our life.

Q. 6. Do we herein pray only for personal good things for our being?

A. No, we pray for civil good things for our condition, that according to our
degree in the World in which God has placed us, we may have a convenient
allowance:

Q. 7. Do we pray here for our selves only?

A. No, but also for our Charge, Children and Family; that under and with us
they may have the good things of this Life.

Q. 8. Why do we pray to God for these good things, can we not get them our
selves, or our fellow creatures give them to us?

A. Not without God: Whatever we have of these things they are from God; who
ever be the second cause or instrument; if our selves, God gives us ability and
success to get them; if others, God inclined their hearts, and opened their
hands to bestow them, Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. And thou say in thine heart, my power and
the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth. But thou shall remember the
Lord thy God; for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth.

Q. 9. Why do we pray to God to give us Bread?

A. Because the least crumb of Bread is a free gift, and never can be merited
by all we can do or suffer; Luke 17.10. So likewise ye, when ye shall have done
all these things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants.

Q. 10. Why are all these good things couched under the expression Bread?

A. (1.) Because Bread is one of the most necessary and useful things to
preserve Life. (2.) Because we must not ask delicacies and dainties of God.

Q. 11. What is meant by day in the Petition?

A. Either (1.) a Natural day of twenty four hours: Or (2.) the day of our
whole life.

Q. 12. Why do we pray for Daily bread?

A. Because God must give us the mercies and good things of every day, or else
we cannot have them.

Q. 13. Why should we not pray for weekly, or monthly, or yearly Bread, as well
as daily?

A. (1.) Because it is fit we should be still sensible of our dependence upon
God. (2;) Because we do frequently pray to God, and so exert our Graces, and
maintain communion with him, and daily render thanks for daily favor, Psalm
55.17. Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud; and he
shall hear my voice.

Q. 14. What need we to pray for Daily bread when we may have stores laid up
for years?

A. They that have the good things of this Life need to pray this Petition, as
well as they that have them not. Not that they may have Bread; but that it may
be Bread to them; for except God give his Blessing upon it, Bread would be
ashes and not sustaneous; neither could all the comforts of this Life do us any
good, Isa. 3.1. For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away from
Jerusalem, and from Judah, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water.
Mal. 2.1, 2. And now O ye priests, this commandment is for you. If you will not
hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, says the
Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your
blessings; yea I have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to heart.

Q. 15. Why do we pray only for daily Bread, or a competency, may we not pray
for abundance and riches?

A. No, because Riches are a great snare and temptation, Matthew. 19.23, 24. Then
said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily, I say unto you, that a rich man shall
hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto you, it is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God. Prove. 30.8, 9. Remove far from me vanity and lies,
give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me; lest I
be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or lest I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain.

Q. 16. What shall we then do with Riches, if Providence cast them upon us,
shall we cast them away?

A. No, for some of the best of Men, and greatest of Gods favorites, have lived
and dyed rich. But (1.) We must wean our hearts from them. Psalm. 62.10. Trust
not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery: if riches increase set not
your heart upon them. (2.) Be thankful for them, and (3.) Fruitful with them in
acts of Piety and Charity. 1 Timothy 6.17, 19. Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy. Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.

Q. 17. Wherefore is the Bread called our Bread?

A. Not because we are absolute Lords and Possessors of it, for so it is Gods
only. Psalm. 24.1, 2. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the world
and they that dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the Seas, and
estabilished it upod the floods. Psalm. 50.10, 12. for every beast of the
forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. If I were hungry, I
would not tell thee, for the world is mine and the fullness thereof. But (1.)
Because we must have a Covenant right to it. and (2.) A civil right; we must
come lawfully and honestly by, and so keep the good things of this life. 2
These. 3.10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any
would not work, neither should ^e eat.

Q. 18. Having prayed for our daily Bread; need we to labor and endeavor to
get it?

A. Yes; we must labor in good and honest callings, Gods blessing and Man's
industry must concur toward the present maintenance of life, Psalm. 128.1, 2.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord: that walks in his ways, for thou
shall eat the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it shall be well
with thee. Prove. 10.4, 22. He becomes poor that deals with aslack hand: but
the hand of the diligent makes rich. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and
he adds no sorrow with it.

Q. 19. What is the first Inference from it?

A. That we must not seek great matters for our selves, neither make them the
matter of prayer to God; nor the end and design of our labors and callings
among Men.

Q. 20. What is a second Inference from hence?

A. That having Food and Raiment, we must be therewith content, and therefore
thankful. 1 Timothy 6.8. And having food and raiment let us be therewith content.
1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks.

Q. 21. What is the third Inference?

A. That we ascribe not our success in the World to our own skill and industry,
for the wisest, and most industrious do sometimes labor in the fire, and put
their gain in a bag of holes; but to Gods free donation to us, and to his
Blessing upon our endeavors, Genesis 33.5, 11. And he lift up his eyes, and saw
the the women and the children; and said, who are those with thee? And he said,
the children which God has graciously given thy Servant. -- Take, I pray thee
my blessing that is brought to thee, because God has dealt graciously with me,
and because I have enough. Deuteronomy 28.3. Blessed shall thou be in the city, and
blessed shall thou be in the field. ver. 6. Blessed shall thou when thou come
in, and blessed shall thou be when thou go out.

Concerning forgiveness of Sins.
Quest. 105. WHat does we pray for in the fifth Petition?

A. In the fifth Petition, which is [and forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors] we pray that God for Christ's sake would freely pardon all our
Sins: which we are the rather encouraged to ask, because by this grace we are
enabled from the heart to forgive others.

Q. 1. Why does this Petition immediately follow the former?

A. To teach that all temporal and corporal good things; without special and
Spiritual ones are little worth, Psalm. 4.6. There be many that say, who will
show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Psalm.
17.14, 15. From men which are thy hand O Lord, from men of the world which have
their portion in this life and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure:
they are full of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their
babes. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness.

Q. 2. Why is it annexed to the former with the Copulative, and?

A. To teach that to be one minute in the confluence of all earthly good things
without the pardon of Sin, is a very dangerous and dreadful condition. Luke
12.16, 20. And he spoke a parable unto them, saying, the ground of a certain
rich man brought forth plentifully, but God said unto him, thou fool, this
night shall thy soul be required of thee: then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided?

Q. 3. Why is forgiveness of Sins placed in the front of spiritual Blessings?

A. Because till sin be pardoned we are under wrath, and can have no special
saving Grace applied to us; till we are accepted; till we are in Christ we have
no Covenant right to the blessings of Christ Matt. 11.28. come unto me all ye
that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, ver. 30. for my
yoke is easy, and my burden is light. John 15.4, 5. abide in me and I in you,
as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine: no
more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the Vine ye are the branches: He that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me
ye can do nothing -- ver. 7. if ye abide in me and my words abide in you, ye
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. John 3. ult. He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life: and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.

Q. 4. Why do we pray for forgiveness, cannot we make amends for our sins, and
be freed from their guilt without pardon?

A. No, all that we can ever do or suffer, can never expiate the guilt of the
least sin, Psalm. 49.7, 8. None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor
give to God a ransom for him: (For the redemption of their soul is precious,
and it cease for ever.) 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against another, the
judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him.

Q 5. Does God then freely, and out of mere Grace forgive us?

A. Yes, without any respect had to any thing we can do, or be, Isa. 43.25. I,
even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Romans 9.15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and
I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. Ver. 18. Therefore has
he mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will be hardneth.

Q. 6. How does God forgive sins?

A. (1.) Universally all sins, Exodus 34.6, 7. And the Lord passed by before
him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin. Jer. 33.8. And I will cleanse
them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me, and I will
pardon all their iniquities whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
transgressed against me. Hos. 14.2. Take away all iniquity and receive us
graciously. (2.) Completely and perfectly, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy
sins. Psalm. 103.12. As far as the east is from the west: so fa^ has he removed
our transgressions from us. Mic. 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all our sins into the depths of the sea. Isa. 38.17. For thou have
cast all my sins behind thy back. (3.) Everlastingly, Ier. 31.34. For I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Heb. 8.12. and
their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.

Q. 7. But does not God punish them afterward whom he ha^ justified and
forgiven?

A. No, not with a proper and vindictive punishment; but he brings evil upon
them for their sins, as a Father chastises his Child; and other sorts of
afflictions for their spiritual good: He may be angry as a Father, with those
he has pardoned, but never hate them as a condemning Judge, Psalm. 89.28. My
mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with
him. Ver. 34. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips.

Q. 8. How can God be said freely to pardon all our sins; when we pray it may
be done for Christ's sake, does not that imply that Christ has satisfied God for
our sins, and deserved our remission?

A. Yes, it does so; for the Lord Christ by his Life and Death did satisfy
Divine Justice, and did merit our forgiveness; but if he did so, we did not so;
our sins cost him dear, but their pardon cost us nothing; our pardon is
perfectly free to us; though due to Christ, for God gave Christ freely for us;
God accepts of his merits, and applies them to us freely, Romans 3.24. Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

Q. 9. But is there nothing required from us as the condition of pardon, and if
so, how can it be absolutely free?

A. There are required Repentance from Sin, and Faith in the Lord Christ, Luke.
13.3. But except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Joh. 3. ult. And he
that believes not the son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on
him. This is required from us toward our pardon; but yet it is free, (1.)
Because God freely ordains thus to pardon. (2.) Because both these are the free
gifts of God, Acts 11.18. Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life. Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of
your selves; it is the gift of God.

Q. 10. When then are our sins forgiven?

A. Just upon our closure with Christ by Faith, in that very moment, Romans 5.1.
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus.

Q. 11. Why do we pray in the answer for the forgiveness of all our sins?

A. Because if the least guilt should remain upon us, 'twould exclude from Gods
favor, and lodge us in everlasting burnings, Romans 6. ult. For the wages of sin
is death.

Q. 12. What are the privileges and blessings that accompany pardon?

A. Justification is accompanied with Adoption, John 1.12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. With the Spirit and Principle of all Grace and
Holiness, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. With an infallible title to Eternal Glory, John. 3.16. That
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Romans
8.30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Q. 13. How may we know that we are pardoned and justified?

A. Ordinarily by our Sanctification, by our loathing of Sin, our contempt of
the World, our valuing of Christ, our love and thankfulness to God, etc. 1 Cor.
6.11. But ye are sanctified. Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? Gal. 6.14. By whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you therefore which
believe he is precious. Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many are forgiven; for
she loved much.

Q. 14. What is meant by [Our] is it only such sins as we have personally and
actually committed?

A. No; but also Adams sin, which is ours by imputation, Romans 5.19. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners. And original sin which is ours by
inhesion, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. And other men's sins which we have made ours, by exciting them to
them, not hindering of them, silence at them, and other ways, 2 Samuel 12.9. Thou
have killed Vriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy
wife, and have slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. 1 Timothy 5.22.
Neither be partaker of other men's sins.

Q. 15. Wherefore are sins called debts?

A. Because they are a non-payment of Gods dues, a nonperformance of our duty,
which makes us liable to the arrest of Death, and to the prison of Hell.

Q. 16. Why do we plead our own forgiveness of others?

A. Not as any merit of our own pardon, but either as an encouragement to our
selves to beg pardon; seeing such evil, envious and malignant persons are
enabled to forgive others; much more may we hope the good and gracious God will
forgive us: Or as a condition, without which we can have no pardon, and with
which we shall, Mat. 6.14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly Father will also forgive you.

Q. 17. How do others trespass against us?

A. When they injure us either in our Persons, or Names, or Families, or
Estates, or Souls, etc. 1 Samuel 2.25. If one man sin against another, the judge
shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him.

Q. 18. Can we forgive our Neighbors freely, fully and perfectly, as God does
forgive us?

A. We cannot.

Q. 19. What then is the meaning of Gods forgiving us as we forgive others?

A. Not as to the quantity and perfection of forgiveness, bu^ as to the
sincerity and quality thereof, Mat. 18. ult. So likewis^ shall my heavenly
father do also unto you, if ye from yoar hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trespasses.

Q. 20. Are we always bound to manifest outwardly our love and forgiveness to
all our enemies; and to behave our selves toward them as friends?

A. No, if we have experienced them to be treacherous and false, and see no
change, we are not bound to trust them, if they be and remain wicked and
profane, we must not associate with them, Psalm. 26.5. I have hated the
congregation of evil doers: and will not sit with the wicked. Ver. 4. I have
not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.

Q. 21. What then must we do to such?

A. We must heartily forgive them all their injuries; we must love them with
the love of benevolence, pray for them, and be ready and willing to do them all
good both of Body and Soul, Mat. 5.44, 45. But I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which dispitefully use you, and persecute you. That you may be the
children of your father which is in heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on
the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust.

Q. 22. If we forgive others shall we be forgiven our selves?

A. We shall, if out of obedience to God, and love to Christ we do it.

Q. 23. What is the first Inference from hence?

A. That except our sins be forgiven, we are lost and undone creatures, and
therefore we must never be contented till we are pardoned.

Q. 24. What is a second Inference?

A. That God is a God of love, goodness and pardon; seeing he will not pardon
us, if we do not pardon others; but will if we do so.

Q. 25. What is a third Inference?

A. That if we live in hatred when we pray the Lords Prayer, we pray for our
own damnation, Mat. 18.22. Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee, until
seven times, but until seventy times seven. Ver. 35. So likewise shall my
heavenly father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one
his brother their trespasses.

Of Gods leading us into Temptation.
Quest. 106. WHat do we pray for in the sixth Petition?

A. In the sixth Petition, which is [And lead us not into Temptation, but
deliver us from evil] we pray that God would either keep us from being tempted
to Sin; or support and deliver us when we are tempted.

Q. 1. Why is this Petition joined to the former with the copulative And?

A. Because 'twill be but little advantage to have former sins pardoned; and to
be left to the power and practice, to the love and trade of sin for for the
future, Ezekiel. 18.26. When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and dies in them; for his iniquity that he has done,
shall he dye.

Q. 2. What is meant by Temptation?

A. In general, a trial or probation of what is in us, or of what we will do.

Q. 3. What is meant by Temptation here?

A. Temptation to sin and wickedness.

Q. 4. How may we be said to be tempted to sin?

A. (1.) Effectually by our selves, and our own hearts, Iam. 1.14, 15. But
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then
when lust has conceived, it brings sorth sin; and sin when it is finished,
brings forth death. (2.) Formally, with an intention to draw into sin, and so
we are tempted of the Devil, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And satan stood up against Israel,
and provoked David to number Israel. Mat. 4.1, 3. Then was Jesus led up of the
spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil. And when the tempter
came to him, he said, if thou be the son of God, command that these stones be
made bread. (3.) Innocently and blamelesly, and so God is said to tempt, 2 Samuel
24.1. And again the anger of the Lord was kinaled against Israel, and he moved
David against them, to say, go number Israel and Judah.

Q. 5. How many ways may God be said to tempt to evil?

A. (1.) By withdrawing his Grace either common or special, 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
Howbeit* in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent
unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him to
try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. (2.) By permitting Satan
and wicked men to tempt, 2 Samuel 24.1. He moved David against them, to say, go
number Israel and Judah. With 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David. Mat. 4.1. Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the
wilderness, to be tempted of the devil. (3.) By presenting oecasions in his
Providence, which he knows will be abused to sin, as in the fall of Adam, the
hardening of Pharaoh, etc.

Q. 6. What do we beg in this Petition?

A. We beg that we may not any of these, or any other ways, whereby the holy
God may be said to lead into temptation, be led thereinto, Psalm. 141.4. Incline
not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works with men that work
iniquity; and let me not eat of their dainties. Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy
servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: then
shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.

Q. 7. What is meant by evil?

A. Some understand it of the Devil, but the best meaning is Sin, which is the
evil of evils; and makes the Devil evil, and is the worst of evils the Devil
can bring upon us, and is usually so understood in Scripture, Psalm. 97.10. Ye
that love the Lord hate evil. Isa. 1.16. Cease to do evil. Amos 5.15. Hate the
evil, and love the good. Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil.

Q. 8. What by deliverance from evil is meant?

A. That if God sees meet to permit us to be tempted by Satan and the wicked
without, or by our own hearts within to sin; or occasionally by his Providence,
that he will not leave us, but undertake for us, that we may not be led into
sin thereby, but by his Grace be made more than conquerors, Psalm. 51.10. Create
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. 119.133.
Order my step^ in thy word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
According to his promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. But God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able. 2 Cor. 12.9. And he said unto
me, my grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.

Q. 9. What is the first Inference?

A. That sin is the worst of evils.

Q. 10. What Is the second Inference?

A. That without Gods Grace we can never withstand, but shall be overcome by
every temptation, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think
any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God. Joh. 15.5. For
without me ye can do nothing.

Q. 11. What is the third Inference?

A. That we must do all we can to keep our selves from Temptation, and to
engage the Grace of God with us in Temptation by Prayer, by pleasing the Spirit
of God, by looking to Jesus, etc.

Of the Conclusion.
Quest. 107. WHat does the Conclusion of the Lords

A. The Conclusion of the Lords Prayer, which is, [For thine is the Kingdom,
and the Power and the Glory, for ever, Amen.] teaches us to take our
encouragement in Prayer from God only, and in our Prayers to praise him,
ascribing Kingdom, Power and Glory to him, and in testimony of our desire, and
assurance to be heard we say, Amen.

Q. 1. Why is the Conclusion joined to the particle For?

A. To teach us that therein are included arguments or reasons to press God
withal, and to prevail with him for audience.

Q. 2. But is it lawful to argue with God, and to urge him with Reasons in
Prayer?

A. It Is not only lawful, but expedient, yea highly commendable; as is seen in
the Sains Prayers. In Moses 's, Numb. 14.13. And Moses said unto the Lord, then
the Egyptians shall hear it (for thou broughtest up this people in thy might
from among them.) Ver. 19. Pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people,
according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this
people, from Egypt, even until now. In Joshua 's, chap. 7.7. And Joshua said,
Alas, O Lord God, wherefore have thou at all brought this people over Jordan to
deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had
been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan. Ver. 9. For the Canaanites,
and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what will thou do unto thy
great name? In Asa 's, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. And Asa c^yed unto the Lord his God, and
said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them
that have no power: Help us* O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy
name we go against this great multitude: O Lord thou art our God, let not man
prevail against thee. In Iehosaphat 's, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. And said, O Lord God of
our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the
kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so
that none is able to withstand thee. And Hezekiahs, 2 Kin. 19.15. And Hezekiah
prayed before the Lord, and said, O Lord God of Israel which dwell between
the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the
earth, thou have made heaven and earth. Ver. 19. Now therefore, O Lord our God,
etc.

Q. 3. But to what purpose can we think to prevail with God by our Arguments
and Importunity?

A. They are not used as though we would put God in remembrance of any thing;
or would prevail with God to do that for us which he is unwilling to give.

Q. 4. Why then?

A. For our own profit, for the enlarging of our own hearts, for the exciting
of our fervency, for the exerting of Faith, Hope, Zeal, Charity, etc. in
Prayer, and so to prepare our selves for the Mercy, that we may the more
gratefully receive it, and the more fruitfully employ it.

Q. 5. How many Arguments are in this Conclusion?

A. Three.

Q. 6. From whence are they taken?

A. From Gods Kingdom, from his Law, and from his Glory.

Q. 7. What Kingdom is here meant?

A. Gods universal, essential and absolute Kingdom, wherein may be and is
involved his special Kingdom over the Church.

Q. 8. What are the Arguments from hence?

A. Because all that we can pray for in this Prayer, is for the advancement and
perfecting of this his Kingdom, by the destruction of all persons and things
that oppose it, and the completion of his dominion over all his Subjects;
therefore he would grant all these requests.

Q. 9. What is another?

(2.) Because he being such an absolute Lord and Sovereign, has an undeniable
Right, and unquestionable Authority to give and grant all we ask, and to effect
and bring to pass all we beg; for all persons and things are his own, and at
his disposal, Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own.

Q. 10. What is meant by Power?

A. Gods essential, infinite, irresistible power, whereby he can do what he
pleases, Ps. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, etc.

Q. 11. What is the Argument from hence?

A. That we ask nothing from God, but what he can do with infinite ease, in
despite of all the opposition that Hell, Earth, and Heart can make to the
contrary, Phil. 3. ult. According to the working, etc. Ephesians. 3.20. Now unto him
that is able, etc.

Q 12. What is meant by Glory?

A. Not his essential Glory, which no Man or Angel can ever apprehend.

Q. 13. What Glory then?

A His declared and acknowledged Glory; even the accomplishment of all his
Decrees by his Providence; and then the love, the adoration and the praises,
the self-dedications of Angels and Saints returned to him for the same.

Q. 14. What is the Argument or Motive from hence?

A. That seeing the substance of every request, does directly tend to, and will
perfectly end in this Glory of God, when they are fully answered; therefore he
would gradually answer them while we are here, and perfectly at last, to the
advancement of his Glory now, and the completion of it then, 1 Chronicles. 29.11.
Thine O Lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, etc. Jos. 7.9. And
what will thou do unto thy great name. Isa. 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my
name, etc. Isa. 48.11. For my own sake, even for my own sake will I do it, etc.

Q. 15. Why is Amen added?

A. Because it is the usual Conclusion of Prayers and Praises, Psalm. 41.13.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. Psalm. 72.19. And blessed be his
glorious name for ever, etc. 2 Cor 13. ult. The grace of the Lord Jesus, and
the love of God, etc. Romans 16.20. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
you, Amen.

Q. 16. But what does this word here signify?

A. It signifies (1.) the reality and ardency of our desire to be granted in
what we pray for, Rev. 22.20. He which testifies these things, says, surely I
come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.

Q. 17. And what besides?

A. Our trust and firm confidence that we shall be heard and answered in all
these our requests, Rev. 1.7. Even so, Amen. Rev. 7.12. Saying Amen: Blessing
and glory, and wisdom, etc.

Q. 18. What are the Inferences from hence?

A. That we ought to use in Prayer all such Arguments as may most and best
affect our Hearts toward God, excite our Graces, and succeed with God.

Q. 19. What Is another?

A. That all we pray for must be in a subserviency to Gods Kingdom, and with a
desire of his Glory.

Q. 20. What is the n^xt?

A. That we must act according to our Prayers; do all we can for the
advancement of Gods Kingdom, and the exaltation of his Glory, as subjects and
votaries thereto, Ps. 116.16. 1 Cor. 10.31.

Q. 21. What may more be gathered hence?

A. That we ought to begin, so to continue, and conclude our Prayers in lowest
Adorations of God, and acknowledgments of his Glory and Attributes.

Q. 22. What more does this Conclusion teach?

A. That in Prayer we must be fervent in our desires, and longing for what we
pray, Jam. 5.16.

Q. 23 Is there any thing besides?

A. That praying for things agreeable to Gods Will, we ought to be confident
that we shall succeed in our requests; praying for (...), and after the manner
of this Prayer, Jam. 1.^^


