Vindiciae Legis and Foederis: OR, A REPLY TO Mr. PHILIP CARY'S SOLEMN CALL.

WHEREIN He pretends to Answer all the Arguments of Mr. Allen, Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Sydenham, Mr. Sedgwick, Mr. Roberts, and Dr. Burthogge, for the right of
Believers Infants to BAPTISM, BY Proving the Law at Sinai, and the Covenant of
Circumcision with Abraham, were the very same with Adam's Covenant of Works,
and that because the Gospel Covenant is Absolute.

By John Flavel Minister of the Gospel in Dartmouth

Membra laxata inepta sunt ad sua munera obeunda, and gravissimo dolor corpus
afficiunt. P. Martyr. Cum consensu videtur deponi fraternitas. Aretius in Heb.
13. 1. LONDON, Printed for M. Wotton at the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet, 1690.

A Friendly Preface to the Author of the SOLEMN CALL, and the more discreet and
charitable of the Party concerned with him in this Controversy.
Christian Friends,
WHen we open our Bibles and read that Text, 1 Cor. 1. 10. we have cause to
deal with it, as Origin once did by another Scripture; even close the Book, and
weep over it, in consideration of the weak and feeble influences such melting
words, delivered with such a Pathos, have upon the hearts of Professors this
day. Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

I beseech you] He dips the nail in oil, that it may drive the easier. I
beseech you, Brethren] a compellation breathing sweetness, and affection, and
should drop from our lips into each others ears, with the same effect that word
once did upon the ears of Benhadads Servants, my Brother Benhadad. Sirs (said
Moses to the striving Israelites) ye are Brethren. O when shall the Church
become a true Philadelphia!

I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ] or as you love
Jesus Christ, ut quantum ipsum amant, tantum studeant concordiae, says Calvin.
Be as studious of concord, as you are free in professing love to Christ.

That there be no divisions] or rents among you, a (...) Schism, or rent in the
Church is much the same, and altogether as dangerous as a (...) or Sedition in
the Commonwealth; and harder to be cured. For as the Lord Verulam truly
observes, differences amongst persecuting Enemies and the Church, are like the
strivings of the Egyptian with the Israelite; which Moses quickly ended, by
knocking down the Egyptian; but dissentions in the Church, are like the
striving of one Israelite with another; and all that Moses can do to quiet and
part these, is only by fair, and gentle words; and reminding them that they are
Brethren.

Great is the mischief of divisions among Christians, and the less the grounds
and causes are, the greater always is the sin and mischief of them. In the
Primitive Church contentions grew fervent about meats lawful, and unlawful;
which did not profit, the meaning is, it greatly damnified them that were
occupied therein, Heb. 13. 9. practical Religion among them grew cold, as
disputations about these trifles grew fervent.

The readiest way to cool such heats is by discovering the trivial nature of
the matter contended about; as Demosthenes appeased the tumult among the people
raised by a small occasion, by relating to them the story of a man that had
hired an Ass to carry him a journey, but the Sun shining servent, he was forced
to quit her back, and betake himself to her shadow; the owner withstood him,
alleging that he had hired the body of the Ass, but her shadow was not in the
bargain; and so the contention between them grew as hot as the Sun. Many such
trifles have raised great contentions in the world, witness the great
contention betwixt the Eastern and Western Church, about keeping of Easter.

Other points there are of greater moment, about which good men contend; and
yet these oftentimes are magnified much above their true intrinsecal value. So
I am sure it is in the Controversy before us. Mr. Carry tells us, that these
things will be found at length to be of highest concernment unto us, and must
therefore be our most serious practice, pa. 243. If so, then the proper subject
of Baptism must be one of those that is of greatest weight, and the profession
thereof, the very Schibboleth to distinguish one person from another in matters
of Religion. No wonder therefore the fires of contention are blown up to such a
vehement heat, even in such an improper season: much like the contentions among
the English Fugitives at Francfort, when their brethren were frying in the
flames at Smithfield. Just so must we be scuffling, whilst thousands of our
Brethren are bleeding in Ireland. Had we a true sense of the quality of the
Subject, or the unseasonableness of the Time, it would certainly allay these
heats among us. Did we see who stand by, and look with pleasure upon our
follies, it would quickly allay our heats. Tertullian tells the Christians of
his time, that they were like the Funambulones, or men that walk upon Ropes;
the least tread awry might be their ruin; so narrowly did their enemies watch
them.

Sirs, the peace, safety and honor of the dissenting interest, are things of
too great value to be hazarded amongst the hands of our common enemies. You may
fancy they will neglect the advantage you give them, but if they do, the Devil
will call them fools for it. Mr. Herle tells us of a Kings fool, who wrote down
the King himself in his Table among his brother fools, because he had trusted
an African Stranger with 4000 l. to buy Barbary Horses. The King asked him how
he would make him amends, if the Stranger should come again? why then (said he)
I Will blot your name out of my Table of Fools, and write down the African in
your stead. Think not our Enemies are such Fools to neglect the advantage we
cast into their hands. It Is a weighty note that of Livy, Consilia non dant
homines rebus, sed res hominibus. Men don't counsel things, but times and
things counsel men. Methink^ the postures of times and affairs giv^ us better
counsel than we seem to be go^ verned by in such work as this. Divisions of
forty years standing and more, about Infants Baptism, have eaten up the times,
wasted the spirits, and alienated the hearts of English Professors; divided
them both in Society, and Love; by reason whereof Gods pleasant Plant in this
resembles the Bramble, which taking root at both ends by reason of the
rancounters of the sap; commonly withers in the middle. Your Brethren in their
Narrative from their general Assembly, make a sad and sensible complaint of
withering in the power of Godliness. And truly we as well as they may complain
with the Church, We do all fade as a Leaf: the Lord help us to discern the true
cause, whether it be not the mis-placing of our Zeal, our being cold where we
should be fervent, and fervent hot where we should be cool; and whether the
eating up of so much time and study about Baptizing of Infants, have not kept
us these forty years in the Infancy of our Graces?

I well remember that blessed time, when Ours and Yours were terms almost
unknown among Professors in England. When their affections and prayers melted
and mingled together sweetly in days of humiliation, and other duties of
edifying and heavenly Communion; and then Churches began to flourish, and the
Graces of Christians every where floured, and became fruitful. But no sooner
did the Saints divide in Society and Affection; but these pleasant blossoms
were nipt by it as by a Frosty morning. The Church formed it self as it were
into two Armies, set in Battalia against each other. It was now with us much
like as its said of the Amphisbena, that has an head at either end; of which
neither can well move, without the consent of both; but if each move a contrary
way, the body tears in the middle. I doubt not but many that differed from us,
belonged to Christ, the same Head with us; and yet it is past doubt, that many
who seemed to be of us, were headed by Satan; and quickly discovered themselves
to be so by running farther than we first, or you next imagined, even into
Quakerism, Socinianism, Ranterism, and the foulest puddle, and sink of
complicated errors; of which an impartial stranger under the name of Honorius
Reggius, (...), Georgius Hornius having heard the report in his own Country
came over on purpose into England for his particular and perfect information,
and has given the foreign Churches a full and sad account thereof in a Latin
Narrative, which I have by me; whereby I find, that if the Lord in mercy to us
had not let in a third party with the common calamity upon us all, we our
selves must in all probability have mutually ruined each other. But God saw
other hands fitter for such dirty work than ours; and now it was time to
reflect upon former follies, and renew our ancient acquaintance in the Common
Goals. And through the goodness of God this did somewhat allay the heats of
good men, and gave us fresh hopes of an hearty, and lasting redintigration. We
hoped the Furnace might have purged our dross, and melted our hearts into
Unity, both by discovering the evils for which the Lord afflicted us, and the
sincerity of the sufferers hearts under those trials. Christians (says Mr.
Jenkins) if we must dye, let us dye like men, by an unanimous holy contention
against the common enemy; not like Fools, by giving him our Sword, and
destroying one another by Schisms in our own bowels.

But alas! alas! no sooner is the rod off our backs, and a respit from
sufferings given us; but we are presently sounding an allarm to the Battle
again, and to my sorrow my self unavoidably engaged therein.

Friends, I have a witness in many of your bosoms, how peacefully and
respectfully I have always carried it toward you; even to such a degree, as
began to bring me under the suspicion of some of your party, that I was
inclining to their Opinion, though I did not openly profess it. But the true
reasons of my moderation in this point were, (1) That I ever did, and still do
look upon many of you as Christians, sound in the other great Doctrines of the
Gospel. (2) That there are difficulties in this Controversy which may puzzle
the minds of well-meaning Christians. (3) I highly valued the peace of the
Church, and durst do nothing that tended to keep open the breaches upon a
Controversy of this nature; you being for purity in Doctrine and Worship in
most other controverted points, as well as we. (4) I observed how rare a thing
it is for engaged parties to give ground. Qui velit ingenio cedere, rarus erit.
(5) My head, heart, and hands have been filled with better employments, from
which I am extremely loath to be diverted. If Bellarmine turned with loathing
from School Divinity, because it wanted the sweet juice of Piety; much more may
I turn from such perverse disputes as these: Sure I may find as fair
expositions of Scripture, and as acurate, and legitimate distinctions among the
Schoolmen; as in Mr. Tombs his Examen and Apology; or (which for the most
part is but a transcript of both) in Mr. Cary's Solemn Call. But I see I must
not be my own chuser, I cannot now be both silent and innocent; for in this
Solemn Call I find the great Doctrines of Gods Covenants abused by my
Neighbor. The Book's dispersed into many families related to me in this place,
one of them delivered to me by the Authors own hand, with a pressing desire to
give my judgment upon it. Several Objections which I privately and seasonably
sent him to prevent the sin and folly of his attempt, pretended to be answered
from p. 164. ad p. 183. Thus am I necessarily brought into the field of
Controversy, whither I come not a Volunteer, but a pressed man; not out of
choice, but necessity. And now I am here, I resolve to be only Adversarius
litis, non personae, an Adversary in the Controversy, not to the person,
especially of my friendly Neighbor. Neither would I have appeared thus
publicly against him, if differences could have been accommodated, and the
evil prevented in a more private way, in order whereto, I have punctually
observed and kept the rules and measures of friendship.

It Is possible some may judge my style against him to be too sharp, but if they
please to read the Conclusion of his Call, and my Answer; I presume they will
find enough to make atonement for that fault, if it be a fault. It Is from the
nature of the matter before me, not from defect of Charity to the person, or
party, that I am forced to be so plain and pungent as I am.

To conclude, I suspect this very Preface may be also censured for its
plainness, and tediousness. I confess when times are busy, we should be brief;
and I am persuaded a sufficient Preface may be contracted into four words,
(...), without Preface, or Passions. However, I have a little eased my own
heart, by discharging my duty to my differing Brethren, and pleased my self, if
not them.

The God of peace create peace in all the borders of Sion, beat our Swords into
Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning Hooks; I mean our polemicals into
practicals, that Jerusalem may once more be a City compact, and no more
terrible to her self; but only to her enemies, as an Army with Banners. This
Brethren, is the prayer, and shall ever be the endeavor of

Your Friend and Servant in Christ

John Flavell.

PROLEGOMENA.
BEfore we enter into the main Controversy, it will be necessary to acquaint
the Reader, why I begin with the middle of the Book; and it is because I there
find these three Principles, or Positions, on which the other parts of his
Discourse are superstructed; and these being destroyed, his other Discourses
are but arenae, sine calce. I properly therefore begin with the Foundation.

Next, I shall show how far we are greed in the matters here controvert^d, and
where it is in each of these, that ^he Controversy indeed lies betwixt us; and
as to

I Position, viz.
That the Sinai-Law is the same with A^am's Covenant of Works, made in Para^ice.

The difference betwixt us here is not (...).) Whether both these be called
Co^enants in Scripture? nor (2.) Whether there were no Grace at all in both, or
either of them: For we are agreed, it is Grace in God to enter into Covenant
with Man, whatever that Covenant be; nor (3.) Whether the Sinai-law be not a
Covenant of Works to some Men, by their own fault and occasion? nor (4.)
Whether the Scriptures do not many times speak of it in that very sense and
notion wherein Carnal Justiciaries apprehend and take it? and by rejecting
Christ make it so to themselves? nor (5.) Whether the very matter of the Law of
Nature be not revived and represented in the Sinai Law? These are not the
Points we contend about: But the Question is, Whether the Sinai Law do in its
own nature, and according to Gods purpose and design in the promulgation of it,
revive the Law of Nature, to the same ends and uses it served to in Adam's
Covenant; and so be properly and truly a Covenant of Works? Or whether God had
not gracious and evangelical ends and purposes, viz. by such a dreadful
representation of the severe and impracticable terms of the first Covenant,
instead of obliging them to the personal and punctual observance of them for
righteousness and life; he did not rather design to convince them of the
impossibility of legal righteousness, humble proud Nature, and show them the
necessity of betaking themselves to Christ, now exhibited in the New Covenant,
as the only refuge to Fallen Sinners. The latter I defend according to the
Scriptures, the former Mr. Carry seems to assert, and vehemently argue for.

2ly. In this Controversy about the Sinai Law, I do not find Mr. Carry
distinguishing (as he ought) betwixt the Law considered more largely and
complexly, as containing both the Moral and Ceremonial Law, for both which it
is often taken in Scripture, and more strictly, for the Moral Law only, as it
is sometimes used in Scripture. These two he makes one and the same Covenant of
Works; though there be some that doubt whether the mere Moral Law may not be a
Covenant of Works; yet I never met with any Man before, that durst affirm the
Ceremonial Law, which is so full of Christ, to be so; and to this Law it is
that Circumcision appertains.

3ly. The Moral Law strictly taken for the Ten Commandments, is not by him
distinguished (as it ought to be, and as the Scripture frequently does)
according to Gods intention and design in the promulgation of it, which was to
add it as an Appendix to the promise, Gal. 3. 19. and not to set it up as an
opposite Covenant, Gal. 3. 21. and the carnal Jews mistaking and perverting the
use and end of the Law, and making it to themselves a Covenant of Works, by
making it the very rule and reason of their Justification before God, Romans 9.
32, 33. Romans 10. 3. these things ought carefully to have been distinguished,
forasmuch as the whole Controversy depends on this double sense and intention
of the Law; yea, the very denomination of that Law depends hereon: For I affirm
it ought not to be denominated from the abused and mistaken end of it amongst
carnal men; but from the true scope, design and end for which God published it
after the Fall: And though we find such expressions as these in Scripture, The
man that does them, shall live in them. And cursed is every one that continues
not in all things, etc. yet these respecting the Law not according to Gods
intention, but Man's corruption and abuse of it, the Law is not thereby to be
denominated a Covenant of Works. Gods end was not to justify them, but to try
them by that terrible dispensation, Ezod. 20. 20. whether they would still
hanker after that natural way of selfrighteousness; for this end God propounded
the terms of the first Covenant to them on Sinai, not to open the way of
self-justification to them, but to convince them, and shut them up to Christ;
just as our Savior, Matthew. 19. 17. puts the young man upon keeping the
Commandments, not to drive him from, but necessitate him to himself in the way
of Faith.

The Law in both these Senses is excellently described, Gal. 4. in that
Allegory of Hagar and Sarah, the figures of the two Covenants. Hagar in her
first and proper Station, was but a serviceable Handmaid to Sarah, as the Law
is a Schoolmaster to Christ; but when Hagar the Handmaid is taken into Sarah's
Bed, and brings forth Children, that aspire to the Inheritance, then says the
Scripture, Cast out the bondwoman, with her son. So it is here; take the Law
in its primary use, as God designed it, as a Schoolmaster, or Handmaid to
Christ and the promise; so it is consistent with them, and excellently
subservient to them; but if we marry this Handmaid, and espouse it as a
Covenant of Works, then are we bound to it for life, Romans 7. and must have
nothing to do with Christ. The Believers of the Old Testament had true
apprehensions of the right end and use of the Law, which directed them to
Christ, and so they became Children of the Freewoman. The carnal Jews trusted
to the works of the Law for righteousness, and so became Children of the
Bondwoman; but neither could be Children of both at once, no more than the
same Man can naturally be born of two Mothers. This is the difference betwixt
us about the first Position; and as to the

II Position.
That Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. is an Adam's Covenant of Works also, because
Circumcision was annexed to it, which obliged Men to keep the whole Law.

The Controversy betwixt us in this point, is not whether Circumcision were an
Ordinance of God, annexed by him to his Covenant with Abraham? nor (2.) Whether
Abraham's ordinary and extraordinary Seed ought to be, and actually were signed
by it? nor (3.) Whether it were a Seal of the righteousness of Faith to any
individual Person; for he allows ^t to be so to Abraham? nor (4.) Whe^he it
pertain'd to the Ceremonial Law, and so must cease at the death of Christ? But
the difference betwixt us is, Whether ^1.) it was a Seal of the Covenant to
^one but Abraham? and (2.) Whether ^n the very nature of the Act, or only from
the intention of the Agent it did oblige men to keep the whole Law, as Adam was
obliged to keep it in inno^ency? (3.) Whether it were utterly ^bolished at the
death of Christ, as a condition of the Covenant of works; or being a sign of
the same Covenant of Grace we are now under, it be not suc^eeded by the new
Gospel-sign, which is Baptism? Mr. Carry affirms that it was (...) it self a
condition of the Covenant of Works, and being annexed to Gods Covenant with
Abraham, Genesis 17. it made that a true Adam's Covenant of works ^lso. This I
utterly deny, and say, A^raham's Covenant was a true Covenant ^f Grace. (2.)
That Circumcision was Seal of the righteousness of Faith, and therefore could
not possibly belong to the Covenant of Works. (3.) That as it was applied both
to the ordinary and extraordinary Infant Seed of Abraham, during that
administration of the Covenant; so it is the will of Christ that Baptism should
take its place under the Gospel, and be applied now to the Infant Seed of all
Abraham's Spiritual Children. These are the things wherein we differ about the
second Position. And lastly, as to the

III Position.
That neither Moses's Law, Exodus 2^ nor God's Covenant with Abraham, Ge^ 17.
can be any other than an Adam's Cov^nant of Works, because they have each (...)
them conditions in them on Man's part; (...) the Gospel Covenant has none at
all, but (...) altogether free and absolute.

The Controversy here betwixt us (...) not (1.) Whether the Gospel-Covenan^
requires no duties at all of them tha^ are under it? nor (2.) Whether it
requires any such conditions as were (...) Adam's Covenant, namely, perfect,
personal, and perpetual obedience under the severest Penalty of a Curse; and
admitting no place of Repentance? Nor (3.) Whether any condition required by
it, on our part, have any thing in its own nature Meritorious of the Benefits
promised? Nor (4.) Whether we be able in our own Strength, and by the Power of
our Free Will, without the preventing, as well as the assisting Grace of God,
to perform any such Work or Duty as we call a Condition? In these things we
have no Controversy, but the only Question betwixt us, is,

Whether in the New Covenant, some act of ours, (though it have no Merit in it,
nor can be done in our own single Strength) be not required to be performed by
us, antecedently to a Blessing or Privilege consequent by virtue of a Promise?
And whether such an Act or Duty, being of a Suspending Nature to the Blessing
promised, it have not the true and proper Nature of a Gospel Condition? This I
affirm, and he positively denies.

These three Positions being confuted, and the contrary well confirmed, viz.
That the Law at Sinai was not set up by God as an Adam's Covenant, to open the
old way of Righteousness and Life by works: but was added to the promise, as
subservient to Christ in its design and use; and consequently can never be a
pure Adam's Covenant of Works. And secondly,

That Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. is the very same Covenant of Grace we are
now under; and (2ly.) that Circumcision in the nature of the act, did not
oblige all men to keep the whole Law for Righteousness. And (3ly.)

That the New Covenant is not absolute and wholly unconditional; though
notwithstanding a most free and gracious Covenant: the Pillars on which Mr.
Carry sets his new Structure sink under it, and the building falls into ruins.

I have not here taken Mr. Cary's two Syllogisms, proving Abraham's Covenant to
be a Covenant of Works; because I find my self therein prevented by that
ingenuous and learned man Mr. Whiston, in his late Answer to Mr. Grantham.
Neither have I particularly spoken to his 23 Arguments to prove the Sinai Law
to be a pure Adam's Covenant, because frustra sit per plura, quod sieri potest
per pauciora, I have overthrown them all together at one blow; by evincing
every Argument to have four terms in it, and so proves nothing. But I have
spoken to all those Scriptures which concern our four Positions, and fully
vindicated them from the injurious senses to which Mr. Carry (following Mr.
Tombs) had wrested them.

These things premised, I shall only further add, that if Mr. Carry shall
attempt a Reply to my Answer, and free his own Theses from the gross
absurdities with which I have loaded them; he must plainly and substantially
prove against me,

(1.) That the Sinai Law, according to its true scope and end, was promulged by
God for man's Justification and Happiness in the way of personal Obedience; and
that the Jews that did accordingly endeavor after Righteousness by the works
of the Law, did not mistake its true end and meaning; or if they did, and
thereby made it what God never intended it to be, a Covenant of works to
themselves; that the Sinai Law ought rather to be denominated from their
mistake and abuse of it, than from its primary and proper use, and God's design
in its promulgation.

(2.) He must prove against me with like evidence of truth, that Circumcision
discovered no more of Man's Native Corruption, nor any more of his remedy by
Christ; nor sealed to any Person whatsoever the Righteousness of Faith, than
Adam's Covenant in Paradise did; and that it did in its own nature oblige all
upon whom it passed, to the same terms of Obedience that Adam's Covenant
obliged him: And,

(3.) That there is not to be found, in the new Covenant, any such Act or Duty
of ours, as has been described and limited above; which is of a suspending
Nature to the Benefits therein granted: And,

(4.) That the respective Expositions he gives of the several Texts by me
explained and vindicated, are more congruous to the Scope and Grammar than mine
are, and more agreeable to the current Sense of Orthodox Expositors, and then
he shall be sure to receive an answerable return from me, else it is but labor
lost to write again.

A REPLY TO Mr. Philip Cary's Solemn Call.
THE Book I have undertaken to animadvert briefly upon, bears the Title of A
Solemn Call; but I am not so much concerned with the Solemnity, as I am with
the Authority of this Call. Not how it is, but whose it is. If it be the Call
of God, it must be obeyed, tho it be to part not only with the Privileges, but
Lives of our dearest Children; but then we had need be very well assured it is
the Call of God, else we are guilty at once of the highest Folly and basest
T^eachery to part with so rich an Inheritance, conveyed by God's Covenant with
Abraham, to us believing Gentiles, and our Seed, at Mr. Cary's Call.

You direct your Solemn Call to all that would be owned as Christ's faithful
Witnesses.

Here you are too obscure and general; Do you mean all that would be owned by
you, or by Christ? If you mean that we must not expect to be owned by you, till
we renounce Infants Baptism, you tell us no news; for you have long since
turned your back upon our Ministry and Assemblies; yet methinks it is strange,
that we who were lately owned as Christ's faithful Witnesses under our late
Sufferings, must now be disowned by you, when we have liberty to amplify and
confirm our Testimony in the peaceful improvement of our common Liberty.

But if your meaning be (as I strongly suspect it is) that we must not expect
to be owned by Christ, except we give up Infants Baptism; then I say it is the
most uncharitable, as well as unwarrantable, and dangerous Censure that ever
dropped from the Pen of a sober Christian, It Is certainly your great evil to lay
Salvation it self on such a point as the proper Subject of Baptism, and to make
it Articulus Stantis, vel cadentis Religionis, the very Basis on which the
whole Christian Religion, and its Professors Salvation must stand. I hope the
rest of your Brethren are more charitable than your self; but however it be, I
do openly profess, that I ever have, and still do own you, and many more of
your Persuasion, for my Brethren in Christ, and am persuaded Christ will own
you too, notwithstanding your many Errors and Mistakes about the lesser and
lower matters of Religion. Nor need your Censure much to affect us, as long as
we are satisfied you have neither a Faculty, nor Commission thus solemnly to
pronounce it upon us.

But what is the condition upon which this dreadful Sentence depends? why, it is
our attendance, or non-attendance to the primitive purity of the Gospel
Doctrine.

Sir, I hope we do attend it, and in some respects better than some greater
Pretenders to primitive Purity; who have cast off, not only the initiating Sign
of Gods Covenant, (this did not Abraham) but also that most comfortable and
ancient Ordinance of singing Psalms; and what other primitive Ordinance of God
may be cashiered next, who can tell?

We have a Witness in your Bosom, that the Defense of Christ's pure Worship and
Institutions has cost us something; and as for me, were I convinced by all
that you have here said, or any of your Friends, that in baptizing the Infants
of Believers we did really depart from the Primitive purity, I would renounce
it, and turn Anabaptist the same day.

But really Sir, this Discourse of yours has very much convinced me of the
weakness and sickliness of your Cause, which is forced to seek a new
Foundation, and is here laid by you upon such a Foundation as must inevitably
ruin it, if your Party, as well as your self, have but resolution enough to
venture it thereupon.

And it appears to me very probable, that they intend to fight us upon the new
ground you have here chosen, and marked out for them, by the high Encomiums
they give your Book in their Epistles to it, wherein they tell us, Your Notions
are of so rare a nature, that you are not beholding to any other for them; and
it is a wonder if you should, for I think it never entered into any sober
Christians Head before you, that Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. was the very same
with Adam's Covenant made in Paradise; or that Moses, Abraham, and all the
Elect of God in those days were absolutely under the very rigor and tyranny of
the Covenant of Works, and at the same time under the Covenant of Grace, and
all the Blessings and Privileges thereof, with many other such rare Notions,
of which it is pity but you should have the sole propriety.

I am particularly concerned to detect your dangerous mistakes, both in love to
your own Soul, and care of my Peoples, amongst whom you have dispersed them;
though I foresee by M. E's Epistle to your Book what measure I am like to have
for my plain and faithful dealing with you: For if that Gentleman, upon a mere
surmise and presumption, that one or other would oppose your Book, dare
adventure to call your unknown Answerer, before ever he put Pen to Paper, a
Man-pleaser, a Quarreller at Reformation, and rank him with the Papists, which
opposed the Faithful for their nonconformity to their Inventions: What must I
expect from such rash Censurers, for my sober, plain, and rational confutation
of your Errors!

As to the Controversy betwixt us, you truly say in your Title Page, and many
parts of your Book, and your Brethren comprobate it in their Epistles, that the
main Arguments made use of by the Paedo-Baptists for the support of their
practice are taken from the Covenant of God with Abraham, Genesis 17. You call
this the very hinge of the Controversy; and therefore if you can but prove
this to be the very same Covenant of Works with that made with Adam in
Paradise, we shall then see what improvements you will quickly make of it.

Ay Sir, You are sensible of the Advantage, no less than a complete Victory you
shall obtain by it; and therefore being a more hardy and adventurous Man than
others, put desperately upon it (which never any before you durst attempt) to
prove Abraham's Covenant, which stands so much in the way of your Cause, to be
a mere Covenant of Works, and therefore now abolished.

My proper Province is to discover here, that part of the Foundation (I mean
Abraham's Covenant) whence our Divines, with great Strength and Evidence,
deduce the Right of Believers Infants to Baptism now. Next, to evince the
Absurdity of your Assertions and Arguments you bring to destroy it: And lastly,
To reflect briefly upon the Answers you give in the beginning of your Book, to
those several Texts of Scripture pleaded by the learned and judicious Divines
you oppose, for the Justification of Infants Baptism.

(1.) Those that plead God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. as a Scripture
Foundation for Baptizing Believers Infants under the Gospel, proceed generally
upon these four Grounds or Principles.

(1.) That God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. was the same Covenant for
substance, we Gentile Believers are now under, and they substantially prove it
from Luke 1. from the 54. to the 74. Verse, which place evidently shows the
sameness of the Covenant of Grace they were, and we are now under; and from
Matt. 21. 41, 43. the same Vineyard and Kingdom the Jews then had, is now let
out to us Gentiles; and from Romans 11. that the Gentile-Christians are grafted
into the same Olive Tree, from which the Jews were broken off for their
Unbelief; and that the Blessing of Abraham comes now upon the Gentiles, Gal.
3. 8, 14, 16. and in a word, that the Partition Wall betwixt them and us, is
now pulled down, and that we, through Faith, are let into the self-same
Covenant, and all the Privileges they then enjoyed, Ephesians. 2. 13.

(2.) They assert and prove, That in Abraham's Covenant, the Infant Seed were
taken in with their Parents, and that in token thereof, they were to have the
Sign of the Covenant applied to them, Genesis 17. 9.

(3.) They affirm and prove, That the Promise of God to Abraham and his Seed,
with the Privileges thereof to his Children, do, for the Substance of them,
descend to Believers now, and their Seed, Acts 2. 38, 39. and though the
external Sign, viz. Circumcision be changed, yet Baptism takes its place under
the Gospel, Col. 2. 11, 12.

(4.) They constantly affirm, That none of those Grants or Privileges, made to
the Infant Seed of Abraham's Family, were ever repealed or revoked by Christ or
his Apostles; and therefore Believers Children now are in the rightful
Possession of them; and that therefore there needed no new Command or Promise;
in Abraham's Command we find our Duty to Sign our Children with the Sign of the
Covenant, and in Abraham's Promise we find God's gracious Grant to our
Children, as well as his, especially since the Apostle directs us, in this very
respect, to the Covenant of God with Abraham, Acts 2. 38, 39.

These, Sir, are the Principles, on which we lay (as you say) great Stress, and
which to this day you have never been able to shake down; here therefore you
attempt a new Method to do it, by proving this Covenant is now abolished; and
this is your Method in which you promise your self great Success: Three things
you pretend to prove; (1.) That the Sinai Covenant, Exodus 20. (2.) That
Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. are no Gospel-Covenants, and that because, (3.)
The Gospel Covenant is Absolute and Unconditional.


How you come to hook in the Mosaic Covenant into this Controversy, is not
very evident, unless you think it were easy for you to prove that to be a
Covenant of Works, and then Abraham's Covenant Genesis 17. being an Old Testament
Covenant, were the more easily proved to be of the same nature. I am obliged to
examine your three Positions above noted, and if I evidence to the World the
Falsity of them, the Cause you manage is so far lost, and the right of
Believers Infants to Baptism stands firm upon its old and sure Foundation. I
begin therefore with your

I Position.
That the Covenant made with Israel on Mount Sinai, is the very same Covenant
of Works made with Adam in Innocence, P. 122. and diverse other places of your
Book the very same.

Now, if I prove that this Assertion of yours does naturally and regularly draw
many false and absurd Consequents upon you, which you are, and must be forced
to own; then this your Position cannot be true, for from true Premises,
nothing but truth can naturally and regularly follow; but I shall make it plain
to you, that this your Position regularly draws many false Conclusions and
gross Absurdities upon you, some of which you own expressly, and others you as
good as own, being able to return nothing rational or satisfactory in your own
defense against them.

(1.) From this Assertion, that the Sinai Covenant was a pure Covenant of
Works, the very same with Adam's Covenant, it regularly and necessarily
follows, that either Moses and all Israel were Damned, there being no Salvation
possible to be attained by that first Covenant; or else that there was a
Covenant of Grace at the same time running parallel with that Covenant of
Works; and so the Elect People of God were at one and the same time under the
first, as a Covenant of Death and Condemnation; and under the second, as a
Covenant of Grace and Justification.

This Dilemma pinches you, to assert, that Moses, and all the Elect of God
under that Dispensation were damned, you dare not; and if you had, you must
have expunged the 11th Chapter to the Hebrews, and a great part of the New
Testament, together with all your hopes of sitting down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. The latter therefore (seeing you cannot
avoid) you are forced upon, and in plain words yield it, p. 174, 175. That
Moses, and the whole body of the Children of Israel, without exception of any,
were under, yea absolutely under the severest penalties of a dreadful Curse;
That the Covenant they were under could be no other than a Covenant of Works, a
ministration of Death and Condemnation; when yet it is also evident from the
same Holy Scriptures of Truth, that at the same time both Moses, and all the
Elect among that People, were under a pure Covenant of Gospel Grace; and that
these two Covenants were just opposite the one to the other; but to this you
have nothing to say, but with the Apostle in another case, O the depth!

Here Sir, you father a pure and perfect contradiction upon the Holy
Scriptures, that it speaks things just opposite, and contradictory the one to
the other, and of necessity one part or member of a contradiction must be
false; this all the rational World knows; but so it is, say you, and fly to the
infinite Wisdom to reconcile them; for you say, you know not what to say to it.
Just so the Papists serve us in the Controversy about Transubstantiation, when
they cannot reconcile one thing with another, they fly to the Omnipotent Power
to do it.

But Sir, I wonder how you hold and hug a Principle that runs naturally into
such gross absurdities: Do you see what follows from hence by unavoidable
consequence? you must, according to this Principle, hold, That Moses, and all
Gods peculiar elect People in Israel, must during their Life, hang midway
between Justification and Condemnation, and after Death, between Heaven and
Hell.

(1.) During Life they must hang midway between Justification and
Condemnation; justified they could not be, for Justification is the Souls
passing from Death to Life, 1 John 3. 14. John 5. 24. This they could not
possibly do, for the ministration of Death, and Condemnation hindered. He that
is under Condemnation by the Law, cannot, during that state, pass into Life.
And yet to be under Condemnation is as impossible on the other side; for he
that is justified, cannot at the same time be under Condemnation, Romans 8. 1.
John 5. 24. What remains then, but that during Life they must stick midway
betwixt both, neither justified, nor condemned; and yet both so and so.
Justification is our Life, and Condemnation our Death in Law: Betwixt these two
which are privatively opposed, there can be no Medium of participation, and yet
such a Medium you here fancy.

(2.) And then after Death they must necessarily hang betwixt Heaven and Hell;
to Heaven none can go that are under the very rigor and tyranny of the Law, a
pure Covenant of Works, as you say they were. To Hell they could not go, being
under the pure Covenant of Grace: What remains then, but some third state must
be assigned them; and so at last we have found the Limbus Patrum, and your
Position leads us right to Purgatory; a Conclusion which, I believe, you your
self abhor as much as I.

(2ly.) This Hypothesis pinches you with another Dilemma, viz. Either there was
pardon on Repentance in Moses his Covenant, and the Sinai Dispensation of the
Law, or there was none; if you say ^one, you directly contradict Lev. 26. 40,
46. If there were, then it cannot be Adam's Covenant of Works.

You answer, page 179. That God promises pardon for the Breach of Moses his
Covenant and of Adam 's Covenant too, but neither Adam 's Covenant, nor the
Jewish legal Covenant promised any pardon upon repentance, but rather threatens
and inflicts the contrary.

Reply. Either this is a direct Answer to my Argument, to prove the Law at
Sinai cannot be a pure Adam's Covenant, because it had a promise of pardon
annexed to it, Lev. 26. 40. but Adam's Covenant had none. If your Answer be
direct, then it is a plain contradiction, in saying it had, and it had not a
promise of pardon belonging to it; or else it is a mere Evasion, and an eluding
of the Argument; and your only meaning is, That the Relief I speak of, is not
to be found in any promise belonging to the Sinai Dispensation, but in some
other Gospel Covenant or Promise. But, Sir, this will not serve your turn; you
see I cite the very promise of Grace made to the Israelites on Mount Sinai by
the hand of Moses; wherein God promises, upon their humiliation, to remember
his Covenant for their good. Now, Sir, you had as good have stood to your first
Answer, which is self-contradictory, as to this which is no less so, as will
evidently appear by a nearer and more particular view of the place, and
gathering up your own Concessions about it; that this Text, Lev. 26. 40. has
the nature of a gracious Gospel-promise in it, no Man can deny, except he that
will deny, that Gods remembering of his Covenant, for the relief of poor
brokenhearted Sinners, is no Gospel-promise pertaining to the Covenant of
Grace: That it was made to the penitent Israelites upon Mount Sinai, and there
delivered them by the hand of Moses for their relief, is as visible and plain
as the Words and Syllables of the 46th Verse are to him that reads them. Let
the Promise then be considered both ways, (1.) In your Sense, as a plain
direction to the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham for their relief; for so
you say it was, p. 180. Or let it be considered absolutely, as that which
contained relief in it self, for the penitent Israelites that should live
toward the end of the World, after they should be gathered from all their
Dispersions and Captivities as you there speak, and more fully explicate in
your accommodation of a Parallel Promise, p. 111, 112, 113. First let us view
it in your sense as a relative promise to the Covenant of Grace made with
Abraham, Genesis 12. to which, say you, it plainly directs them; and then this
legal Dispensation can never be the same with Adam's Covenant; for to that
Covenant no such Promise was ever annexed, which should guide and plainly
direct them to Christ and Pardon; as that Star which appeared to the Wise Men
directed their way to Christ. If there be any such relative promise belonging
to Adam's Covenant in Paradise, as this which I plainly show you was made on
Mount Sinai, be pleased to produce it, and you end the Controversy but if you
cannot (as you know you can not) then never say the legal Dispensation at
Sinai, and the Covenant of Work with Adam in Paradise, are the very same
Covenant. Secondly, Let us consider this Promise absolutely in it self, an^
then I demand, was there Mercy, Relie^ and Pardon contained in it for any pen^
tent Sinner present, or to come? Ye^ say you, it extends Relief to Penitent^
after God shall gather them from a^ their Captivities at the end of the World;
very Good. Then it is a ver^ vigorous Promise of Grace, which no^ only reaches
430 years backward, as fa^ as the first Promise to Abraham; b^ also extends its
Reliefs and Comfort^ many thousand years forwards, even t^ the purest times of
the Gospel, just before Christ's coming to Judgment; an^ can such a Promise as
this be denie^ to be in it self a Gospel-Promise? Su^ it can neither be denied
to be such nor yet to be made upon Mount Sinai b^ the Hand of Moses. This
Dilemma is a^ pinching as the former.

Perhaps you will say, this Promise did not belong to the Moral Law given at
Sinai, but to the Ceremonial Law; if so, then I should reasonably conclude,
that you take the Ceremonial Law (of which you seem to make this a Branch, Page
181.) to be a Covenant of Grace, seeing one of its Branches bears such a
gracious Promise upon it. No, that must not be so neither, for say you Page
151. the Ceremonial Covenant is of the same nature with the Covenant of Works,
or Law written in Tables of Stone; whither then shall we send this Promise? To
the Covenant of Grace we must not send it, unless only as an Index or Finger to
point to it, because it was made upon Mount Sinai, and delivered to Israel by
the Hand of Moses; to the Gospel-Govenant we must not therefore annex it; and
to the legal Dispensation at Sinai you are as loath to annex it, because it
contains so much Relief and Grace in it for poor Penitents; and that will
prove, that neither the Moral nor Ceremonial Law (place it in which you please)
can be a pure Covenant of Works as Adam's was.

Moreover, In making this the Promise which must Relieve and Comfort the
distressed Israelites in the purest Gospel Times, toward the end of the World,
you as palpably contradict your self in another respect; for we shall find you
by and by stoutly denying, that the Gospel-Promises have any Conditions or
Qualifications annexed to them; but so has this which you say relates to them
that shall live at the end of the World. If their uncircumcised Hearts be
humbled, and if they accept the punishment of their Iniquities, then will I
remember my Covenant, etc. But be this Promise Conditional or Absolute, two
things are undeniably clear. (1.) That it is a Promise full of Grace, for the
relief of Law-Transgressors, ver. 40. (2.) That it was a Mount Sinai Promise,
ver. 46. and such a Promise as you can never show in Adam's Covenant.

Besides, It is to me an unaccountable thing, that a Promise which has a
double comfortable Aspect, 430 years back, and some thousands of years forward;
should not cast one comfortable glance upon the Penitents of the present Age
when it was made, nor upon any till near the end of the World. What think you
Sir, of the 3000 Jews pricked at the Heart? Acts 2. had they no Relief from it,
because their Lot fell not late enough in time? Were the Penitent Jews in Moses
and Peter's days, all born out of due time, for this Promise to relieve? O what
Shifting and Shuffling is here! Who can think a Man that twists and winds every
way, to avoid the dint of an Argument, can possibly have a Moral Assurance of
the truth of his own Opinion?

(3.) You say, Page 134. That through Christ's satisfaction there is no
repugnancy or hostile contrariety betwixt the Law and Promise, but an Agreement
betwixt them, and that they differ only in respect of Strength and Weakness,
the Gospel is able to go through stitch with it, which the Law cannot do.

Reply. Well then, the Law considered as a Covenant of Works, whose Terms or
Condition is, do this and live, and the Promise or Gospel, whose Condition is,
Believe and thou shall be saved, are not specifically different, but only
gradually in point of Strength and Weakness; and the Reason you give, is as
strange, that this comes to pass through the satisfaction of Christ. Good Sir,
enlighten us in this rare Notion. Did Christ die to purchase a Reconciliation
betwixt the Covenant of Works as such, and the Covenant of Grace; as if both
were now by the Death of Christ agreed; and to be justified by Works and by
Faith, should after Christ's Death make no Odds or Disserence between them? If
it be so, why have you kept such a coil to prove Moses's and Adam's Covenant,
yea, Abraham's too, being Covenant of Works can never consist or mingle with
the Gospel Covenant? And then I say, you contradict the Apostle, who so
directly opposes the Covenant of Works as such, to the Covenant of Grace, Gal.
3. 18.
and tells us, they are utterly inconsistent and exclusive of each other; and
this he spoke after Christ's Death and actual satisfaction: But

(4.) That which more amazes me, is the strange Answer you give to Mr.
Sedgwick, Page 132, 133. in your return to his Argument, That if the Law and
the Promise can consist, then the Law cannot be set up as a Covenant of Works.
You answer, That the Law and the Promise having diverse ends, it does not thence
follow, that there is an inconsistence betwixt them, and that the Law, even as
it is a Covenant of Works, instead of being against the Promise, tends to the
Establishment of it. And Page 133. That by convincing Men of the Impossibility
of obtaining Rest and Peace in themselves, and the necessity of betaking
themselves to the Promise, etc. the Law is not against the Promise, having so
Blessed a Subserviency toward the Establishment thereof. Here you own a
Subserviency, yea, a Blessed Subserviency of the Law to the Promise, which is
that Mr. Sedgwick and my self have urged, to prove it cannot be so, as it is a
pure Adam's Covenant; but that therefore it must come under another
Consideration; only here we differ, you say it has a Blessed Subserviency to
the Promise, as it is the same with Adam's Covenant, we say it can never be so
as such, but as it is either a Covenant of Grace, though more obscure, as he
speaks; or though the matter of it should be the same with Adam's Covenant, yet
it is subserviently a Covenant of Grace as others speak; and under no other
Consideration can it be reconciled to the Promise. But will you stand to this,
that the Law has no Hostile Contradiction to the Promise, but a Blessed
Subserviency to it, as you speak, Page 173. where you say, That if we preach up
the Law as a Covenant of Life, or a Covenant of Faith and Grace (which are
equipollent Terms) let us distinguish as we please, between a Covenant of Grace
Absolutely and Subserviently such; then we make an ill use of the Law; by
perverting it to such a Service as God never intended it for, and are guilty of
mingling Law and Gospel, Life and Death together.

Reply. Here, Sir, my Understanding is perfectly posed, and I know not how to
make any tolerable Orthodox Sense out of this Position: Is the Law preached up
as a pure Covenant of Works (that is, pressing Men to the personal and punctual
Obedience of it, in order to their Justification by Works) no way repugnant to
the Promise; but altogether so, when preached in Subserviency to Christ and
Faith? This is new Divinity with me, and I believe must be so to every
Intelligent Reader. Don't I oppose the Promise, when I preach up the Law as a
pure Covenant of Works, which therefore as such must be Exclusive of Christ and
the Promise; and do I oppose either, when I tell Sinners the Terrors of the Law
serve only to drive them to Christ, their only Remedy, who is the end of the
Law for Righteousness, to every one that Believes, Romans 10. 4.? are Works and
Grace more consistent than Grace with Grace? Explain your meaning in this
Paradoxical Expression, and leave not your self and others in such a Maze. I
read Gal. 3. 19. for what end God published the Law 430 years after the Promise
was made to Abraham, and find it was added because of Transgression, (...) it
was put to, not set up by it self alone, as a distinct Cov^ nant, but added as
an Appendix to the Covenant of Grace; whence it is plain, that God added the
Sinai Law to the Promise, with Evangelical ends and Purposes. If then I preach
the Law to the very same Evangelical Uses and Purposes for which God added it
to the Promise, do I therein make an ill use of the Law, and mingle Life and
Death together? But preaching it as a pure Covenant of Works, as it holds forth
Justification to Sinners by Obedience to its Precepts; do I then make it
blessedly subservient (as you speak) to the Promise, or Covenant of Grace? The
Law was added because of Transgression, that is, to restrain Sin in the World,
and to convince Sinners under guilt, of the necessity of another Righteousness
than their own, even that of Christ; and for the same ends God added it to the
Promise; I always did, and still shall Preach it; and I am persuaded without
the least danger of mingling Law and Gospel, Life and Death together, in your
Sense.

It Is plain to me, that in the Publication of the Law on Sinai, God did not in
the least intend to give them so much (...) a Direction how to obtain
Justification ^y their most punctual Obedience to its Precepts, that being to
Fallen Man utterly impossible; and beside, had he promulged the Law to that end
and purpose, he had not added it, but directly opposed it to the Promise; which
its manifest he did not, Gal. 3. 21. Is the law then against the promise of
God? God forbid. And ver. 18. makes it appear, that had it been set up to that
end and purpose, it had utterly disannulled the Promise; for if the inheritance
be of the law, it is no more by promise. What then can be clearer, than that
the Law at Sinai was published with gracious Gospel-ends and purposes, to lead
Men to Christ; which Adam's Covenant had no respect nor reference to? and
therefore it can never be a pure Adam's Covenant, as you falsely call it;
neither is it capable of becoming a pure Covenant of Works to any Man, but by
his own Fault, in rejecting the Righteousness of Christ, and seeking
Justification by the works of the Law, as the mistaken carnal Jews did, Romans
10. 3. and other legal Justiciaries now do. And upon this account only it is,
that Paul, who so highly praises the Law in its subserviency to Christ,
thunders so dreadfully against it, as it is thus set by ignorant mistaken Souls
in direct Opposition to Christ.

(5ly.) And further, to clear this Point, the Apostle tells us, Romans 10. 4.
That Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes. Whence I argue, That if Adam's Covenant had one End, namely, the
Justification of Men by their own personal Obedience; and the Law at Sinai had
a quite contrary End, namely, To bring Sinners to Christ by Faith for their
Righteousness; the one to keep him within himself, the other to take him quite
out of himself, and bring him for his Justification to the Righteousness of
another, even that of Christ; then the Sinai Law cannot possibly be the same
thing with Adam's Covenant of Works; but the Antecedent is true and plain in
the forecited Text, therefore so is the Consequent.

Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness. Take the Law here, either more
strictly for the Moral Law, or more largely, as it comprehends the Ceremonial
Law; still Christ is the end of the Law. The Moral Law shuts up every Man to
Christ for Righteousness, by convincing him (according to Gods design in the
Publication of it) of the impossibility of obtaining Justification in the way
of Works.

And the Ceremonial Law many ways prefigured Christ, his Death and Satisfaction
by Blood, in our room, and so led Men to Christ, their true Propitiation; and
all its Types were fulfilled and ended in Christ. Was there any such thing in
Adam's Covenant? You must prove there was, else you will never be able to make
them one and the same Covenant.

(6ly.) It seems exceeding probable from Acts 7. 37, 38. That the Sinai
Covenant was delivered to Moses by Jesus Christ, there called the Angel. This
is he that was in the Church in the Wilderness, with the Angel that spoke to
him in the Mount Sinai, and with our Fathers, who received the lively Oracles
to give unto us. Now, if Christ himself were the Angel, and the Precepts of the
Law delivered by him to Moses were the Lively Oracles of God, as they are there
expressly affirmed to be, then the Law delivered on Mount Sinai cannot be a pure
Adam's Covenant of Works: For it is never to be imagined that Jesus Christ
himself should deliver to Moses such a Covenant, directly opposite to all the
ends of his future Incarnation; and that those Precepts (which if they were of
the same nature, and revived to the same end, at which Adam's Covenant directly
aimed) should be called the Lively Oracles of God: When contrariwise, upon your
Supposition they could be no other than a Ministration of Condemnation and
Death: But that they were Lively Oracles, viz. in their Design and Intention,
is plain in the Text; and that they were delivered to Moses by Jesus Christ,
the Angel of the Covenant, seems more than probable, by comparing it with the
former Verses.

(7ly.) Neither is it easy to imagine how such a Covenant, which by the Fall of
Adam had utterly lost all its Promises, Privileges and Blessings; and could
retain nothing but the Curses and Punishments annexed to it, in case of the
least Failure, could possibly be numbered among the chief Privileges in which
Gods Israel gloried; as it apparently was, Romans 9. 4. Who are Israelites, to
whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving
of the law, and the service of God, and the promises.

These things considered, with many more (which the intended Brevity of this
Discourse will not now admit) I am fully satisfied of the Falsity of your
Position, and so may you too, when you shall review the many gross and palpable
Absurdities with which I have clogged and loaded it; with many more regularly
and fairly deducible from it, which I could easily produce, did I not suspect
these I have produced have already pressed your Patience a littly too far: But
if ever I shall see (which I never expect) a fair and Scriptural Solution of
these weighty Objections, you may expect from me more Arguments against your
unsound Position, which at the present I judge needless to add.

To conclude, Those Premises (as before I noted) can never be true, from whence
such, and so many gross and notorious Absurdities are regularly and unavoidably
deducible. For Ex veris nil nisi verum, from true Premises nothing but Truth
can regularly follow.

Had you minded those things which I seasonably sent you, you had avoided all
those Boggs into which you are now sunk, and been able fairly to reconcile all
those seeming Contradictions in Paul's Epistles, with respect to the Law at
Sinai: But however, by what has been said, your first Position, That the Sinai
Covenant is the same Covenant of Works with Adam 's in Paradise, vanishes
before the Evidence of Scripture-truth and sound Reason.

But yet, though what I have said destroys your false Position, I am not
willing to leave you, or the Reader, ignorant wherein the Truth lies in this
controverted Point betwixt us; and that will appear by a due consideration of
the following Particulars.

(1.) It Is plain and uncontroverted, That Adam's Covenant in Paradise contained
in it a perfect Law and Rule of natural Righteousness, founded both in God's
Nature, and in Man's, which in its perfect state of Innocence was every way
enabled perfectly to comply therewith: For the Scripture tells us, Eccles. 7.
29. That God made Man upright, and his punctual complying therewith was the
Righteousness by which he stood.

(2.) This Covenant of Works being once broken, can never more be available to
the Justification and Salvation of any Fallen Man: There was not now a Law
found that could give Righteousness; the broken Covenant of Works lost
immediately all the Blessings and Privileges, which before it contained, and
retained only the Curse and Punishment; in token whereof Cherubims with flaming
Swords turning every way, were set to keep the way of the Tree of Life, Genesis 3.
24.

(3.) Soon after the Violation of the Covenant of Works, God was graciously
pleased to publish for the relief of Mankind, now miserable and hopeless, the
Second Covenant, which we call the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. which is the
first opening of the Grace of God in Christ to Fallen Man; and though this
first Promise of Christ was but short and obscure, yet it was in every Age to
be opened clearer and clearer, until the promised Seed should come. After the
first opening of this new Covenant in the first Promise of Christ, the first
Covenant is shut up for ever, as a Covenant of Life and Salvation; and all the
World are shut up to the only way of Salvation by Christ, Gal. 3. 23. it being
contrary to the Will of God, that two ways of Salvation should stand open to
Man at once, and they so opposite one to another, as the way of Works and the
way of Faith are, Acts 4. 12. John 14. 6. Gal. 2. 21.

(4.) It Is evident however, that after the first opening of the Promise of
Christ, Genesis 3. 15. God foreseeing the Pride of Fallen Man, who naturally
inclines to a Righteousness of his own in the way of doing, was pleased to
revive the Law of Nature, as to its matter, in the Sinai Dispensation, which
was 430 Years after the first Promise had been renewed, and further opened unto
Abraham, of whose Seed Christ should come; and this he did not in opposition to
the Promise, but in subserviency thereto, Gal. 3. 21. And though the matter and
substance of the Law of Nature be found in the Sinai Covenant, strictly taken
for the Ten Commandments, yet the Ends and Intentions of God in that terrible
Sinai Dispensation were twofold: (1.) To convince Fallen Man of the sinfulness
and impotency of his Nature, and the impossibility of obtaining Righteousness
by the Law, and so by a blessed necessity to shut him up to Christ, his only
Remedy. And (2.) To be a standing Rule of Duty both toward God and Man, to the
end of the World: But if we take the Sinai Covenant more largely, as inclusive
of the Ceremonial with the Moral Law, (as it is often taken, and is so by you,
in the New Testament) then it did not only serve for a Conviction of Impotency,
and a Rule of Duty, but exhibited and taught much of Christ, and the Mysteries
of the New Covenant in those its Ceremonies, wherein he was prefigured to them.

(5.) Whence it evidently appear that the Sinai Covenant was neither repugnant
to the New Covenant in its scope and aim. The law is not against the promise,
Gal. 3. 21. nor yet set up as coordinate with it, with a design to open two
different ways of Salvation to Fallen Man, but was added to the Promise, in
respect of its Evangelical purposes and designs; on which account it is called
by some a Covenant of Faith or Grace, in respect of its subserviency unto
Christ, who is the end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10. 4. and by others
a Subservient Covenant, according to Gal. 3. 23, 24. and accordingly we find
both Tables of the Law put into the Ark, Heb. 9. 4. which shows their
Consistency and Subordination with, and to the method of Salvation by Christ in
the New Covenant.

(6.) This design and intention of God was fatally mistaken by the Jews, ever
since God promulg'd that Law at Sinai, and was by them notoriously perverted to
a quite contrary end to that which God promulged it for, even to give
Righteousness and Life in the way of personal and perfect Obedience, Romans 10.
3. for they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness
of God. Hence Christ came to be slighted by them, and his righteousness
rejected; for they rested in the Law, Romans 2. 17. were married to the Law as an
Husband, Romans 7. 2, 3. and so might have no Conjugal Communion with Christ.
However, Moses, Abraham, and all the Elect discerned Christ as the end of the
Law for righteousness, and were led to him thereby.

(7ly.) This fatal Mistake of the Use and Intent of the Law, is the ground of
those seeming Contradictions in Paul's Epistles. Sometimes he magnifies the
Law, when he speaks of it according to Gods end and purpose in its
Promulgation, Romans 7. 12, 14, 16. but as it was fatally mistaken by the Jews,
and set in opposition to Christ; so he thunders against it, calls it a
ministration of Death and Condemnation, and all its appendent Ceremonies, weak
and beggarly elements; and by this distinction, whatsoever seems repugnant in
Paul's Epistles, may be sweetly reconciled; and it is a distinction of his own
making, 1 Timothy 1. 8. We know that the Law is good, Romans 10. 3. Romans 2. 17.
if we use it lawfully. There is a good and an evil use of the Law. Had you
attended these things, you had not so confidently and inconsiderately
pronounced it a pure Covenant of Works.

II Position.
Secondly, you affirm with like Confidence, That the Covenant of Circumcision
is also the same, viz. The Covenant of Works made with Adam in Paradise.

This I utterly deny, and will try whether you have any better Success in the
Proof of your second, than you had in your first Position; and to convince you
of your mistake, let us consider what the general nature of this Ordinance of
Circumcision was, what its ends were, and then prove that it cannot be what you
affirm it to be, the very same Covenant God made with Adam before the Fall, but
must needs be a Covenant of Grace.

(1.) Circumcision in its general Nature, was (1.) an Ordinance of God's own
Institution in the 99th year of Abraham's Age, at which time of its
Institution, God renewed the Covenant with him, Genesis 17. 9, 10. (2.) That it
consisted (as all Sacraments do) of an external Sign, and a Spiritual Mystery
signified thereby. The external part of it (which we call the Sign) was the
cutting off the Foreskin of the Genital part of the Hebrew Males, on the eighth
Day from their Birth. The Spiritual Mystery thereby signified and represented,
was the cutting off the Filth and Guilt of Sin from their Souls, by
Regeneration and Justification, called, the Circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy.
10. 16. And though this was laid upon them by the Command, as their Duty, yet a
gracious Promise of Power from God to perform that Duty, was added to the
Command, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart to love him,
etc. just as Promises of Grace in the New Testament, are added to commands of
Duty: (3.) Betwixt this outward visible Sign, and Spiritual Mystery, there was
a Sacramental Relation, from which Relation it is called the Token of the
Covenant, Genesis 17. 12. The Sign and Seal of the Covenant, Romans 4. 11. yea, the
Covenant it self, Acts 7. 8.

(2.) Next let us consider the ends for which Circumcision was instituted and
ordained of God, of which these were the Principal.

(1.) It was instituted to be a convictive Sign of their natural Corruption,
propagated by the way of natural Generation. For which reason this natural
Corruption goes in Scripture under the name of the Uncircumcision of the heart*
(...). 9. 26.

(2.) It also signified the putting off of this Body of Sin, in the virtue of
Christ's Death, Col. 2. 11.

(3.) It was appointed to be the initiating Sign of the Covenant, or a token of
their Matriculation and Admission into the Church and Covenant of God, Genesis 17.
9, 10, 11.

(4.) It was ordained to be a discriminating Mark betwixt God's Covenanted
People, and the Pagan World, who were Strangers to the Covenant, and without
God in the World: And accordingly, both Parties were from this Ordinance
denominated the Circumcision and the Uncircumcision, Col. 3. 11.

(5.) It was also an obliging Sign to Abraham and his Seed, to walk with God in
the Uprightness and Sincerity of their Hearts, in the performance of all
covenanted Duties, in which Duties Abraham and the Faithful wa^ked
Obedientially with God, looking to Christ for Righteousness; but the carnal
Jews resting in, and trusting to those Duties and Ordinances for Righteousness
and Justification, made it a Covenant of Works to themselves, and Circumcision
it self a Bond of that Covenant.

(6.) Now for as much as Circumcision prefigured Christ, who was to come of
this Holy circumcised Seed of Abraham, and his Death also was pointed at
therein, Heb. 2. 16. Col. 2. 11. of necessity this Ordinance must vanish at the
Death of Christ, and accordingly did so.

These things duly pondered, how irrational is it to imagine this Covenant of
Circumcision to be the very same with the Paradisical Covenant! Did that
Covenant discover native Corruption, and direct to its remedy in Christ as this
did? Surely it gave not the least glimps of any such thing. Did that Covenant
separate and distinguish one Person from another as this did? No, no, it left
all under equal and common Misery, Ephesians. 2. 3.

Had Adam's Covenant a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith annexed to it as this
had? Romans 4. 11. He received Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith.
The Righteousness of Faith is Evangelical Righteousness, and this Circumcision
sealed. Say not it was to Abraham only, that it sealed it; for it is an
injurious Restriction put upon the Seal of a Covenant, which extended to the
Fathers as well as to Abraham, Luke 1. 72. But you admit however, that it
sealed Evangelical Righteousness to Abraham; but I hope you will not say, that
a Seal of the Covenant of Works ever did or could Seal Evangelical
Righteousness to any individual Person in the World. So then turn which way you
will, this truth still follows you, and will fasten upon you; That the Covenant
of Circumcision was not a pure Covenant of Works, but a Gospel Covenant, which
I thus prove.

Argument I.
If Circumcision be a part of the Ceremonial Law, and the Ceremonial Law was
dedicated by Blood; and whatsoever is so dedicated, is by you confessed to be
no part of the Covenant of works; then Circumcision is no part of the Covenant
of works, even by your own confession. But it is so, Ergo.

That it is a part of the Ceremonial Law, was never doubted or denied by any
Man: That it was dedicated by Blood, and therefore no part of the Moral Law,
you your self not only acknowledge, but vehemently plead for it, Page 148.
where you blame Mr. Sedgwick with some Sharpness, and unbecoming Reflection,
for making no distinction betwixt the Ceremonial Covenant which was dedicated
by Blood, and the Law written in Tables of Stone; which was not so dedicated,
and therefore could not be the same with the Moral Law, which you make the
Covenant of works; telling him, that this Dedication by Blood ought to
distinguish it from the Moral Law, or Sinai Covenant of works, as you say it
does, and ought to do; how then can Circumcision be the same with, and yet
quite another thing from the Sinai Covenant? was the Ceremonial Law dedicated
by blood? Yes, the Apostle ^lainly asserts it from Exodus Heb. 9. 18, 19. ^4. 7,
8. Moses took the Book ^f the Covenant, and read it in the audience ^f the
people, and took the blood, and sprink^d it upon the people, and said, behold
the blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has ^ade with you concerning these
things. But that kind of Covenant then was this Co^enant that was sprinkled
with Blood? ^ou tell us, Page 147. it could not possi^y be the Law written in
Stones (which ^ou make the Covenant of works) but ^as indeed another Covenant
delivered (...) a distinct Season, and in a distinct ^ethod. What Covenant then
must this ^e, seeing it could not possibly (as you ^y) be the Sinai Covenant
written in ^ones? It must either be the Covenant ^f Grace, or none. No, say
you, that (...) was not neither; for it was of the same ^ture with, and is no
other than a Co^enant of works, Page 151. it was the ^me, and yet could not
possibly be the same. Mr. Sedgwick, that Learned-Grave Divine, is checked Page
148. for confounding the Ceremonial Law that wa^ sprinkled with Blood, with the
Mora^ Law (which you call the Covenant o^ works) that was not sprinkled wit^
Blood; and say you, Page 147. It could not possibly be the same: And then P.
151 you say, It Is clear, these two, viz. the Moral and Ceremonial Law, were
both (...) the same nature, that is, no other than (...) Covenant of Works. How
does this han^ together? Pray reconcile it if you ca^ You say it is an
ungrounded Supposition (...) Mr. Sedgwick 's, that that Covenant whi^ was so
confirmed by Blood, must of necessi^ be confirmed by the Blood of Christ als^
Page 148. But Sir, the truth you oppos^ viz. That the Book of the Ceremoni^ Law
was sprinkled by Typical Bloo^ and therefore confirmed by the Blo^ of Christ
for the time it was to contin^ shines like a bright Sunbeam in yo^ Eyes, from
Heb. 9. 14, 23. was not t^ Blood that sprinkled this Law, the (...) gure or
Type of Christ's own Blood whose Blood was it then, if not Christ'^ How dare
you call this an unground^ Supposition? was not that Blood Typ^ call Blood? And
what, I pray you, was the Antitype but Christ's Blood? And did not the Holy
Ghost signify the one by the other? Heb. 9. 8. I stand amazed at these things:
You distinguish and confound all again. You say it could not possibly be the
same with the Law written in Stone, and you say it is clear both were of the
same nature, no other than a Covenant of works. At this ^ate you may say what
you please, for (...) see Contradiction is no Crime in your Book.

Argument II.
If Circumcision was the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, it did not per^ain
to the Covenant of works, for the Righteousness of Faith and Works are
Opposites, and belong to two contrary Covenants.

But Circumcision was the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. He
^i. e. Abraham) received the sign of Cir^umcision, a seal of the righteousness
of Faith. Therefore it pertains not to the Covenant of Works, but Grace.

A Man would think it impossible to evade so clear and Scripture an Argument as
this is. The Major Proposition is even self-evident and undeniable; the Minor,
the plain words of the Apostle.

And what is your Reply to this? certainly as strange a one as ever I met with,
Page 205. You say, It Is true, Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith to Abraham, but it was so to him only, in his extraordinary Circumstance^
but it was not so to any of his natural S^ in its ordinary use.

I cannot deny but I have met with such an Assertion before in Mr. Tombs and I
can tell you too, that Bellarmine invented it before Mr. Tombs was born, and
that Dr. Ames fully confuted it in his third Tome, Page 27. proving that there
was no extraordinary cause o^ Abraham's account, why God should justify or
seal him more than any other Believer; and that Abraham had nothing to glory in
before God. But to restrain* as you do, the public Seal of a Covenant, that
comprehended and equally concerned the whole Church and People of God, to one
single Person, so tha^ neither Isaac nor Jacob, who were b^ name enrolled in
that great Charter, should have any right to the Seal of it; ^s such a Conceit
as amazes an intelligent Reader. We know Abraham was the ^rst that received it,
but utterly deny that he received only for himself; but ^e received it as the
Father of all them that Believe, whether Jews or Gentiles, ^s the very next
words tell us, he re^eived it that he might be the Father of ^ll that Believe,
that is, for himself, and ^ll his Spiritual Children. One half of his Sacrament
of Circumcision you allow, ^age 205. to the rest that were under (...), viz. to
be a sign of the Covenant; but ^e other half you cut off, and say it ^as only a
Seal to him. What good ^ouchers have you for this Exposition ^f the Text? Have
you the Concurrence (...) Orthodox Expositors? Or is it the rash ^d bold
Adventure of your own head? ^am sure it no ways agrees with the drift ^d scope
of the Apostles Argument, which evidently is to prove, that both ^ws and
Gentiles are justified by Faith, as ^braham was; and that the Ground of
^stification and Blessedness, is common ^th to the uncircumcised Gentiles, and
^cumcised Jews; and that Abraham, and all other Believers, have but one way of
Justification and Salvation; and that how great soever Abraham was, in this
case he has found nothing whereof to Glory, ver. 1, 2. and is not your
Exposition a notable one, to prove the Community of the Privilege of
Justification, because the Seal of it was peculiar to Abraham alone? rectify
it, and better consider it.

Argument III.
In the Covenant of Circumcision* Genesis 17. God makes over himself t^ Abraham
and his Seed to be their God or give them a special Interest in himself.

But in the Covenant of Works, God does not, since the Fall, make over himself
to any to be their God by way o^ special Interest.

Therefore the Covenant of Circumcision cannot be the Covenant of Work^

This is so plain and clear, that no^ can doubt or deny it, that understand the
nature of the two Covenants. A^ now Sir, what course do you take (...) avoid
this Argument? such a one sure, (...) no Man that ever I met with took before
you; and that is this, you boldly cut Abraham's Covenant Genesis 17. into two
parts, and make the first to be the pure Covenant of Grace; which is the
promissory part, to the ninth Verse, and the Restipulation (as you call it)
Page 205. ^o be as pure a Covenant of Works. What hard shift will some Men make
^o maintain their Opinion! You say ^ruly Page 205. that at the seventh and
^ighth Verses was their Restipulation, why ^hen do you say, Page 224. that at
Verse ^he seventh, he proceeds to speak of another Covenant than what he had
been ^eaking of before? Does the Promise and the Restipulation make two
Cove^ants, or are they just and necessary parts ^f one and the same Covenant?
You ^lso tell us, that the Covenant Genesis 17. (...), 2, 3, 4. was a plain
Transcript of ^veral free Promises of the Gospel, under ^e denomination of a
Covenant. But ^hy then don't you take the Restipula^on, verse 7, 8, 9, 10. to
be a part of (...)? Oh, no, there is something required (...) Abraham's and his
Posterities part, ^ey must be circumcised, and that spoils ^l. Why, but Sir, if
the requiring of Circumcision alters the case so greatly, as to make it a quite
contrary Covenant, how comes it to pass, that in the Covenant to Abraham, he
himself was first required to be circumcised? Why this is the reason, here is
somewhat required on their part as a Condition, and a Condition quite alters
the nature of the Covenant. Very well, but tell me then, why you say, Page 223.
and in many other places, that the Covenant made with Abraham in Genesis 12. was a
Gospel Covenant, and yet there Abraham is obliged to walk before God, and be
perfect? Does not that also there alter the nature of the Covenant, as well as
here in the seventeenth Chapter? You also grant the Covenant made with Abraham,
Genesis 22. was a pure Gospel Covenant, or if you deny it, the Apostle proves it,
Heb. 6. 13. and yet there is more appearance of respect to Abraham's Obedience
in that Covenant, than is in submitting to Circumcision; see Genesis 22. 16, 17.
By my self have I sworn, says the Lord, for because thou have done this thing,
etc. That in Blessing I will bless thee; and in multiplying I will multiply
thee.

I will trouble you on this Head but with one Query more: If the four first
Verses of the Seventeenth of Genesis, contain a pure Gospel Covenant as you
say, and the Restipulation in the following Verses make a Covenant of works,
because it thereby becomes Conditional: Then tell me, if you please, whether
what God graciously granted to Abraham in the former Verses, be not all nulled,
and made void again by their Restipulation? Does not this seem Harsh? Here you
have brought Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the believers of Abraham's
race, just into the same case you brought Moses and all the Israelites before,
under two opposite Covenants, where one cuts off all that the other granted.

But there is a stronger reason urged than the conditionality of the Covenant,
to prove it a Covenant of Works, and that is, Circumcision is made the
Condition of Abraham's Covenant; and that is the worst of all conditions; for it
obliges a man to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3. it is the yoke of bondage, and
to whatsoever Covenant it be so annexed, it makes it become a bondage Legal
Covenant. If we be circumcised, Christ shall profit us nothing. Thus it was in
the Covenant. Genesis 17.

Great use is made of this in many parts of your Discourse; but Sir, you are
greatly mistaken in applying these Texts to the Purposes you do. For the
Apostle all along in that Epistle to the Galatians argues against the false
Teachers, who taught and pressed the necessity of Circumcision, as a Bond
obliging them to the strict and perfect Obedience of the Law, in order to their
Justification thereby, or at least to join it with the Righteousness of Christ,
as a Con-cause of Justification; see Gal. 2. 4, 5. and the 3. 1. Now against
this Abuse of Circumcision it is that the Apostle argues thus, and tells them,
that in submitting to it on that account, they made the Death of Christ of no
Effect, and obliged themselves by it to the whole Law; for Circumcision did not
simply and absolutely, in the nature of the work or action, oblige Men to the
whole Law in the way of Justification by it, but it did so from the Intention
of the worker, and the Supposition of such an Opinion of it, and design in it;
for in it self, and with respect to Gods design in the Institution of it, it
was to be a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. and so it was an
excellent useful instructive Ordinance to all Believers, as long as the
Ceremonial Law stood; and even when it was expiring, as the Gospel began to
open more and more clearly, there was yet some kind of Toleration of it, to
such as were born of Jewish Parents: Thus Paul himself circumcised Timothy, his
Mother being a Jewess, Acts 16. 1, 3. but Titus being a Greek was not
circumcised; and that because of these false Teachers, that would make an ill
use of that their Liberty, Gal. 2. 3, 4. this Paul could never have done, in
case Circumcision, in the nature of the act, had bound Timothy to keep the Law
for Justification. By which it appears that the action in its own nature, did
not oblige to the keeping of the whole Law, but from the Intention of the
Agent; and therefore as the Apostle rightly argues, if a Man be circumcised
with this design to be justified by it, he would thereby bind himself to the
whole Law, and frustrate the Death of Christ to himself; but it was now to have
its Funeral with all other parts of the Ceremonial Law which vanished, and were
accomplished in the Death of Christ; and it falling out that such a vile use
was made of it at that time, the Apostle thus thunders against it. Had this
been observed, as also the like abuse of the Moral Law, you would have known
how to have reconciled the Apostles Encomiums of them both, with his sharp
Invectives against the one, and the other. But being Ignorant of these two
great and necessary Distinctions of the Law, according to Gods Intention in the
Promulgation of it at Sinai, and the carnal Jews Sense of it, as a pure
Covenant of works, against which the Apostle so sharply inveighs in the places
by you cited, all your 23 Arguments from Page 183. to Page 187. fall to the
Ground at one stroke, your Medius Terminus having one sense in your Major
Proposition, and another in your Minor; and so every Argument has four Terms
in it; as will easily be evinced by the particular consideration of the
respective places from whence you draw them.

So in like manner in your arguing here against Circumcision, as a Bond to keep
the whole Law; and as such vacating the Death of Christ, is a stumble at the
same stone, not distinguishing as you ought to have done, betwixt an
Obligation, arising out of the nature of the work, and out of the end and
intention of the Workers, and this every learned and judicious Eye will easily
discern. But we proceed to

Argument IV.
That which in its direct and primary end, teaches Man the Corruption of his
Nature by Sin, and the Mortification of Sin by the Spirit of Christ, cannot be
a condition of the Covenant of works; but so did Circumcision in the very
direct and primary end of it.

This Ordinance supposes the Fall of Man, points to the Means and Instruments
of his Sin and Misery; and also to the Remedy thereof by Christ. (1.) It
singles out that Genital part, by which original Sin was propagated, Genesis 17.
11. Psalm 51. 5. to this the Sign of the Covenant is applied in Circumcision,
for the Remission of Sins past, and the Extirpation of Sin for the future. (2.)
Therefore it was instituted of God, that Men might see both the necessity and
true way of Mortifying their Lusts, in the virtue of Christ's Death and
Resurrection; whereof Baptism, that succeeds it, is a Sign now, as Circumcision
was then; as is plain from Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised with
the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the Sins of the
Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism, wherein also
ye are risen with him, through the Faith of the operation of God, who raised
him from the dead. It Is clear then, that Circumcision directed Men to the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, as the true and only means of mortifying their
Lusts; and if it did so, sure it was not the Covenant of Works, for that gives
Fallen Man no hint of a remedy. (3.) It was also a discriminating Sign or
Token, betwixt the Church and the World. God's People, and the Heathens, who
were accordingly denominated from it, the Circumcision and the Uncircumcision,
the Holy Seed and the Gentiles. And now under the New Testament, the Children
of Abraham by Faith, and the Children of the Flesh. This also shows it cannot
be the Covenant of Works; for in that Covenant all are equally and alike
concluded under Sin and Misery, Ephesians. 2. 3. and there is no difference made by
that Covenant betwixt Person and Person, State and State.

If this be not enough to evince, that the Covenant of Circumcision is a
Covenant of Grace, I promise you many more Arguments to prove it, as soon as I
shall find these refuted, and your contrary Assertion well discharged from the
gross Absurdities with which it is clogged and loaded. You see how genuine,
natural and congruous to Scripture the notion of it as a Covenant of Grace is,
and all the World may see how harsh, alien, and repugnant to Scripture your
Notion of Circumcision, as a Covenant of Works, is. You see into what Boggs you
are again driven in defense of your Opinion. Exemp. gra.

That Circumcision is a part of the Ceremonial Law, which was dedicated with
Blood, and therefore could be no ^art of the Moral Law or Ten Commandments,
which was (say you) the Co^enant of Works; and yet that it is of ^he same
nature; and that it is clear (...) is no other than a Covenant of Works. Don't
you there distinguish and confound all again? blame and check Mr. Sedgwick
without Cause, and commit a greater Absurdity presently than you charged him
with? Don't you question whether that Covenant that was typically sealed by
Blood, was sealed by Christ's Blood? Pray, Sir, consider wherever God commands
typical Blood to be applied, it relates to Christ's Blood Spiritually applied,
or to nothing.

Are not you forced in defense of your erroneous Thesis, to say with
Bellarmine, That Circumcision was extraordinary in its Institution, and applied
as a Seal to none but Abraham himself? it excluded even Isaac the Type of
Christ, and Jacob a Prince with God. O what will not Men venture upon in
defense of their darling Opinions!

Are you not forced for your Security from the danger of the Third Argument to
cut one and the same Covenant made with Abraham just in two, and of the pure
promissory part to make a Covenant of Grace; and of the other part, which you
your self call a Restipulation, to make another quite opposite Covenant? Don't
you magnify the Bounty and Grace of God to Abraham in the first four Verses,
and then destroy it all, by putting him at once under a contrary Covenant, and
so cut off all capacity to enjoy one of those mercies?

Don't you make Circumcision in its own Nature, without respect to the
intention of the Person, an Obligation to the whole Law, and that which
frustrates the Death of Christ, and yet must grant, that Paul himself took
Timothy and circumcised him, and yet thereby brought him under no such
dangerous obligation to the Law? In a word,

You reject all those Covenants as legal, that have any conditions in them, or
respect to any thing that is to be done by us, and allow Genesis 12. and Genesis 22.
to be pure Gospel-Covenants of Grace; and yet in the first Abraham is bound to
walk before God and be perfect; and in the other God says, For because thou
have done this thing, surely blessing I will bless thee.

And so much for Abraham's Covenant.

III. Of the Conditionality of the New Covenant.
Come we next to consider that Opinion of yours, which led you into these other
gross mistakes and absurdities, and that is this, That the Covenant of Grace is
absolute, and whatever Covenant is not so, but has any condition upon our
part, must needs for that reason be a Covenant of Works. See Page 229. It is
observable (say you) that as the Covenants mentioned Genesis 2. Exodus 20. etc.
were all conditional, and therefore legal Covenants, requiring strict and
perfect Obedience, as the condition propounded, in order to the enjoyment of
the mercies contained in them, which are all therefore done away in Christ; so
on the other hand we see, that the Covenant God made with Abraham, Genesis 12. 2,
3. and Genesis 17. 2, 3. and Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. was wholly free and absolute,
and therefore purely Evangelical, etc. We will review these things anon, and
see if you truly represent the matter; but in order to it, let me first tell you

(1.) What we mean by a Gospel-Condition. (2.) Prove that there are such in the
Gospel Covenant. (3.) Show you the absurdity of your Opinion against it.
(1.) What we mean by a Condition in the Gospel Covenant. By a Condition of the
Covenant, we do not mean in the strictest rigid Sense of the Word, such a
Restipulation to God from Man of perfect Obedience in his own Person, at all
times, so as the least Failure therein forfeits all the mercies of the
Covenant: That Is rather the condition of Adam's Covenant of Works, than of the
Evangelical Covenant; nor do we assert any meritorious condition, that in the
nature of an impulsive Cause, shall bring Man into the Covenant and its
Privileges, or continue him in when brought in. This we renounce as well as
you; but our Question is about such a Condition, as is neither in the Nature of
it, an Act perfect in every degree, nor meritorious in the least of the Benefit
conferred, nor yet done in our own strength. But plainly and briefly; our
Question is, Whether there be not something as an Act required of us in point
of Duty, to a Blessing consequent by virtue of a promise? Such a thing,
whatever it be, has the nature of a Condition, inasmuch as it is antecedent to
the Benefit of the Promise, and the Mercy or Benefit granted is suspended,
until it be performed. The Question is not, Whether there be any intrinsecal
worth or value in the thing so required, to oblige the Disposer to make or
perform the Grant or Promise: but merely that it be antecedent to the enjoyment
of the benefit; and that the disposer of the benefit do suspend the benefit,
until it be performed. Thus an Act or Duty of ours, which has nothing at all
of Merit in it, or answerable value to the benefit it relates to, may be in a
proper Sense a Condition of the said benefit. For what is a Condition in the
true Notion of it, but Conditio est suspensio alicujus dispositionis, tantisper
dum aliquid futurum fiat. Navarr. Enchirid. 482.
the Suspension of a Grant until something future be done? or Est verborum
adjectio in futurum suspendentium, secundum quam disponens vult dispositum
regulari.
as others to the same purpose, the adding of words to a Grant for the future
of a suspending quality, according to which the Disposer will have the benefit
he disposes to be regulated. This properly is a Condition, though there be
nothing of equivalent value or merit in the thing required: And such your
Brethren in their Narrative, page 14. do acknowledge Faith to be, when they
assert none can be actually reconciled, justified, or adopted, till they are
really implanted into Jesus Christ by Faith, and so by virtue of this their
Union with him, have these fundamental benefits actually conveyed unto them,
which contains the proper Notion of the Condition we contend for.

And such a Condition of Salvation we assert Faith to be in the New Covenant
Grant; that is to say, the Grant of Salvation by God in the Gospel Covenant is
suspended from all Men, till they believe, and is due by Promise, (not Merit)
to them as soon as they do truly believe. The Notes or Signs of a Condition
given by Civilians or Moralists are such as these, If, If not, unless, but if,
except only, and the like. When these are added in the Promise of a Blessing,
or Benefit for the future, they make that Promise conditional; and your Grammar
(according to which you must speak, if you speak properly and strictly) will
tell you, that Si, sin, modo, dum, dummodo are all conditional Particles; and
it is evident, that these conditional Particles are frequently inserted in the
Grants of the Blessings and Privileges of the New Testament: As for example,
Mark. 9. 23. (...), If thou can believe. Acts 8. 37. (...), If thou believe
with thy whole heart, thou may, etc. Romans 10. 9. (...), That if thou shall
confess with thy mouth, and believe with thy heart, etc. thou shall be saved.
Matthew. 18. 3. (...), Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, you
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Mark 5. 36. (...), Only believe.
Mark 11. 26. (...), But if ye forgive not, etc. with multitudes more, which are
all conditional Particles inserted in the Grants of Benefits.

(2.) Having shown what the nature of a Condition is, I shall, I hope, make it
plain to you, That Faith is such a Condition in the Gospel-grant of our
Salvation; for we find the Benefit suspended till this Act of Faith be
performed, John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life; and
he that believes not the Son, shall not see Life, but the wrath of God abides
on him. And most plainly, Romans 10. 9. having shown before what the Condition of
Legal Righteousness was, he tells us there what the Gospel-condition of
Salvation is, The righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise, that
if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy
heart, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. I ask you, Sir,
whether it be possible to put Words into a Frame more lively expressive of a
Condition than these are? Do but compare Mark 16. 16. He that believes, and is
baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. Do but
compare, I say, that Scripture Phrase with the Words of Jacob's Sons, which all
allow to be conditional, Genesis 43. 4, 5. If thou will send our brother with us,
we will go down; but if thou will not send him, we will not go down; and judge
whether the one be not as conditional as the other: More particularly,

Argument I.
If we cannot be Justified or Saved till we believe, then Faith is the
Condition on which those consequent Benefits are suspended.

But we cannot be Justisied or Saved till we believe. Ergo.

The Sequel of the Major is evident; for as was said before, a Condition is the
Suspension of a Grant, till something future be done. The Minor is plain in
Scripture, Romans 4. 24. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that
righteousness was imputed to him, but for our sakes also, to whom it shall be
imputed, if we believe. (...), Qibus futurum est ut imputetur, to whom it shall
come to pass, that it shall be imputed, if we believe: And Acts 10. 43.
Whosoever believes on him, shall receive remission of sins. John 3. 36. He
that believes not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him;
with multitudes more. Now, Sir, lay seriously before your Eyes such Scriptures
as these, that promise Salvation to Believers, and threaten Damnation to all
Unbelievers, as Mark 16. 16. does, and then give a plain and clear Answer to
this Question; either the positive part of that Text promises Salvation
absolutely to Men, whether they believe, or believe not, and consequently
Unbelievers shall be saved as well as Believers: and the negative part
threatens Damnation absolutely to Sinners, as Sinners; and consequently all
Sinners shall be damned, whether they believe, or believe not; or else if you
allow neither to be absolute, but that none can be saved till they believe, nor
any damned when they do believe; is not that a conditional Promise and
Threatening?

Argument II.
If Gods Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3. and that Genesis 17. 2, 3. were (as
you say) pure Gospel-Covenants of Grace, and yet in both some things are
required as Duties on Abraham's part, to make him partaker of the Benefits of
the Promises; then the Covenant of Grace is not absolute, but conditional.

But so it was in both these Covenants. Ergo.

The Minor only requires proof, for which let us have recourse to the places,
and see whether it be so or not.

(1.) For the first you instance in as a pure Gospel Covenant made with
Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3.. I must confess, as you dismember the Text, page 229.
by choosing out the second and third Verses, and leaving out the first, which
was the Trial of Abraham's Obedience in forsaking his native Country, and his
Fathers House; I say, give me but this liberty to separate and dis-joyn one
part of a Covenant from the other, and it is easy to make any conditional
Covenant in the World to become absolute: For take but the Duty required, from
the Promise that is made; and that which was a conditional, presently becomes
an absolute Grant. Suppose, Sir, that Abraham had refused to leave his dear
native Country and nearest Relations, as many do; think you that the promised
mercies had been his? I must plainly tell you, you assume a strange liberty in
this matter, and make a great deal bolder with the Scriptures than you ought;
and the very same usage the other Scriptures has.

(2.) For when you cite your Second Covenant with Abraham, you only cite Genesis
17. 2, 3. and then call it an absolute Gospel Covenant; when indeed you made it
so, by leaving out the first Verse, which contains the Condition o^ Duty
required on Abraham's part; for thus run the three first Verses. An^ when
Abraham was ninety nine years old, the Lord appeared to Abraham, and said unto
him, I am the Almighty God, walk thou before me, and be thou perfect, and I
will make my Covenant between me and thee, etc. Here an upright Conversation
before God is required of him, at God's entrance into this Covenant with him;
but that is, and must be omitted, and cut off, to make the Covenant look
absolute. I am really grieved to see the Scriptures thus dealt with, to serve a
design.

Argument III.
If all the Promises of the Gospel be absolute and unconditional, requiring no
Restipulation from Man, then they cannot properly and truly belong to the New
Covenant.

But they do properly and truly belong to the New Covenant: Therefore they are
not all absolute and unconditional.

The Sequel of the Major is only liable to doubt, or denial, namely, That the
Absoluteness of all the Promises of the New Testament cuts off their Relation
to a Covenant; but that it does so, no Man can deny, that understands the
difference between a Covenant and an absolute Promise. A Covenant is a mutual
Compact, or Agreement betwixt Parties, in which they bind each other to the
Performance of what they respectively promise: So that there can be no proper
Covenant, where there is not a Restipulation, or Re-obligation of one part, as
well as a Promise on the other. But an absolute Promise binds only one Party,
and leaves the other wholly free, and unobliged to any thing in order to the
enjoyment of the good promised. So then if all the New Testament Promises be
unconditional and absolute, they are not part of a Covenant, nor must that Word
be applied to them; they are absolute Promises, binding no Man to whom they are
made, to any Duty, in order to the enjoyment of the Mercies promised: But those
Persons that are under these absolute Promises, must and shall enjoy the
Mercies of Pardon and Salvation, whether they repent, or repent not; believe,
or believe not; obey, or obey not. Now, to what Licentiousness this Doctrine
leads Men, is obvious to every Eye. Yet this absoluteness of the Covenant (as
you improperly call it) is by you asserted, page 229, 230. there is (say you)
no condition at all, it is wholly free and absolute, as the Covenant with
Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3. Genesis 17. 2, 3. Thank you, Sir, for making them so; for
by cutting off the first Verses, where the Duty required on Abraham's part is
contained, you make them what God never intended them to be. And the same foul
play ^s in Deuteronomy. 30. where you separate the plain condition contained in verse.
1, 2. from the Promise, verse. 6. Or if the Condition, verse. 1, 2. be not plain
enough, ^ut you will make it part of the Pro^ise, I hope that after in verse.
10. is too ^lain to be denied. As to the other Texts more anon: Mean time see
how ^ou destroy the Nature of a Covenant.

Object. But, say you, page 233. To im^ose new Conditions, though never so
^ild, is a New Covenant of Works with me Mercy, but not a Covenant of race,
properly so called.

Sol. T's true, if those Works or Acts ours, which God requires, be under^od of
meritorious Works in our own Strength and Power to perform, it destroys the
Free Grace of the Covenant; but this we utterly reject, and speak only of Faith
wrought in us by the Spirit of God, which receives all from God, and gives the
entire Glory to God, Ephesians. 2. 5, 8.

Obj. But you will say, If Faith be the Condition, and that Faith be not of our
selves, then both the Promise and the Condition are on Gods part; (if you will
call Faith a Condition) and so still on our part the Covenant is absolute.

Sol. This is a mistake, and the mistake in this leads you into all the rest;
though Faith (which we call the Condition on our Part ^e the Gift of God, and
the power of Believing be derived from God; yet the act of believing is
properly our act, though the power by which we believe be of God; else i^ would
follow when we act any Grace, as Faith, Repentance or Obedience, tha^ God
believes, repents, and obeys in us and it is not we, but God that does al^
these. This, I hope, you will not dar^ to assert: They are truly our Works
though wrought in Gods Strength, Is^ 26. 12. Lord, thou have wrought all o^
works in us, (i. e.) Though they be our Works, yet they are wrought in us by
thy Grace, or Strength.

As for Dr. Owen, it is plain from the place you cite in the Doctrine of
Justification, page 156. he only excludes Conditions as we do, in respect of
the dignity of the Act, and is more plain in his Treatise of Redemption, page
103, 104. in which he allows Conditions in both the Covenants, and makes this
the difference, That the Old required them, but the New effects them in all the
Federates.

I know no Orthodox Divine in the World that presumes to thrust in any Work of
Man's into the Covenant of Grace, as a Condition, which in the Arminian Sense he
may, or may not perform, according to the power and pleasure of his own
Free Will, without the preventing or determining Grace of God; which preventing
Grace is contained in those Promises, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. etc. Nor yet that
there is any meritorious Worth, either of Condignity or Congruity in the Popish
Sense, in the very justifying Act of Faith, for the which God justifies and
saves us. But we say, That though God in the way of preventing Grace works
Faith in us, and when it is so wrought, we need his assisting Grace to act it;
yet neither this assisting nor preventing Grace makes the act of Faith no more
to be our Act: It Is we that believe still, tho in Gods Strength, and that upon
our believing or not believing, we have, or have not the Benefits of Gods
Promises; which is the very proper Notion of a Condition.

Argument IV.
If all the Promises of the New Covenant be absolute and unconditional, having
no respect nor relation to any Grace wrought in us, nor Duty done by us; then
the Trial of our Interest in Christ by Marks and Signs of Grace is not our
Duty, nor can we take comfort in Sanctification, as an Evidence of
Justification.

But it is a Christians Duty to try his Interest in Christ by Marks and Signs,
and he may take comfort in Sanctification, as an evidence of Justification.
Ergo.

The Sequel of the Major is undeniably clear, for that can never be a Sign or
Evidence of an Interest in Christ, which that Interest may be without; yea, and
as Dr. Crispe asserts, according to his Antinomian Principles, Christ is ours
(says he) before we Dr. Crispe 2d Vol. of Christ exalted. Sermon. 14.
have gracious Qualifications. Every true Mark and Sign must be inseparable
from that it signifies. Now, if the works of the Spirit in us be not so, but an
Interest in Christ may be where these are not; then they are no proper Marks or
Signs; and if they are not, it cannot be our Duty to make use of them as such;
and consequently if we should, they can yield us no Comfort.

The Minor is plain in Scripture, 1 John 2. 3. Hereby we do know that we know
him, if we keep his Commandments. The meaning is, we perceive and discern our
selves to be sincere Believers, and consequently that Christ is our
Propitiation; when Obedience to his Commands is become habitual and easy to
us. So 1 John 3. 19. Hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure
our hearts before him, (i. e.) by our sincere cordial love to Christ and his
Members, as v. 18. this shall demonstrate to us, that we are the Children of
Truth; and again, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we are passed from death to life;
because we love the Brethren. With Multitudes more to the same purpose, which
plainly teach Christians to fetch the Evidences of their Justification out of
their Sanctification, and to prove their Interest in Christ, by the works of
his Spirit found in their own Hearts.

And this is not only a Christians Liberty, but his commanded duty; to bring
his Interest in Christ to this Touchstone and Test, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your
selves, prove your selves, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure, (i. e.) your Election by your calling. No Man can
make his Election sure a priori, nor can any Man make it surer than it is in
se, therefore it is only capable of being made sure to us a posteriori, arguing
from the work of Sanctification in us, to God's eternal choice of us.

And as the Saints in all Ages have taken this course, so they have taken great
and lawful Comfort in the use of these Marks and Signs of Grace, 2 Kings 20. 3.
2 Cor. 1. 12.

I am sensible how vehemently the Antinomian Party, Dr. Crispe, Mr. Air and
some others do oppugn this truth, representing it as legal and impracticable
(for they are for the absolute and unconditional Nature of the new Covenant as
well as you) but by your espousing their Principle, you have even run
Anabaptism into Antinomianism, and must by this Principle of yours, renounce
all Marks and Trials of an Interest in Christ, by any work of the Spirit
wrought in us. You must only stick to the immediate Sealings of the Spirit,
which if such a thing be at all, it is but rare and extraordinary.

I will not deny but there may be an immediate Testimony of the Spirit, but
sure I am his mediate Testimony by his Graces in us, is his usual way of
sealing Believers. We do not affirm any of these his works to be meritorious
causes of our Justification, or that considered abstractedly from the Spirit,
they can of themselves Seal or evidence our Interest in Christ. Neither do we
affirm, that any of them are complete and perfect Works; but this we say, that
they being true and sincere, though imperfect Graces, they are our usual and
standing Evidences to make out our Interest in Christ by. And I hope you and
the whole Antinomian Party will find it hard, yea, and impossible, to remove
the Saints from that comfortable and scriptural way of examining their Interest
in Christ, by the Graces of his Spirit in them; as the Saints who are gone to
Heaven before them, have done in all Generations.

Argument V.
If the Covenant of Grace be altogether Absolute and Unconditional, requiring
nothing to be done on our part, to entitle us to its Benefits; then it cannot
be Man's Duty in entering Covenant with God, to deliberate the Terms, count the
Cost, or give his consent by word or writing, explicitly to the Terms of this
Covenant.

But it is Man's Duty, in entering Covenant with God, to deliberate the Terms,
and count the Cost, Luke 14. 26. to 34. and explicitly to give his consent
thereto, either by Word or Writing, Ergo,

The Sequel of the Major is self-evident; for where there are no terms or
Conditions required on our part, there can be none to deliberate or give our
consent to; and so a Man may be in Covenant without his own consent.

The Minor is undeniable in the Text cited. If you say these are Duties but not
Conditions; I reply, they are such Duties, without the performance of which, we
can have no Benefit by Christ and the new Covenant, Luke 14. 33. and such
Duties have the true suspending nature of Conditions in them. If you say they
are only subsequent Duties, but not antecedent or concomitant Acts; the 28th
Verse directly opposes you, Let him first sit down and count the cost: And for
those overt acts whereby we explicitly declare our consent to the terms of the
Covenant, at our first entering into the Bond of it, I hope you will not say
that is a legal Covenant too, Isa. 44. 3, 4. I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my spirit upon thy Seed,
and my Blessing upon thine Offspring, and they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willows by the watercourse. One shall say I am the Lords, and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe
with his hand unto the Lord, etc. A plain allusion to Soldiers, when they List
themselves under a Captain or General. What remains now, to reply to these
Arguments? but either that the places by me cited and argued upon, do not
intend the new Covenant under which we are, or that this new Covenant has its
Conditions, and is not altogether Absolute, as you have asserted it to be.

And thus Sir, you are fairly beaten off (if I mistake not) from the new Ground
you had chosen and marked out to raise your Battery upon, to demolish that
strong Fort which secures the Right of Believers Infants to Baptism, and you
must return again to the old answers of Mr. Tombs and others, to our solid and
substantial Arguments from Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. which have been bassled
over and over by Baxter, Blake, Sydenham, and many other stout Champions for
Infants Baptism.

All that I am further concerned about, is to examine so many of those
Scriptures as you have spoken to, which are by us produced in defense of those
four Grounds or Principles mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse,
whereon we establish the Right of Infants Baptism; and to vindicate those
Scriptures from your strained and injurious Interpretations of them. Which
being done, they will each of them stand in those eminent places of Service,
where they have been so long useful to the Cause we defend.

As for your pretended Solutions of the incomparable Mr. Baxter's, and the
learned and acute Dr. Burthogg's Arguments; I admire at your Confidence
therein; and let me tell you, without breach of Charity, it is an high piece of
Confidence in you, to throw the Gantlet and bid Defiance to two such Worthies
yet alive, and easily able to detect your Folly in the Weakness and
Impertinency of your Answers. Alas! my Friend, you little know what it is to
have such weak and inartificial Discourses as yours, brought under the strict
Examen of such acute and judicious Eyes. But -- -- Sic Dama leonem
Insequitur, audetque viro concurrere Virgo.


Nor will I presume to anticipate either of their Answers to your Discourse,
(if they shall think it worthy of an Answer) but rather briefly reflect upon
what you return to the Arguments of those eminent Divines that are gone to
Glory, in the Faith of that Truth you oppose; and are not capable of defending
their solid and regular Interpretations of Scriptures, against the Notions you
force upon them, contrary both to the Grammar and Scope of several of them.

And here Sir, in the beginning, let me mind you what a learned and judicious
Person says, about all Interpretations of Scriptures. Four things (says he)
commend an Interpretation, and establish it as a King upon the Throne, against
whom there is no rising up.

(1.) If the Letter and Grammar of the Text will fairly bear it. (2.) If the
Scope and Argument of the place will close directly with it. (3.) If the
Interpretation set up against it, cannot stand before both, or either of the
former. (4.) If the Judgment of learned, wise and impartial Men, be found
generally agreeable to it.
According to these Rules (whereat you can have no just Exception) I shall
briefly, yet I hope clearly and sufficiently, answer some of the Replies you
make to the Arguments of those deceased Worthies: And

(1.) In Page 1. you produce Mr. William Allen's Argument ad hominem against
your Practice. He tells you your own Principle condemns you, for you reject the
Baptizing of Infants; because there is no Example in the New Testament for it;
and yet baptize Persons at Age, whose Parents were Christians, which is as much
without a Gospel-president or example as the former. The Sum of your Reply is,
That though it should be granted, that there is no express example for the
Baptizing of such in Scripture, yet there are Examples enough concerning the
Baptism of Believers.

Reply. Here you grant all that Mr. Allen objects, viz. That you are altogether
without Example or President for your Practice; And object to him and us what
neither he nor we ever scrupled or denied, viz. The Baptizing of some adult
Persons upon the personal Profession of their Faith. I have done it my self,
and in like Circumstances am ready to do it again. Once you clearly yield it,
that you have no President nor Example for your Practice in the Gospel. That Is
all that he seeks, and what he seeks you plainly grant. As to the Precept and
Examples of Baptizing adult Believers, whose Parents were Unbelievers, and
themselves never baptized in Infancy; that is not the Point you are now to speak
to: Nor have we any Controversy about it. Certainly you are none of the
fittest Persons in the World, to clamor so loudly against us for want of
express Presidents for Infant Baptism, whilst your self confesses you want even
one President in the New Testament to legitimate your own Practice; and in the
mean time are found in the sinful neglect of a sweet and heavenly
Gospel-Ordinance, viz. the singing of Psalms, for which you have both Precept
and President in the Gospel, Col. 3. 16. James 5. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 26.

(2.) It is objected against you, Page 2. That if the Commission Matt. 28.
excludes none from Baptism, but such as are to be excluded by the order therein
to be observed, and if Baptizing and Teaching are to precede or follow one the
other, as there named by Christ, then these two Conclusions will follow. (1.)
That Infants are not there excluded from Baptism. (2.) That a Person may be
baptized before he be taught; for there we have First (...). Disciple all
Nations, make them Disciples or Christians. Secondly, We have (...), which
literally to translate is Baptizing-teaching. Now then Discipling being a
general word, that contains in it the two others that follow, viz. Baptizing
and Teaching; and being the Imperative Mood, whereas the other two are
Participles; it is manifest, that the whole Command or Commission is given in
that, and the mode of Execution in these; and if the mode of executing that
general Commission be expressed in these, where Baptizing is first, and
teaching comes after; what is become of the order the Antipoedobaptists have so
long talked of?

The Sum of your Answer is, That if Baptizing be first, and teaching comes
after; then it will follow, that the Apostles understood not their Commission
aright, for they first preached, and then baptized them that by their preaching
believed, Acts 8. Acts 10. Acts 2. with many other places you heap up to the
same purpose, and therefore Infants must be excluded by that Commission,
because incapable of being taught. And therefore let us criticize as we please,
upon Imperative Moods and Participles, the case is clear, Teaching must go
before Baptizing.

Reply. It had been more modest to suspect, that you understood not the Text
aright, than that the Apostles understood not their Commission aright. The
order of the words (as this well fortified Objection declares, and you cannot
deny) puts Teaching after Baptizing; and though we should allow you that they
discipled adult Persons by teaching, and taught others Baptized in Infancy,
after their Baptizing them; in both they followed their order and commission in
Discipling the Parents by Preaching, and teaching their Children Baptized by
virtue of the promise to them, after their Baptism: For he declares, Acts 2.
the Promise is to them, and to their Children, which gives a right of both unto
Baptism; and so teaching, according to the order of this Commission, may be an
antecedent Duty to the Parent, and a subsequent Duty to him and his baptized
Children: For if (...) includes Teaching before Baptizing, why should not
(...), which is put after Baptizing, respect the subsequent Duty of teaching
both the one and other?

(3.) Mr. Allen's next Argument, mentioned by you, page 5. is taken from Matthew.
19. 14. Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Whence he argues against your Objection of the
Incapacity of Infants for Baptism, That if they are capable of Interest or
Membership in the Kingdom of Heaven, or Church, they are equally capable of the
Sign or Cognizance, which is Baptism.

To this you reply three things: (1.) That it remains to be proved, that these
little Children were Infants, and not grown Boys or Girls, capable of making an
actual profession of their Faith in Christ. (2.) It Is doubtful whether they
were for present in the Kingdom of God, or were only elected, and so in time
should be of his Kingdom. And (3.) Whatever they were, they were brought unto
Christ, who himself baptized not; not to his Disciples, who did baptize.

Reply. Your first Exception is vain and groundless; that they were very young
and little ones, appears not only by Christ's taking them in his Arms, but from
the very Notation of the Word (...), a Diminutive Word, signifying a little
Child or Infant. So John was called when Newborn, Luke 1. 76. and Christ when
he lay in the Manger, and Moses when among the Flaggs. And if this be not
enough, St. Luke gives them another Name, Luke 18. 15. (...), Infants, a word
given to a Child in the Womb, Luke 1. 41. And for what you object out of
Piscator, that the same word is used of Timothy, who knew the Scriptures from a
Child; It Is an evident mistake, or shift, for the word is (...), He knew them
not being an Infant, but from his Childhood or Infancy; that is, when he had
past his Infant State, in which State th^se were that were brought unto Christ.
And (2.) Whereas you question their present Right in the Kingdom of God, or
whether it were not future by virtue of their Election? The Text will not allow
your Interpretation, (...), of such is, not (...), shall be the Kingdom of God.
Their present Church Membership asserted by Christ, is also a known Rule to
regulate for the future, the Disciples Carriage toward them, which was too
severe, harsh, and therefore highly displeasing to Christ; but by telling them
they were Members of the Church, or Kingdom of Heaven (they being very probably
the Infants of believing Parents, as their bringing them unto Christ with such
affection, through the Frowns and Repulses of the Disciples, shows) he gives
them a known and plain Rule how to distinguish Infants, and regulate their
Carriage toward them, which God's Election can never be, that being an
unrevealed Secret. And (3.) Whereas you say Christ did not Baptize them. I
reply, We never urged this Scripture to prove he did so, but only to prove
their Chruch-membership; which methinks Christ asserts as plainly as words can
assert it, when he says, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and tho you use to
quibble at the word (...), of such, as though it respected not the present
Infants, but grown Persons, resembling them in humble and innocent qualities;
Mr. Sydenham has sufficiently baffled that Interpretation, by showing its
inconsistence with the Scope and Argument of the place, and how ridiculous this
Sense would be, when reduced to a formal Argument.

(4.) The fourth Argument you pretend to answer, page 8. is drawn from 1 Cor.
7. 14. Else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy. To this you
answer two things. (1.) That the Holiness here spoken of, is not a Federal, but
a Matrimonial Holiness, namely, Legitimacy, and is as much as to say, your
Children are no Bastards, seeing one of you is a Believer.

Reply. If this be true, and the genuine Sense of this Text, then all the
Children in the World, not immediately descended from one or both believing
Parents, must of necessity be all Bastards, and their Parents, how solemnly
soever married, must live in uncleanness; and what mad Work (think you) will
this Assertion make in the World? And how many Millions of Persons will it
nearly touch, both in point of Honor, and Inheritance?

(2.) You say, Though the Holiness here spoken of should be allowed to be a
Federal or Covenant Holiness, yet for want of an express Institution, it will
not warrant our Practice.

Reply. The Holiness of the Children being granted to be a Covenant Holiness,
none can deny them to be within the Covenant; how else come they to be holy by
Covenant? and if within the Covenant, who can deny them the Initiating Sign,
which is Baptism? Or how shall they ordinarily be visibly admitted into the
Visible Church without it? The Connection betwixt their Federal Holiness and
right to Baptism, will appear plain enough from Acts 2. 38. which you come next
to speak to.

(5.) You attempt to answer Mr. Allen's argument from Acts 2. 38. Be baptized,
or the promise is unto you, and to your Chil^ren, and unto all that are afar
off, even ^s many as the Lord our God shall call.

On this Text you know we lay very great stress, for the Proof of Infants
Baptism; and it deserves a remarque, that you wholly Suppress our Arguments
drawn from that Text, but however return an Answer to them all, such as it is.
You first tell us, The Promise here spoken of, is not a promise of any external
privileges, but the promise of the Gospel, or the Grace of God in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, That the Promise was not to their Children as Believers Seed, nor to
them, or any other uncalled by the Lord, but only a promise of remission of
Sins, and receiving the Holy Ghost, upon their actual Repentance, which Infants
cannot perform, and therefore cannot here be intended. This is the true and
whole Sense of your Answer.

Reply. Now because you have wholly omitted our Argument from this Text, (for
which doubtless there was some reason) I think my self obliged to let the World
know how we expound it, and what we duly infer from that Exposition of it: And
then let the Reader judge, whether by the forementioned Rules of a just
Interpretation, you or we are in the right.

(1.) We observe this famous Text to contain the first Argument used by the
Apostle, after Christ's Ascension, to persuade the Jews to embrace Christianity,
by repenting, and submitting themselves to Baptism, the initiating Sign of it;
and therefore here we justly expect much Light about this controverted Point;
nor does the Apostle in this Text deceive our expectation.

(2.) We take it for granted, that the direct and proper Scope of this place,
is to persuade the Jews (to whom St. Peter preached) to repent and be baptized.
This you allow, when you say, page 10. He uses it as a Motive why they and
theirs should actually repent and be baptized. In these two then there is no
Controversy.

(3.) We take it for certain, that the Promise here referred to by Peter is
that gracious Promise, Genesis 17. 7. I will be a God to thee and thy Seed; the
adjoining of their Children to them (says Calvin (and with him runs the
general current of Expositors) depends on the Words of that Promise, Genesis 17.
7. If you be not satisfied with this, but rather will refer it to Joel 2. 28.
you are then obliged to answer Mr. Sydenham's Arguments a fortiori, from that
reference. But you make no Exception at all to this Accommodation of it: And
then the Sense must be this, The Promise shall run as before, to you and to
your Children.

(4.) We say, that except it had had relation to the Covenant with Abraham,
there had been no occasion or reason at all here to have mentioned Children, as
well as Parents; The promise is to you, and to your Children: It had been
enough, if he had only intended the believing Parents, exclusive of their
Infant Seed, to have said, The Promise is made to as many as the Lord our God
shall call. What reason or occasion was there to bring in their Children at all?

(5.) We find here the Children both of believing Jews and Gentiles mentioned
in the Promise, accompanying the Precept of Baptism, and the Precept to them
built upon the Promise, as that which gave them their Title to Baptism, (...),
for the Promise is to you and to your Children. In the same Line that he
mentions Baptism, he also mentions the Promise, upon which their Right is
founded; and in the same Breath with which he mentions their Children, he also
mentions the Promise; which he would never have done, had his design been to
have excluded their Children from both, or either of them; especially seeing
their Children had been so long in the possession of both. These things are
obvious, natural, and every way agreeable both to the Grammar and Scope of the
Text; whence we argue

Arg. If the Promise be the same to Believers under the Gospel, that ever it
was to Abraham, and his natural Seed, then the Children of Believers by virtue
thereof, have as good a Title to Baptism, as Abraham's Children had to
Circumcision.

But the Promise is the same, Ergo, etc.

Next, let us consider your Answers.

(1.) You say, The Promise here spoken of is not a Promise of any external
Privileges, but the Promise of the Gospel.

Reply. Your Distinction is vain and groundless, for it opposes Promises that
contain external Privileges, to Gospel Promises, contrary to 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness has promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.
Secondly, Circumcision then, and Baptism now, which have both their Foundation
in that Promise, contain Privileges in them of both sorts. This no Man can
deny, but he that thinks it no Privilege to be admitted into the Visible Church
by the external initiating Sign, and to be thereby distinguished from the Pagan
World. You have no Warrant therefore to divide those things which God has
united.

(2.) You say the Promise was not to them as Believers Seed, nor to any
uncalled by the Lord.

Reply. Your meaning is, that these Words [as many as the Lord shall call] are
a Limitation of the Promise to them only, whether Parents or Children, that are
actually called; let this your Interpretation be compared with, and examined by
the Scope of the Text, which you confessed before to be a Motive to persuade
them and theirs to Repentance and Baptism, and see if it can stand before it,
as ours does: For if this be the meaning, then the Apostle's Argument must run
thus: I exhort you, convinced Jews, to Repentance and Christian Baptism; for
whereas you and your Children have hitherto been an holy Seed, and the Promise
formerly was to them as well as you; but now the case is altered; if you your
selves repent and be baptized, you shall have the benefit of the Promise; but
as for your Children, they shall be in the self-same case and state with the
Children of Pagans and Infidels: Indeed, if any of your Children shall
hereafter believe, they shall have benefit by the Promise, but no more than the
Childen of Pagans and Infidels, which upon Repentance shall be equal with them.
Repent ye therefore, and be baptized, for the promise is unto you, and to your
Children. This, and no other, must the Apostles Motive be, according to your
Interpretation and Limitation of his Words.

We make the Motive or Argument to run thus: God has now remembered his
Covenant to Abraham, in sending that blessed Seed, in whom he promised to be
the God of him and his Seed; yea, and of all believing Gentiles, as well as
Jews and their Children: Don't you therefore by your Unbelief deprive both your
selves, and your dear Children, of the mercies and privileges of so great a
Promise? Repent therefore, and be baptized, for the Promise is unto you, and to
your Children, etc. Let the impartial Reader judge both, and the acknowledged
Scope of the place determine the matter: And as it cannot stand with the scope
of the place, so neither (as Mr. Sydenham has plainly evin'd) with the Grammar
Infant Baptism, page 45, 45.
of the Text, nor Rules of Logic, by which (according to your Exposition) the
Word [Children] must be redundant and superfluous, as being neither
comprehended under Jews or Gentiles, those that are near, or far off; into
which two Classes or Ranks the Text distributes the whole World, but must stand
out of the Text, as a Party by themselves; though expressly mentioned in it, as
those to whom the Promise belongs. But enough of this.

(6.) Having vindicated Acts 2. 38, 39. which confirms our Fourth Assertion,
viz. The Identity of the Promise the Jews were, and we are under: We proceed
next to vindicate 2 Col. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. whereby we prove the Succession of
Baptism to Circumcision, and vindicate it from that Foreign Sense you force
upon it, to the great Injury of the Text, as well as of our Infants, whom you
exclude from any concernment therein.

Without any representation at all of the grounds on which we proceed, to prove
the Succession of this Ordinance to that, you as rashly as confidently call it
a groundless Inference; which, whether it be or no, let the Impartial judge,
when they shall see the grounds on which we build that Assertion.

(1.) It Is out of Controversy, that the Scope of this place is to take off the
Colossians from Circumcision, and other Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, which the
False Teachers at that time earnestly endeavored to reduce them to, as appears
verse. 4. to be his plain design, And this I say, lest any man should beguile
you with enticing words; and he says it with great concernment of mind, as
appears verse. 1.

(2.) It Is as plain that the Argument by which he establishes them in the truth
of the Gospel, and secures them against the danger of returning to those Jewish
Rites, especially Circumcision, is drawn from their Compleatness in Christ
without it, verse. 9. and 10. and that whatsoever they had under Circumcision,
they now enjoy in as complete and full a measure and manner, as ever Abraham
and his Seed did. And ye are complete in him, i. e. in Christ.

(3.) To evince this he instanceth in the very case then under Debate, viz.
Circumcision, verse. 11, 12. And first distinguishing of a twofold
Circumcision, one made with, and the other without Hands, which he calls the
Circumcision of Christ: He tells them, as to both of these, namely, Inward
Circumcision of the Heart, and the external Sign thereof too, both are fully
answered in Baptism, in whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made
without hands in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism, ver. 11, 12. that is, look
as before inward Circumcision of the Heart was signified by outward
Circumcision of the Flesh, as the proper, direct and appointed Sign of it: So
now, the same inward Circumcision or Regeneration of the Soul, is as really and
fully signif^ed to you by the new Gospel Sign of it, which is Baptism: And
therefore you are as complete, in respect both of outward and inward
Privileges now, as ever Abraham and his Seed were. Do but convert the
Proposition, and suppose the Apostle's Design had been to take them off from
Baptism, and bring them back to Circumcision, and in order to it had said, In
whom ye are also baptized with the Baptism of Christ, being circumcised with
him: Would not the Substitution of Circumcision in the place of Baptism have
been clear? And why is not this as clear as that would have been?

(4.) We further say, That except he had intended in these Words to have placed
Baptism as an external Ordinance, in place and stead of outward Circumcision,
he could never have pitched upon a worse Instance than that of Circumcision,
which was so much valued by them: Yea, from the very instance he brings, he had
put a strong Objection into their Months against his Assertion, verse. 10. That
we are every way as complete without it, as the Jews were with it; for then
their Children enjoyed an Ordinance of great value, which ours are deprived of,
having none under the Gospel in lieu of it. Hence we argue,

Argument. If the Ordinance of Baptism now be appointed to answer the same ends
that Circumcision did to the Jews, and to make us every way as complete in
Privileges, as Circumcision did them, then it comes in the place and room of
it; and our Children have the same right to this, as theirs had to that.

But the Antecedent is plain from the Scope and Argument of the Apostle in this
Text and Context.

Ergo, So is the Consequent.

The Sum of your Answer is, (1.) That Circumcision in the Flesh is neither
expressed, nor meant here, but that of Christ in his own Person. (2.) That if
Baptism had been intended to have come in the place of Circumcision, then it
would follow that Females must be excluded from Baptism.

Reply. Your first Answer is manifestly false; for if the Apostle distinguishes
of a twofold Circumcision, one made with Hands, the other made without Hands,
then it is manifest he means Circumcision in the Flesh, which is now abolished,
and all its ends and uses answered in Gospel-Baptism. And whereas you say, the
Circumcision here spoken of, is no other but the Circumcision of Christ in his
own Person; I would gladly know how the Colossians are said to be circumcised
in Christ's personal Circumcision only? And whether the Baptism here spoken of,
wherewith they are said to be buried with him, be not meant of Christ's personal
Baptism too? and consequently there is no need of the outward Ordinance to pass
upon them or us; but especially it is worth while for you to explain the Reason
why he calls the Colossians Circumcision a Circumcision of Christ made without
hands, if he only intends Christ's personal Circumcision; when we all know that
Christ's personal Circumcision was a Circumcision made with Hands; and could not
possibly be such a Circumcisiou as theirs was, consisting in the putting off of
the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, or Mortification of their Corruptions.
Christ had no Sin by Propagation to put off or mortify in his own Person.

(2.) Your Second Answer is no less absurd, That if Baptism, according to our
Argument, succeeds in the place of Circumcision, then Females must be excluded
from Baptism. You had as good have said, That the enlargement of the Privilege
under the Gospel, is no good Medium to prove we are as complete now under
Baptism, as they were under Circumcision: Cannot Baptism stand in the place of
Circumcision, because it answers all its ends, with an advantage? This to me is
a very strange Answer; however it must stand in the place of a better, rather
than Baptism shall stand in place of Circumcision.

Obj. But if Baptism succeed in the room of Circumcision, and there be such an
Analogy betwixt them as you pretend, then it will follow, that you are obliged
to Baptize your Children the Eighth Day, as they Circumcised theirs.

Sol. The Objection is frivolous and vain; no Man that I know doubts but the
Lords Supper succeeds in the room and place of the Passover. Christ was the
substance of that as well as this, and that was abrogated by his Institution of
this, the very same Night, as soon as he and his Disciples had celebrated the
one, the other was instituted, and immediately succeeded it; and yet Christians
are not obliged to the same Month, Day, or Hour for the Celebration of the
Lords Supper: the Analogy is betwixt the substantial parts of both, amongst
which the Spiritual Mystery, Principal Ends, and proper Subjects are of
principal Consideration; not the minuter Circumstances of time and place. In
the Passover and the Lords Supper there is a Correspondence betwixt the proper
Subjects of both: No uncircumcised Person, or Stranger to the Covenant might
eat of that, Exodus 12. 43, 48. No unbelieving Person, uncircumcised in Heart,
has a right to this, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28. So in the other, The Infants of God's
Covenanted People were the proper Subjects of Circumcision then, and so they
are (say we) of Baptism now; for the same Promise is still to Believers and
their Children, Acts 2. 38, 39. Here lies the Analogy, and not in the variable
circumstances of time.

Whereas you say, page 12. Baptism cannot succeed Circumcision, because it
leaves no Character or Mark upon the Body, as that did. This very Objection of
yours is borrowed in express Words from Socinus, that Enemy of Christ, in Disp.
de Bap. page 113. and fully answered by Maccovius, Loc. Com. page 830, 831.

Object. But it will be further said, that according to our Opinion there can
be no Analogy or Correspondency betwixt the very Subjects of both Ordinances;
for Infants at eight days Old were the proper Subjects of Circumcision, but the
Subjects of Baptism were adult believers, from the time of it is first
institution. And so the Analogy fails in the very Subjects.

Sol. This Objection is grounded upon a great Mistake, it is your Opinion not
ours that destroys it. For with us it lies fairly in these three respects of it
(1.) We find that at the first institution of Circumcision, Abraham the Father,
at Ninety Years old, and all the Men of his House, were first Circumcised, Genesis
17. 25, 26, 27. Answerably, at the first institution of Baptism, Parents,
Masters of Families, etc. being adult believers, were first Baptized. (2.)
After the Circumcision of Abraham and the Men of his House their Infant Seed
were also Circumcised, the promise belonging to them, as well as their Parents.
Answerably under the Gospel the whole Families of believers were Baptized, and
the promise runs to their Infants under the Gospel as it did before, Acts 2.
39. (3.) As in the days of Circumcision, if any stranger that had not been
Cicumcised in his Infancy, should afterward become a Proselyte, and join
himself to the Lord, he was to be Circumcised, of what ever Age he was: So now,
if any Infidel shall be converted, he is to be Baptized upon his Personal
Profession of Faith. And so much for the Analogy. As for your Correspondency of
Identity I cannot understand it.

I meet with little more in your first Part, werein I have any concernment;
only there I find four Arguments in Mood and Figure against the Innovation of
Symbolical Rites by Humane Authority, into the Worship of God; which is
certainly the best Page in your Book. And of them I have nothing to say, but
that they are good Ware, and I very well know the Mark and Number of that
Parcel of Goods, and to whom they properly belong.

But yet before I dismiss your Book I think my self concerned to Vindicate one
place of Scripture more, viz. Romans 11. 16, 17. Which I alleged in the
beginning, for the confirmation of our first Proposition, viz. That Gods
Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. is the same Covenant for Substance we Gentile
Believers are now under. If the first Fruits be holy, the lump is also holy.
And if the root be holy, so are the branches; and if some of the branches be
broken off, and thou being a wild Olive were'st grafted in among them, and with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree: boast not against the
branches, etc. This place is deservedly of great value with us, to prove that
we Gentile Believers, with our Infant Seed, are invested under the Gospel with
the same Substantial Privileges that the Jews and their Infants formerly
enjoyed. Here without opening one term, you proceed in your wonted manner,
confidently to deny the Arguments of our Learned Divines from this place. I
shall therefore open this Famous Text, and regularly deduce the right of
Gentile believers Infants to Baptism from it; and here, keeping to the rules
above,

(1) I note that ver. 13, 14, 15. give us the true level and scope of the
Apostles Argument, which is to prove the calling in again of the Jews, though
for the present broken off; and on this ground to excite himself to all
diligence for their conversion, and suppress all glorying and boasting in the
Gentile Believers, as if they were more worthy than those, because they fill
their Rooms and places.

(2) To prove the calling again of the Jews he argues strongly, ver. 16. from
the Federal Holiness derived to the branches from their root or Ancestors,
namely, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with whom the Covenant was made, Genesis 17. For
if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy. And if the root be holy, so
are the branches, (i. e.) Abraeham, Isaac and Jacob being in Covenant with God.
A Federal Holiness is from them derived to the branches. And this can be no
other than a Federal Holiness, because those their Ancestors were utterly
incapable to transmit any inherent Holiness to them; That being the
Incommunicable Prerogative of God. This Federal Holiness lying still in the
root, (the Covenant with Abraham) will recover the branches again to Life,
though at present many of them be broken off, as Job speaks in another case,
Job. 14. 7, 8, 9. There is hope of a Tree though it be cut down, that it will
Sprout again; and that the tender branch thereof will not cease though the root
thereof wax old in the Earth, and the Stock thereof dye in the ground; yet
through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.

(3) We affirm by the Authority of this Text, that all the Jewish Nation was
not broken off, but only a part of it: So the 17th. ver. plainly declares; And
if some of the branches be broken off, etc. Not all, but some. For many of them
were converted to Christ. We read of Three Thousand at one Sermon, Acts 2. And
multitudes more at other times; all these converted Jews stood in the Apostles
time, as branches in the true Olive, still enjoying all their privileges: And
that which brake off them that were broken off, was nothing else but their own
unbelief, ver. 20. Well then, because of unbelief they were broken off. For at
the promulgation of the Gospel, a new Article was added to their Creed; namely,
that this same Jesus whom they had crucified, is the promised and true Messiah.
This some believed, and so stood by Faith, still enjoying all their ancient
privileges of the Covenant: others believed not, and their unbelief broke them
off.

(4.) We find in this place two sorts of Branches growing upon this Root
Abraham; some natural Branches, namely Jews by Nature, embracing Christ by
Faith; others wild and foreign Branches, viz. Gentiles by Nature, but ingrafted
by Faith, and by their Ingrafture growing among the natural Branches, and with
them partaking of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree, verse. 17. that is,
the rich Privileges of the Covenant, and Promise to Abraham, Genesis 17. I will
be a God to thee, and to thy Seed. This is the sweet Juice or Fatness of the
Olive Tree, which both sorts of Branches live upon, verse. 17. some on the
external, others on the internal, some on both.

(5.) These naturally wild, but now engrafted Branches, viz. the Believing
Gentiles, being grafted by Faith amongst the natural Branches, and with them
sucking the Fatness of the same Root and Olive, that is to say, the
Privileges, Ordinances and Franchises of the Church; we cannot but judge it to
be a natural, clear and necessary Consequent, that the same Privileges the
natural Branches once had, and the remaining Branches, amongst whom the Gentile
Believers were ingrafted, then had; the very same the Gentile Believers and
their Children do now enjoy, by virtue of their Interest in the same Root; else
we cannot understand how we should be said to partake with them of the root and
fatness of the Olive: Certainly the Sap is the same, which the Root sends into
all the Branches, whether they be natural, or ingrafted ones; and is as
plentifully communicated to the ingrafted, as to the natural Branches: For the
watering of this Olive with the more rich and plentiful Grace of the Gospel,
must make the Olive Tree as s^t and flourishing as e^r it was to supply all its
Branches, and ^ore than ever before.

Seeing then we Gentiles have (1.) The same grafting into the true Olive. And
(2.) That our present grafting in, is answerable to their present casting out.
And (3.) That their re-ingrafting in the end of the World, shall be the same
for substance that ours now is, and their own first was: For when they were
first taken in, they and their Children were taken in together; when they were
broken off, they and their Children were broken off together; and when they
shall be taken in again, they and their Children shall be taken in again. And
(4.) Seeing all these their expected mercies are secured to them by the
Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which will extend again to them, when
their Unbelief shall be taken away: Methinks (as was said before) nothing can
be clearer than this Conclusion, That we Gentile Believers are now invested
with the same Privileges they once enjoyed, and our Children have the same
Federal Holiness, or relation to the Covenant theirs had, by being grafted
amongst them, and living on the same Sap they did, and that by the ^ame
Promise, Acts 2. 39.

But you will say, There Is no mention ^ere made of the grafting in of our
Children with us. We reply, Neither ^s there any mention here made of the
^reaking off of their Children with them, which yet was so. Nor was there need
(...) say it, seeing both their Infants and ^urs, are comprehended in the
Parents, as ^wigs are comprehended in the Branch, (...) Buds in the Graft; and
the one be^g holy, so is the other: And this Fede^l Holiness of the Children is
not only ^entioned in this Chapter, verse. 16. but also in 1 Cor. 7. 14. Now are
your Chi^ dren holy. And the very same Promis^ which conveyed the Fatness of
the Olive to Abraham's natural Seed, man^ festly extends it self to the Gentile
Be^ lievers Seed, Acts 2. 38, 39. And (...) Men will not shut their Eyes, and
stud^ Evasions, what can be plainer from Scripture in this Explication and
Application of this place! We have with (...) the Consent of the generality of
Orth^ dox Expositors; the Sense it self is g^ nuine, easy, and unconstrained;
agre^ able with the Letter and Scope of t^ Text; whether the Sense you set
(...) against it be as probable as this, (...) come next to examine. And truly,
Si^ your Answer is as ambiguous as a D^ phic Oracle: For (1.) You tell us, page
(...) That the ingrafting spoken of in this place, into the invisible Church by
election. We s^ it is into the visible Church by Profess^ of Faith; for we know
not how to (...) derstand any breaking off from the i^ visible Church, nor
falling from Elec^ on: But it is like you better consider^ the Consequents of
that Opinion dra^ upon you by Mr. Sydenham in his 85^ Page, and therefore
nauseating the Dregs of Arminianism, you speak more Orthodoxly to the Point,
page 27, where you honestly acknowledge, That the Church of the Jews and
Gentiles, as to the true Essence and inward Substance of either, is one and the
same; in which respect the believing Gentiles (according to the Apostles
Metaphor) are here said to be grafted in amongst them, and with them to be made
Partakers of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree; and in reference hereunto
it is rightly added by the Apostle, that the gifts and callings of God are
without repentance. The inward Substance of the Church and Covenant of Grace
whereon it is founded, being invariable, and which shall for ever remain
immovable, though the outward Form and Administration be not so. Well then,
from hence we have gained two things: (1.) That the Church of the Jews and
Gentiles are essentially and substantially the same Church. (2.) That the Jews
were not broken off from the invisible Church, or from Faith and Election; for
these you truly say are invariable and immovable; and if you had denied it,
the Apostle assures us, that the foundation of God stands sure; and that the
gifts and callings of God are without repentance. But what then was their
breaking off, and the Gentiles grafting in, which made this great alteration in
the Church? Can it be any thing else but our ingrafting into the Visible Church
by the Profession of our Faith, from whence the Jews were broken off from their
unbelief? For certainly from the Invisible Church they were not broken off, and
into the Invisible Church multitudes of professing Christians are not
ingrafted. It Is evident therefore, by grafting us into the Olive Tree, he means
the Visible Church; and by the Fatness thereof, the Ordinances and Privileges
of that Church: Though we deny not but all sincere Professors are Members of
the Invisible Church also, and do belong to the Election of Grace; but that is
not the breaking off, or grafting in here spoken of. And now having given up
Mr. Tombs his Notion of the Invisible Church and Election, you are again put
to your Shifts, and must either shuffle, and seek to hide your self in an heap
of strange and unintelligible Distinctions, or (which had been much fairer)
honestly have yielded the Cause; and wherever you met with them, I find a
whole Troop of distinctions rallied together, for this purpose page 23, 24.

This grafting in (say you) may be either into the visible, or invisible
Church; either by Faith, or profession of Faith; or by some outward Ordinance.
Children may be either grown Men or Infants. The ingrafting ^n, may be either
certain, or probable. Certain, either by reason of election, or their natural
Birth; being Children of believers. Probable, as being likely; either because
frequently, or for the most part it happens so: Though necessary, and so not
certain; the thing to be proved is, That the Children of believers are in the
Covenant of free grace, in Christ, and by virtue thereof to be Baptized into
the communion of the visible Church.

Reply. Words enough, and distinctions enough to reduce the Text to an
indivisible point. But whither does all this tend? I will ask you Two or Three
plain Qestions, and then make what use you please of your distinctions. (1.)
Whether the Breaking off of the Jews and the ingrafting of the Gentiles here
spoken of, have Relation to the invisible Church by election, or to the visible
Church by profession of Faith, and some outward Ordinance? (2.) Whethether if
it were into the visible Church by profession of Faith, that the Gentile
believers were grafted in; as doubtless it was (and by relinquishing the former
sense you here seem to yield it, saying this ingrafture may be certain upon the
account of natural Birth, being Children of believers;) then I would fain know
why you so state the Question, as to make the certainty of Believers Childrens
interest in Christ, to be the only ground of their admission into the Communion
of the visible Church? This (say you) must be proved, or no Baptism for them.

Alas poor Infants, to what hard terms are they here tied up! Very much harder
than the terms any of your one Society are tied to; and if Baptism must be
suspended till this point can be cleared, that the person to be Baptized be
first in Christ, and in the Covenant of free grace, as to the saving benefits
thereof; Then farewell to all Baptism both of Infants, and adult prof^ssours
too. For how can you prove that the persons you Baptiz^ are all or any of them
really in Christ? May they not deceive you as Simon Magus did Peter? I did not
think you had proceeded in this matter upon a Certainty, but a Probability; and
if you proceed with yours upon the grounds of Probability, how come you to tie
up the Children of Believers to a certainty of their Interest in Christ, as the
antecedent suspending condition of their Baptism? We need dispute no more about
the proper Subjects of Baptism, for by this account we have lost the Ordinance
of Baptism it self.

We thought, Sir, that our Childrens Title to Baptism was derived to them from
their believing Parents, as the Children of the Jews was to Circumcision, from
their circumcised and professing Parents; and that the same Promise which
conveyed their Childrens Privilege to them, Genesis 17. had conveig'd the right
of Believers Children to Baptism unto them also, Acts 2. 38, 39. and that the
root being holy, the branches are holy also, that is, federally holy, Romans 11.
16. But to this you make such an Answer as astonishes me to read, page 26.
where allowing Abraham to be the Root, you say, The Holiness here spoken of, is
first in respect of Gods Election; Holiness personal, and inherent in God's
intention, Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in him, that we should be holy. (2.)
It Is also Holiness derivative, but not from any Ancestors, but from Abraham
only; and that not as a natural, but a spiritual Father, wherein he is a lively
Image or Figure of Christ; and is derived from the Covenant of Grace, which
passed in his Name to him and his Seed. And lastly, It shall be inherent, being
actually communicated by the Spirit of God, when they shall be actually called.

Reply. Here we see into what Brakes and Pits Men run themselves, when they
depart from the plain and safe Path in Explications of Scripture. Here is such
a tripartite Distinction of Holiness, as I never met with before. (1.) Here is
personal Holiness inherent in Gods intention. By this you must either mean
Sanctification decreed for them, and to be bestowed on them at the time of
their Calling; and then it is coincident with the third Member of your
Distinction: Or else you mean, that it is Holiness inherent in the Intention of
God, as an Accident in its Subject; and then the Simplicity of Gods Nature
resists your incongruous Notion. But it would be a less Crime, to confound the
first with the last Member of your vain and self-created Distinction, than to
speak things so repugnant to the simple and uncompounded Nature of God.

Or if your meaning be, That this Holiness is in God by way of Intention, but
in them by way of Inhesion; that will not deliver you out of your Confusion
neither, but run you into greater; for then you confound the immanent with the
transient Acts of God, and make the same thing, at the same time, to be purely
in Intention, and in Execution; or to be only in Gods Purpose to bestow
hereafter, and yet at present inherent in the Persons he intends it for; so
that I must leave your strange Notion of Personal Holiness inherent in Gods
Intention, to be cleared by a more Metaphysical Head than mine; or else to
stand among other rare and unintelligible Notions, to be admired and applauded
by the ignorant Reader.

But then, when we come to the Second Member of your Distinction, I am as much
at a loss to find your Sense as before: For there you tell us, The Holiness
here spoken of is a Derivative Holiness also, and that from Abraham only, and
from him not as a natural, but a spiritual Father, resembling Christ herein.

Reply. This word derivative is an equivocal word, and may signify either
inherent personal Holiness, or Federal Holiness, for both of them are derived.
If you say the former, it looks too black and horrid for me to believe you mean
it, though you should say you mean it; for then you make Abraham not only the
Figure and Image of Christ (as you speak) but Christ himself, by attributing to
Abraham Christ's incommunicable Property and Prerogative. Then Abraham may say
to all his Children, as Christ does, John 15. 4, 5. I am the vine, ye are the
branches, etc. I am he that sanctifies you: But if you mean the last, (as
necessarily you must, if you mean any thing that has Orthodox Sense in it)
then this derivative Holiness you speak of is not personal Holiness, or
internal Sanctification, but federal Holiness, derived from Covenanted
Ancestors or Parents to their Children; and therein you come over to us, and to
the true Sense of the Text. But why must this be squeezed from you with so much
difficulty? And why did you hide this federal Holiness under an equivocal term,
lest you should seem to yield the Controversy with a Word? this is not fair.

Object. If you say we are too hasty, and triumph before the Victory; for
though you do yield it to be a federal Holiness, yet it is such as can be
derived from no other Father or Progenitor but Abraham only.

Sol. Yes, Sir, I hope you will allow Isaac and Jacob at least to be the Root
and First Fruit as well as Abraham, seeing the Covenant was jointly and
expressly made with them all three; and thereby they became the Root and First
Fruit of that holy Nation: And if that People be called the Seed of Abraham,
they are also called the Seed of Jacob; and if Fatherhood he ascribed to
Abraham, it is ascribed to Jacob too, Isa. 58. 14. And if Abraham be first
named in the Covenant, so is Jacob, see Levit. 26. 42. But if you allow these
three Patriarchs, belike that is all you will allow; for you seem to say that no
federal Holiness can be derived from any other Progenitors. Good Sir, whatever
your own private Opinion be in this matter, allow us to believe otherwise, as
long as those Scriptures, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and Acts 2. 39. stand in our Bibles;
for we cannot think but the federal Holiness of Children results from the
immediate Parents Faith or Covenant Interest, as well as from the remoter
Progenitors; else we cannot understand how the Corinthians Children should be
holy, or how the Promise should belong to the Children of them that are afar
off, viz. the Gentiles, who could derive no such thing to their Children by a
Lineal Descent from Abraham, but only as they became ingrafted Branches by
Faith; and so suck the Fatness of the Olive to themselves, and to their Buds,
or Childrn, as the natural Branches did. I desire you to consider also how this
Covenant passed, as you say it did, to Abraham and his Seed in Christ's Name, if
it be the same with Adam's Covenant? Did that pass to Adam in Christ's Name too?

I have now dispatched what I at first promised and intended, viz. The
Confutation of my Friends Mistakes about the Covenants, and the Vindication of
those Scriptures, by which our Arguments deduced from one of them, are
confirmed. And now I have no further concernment with Mr. Cary's Solemn Call,
save only to note his high Confidence, rash and most unchristian censures of
all his differing Friends and Brethren with which he concludes his discourse,
wherein he calls Infants Baptism,

(1.) A great abuse in the Divine Worship. Page 242, 243. And yet he that so
calls it, never looked half way into the Controversy, nor is able without
manifest shuffling, and contradiction both to the Words of God, and his own
Words, to Answer our Arguments; as is here made too evident.

(2.) That it is no other, than a change of a Divine Institution, and making
void the Commandment of Christ, the horrid Sin charged by Christ upon those
Hypocrites, the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 15. 6. With no better than these
does he rank and assiociate the many thousands of Gods choice and dear People,
who differ in this circumstantial Point from him.

(3.) He compares it with the Sin of Nadab and Abihu. And with that of Israel,
with respect to the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. a Sin which provoked the Lord to
execute Judgment by an immediate Stroke in Fire from Heaven upon them. Thus Mr.
Carry is ready to call for Fire from Heaven upon his Brethren, Alas! Poor Man,
he knows not what Spirit he is of, as Christ told the Disciples in a like case.
It Is well we are not in his hands to execute the Wrath, as well as charge the
guilt upon us. But I hope all this is but Rashness in him.

(4.) He affirms it to be no less than a transgressing of the Law, a changing
of the Ordinances; And a breaking of the everlasting Covenant. If it be a
transgressing of the Law, he should have shown us in what Scripture that Law
that forbids it is, or where God has repealed his former Grant to the Children
of his Covenant People: And for the changing of the Ordinances, I am of Opinion
it is he that is guilty of that Sin and not we; for we have proved God settled
this privilege upon the Infant Seed of his People, that the Promise under the
Gospel continues still to them, and if he exclude them from Baptism, he changes
the Ordinance of God. And for breaking the everlasting Covenant, for which he
cites Isa. 24. 5, 6. the Lord make him sensible of the Danger he has put
himself under from that very Text he produces against us; for it is manifest
that the Covenant there spoken of, is Gods Covenant with Abraham, renewed with
the Israelites at Sinai, which in that Text is truly called an everlasting
Covenant; when mean time Mr. Carry has pronounced it to be an Adam's Covenant,
and now utterly abolished. Who is it Sir, that Fights against and changes this
everlasting Covenant, you or we that are for its continuance to us and our
Children?

(5.) He affirms these things to be of highest concernment to us. If so, then
sure it must follow, that Repentance from dead Works, and Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ, must be inferior things to them; for nothing can be higher
than the highest, or equal with it. And then by making them the chief
Fundamentals in Religion, as that Expression does, (if it be not a vain and
Sinful Hyperbole) the Salvation or Damnation of Men depends upon compliance, or
noncompliance with them. And then whither must you send all Gods People in the
World that differ from you? Sir, I find your Brethren in the Appendix to their
confession of Faith, Page 110, placing one of these which you make of highest
concernment, among the other circumstances of Religion: And doubtless that is
it is Proper place. Nor do I see how they can free themselves from Participation
in your Sin, 'till they have admonished you for it, and caused you to expunge
it out of your Book.

(6.) That it is a Settling of our Thresholds by Gods Threshold. The Words you
recite from Ezekiel. 43. 8. which speaks of the Idolatrous Kings of Judah and
Israel, building Temples and Altars for their Idols, in, or near the Courts of
the Temple of God: As the English Annotations on the Text will inform you, an
Abomination that defiled Gods Holy Name, a Wickedness not to be Named, and for
which the Lord consumed them; And calls it Whoredom in the next Words. Here
Sir, you have exceeded all the Bounds of Society and Christian Charity; And
made this circumstantial difference about the Proper Subject of Baptism, the
Grossest Heathenish Idolatry in the World: And consequently dissolved the Bond
of Christian Charity, and broken off all communion with us; for with such
Idolaters you ought not to have any communion.

Your more wise and moderate Brethren in the place above cited, tell us, they
are loath hereby to alienate their Affections or Conversations from any that
fear the Lord, and are willing to participate of the Labors of those whom God
has endued with Abilities above themselves; Qualified and called to the
Ministry of the Word; Desirous of Peace and not of renewed Contests hereabout.
This is a Language of another Air. And if they be (as I dare not suspect but
they are) sincere in that Profession, they dare not Comprobate such a desperate
and unchristian censure as yours is: If they do, then we may easily guess what
our Lot and Treatment shall be whenever Anabaptism get the Ascendent in
England. We may expect as civil usage as is due to gross Idolaters, and no
better. But I hope better things.

(7.) You say, that as these things are of highest concerment, so they ought to
be our most serious Practice and endeavor, page 243. l. ult. Good Lord,
whither has Zeal for an Opinion Transported you! Our most serious Practice and
endeavor, Sir! I thought the most serious Practice of a Minister had been to
Preach Christ, and Salvation to the Souls of Men; And not to Baptize. I am sure
St. Paul reckned so, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach. That is,
Baptism is not my principal Work, or main business. And ver. 14th. he thanks
God he had Baptized none of them, but Crispus and Gaius. I believe he never
uttered such an expression about his other Work of Preaching Christ. And for
all Christians, I thought, the secureing of their Interest in Christ, living in
the duties of communion with him, Watching their Hearts, and mortifying their
corruptions, had been the Object matter of their most serious Practice, and
Faithful endeavor; and not the Litigations about Baptism. But I hope these
were only inconsiderate expressions, falling from your Pen whilst you were in
a Paroxism of Zeal, or a transport in the height of a conceited Triumph. But
whatever was the cause, I am sure you ought to revoke and repent such Words.

(8.) You wish your Testimony rise not up at last as a Witness against us. Sir,
we do not apprehend any Cause we have to fear your Testimony against us, or
severest Censures of us, whilst we are satisfied, that as you neither have a
Faculty or Commission to be our Judge, so neither is there any convincing
Evidence in your Reply to our Arguments. But I think you have much more Cause
to fear, lest those Arguments should come in at last as a Witness against you,
who deny and contemn them; when mean time you are put to most lamentable
Shifts, even Contradictions, and somewhat worse, to escape the Point and Edge
of them.

(9.) To conclude, You tells us we must not expect the special Presence of
Christ to be afforded to us, without our compliance in these Points with you.

Sir, We never yet deserted the Judgment or Practice of Infants Baptism, and
yet have had (blessed be Jesus Christ for it) great and manifold, sweet and
signal Proofs and Evidences of his Presence with us: He has owned and blessed
our Ministry to the Conversion of many; and there are some, and those not mean
or few, of our Spiritual Children, now in your Societies in England, who have
acknowledged us to be the Instruments of their Conversion: The Lord lay it not
to their Charge, who now desert that Ministry in which they first received
Christ. But as for the Departure of his Presence, I assure you, Friend, I am
more afraid of the Rents and Divisions you now renew so unseasonably among the
Churches of Christ, than of any one thing amongst us beside it. It grieved my
Soul to see you Quiet a movere, awake a sleeping Controversy, especially in
such a Season, when we are little more than half delivered from our Enemies and
Dangers; you take us by the heel, as Jacob did his Brother, whilst but yet in
the Birth. Sir, except you return to a more quiet and Christian Temper than you
seem here to be in, I am out of hope that ever you and I shall see those
blessed days we have so often with pleasure comforted our selves with the hopes
of. ^wever extend your Charity (if you have any left) so far, as to believe
that I am one notwithstanding all this) that am studious of the Churches Peace,
and ^quisitive into the Rules of Duty, not daring to hold any Truth of God in
Unrighteness; and yet well satisfied I am in the Path of my Duty, wherein,
though we cannot walk together, yet I hope to meet you at the end of our way in
our Fathers House, where perfect Light and Peace dwells.

And here I had put an end to this Debate, had I not received your Return to
some of these Sheets, whilst the last of them was under my Hand; wherein I only
find four things in which I am concerned. In general, you tell me, You are not
convinced of any Error, by what I have said. I am sorry to hear it: But
considering the nature of Error on one side, and the difficulty of Self-denial
on the other, you have not much deceived my Expectation. More particularly,

(1.) You say, As to your hooking the Sinai Covenant into this Controversy, I
gave you the first occasion of it; for when you showed me your Papers about
God's Covenant with Abraham, I told you that you were best first to try if you
could prove the Covenant at Sinai to be a Covenant of Works; forasmuch as our
Divines are so far from conceiting the Covenant with Abraham to be a Covenant
of Works, that they will not allow the Sinai Law it self to be so; and to
convince you of it, I lent you Mr. Roberts and Mr. Sedgewick on the Covenant,
to enlighten and satisfy you about it: But little did I think you had had
Confidence enough to enter the Lists with two such learned and eminent Divines,
and make them to follow your triumphant Chariot, shackled with the incomparable
Baxter and Allen, Sydenham and Burthogg, like three pair of Noble Prisoners of
War. But whatever was the occasion, (setting aside your Sin) I am not sorry you
have given a fit opportunity to enlighten the World in that Point also.

(2.) You seem to fancy in your Letter, that I was once of your Opinion about
the Moral Law, because you find these Passages in a Sermon of mine upon John 8.
36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, then are you free indeed, viz.

That the Law required perfect working, under pain of the Curse; accepted no
short Endeavors, admitted no Repentance, and gave no Strength. But finding me
here pleading for the Law, you think you find me in a Contradiction to that
Doctrine.

The Words I own, the Contradiction I positively deny; for I speak not there
and here ad idem: For in that Sermon, and in those very Words you cite, I speak
against the Law, not as God intended it, when he added it to the Promise, but
as the Ignorance and Infidelity of unregenerate Men make it to themselves a
Covenant of Works, by looking upon it as the very rule and reason of their
Justification before God. This was the Stumbling Stone at which all Legal
Justiciaries then did, and still do stumble, Romans 9. 31, 32, 33. In this Sense
the Apostle in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians argues against the Law,
and so do I in the Words you cite; but vindicate the Law in the very same
Sermon you mention, as consistent with, and subservient to Christ, in the
former Sense; and there tell you, The Law sends us to Christ to be justified,
and Christ sends us back to the Law to be regulated. The very same double Sense
of the Law you will find in this Discourse, and from the mistaken end and abuse
of the Law, which the Apostle so vehemently opposes, I here prove against you,
that the Law in this Sense cannot consist with, or be added to the Promise, and
therefore make it my Medium to prove against you, That the true Nature and
Denomination of the Sinai Law can never be found in this Sense of it, but it
must be estimated and denominated from the Purpose and Intention of God, which
I have proved to be Evangelical. Try your skill to fasten a Contradiction
betwixt my Words in that Sermon and this Discourse. I know you would be glad to
find the shadow of one, to make some small Excuse or Atonement for the many
faults of that nature you have here committed.

(3.) Your Letter also informs me, that you hear you are answered by one hand
already, and for ought you know many more may be employed against you, and I
for one; and so we shall compass you about like Bees.

Reply. I have only seen Mr. Whiston's little Book against your Brother
Grantham, wherein he has baffled two of your principal Arguments; but you only
come in collaterally there, and must not look upon it as a full Answer to your
Book, but only as a Lash for your Folly en passant. And for our compassing you
about like Bees, methinks you seem to be greatned in your own Fancy by the
supposition or expectation of a multitude of Opponents. You know as well as I,
who it is that glories in this Motto, Unus contra omnes. Sir, I think your Mind
may be much at rest in that matter. Of all the six famous Adversaries mentioned
in your Title Page, there are but two living; and you know mortui non mordent;
and of the remaining two, one of them, viz. Mr. Baxter is almost in Heaven,
living in the daily Views and cheerful Expectations of the Saints everlasting
rest with God; and is left for a little while among us, as a great Example of
the Life of Faith: And it is questionable with me, whether such a great and
Heavenly Soul can find any leisure or disposition to attend such a weak and
trivial Discourse as this.

And as for my self, you need not much fear me; I have not, neither do I intend
to vibrate my Sting against you, unless I find you infecting or disturbing that
Hive to which I belong, and to which I am daily gathering and carrying Honey;
and then who but a Drone would not sting?

(4.) To conclude, in the Close of your Letter you fall into the former strain
of Love, assuring me, That the ancient Friendship of so many years shall still
continue on your part.

Reply. All that I shall return to this, is only to relate a short Story out of
Plutarch, in the Life of Alexander; where he tells us, That whilst he was
warring in the Indies, one Taxiles an Indian King came with his Company to meet
him, and saluting Alexander, said, What need you and I to fight and war one
upon another? if thou come not to take away our Water, and the necessaries of
Life from us, for which we must needs fight: As for other Goods, if I am richer
than thee, I am ready to give thee of mine; and if I have less, I will not
think scorn to thank thee for thine. Alexander highly pleased with his Words,
made him this Reply, Think thou that this meeting of ours can be without
fighting? no, no; thou have won nothing by all thy fair words; for I will fight
and contend with thee in Honesty and Courtesy, and thou shall not exceed me in
Bounty and Liberality.

I say with Taxiles, I had never armed against you, had you not come to take
away our Water, and the necessaries of Life, I mean, the Covenant of God with
Abraham, which contains the rich Charter of the Gentile Believers Children, and
make it an abolished Adam's Covenant, and told us, that we must come up to the
Primitive Purity in these things, that is, in renouncing it as a Covenant of
Grace, and relinquishing Infants Baptism, as grounded thereon.

Sir, Were my one Father alive, I must and would oppose him, should he attempt
what here you do. Infant Baptism with you is not; Singing of Psalms, that plain
and Heavenly Gospel-Ordinance, with you is not, and will you take away our
Benjamin also? What! the Covenant of God with Abraham and his Children in their
Generations? all these things are against us. No, Sir, we cannot part with that
Covenant as an abolished Adam's Covenant; nor will I give it up for all the
Friendship in the World.

And yet I will say with Alexander, I will contend with you in Friendship and
Courtesy, even whilst I earnestly contend against you for the Truths of God,
which you have here opposed, and I have endeavored to vindicate.

One Word more before I part with you, I do assure you, and the whole World,
that in this Controversy with you, I have not knowingly or advisedly
misrepresented your Sense: If you shall say I did so in my second Argument from
the Words p. 179. I assure you, both my self and others could understand you no
otherwise than I did in the Papers I sent you; and when you told me, you meant
there was no pardon in either of those Covenants, but that it plainly directed
to Abraham's Covenant, you will find I have given you as fair a Choice as you
can desire, either to stand to your words in the first Sense wherein I
understood them, (or which will be the same to me) to your own Sense in which
you afterward explained it to me. And whereas I blame you over and over in my
Epistle and Conclusion, for putting the proper Subject of Baptism among the
highest things in Religion: Let the Reader view your Conclusion, and see
whether you do or not: If you say you speak of the Covenant there as well as of
baptism: I allow that you do so; yet I hope it is equally as bad, nay indeed and
truth, a great Aggravation of your Fault, to make this Article, viz. Gods
Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17, is an abolished Adam 's Covenant, one of the
highest concernments of a Christian; the Baptism only of Adult Believers
another. My consequences from your Words are just and regular, how startling
soever they seem to you.

If you think fit to rejoyn to this my Answer, I desire you will avoid as much
as you can a tedious Harangue of Words, and speak strictly and regularly to my
Arguments, by limiting, distinguishing, or denying, as a Disputant ought to do:
If so, I promise you a Reply; but if I find no such thing, it shall pass with
me but for waste Paper; nor will I wast time about it. The Lord give us Unity
in things necessary, Liberty in things indifferent, and Charity in all things.

FINIS.

