A TOKEN FOR MOURNERS: OR, The Advice of Christ to a distressed Mother,
bewailing the Death of her Dear and only Son. WHEREIN, The Boundaries of Sorrow
are duly fixed, Excesses restrained, the Common Pleas Answered, and diverse
Rules for the support of Gods afflicted ones prescribed. By J. F. Preacher of
the Gospel of Christ at Dartmouth in Devon.

(...). Transivere patres, simul hinc transibimus omnes.
In coelo patriam, qui been transit habet.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-head in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange. 1674.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To his dearly beloved Brother and Sister, Mr J. C. and Mrs. E. C. the Author
wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Dear Friends,

THE double tie of Nature and Grace, beside the many endearing passages that
for so many years have linked and glewed our affections so intimately, cannot
but beget a tender sympathy in me under all your troubles; and make me say of
every affliction which befalls you, half mine. I find it is with our
affections, as with the strings of Musical instruments exactly set at the same
height, if one be touched the other trembles, though it be at some distance.

Our affections are one, and so in a great measure have been our afflictions
also. You cannot forget that in the years lately past, the Almighty visited my
Tabernacle with the Rod, and in one year, cut off from it the root, and the
branch, the tender Mother, and the only Son. What the effects of those strokes,
or rather of my own unmortified passions were, I have felt, and you and others
have heard. Surely I was as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke. Yea I may say
with them, Lam. 3. 19, 20. Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the
wormwood and the gall, my soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled
in me.

I dare not say that ever I felt my heart discontentedly rising and swelling
against God; no, I could still justify him, when I most sensibly smarted by
his hand: if he had plunged me into a Sea of sorrow, yet I could say in all
that Sea of Sorrow, there is not a drop of injustice: But it was the
over-heating, and over-acting of my fond and unmortified affections and
passions that made so sad impressions upon my body, and cast me under those
distempers which soon imbittered all my remaining comforts to me.

It was my earnest desire so soon as I had strength and opportunity for so
great a Journey to visit you; that so, (if the Lord had pleased) I might both
refresh, and be refreshed by you, after all my sad and disconsolate day. And
you cannot imagine what content and pleasure I projected in that visit! but it
proved to us (as all other Comforts of the same kind ordinarily do) more in
expectation, than in fruition; for how soon after our joyful meeting and
embraces, did the Lord overcast and darken our day, by sending death into your
Tabernacle, to take away the desire of your eyes with a stroke! to crop off
that sweet and only bud from which we promised our selves so much Comfort: But
no more of that, I fear I am gone too far already. It is not my design to
exasperate your troubles, but to heal them, and for that purpose have I sent
you these papers, which I hope may be of use both to you and many others in
your condition; since they are the after-fruits of my own troubles; things that
I commend not to you from another hand, but which I have (in some measure)
proved and tasted in my own trials.

But I will not hold you longer here. I have only a few things to desire for
and from you, and I have done.

The things I desire are,

First, That you will not be too hasty to get off the yoke which God has put
upon your neck. Remember when your child was in the Womb, neither of you
desired it should be delivered thence, till Gods appointed time was fully come;
and now that you travail again with sorrow for its death. O desire not to be
delivered from your sorrows one moment before Gods time for your deliverance be
fully come also. Let patience have its perfect work; that Comfort which comes
in Gods way and season, will stick by you, and do you good indeed.

Secondly, I desire, that though you and your afflictions had a sad meeting,
yet you and they may have a Comfortable parting. If they effect that upon your
hearts which God sent them for, I doubt not but you will give them a fair
testimony when they go off.

If they obtain Gods blessing upon them in their operation, surely they will
have your blessing too at their valediction. And what you entertained with
fear, you will dismiss with praise. How sweet is it to hear the afflicted soul
say when God is looseing his bands, It Is good for me that I have been afflicted!

Thirdly, I heartily wish, that these searching afflictions may make the most
satisfying discoveries, that you may now see more of the evil of sin, the
vanity of the Creature, and the fullness of Christ, than ever you yet saw.
Afflictions are searchers, and put the soul upon searching and trying its ways,
Lam. 3. 40. When our sin finds us out by affliction, happy are we, if by the
light of affliction we find out sin. Blessed is the man whom God chasteneth,
and teaches out of his Law, Psalm. 94. 12. There are unseen causes many times
of our troubles; you have an advantage now to sift out the seeds and principles
from which they spring.

Fourthly, I wish that all the love and delight you bestowed upon your little
one, may now be placed to your greater advantage upon Jesus Christ: and that
the stream of your affection to him, may be so much the stronger, as there are
now fewer channels for it to be divided into. If God will not have any part of
your happiness to lie in children; then let it wholly lie in himself. If the
Jealousy of the Lord has removed that which drew away too much of your heart
from him, and has spoken by this rod, saying, Stand aside child, thou art in
my way, and fillest more room in thy Parents hearts than belongs to thee. O
then deliver up all to him, and say, Lord, take the whole heart entirely and
undividedly to thy self. Henceforth let there be no parting, sharing or
deviding of the affections betwixt God and the Creature, let all the streams
meet and center in thee only.

Fifthly, That you may be strengthened with all might in the inner man to all
patience, that the peace of God may keep your heart and mind. Labor to bring
your hearts to a meek submission to the rod of your Father. We had Fathers of
our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much more
be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live? Is it comely for children
to contest and strive with their Father? Or is it the way to be freed from the
yoke by struggling under it? Oh that your hearts might be in a like frame with
his, that said, Lord, thou shall beat, and I will bear. It was a good
observation that one made, Anima sedendo, and quiescendo fit sapiens. The Soul
grows wise by sitting still and quiet under the rod. And the Apostle calls
those excellent fruits which the Saints gather from their sanctified
afflictions, The peaceable fruits of Righteousness, Heb. 12. 11,

Lastly, My hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that you may die daily
to all visible enjoyments, and by these frequent converses with death in your
family, you may be prepared for your own change and dissolution when it shall
come.

O, Friends, How many graves have you and I seen opened for our dear Relations!
How often has death come up into our windows, and summoned the delight of our
eyes? It is but a little while and we shall go to them, we and they are
distinguished but by short intervals.

Transivere patres, simul hinc transibimus omnes.

Our dear Parents are gone, our lovely and desirable children are gone, our
bosom Relations, that were as our own souls, are gone, the greatest part of us
is gone: And do not all these warning-knocks at our doors acquaint us, that we
must prepare to follow shortly after them!

O that by these things our own death might be both more easy and more
familiar to us! the oftener it visits us, the better we should be acquainted
with it, and the more of our beloved Relations it removes before us, the less
of either snare and intanglement remains for us when our turn comes.

My dear Friends, my flesh and my blood, I beseech you for Religion sake, for
your own sake, and for my sake, whose Comfort is in great part bound up in your
prosperity and welfare, that you read frequently, ponder seriously, and apply
believingly these Scripture-consolations and directions, which in some haste, I
have gathered for your use, and the God of all consolation be with you.

I am Your most endeared Brother JOHN FLAVEL.

Luke 7. 13. And when the Lord saw her, he had Compassion on her, and said to
her, Weep not.
TO be above the stroke of passions, is a condition equal to Angels: to be in a
State of Sorrow, without the sense of sorrow, is a disposition beneath Beasts;
but duly to regulate our Sorrows, and bound our Passions under the rod, is the
Wisdom, duty, and excellency of a Christian. He that is without natural
affections, is deservedly ranked among the worst of Heathens; and he that is
able rightly to manage them, deserves to be numbered with the best of
Christians. Though when we are Sanctified, we put on the Divine Nature; yet
till we are glorified we put not off the infirmities of our humane Nature.

Whilst we are within the reach of troubles, we cannot be without the danger,
nor ought to be without the fear of sin; and it is as hard for us to escape
sin, being in adversity, as becalming in prosperity.

How apt we are to transgress the bounds both of Reason and Religion under a
sharp affliction, appears, as in most men's experience, so in this Woman's
example, to whose excessive Sorrow, Christ puts a stop in the Text: He saw her,
and had Compassion on her, and said to her, Weep not.

The Lamentations and waylings of this distressed mother, moved the tender
compassions of the Lord in beholding it, and stirred up more pity in his heart
for her, than could be in her heart for her dear and only Son.

In the words we are to consider, both the Condition of the woman, and the
Counsel of Christ with respect unto it.

First, The condition of this Woman, which appears to be very dolorous and
distressed; her groans and tears moved and melted the very heart of Christ, to
hear and behold them: When he saw her, he had Compassion on her.

How sad an hour it was with her when Christ met her, appears by what is so
distinctly remark't by the Evangelist, in ver. 12. where it is said, Now when
they came nigh to the Gate of the City, behold, there was a dead man carried
out, the only Son of his Mother, and she was a Widow, and much people of the
City was with her.

In this one Verse, diverse heart piercing circumstances of this affliction are
noted.

First, It was the death of a Son. To bury a child, (...). Graec Comic.
any child, must needs rend the heart of a tender Parent; for what are children
but the parent multiplied: a child is a part of the parent made up in another
skin. But to lay a Son in the grave, A Son which continues the name, and
supports the family; this was ever accounted a very great affliction.

Secondly, This Son was not carried from the Cradle to the Coffin, nor stripped
out of its Swathing, to be wrapped in its Winding clothes: Had he dyed in
infancy, before he had engaged affection, or raised expectation, the affliction
had not been so pungent and cutting, as now it was. Death smote this Son in the
flower and Prime of his time. He was a man (says the Evangelist) ver. 12. a
young man, (as Christ calls him) ver. 14. he was now arrived In adolescentia
defunctus fuit, ideo plus dolendum fuerat, quia in flore aetatis suae fuit, et
cum grandi labor ac solicitudine parentum ad istam aetatem perductus. Dion.
Cath. in loc.
at that age which made him capable of yiedling his Mother all that comfort
which had been the expectation and hope of many years, and the reward and fruit
of many cares and Labors: Yet then when the endearments were greatest, and her
hopes highest, even in the flower of his age, he is cut off. Thus Basil
bewailed the death of his Son: Filius mihi erat adolescens, solus
vitaesuccessor, solatium senectae, gloria generis, flos aequalium, fulcrum
domu, saetatem gratiosissimam agebat: hic raptus periit, qui paulo ante
jucundam vocem edebat, and jucundissimum spectaculum parentis oculis erat.

I once had a Son who was a young man, my only successor, the solace of my age,
the glory of his kind, the prop of my family, arrived to the endearing age:
then was he snatched from me by death, whose lovely voice but a little before I
heard, who lately was a pleasant spectacle to his Parent.

Reader, if this have been thine own condition, as it has been his that writes
it; I need say no more to convince thee, that it was a sorrowful State indeed
Christ met this tender Mother in.

Thirdly, And which is yet more, he was not only Mortem levins toleraret, si
non unicus fuisset; si alter qui parentis dolorem leniret superfuisset. Ambros.
a Son, but an only Son: so you find in ver. 12. He was the only Son of his
Mother: One in whom all her hopes and Comforts of that kind were bound up. For,

Omnis in Ascanio stat chari cura Parentis. All her Virgil.
affections were contracted into this one object. If we have never so many
children, we know not which of them to spare. If they Nibil charius unico
filio: sic dolor de morte ipsius intenfissimus existit. Carthus. in Loc.
stand like Olive plants about our Table, it would grieve us to see the least
twigg amongst them broken down. But surely the death of one out of many, is
much more tolerable than of all in one.

Hence its noted in Scripture as the greatest of earthly Sorrows, Jer. 6. 26. O
daughter of my people gird thee with Sackcloth, and wallow thy self in Ashes.
Make thee mourning as for an only Son, most bitter Lamentation. Yea, so deep
and penetrating is this grief that the holy Ghost borrows it to express the
deepest spritual troubles by it. Zech. 12. 10, They shall mourn for him,
(namely Christ whom they pierced) as one mourns for an only Son.

Fourthly, And yet to heighten the afflliction it Duplici nomine charissimus
fuit tum quod esset unigenitus tum quod esset solatium, and quasi bacu^lus
viduitatis ipsius. Pisc. in Loc.
is super added, ver. 12. And she was a Widow. So that the staff of her age,
on whom she leaned was broken: She had now none left to comfort or assist her
in her helpless comfortless State of Widdowhood; which is a condition not only
void of comfort, but exposed to oppression and contempt.

Yea, and being a Widow, the whole burden lay upon her alone; she had not an
Husband to comfort her, as Elkana did Hannah in 1 Samuel 1. 8. Why weepest thou?
and why is thy heart grieved? ^m not I more to thee than ten Sons? This would
have been a great relief; but her Husband was dead as well as her Son: both
gone, and she only surviving, to lament the loss of those comforts that once
she had. Her calamities came not single, but one after another, and this
reviving and aggravating the former. This was her case and condition when the
Lord met her.

Secondly, Let us consider the Council which Christ gives her, with respect to
this hersad and sorrowful case. And when the Lord saw her, he had Compassion on
her, and said unto her, Weep not: Relieving and Supporting words, wherein we
shall consider,

The Occasion. Motive. Council it self.

First, The occasion of it, and that was his seeing of her. This meeting at the
Gate of the City, how accidental and occasional soever it seems, yet without
doubt it was providentially suited to the work intended to be wrought: The eye
of his Omniscience foresaw her, and this meeting was by him designed, as an
oc^^sion of that famous Miracle which he wrought upon the young man. Christ
has a quick eye to discern poor mourning and disconsolate Creatures: and
though he be now in Heaven, and stands out of our sight, so that we see him
not; yet he sees us; and his eye (which is upon all our troubles) still affects
his heart, and moves his bowels for us.

Secondly, The Motive stirring him up to give this relieving and comfortable
Council to her, was his own Compassion. She neither expected, nor desired it
from him; but so full of tender pittty was the Lord toward her, that he
prevents her with unexpected consolation: Her heart was nothing so full of
compassion for her Son, as Christ was for her: He bore our infirmities, even
natural as well as moral ones, in the days of his flesh; and though he be now
exalted to the highest glory, yet still he continues as merciful as ever, and
as apt to be touched with the sense of our miseries, Heb. 4. 15.

Lastly, The Council it self, Weep not, herein fulfilling the office of a
Comforter to them that mourn, whereunto he was anointed, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Yet
the words are not an absolute prohibition of tears and sorrow; he does not
Condemn ^ll mourning as sinful, or all expressions of grief for dead Relations
as uncomely: no, Christ would not have his people stupid and insensate; he only
prohibits the excesses and extravagancies of our sorrows for the dead, that it
should not be such a mourning for the dead as is found among the Heathens, who
sorrow without measure, because without hope, being ignorant of that grand
relief by the Resurrection which the Gospel reveals.

The Resurrection of her Son from the dead, is the ground upon which Christ
builds her consolation and relief. Well might he say, Weep not, when he
intended quickly to remove the cause of her tears by restoring him again to
life.

Now though there be somewhat in this case extraordinary and peculiar; for few
or none that carry their dear children to the grave, may expect to receive them
again from the dead immediately by a special resurrection, as she did: I say
this is not to be expected by any that now loose their Relations; the occasion
and reasons of such miraculous special resurrections being removed, by a
sufficient and full evidence and confirmation of Christ's divine power and
Godhead: Yet those that now bury their Relations, if they be such as dye in
Christ, have as good and sufficient reason to moderate their passions, as this
mourner had, and do as truly come within the reach and compass of this Christ's
comfortable and supporting council, Weep not, as the did; For do but consider,
what of support or comfort, can a particular and present Resurrection from the
dead give us, more than that it is, and as it is a Specimen, hansell, or pledge
of the general Resurrection? It is not the returning of the soul to its body,
to live an Animal life again in this world of sin and sorrow, and shortly after
to undergo the agonies and pains of death again, that is in it self any such
privilege, as may afford much comfort to the person raised, or his Relations:
It is no privilege to the person raised; for it returns him from rest to
trouble, from the harbor back again into the Ocean. It is matter of trouble to
many dying Saints, to hear of the likelihood of their returning again, when
they are got so nigh to Heaven.

It was once the case of a godly Minister of this Nation, who was much troubled
at his return, and said, I am like a sheep driven out of the storm almost to
the fold, and then driven back into the storm again: or a weary Traveller that
is come near his home, and then must go back to fetch somewhat he had
forgotten: or an Apprentice, whose time is almost expired, and then must begin
a new term.

But to die, and then return again from the dead, has less of privilege, than
to return only from the brink of the grave; for the sick has not yet felt the
agonies and last struggles or pangs ofdeath: but such have felt them once, and
must feel them again; they must die twice, before they can be happy once: and
besides, during the little time they spend on earth betwixt the first and
second dissolution, there is a perfect (...) forgetfulness and insensibleness
of all that which they saw or enjoyed in their state of separation: It being
necessary, both for them, and others that it should be so; for themselves its
necessary, that they may be content to live, and endure the time of separation
from that Victurosque dii celant, ut vivere durent.
blessed and ineffable state, quietly and patiently; and for others, that they
may live by faith, and not by sense, and build upon divine and not humane
authority and report.

So that here you see, their agonies and pangs are doubled, and yet their life
not sweetened by any sense of their happiness which returns and remains with
them, and therefore it can be no such privilege to them.

And for their Relations, though it be some comfort to receive them again from
the dead; yet the consideration, that they are returned to them into the stormy
Sea, to partake of new sorrows and troubles, from which they were lately free;
and in a short time they must part with them again, and feel the double sorrows
of a parting pull, which others feel but once: surely such a particular
Resurrection considered in it self, is no such ground of comfort as at first we
might imagine it to be.

It remains then, that the ground of all solid Comfort and relief against the
death of our Relations, lies in the General and last In eo futurae
resurrectionis illustre habemus Specimen. Call. in Loc.
Resurrection, and what is in a particular one, is but as it is a Specimen, and
evidence of the general: and there the Apostle places our relief, 1 These. 4.
17. that we shall see and enjoy them again at the Lords coming. And surely this
is more, than if with this Mother (in the Text) we should presently receive
them from the dead, as she did her Son: And if we judge not so, it is because
our hearts are carnal, and measure things rather by time, and sense, than by
faith and eternity.

Thus you see the Council, with its ground, which for the most part is common
to other Christian mourners with her; the difference being but inconsiderable,
and of little advantage.

Here then you find many aggravations of sorrow meeting together; A Son, an
only Son, is carrying to the grave, yet Christ commands the pensive Mother, not
to Mourn.

Hence we note,

Doct. That Christians ought to moderate their Sorrows for their dead
Relations, how many afflicting circumstances and aggravations soever do meet
together in their Death.

It is as common with Quae ardenter diligimus habita, graviter suspiramus
amissa. Greg. mor.
men, yea, with good men, to exceed in their sorrows for dead Relations, as it
is to exceed in their loves and delights to living Relations; and both of the
one and other, we may say as they say of waters, It Is hard to confine them
within their bounds. It is therefore grave advice which the Apostle delivers in
this case, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, But this I say Brethren, the time is short, It
remains, that both they that have Wives, be as though they had none, and they
that weep, as though they wept not, and those that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not. As if he had said, the floating world is near its port: God has
contracted the sails of (...).
man's life: its but a point of time we have to live, and shortly it will not be
a point to choose, whether we had wives or not, children or not: all these are
time-eaten things, and before the expected fruit of these comforts be ripe, we
our selves may be rotten. Its therefore an high point of Wisdom, to look upon
things which shortly will not be, as if already they were not, and to behave
our selves in the loss of these carnal enjoyments, as the natural man behaves
himself in the use of spiritual Ordinances: He hears as if he heard not, and we
should weep as if we wept not; Their affections are a little moved sometimes by
spiritual things, but they never lay them so to heart, as to be broken hearted
for the sin they hear of, or deeply affected with the glory revealed: We also
ought to be sensible of the stroke God upon our dear Relations: but yet still
we must weep, as if we wept not; that is, we must keep due bounds and
moderation in our sorrows, and not be too deeply concerned for these dying
shortliv'd things.

To this purpose the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 12. 5, My Son despise not the
chastening of the Lord; neither faint when thou art rebuked of him. These are
two extremes, despising, and fainting: when God is correcting, to say, I do not
regard it, let God take all if he will; if my estate must go, let it go; if my
children die, let them dye: this is to despise the Lords chastening: and God
cannot bear it, that we should bear it thus lightly.

There is also another extreme, and that is Fainting: if when goods are taken
away, the heart be taken away, and when children dye, then the spirit of the
Parent dies also; this is fainting under the rod. Thou lamentest (says Seneca)
thy deceased friend, but I would not have thee grieve beyond what is meet: That
thou should not grieve at all, I dare not require thee; tears may be excused,
if they do not exceed: Let thine eyes therefore be neither wholly dry, nor yet
let them overflow; Weep thou may, but Wayle thou must not.

Happy man that still keeps the golden bridle of moderation upon his passions
and affections, and still keeps the possession of himself, whatsoever he
loses the possession of.

Now the the method in which I purpose to proceed shall be, 1. To discover the
Signs of immoderate Sorrow. 2. To dissuade from the sin of immoderate Sorrow.
3. To remove the pleas of immoderate Sorrow. 4. To propose the cure of
immoderate Sorrow.


First, I shall give you the Signs of immoderate Sorrow, and show you when it
exceeds its bounds, and becomes sinful, even a sorrow to be sorrowed for; and
for clearness sake, I will first allow what may be allowed to the Christian
mourner, and then you will the better discern wherein the excess and
sinfulness of your sorrow lies.

And First, How much soever we censure and condemn immoderate Sorrow, yet the
afflicted must be allowed an awakened and tender sense of the Lords afflicting
hand upon them. Its no virtue to bear what we do not feel: Yea it is a most
unbecoming temper, not to tremble when God is smiting.

The Lord faith to Moses, in the case of Miriam, Number. 12. 24. If her Father had
spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? The face is the Table
and Seat of beauty and honor; but when it is spit upon, it is made the sink of
shame: Had her own Father spit upon her face when she had displeased him, Would
she not have gone aside as one ashamed by such a rebuke, and not have showed
her face to him again in seven days? How much more should she take it to heart,
and be sensible of this rebuke of mine, who have filled her face with Leprous
spots, the signs of my displeasure against her? Surely God will be ashamed of
those, that are not ashamed when he rebukes them.

It is not magnanimity, but stupidity to make light of Gods corrections, and
for this the afflicted are smartly taxed, Jer. 5. 3. I have smitten them but
they have not grieved. When God smote Job in his person, children, and estate,
he arose and rent his mantle, and put dust upon his head, to show he was not
senseless and unaffected, and yet blessed the afflicting God, which as plainly
showed he was not contumacious and unsubmissive.

Secondly, We must allow the mourning afflicted soul, a due and comely
expression of his grief and sorrow, in his complaints both to God and men.

Its much more becoming a Christian ingenuously to open his troubles, than
sullenly to smother them. There Is no fin in complaining to God, but much
wickedness in complaining of him. Griefs are eased by groans, and heart
pressures relieved by utterance. This was David's course, and constant way, who
was a man of afflictions, Psalm. 142. 2, 3, I poured out my complaint before
him, I showed before him my trouble: when my spirit was overwhelmed within me,
then thou knew my path.

To whom should children go but to their Father to make their moan? Whence may
they expect relief and comfort but from him? The 102. Psalm is entitled, A
Psalm for the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint
before the Lord.

And happy were it if every afflicted soul would choose this way to express his
sorrows. Did we complain more to God, God would complain less of us, and
quickly abate the matters of our complaint. O you cannot think how moving, how
melting, how prevailing it is with God, when his poor burdened and afflicted
people, in a day of distress and despondency, when deep calls unto deep, and
one wave drives on another, then for the oppressed soul with humility, filial
confidence, and faith, to turn it self to the Lord and thus bespeak him,

Father, What shall I do? My soul is greatly bowed down by trouble, I am full
to the brim, my vain heart has looked for relief this way and that way but
none comes, every door of comfort is shut up against me: Thou have multiplied
my sorrows, and renewed thy witnesses against me: Comfort is removed from my
outward, and peace from my inner man: Sharp afflictions without, and bitter
reflections within. O Lord I am oppressed, undertake for me. Fathers of the
flesh pity their disstressed children when they complain to them, and wilt not
thou O Lord, whose compassions as far exceed creature-compassions, as the Sea
exceeds a drop. O my Father pity me, support me, deliver me.

O how acceptable is this to God! how advantageous to the soul!

We may also make our complaint to men. So did Job, Chap. 19. 21. Have pity,
have pity on me O ye my friends; for the hand of God has touched me. And it
is a mercy if we have any friends that are wise, faithful, and experienced.
They are born for such a time as this, Prove. 17. 17. But be they what they
will, they connot pity as God, relieve and succor as he: and often times we
may say with Job, Chap. 21. 4. As for me, Is my complaint to men? and if it
were, Why should not my spirit be troubled? q. d. What great advantage can I
get by these complaints? I may burden the heart of my friend, but how little
does that ease my own! Yet the very opening of the heart to an experienced
tender Christian is some relief, and the engaging his prayers is more. Thus far
you moan safely: In all this there is no danger.

Thirdly, The afflicted person may (ordinarily) accuse, judge and condemn
himself, for being the cause and procurer of his own troubles. He may lawfully
be discontented, and vexed with himself for his own folly, when the iniquity of
his heels compasses him about. And truly it is but seldom that any great
affliction befalls a gracious person, but he saw the need of such a rod before
he felt it.

Has God smitten thy child or friend? and did thou not foresee some sharp
trial coming? Did not thy fond secure carnal temper need such a scourge, to
awaken, quicken and purge thee? Or if you did not foresee it, its now your duty
to search and examine your selves. So the Church in their afflictions resolved,
Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways. When God is smiting we should be
searching. Surely our iniquities will enquire after us, if we will not enquire
after them. Yea, in the day of affliction, a gracious soul is inquisitive about
nothing more than the procuring and provoking cause of his troubles, Job 10. 2.
Show me wherefore thou contendest with me? q. d. Lord what special corruption
is it that this rod is sent to rebuke? What sinful neglect does it come to
humble me for? O discover it now to me, and recover me now from it.

And having found the root and cause of their troubles, ingenuous souls will
shame themselves for it, and give glory to God by an humble submission, and
vindication of the equity of his proceedings, Job. 7. 20. I have sinned, what
shall I do unto thee, thou preserver of men? He thinks it no shame freely to
discover unto God, and deeply to abase himself before him, for his folly.

I remember a choice note that Nec enim pudet sanctos viros postquam renovata
corda fuerint per resipiscentiam, lapsus sui and dedecoris ad dei gloriam
meminisse. Nihil nobis decedit quod cedit in illius honorem. Brightman in Cant.
cap. 1. ver. 4. page 11.
Mr. Brightman has in his commentary upon the Canticles.

Holy men (says he) after their hearts are renewed by repentance, are not
ashamed to remember and confess their slips and shameful falls, to the glory of
God: for they account that glory which such confessions take from them is not
lost, whilst it goes to the glory of God. If his glory may rise out of our
shame, how willing should we be to take such shame to us? Holy David was not
ashamed to acknowledge, Psalm. 38. 5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because
of my foolishness. He is the wisest man that thus befooles himself before God.

Its true God may afflict from prerogative, or for trial; but we may always see
cause enough in our selves, and its safest to charge it upon our own folly.

Lastly, The afflicted Christian may in an humble submissive manner, plead with
God and be earnest for the removal of the afflicton.

When affliction presses us above strength, when it disables us for duty, or
when it gives advantage to temptation, then we may say with David, Remove thy
stroke from me, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand, Psalm. 39. 10. Even our
Lord Jesus Christ, in the day of his troubles, poured out his soul with strong
cries and many tears, saying, Father if thou be willing, let this cup pass from
me, Luke 22. 42. Oppressed nature desires ease; and even our renewed nature
desires freedom from those clogs and temptations which hinder us in duty, or
expose us to snares.

Thus far we may safely go.

But Sorrow then becomes sinful and excessive when,

First, It causes us to slight and despise all our other mercies and
enjoyments, as small things in comparison of what we have lost.

It often falls out that the setting of one comfort clouds and benights all the
rest Our tears for our lost enjoyment, so blinds our eyes that we cannot see
the many other mercies which yet remain: We take so much notice of what is
gone, that we take little or no notice of what is left: But this is very
sinful; for it involves in it both ignorance, ingratitude, and great
provocation.

Its a sin springing from ignorance. Did we know the desert of our sin, we
would rather wonder to see one mercy left, than that twenty are cut off. They
that know they have forfeited every mercy, should be thankful that they enjoy
any, and patient when they loose many of their comforts.

Did we know God, even that Sovereign Lord at whose dispose our comforts come
and go, who can the next moment blast all that remain, and turn you into hell,
afterward you would prize the mercies he yet indulges to you at an higher
value. Did you understand the fickle vanishing nature of the Creature, what a
flower, what a bubble it is, Oh how thankful would you be to find so many yet
left in your possession!

Did you know the case of thousands as good, yea better than you, whose whole
harvest of comfort in this world, is but an handful to the gleanings of the
comforts you still enjoy, who in all their lives never were owners of such
comfortable enjoyments as you now overlook, surely you would not act as you do.

Beside, What vile ingratitude is in this? What! are all your remaining mercies
worth nothing? You have buried a child, a friend: Well, but still, you have a
husband, a wife, other children; or if not, you have comfortable accommodations
for your selves, with health to enjoy them; or if not, yet you have the
Ordinances of God, it may be an interest in Christ, and in the Covenant, pardon
of sin, and hopes of glory. What! and yet sink at this rate, as if all your
mercies, comforts, and hopes, even in both worlds, were buried in one grave.
Must Ichabod be written upon your best mercies, because mortality is written
upon one? Fie, fie, What shameful ingratitude is here?

And really friend, Such a carriage as this under the rod, is no small
provocation to the Lord to go on in Judgment, and make a full end of all that
remains, so that affliction shall not rise up the second time.

What if God taking notice how little thou regardest the many undeserved
favors thou yet possessest, should say, Well, if thou think them not worth
the owning, neither do I think them worth the continuing. Go death, there is a
husband, a wife, other children yet left, smite them all. Go sickness and
remove the health of his body yet left; go losses and impoverish his estate yet
left; go reproach and blast his reputation which is yet sweet. What would you
think of this? And yet if you be out of Christ, you are in danger of a far
sadder stroke than either or all yet mentioned. What if God should say, Prizest
thou not my mercy? Have thou no value for my goodness, and forbearance toward
thee? Is it nothing that I have spared thee thus long in thy sins and
rebellions? Well then, I will stretch out my hand upon thy life, cut off that
thread which has kept thee so many years from dropping into hell.

O think then what you have done, by provoking the Lord through your vile
ingratitude! Its a dangerous thing to provoke God, when he is already in a way
of Judgment. And if you be his own people, and so out of the danger of this
last and worst stroke: yet know, you have better mercies to lose, than any you
have yet lost. Should God cloud your soul with doubts, let loose Satan to
buffet you, remove joy and peace from your inner man, How soon would you be
convinced, that the funeral of your dearest friend is but a trifle to this?

Well then, Whatever God takes, be still thankful for what he leaves. It was
the great sin of Israel in the wilderness, that though God had delivered them
from their cruel servitude in Egypt, miraculously fed them in the desert, and
was leading them on to a Land flowing with milk and honey; yet as soon as any
want did but begin to pinch them, presently all these mercies were forgotten,
and slighted, Numb. 14. 12. Would to God (say they) we had died in Egypt. And
Numb. 11. 6. There is nothing at all beside this Mannah. Beware of this O ye
mourning and afflicted ones. You see both the sin that is in it, and the danger
that attends it?

Secondly, And no less sinful are our Sorrows, When they so wholly ingulph our
hearts, that we either mind not at all, or are little or nothing sensible of
the public evils and calamities which lie upon the Church and people of God.

Some Christians have such public spirits that the Churches troubles swallow
up their personal troubles. Melanchton seemed to take little notice of the
death of his child, which he dearly loved, being almost overwhelmed with the
miseries lying on the Church.

And it was a good evidence of the graciousness and publickness of Elies spirit
who sitting in the gate anxiously waiting for tidings Cumque ille nominasset
Arcam dei, q- d. nondum integram, sed inchoatam audiens narrationem, mente
praevolans and exitum presagiens ruebat. Meneoz. in Loc.
from the Army, when the tidings came that Israel fled before the Philistines,
that his two Sons Hophni and Phineas were dead, and that the Ark of God was
taken; just at the mention of that word, The Ark of God, before he heard out
the whole narration, his mind quickly presaging the issue, he sank down and
died, 1 Samuel 4. 19, 20. O that was the sinking, the killing word; had the
messenger stopped at the death of his two Sons, like enough he had supported that
burden, but the loss of the Ark was more to him than sons or daughters.

But how few such public spirits appear even among Professors in this selfish
generation? May we not with the Apostle complain, Phil. 2. 21. All seek their
own, and not the things that are of Christ. Few men have any great cares or
designs lying beyond the bounds of their own private interests. And what we say
of cares, is as true of sorrows: if a child dye, we are ready to dye too, but
public calamities pierce us not.

How few suffer either their domestic comforts to be swallowed up in the
Churches troubles, or their domestic troubles to be swallowed up by the
Churches mercies! Now when it is thus with us, when we little regard what
mercies or miseries lie upon others, but are wholly intent upon our own
afflictions, this is a sinful sorrow, and ought to be sorrowed for.

Thirdly, Our Sorrows then become sinful and exorbitant, When they divert us
from, or distract us in our dutys, so that our intercourse with heaven is stopped
and interrupted by them.

How long can we sit alone musing upon a dead Creature? Here our thoughts
easily flow, but how hard to fix them upon the living God! When our hearts
should be in heaven with our Christ, they are in the grave with our dead. May
not many afflicted souls justly complain, that their troubles have takenaway
their Christ from them, (I mean as to sweet sensible communion) and laid the
dead child in his room?

Poor Creature, cease to weep any longer for thy dead Relation, and weep rather
for thy dead heart. Is this thy compliance with Gods design in afflicting thee?
What, to grow a greater stranger to him than before! Or is this the way to thy
cure and comfort in affliction, to restrain prayer, and turn thy back upon God?

Or if thou dare not wholly neglect thy duty, yet thy affliction spoils the
success and comfort of it; thy heart is wandering, dead, distracted in prayer
and meditation, so that thou have no relief or comfort from it.

Rouse up thy self Christian and consider, This is not right. Surely the rod
works not kindly now. What did thy love to God expire, when thy friend expired?
Is thy heart as cold in duty, as his body is in the grave? Has natural death
seized him, and spiritual deadness seized thee? Sure then thou have more reason
to lament thy dead heart, than thy dead friend. Divert the stream of thy
troubles speedily, and labor to recover thy self out of this temper quickly;
least sad experience shortly tell thee, that what thou now mournest for, is but
a trifle to that that thou shall mourn for hereafter. To loose the heavenly
warmth and spiritual liveliness of thy affections, is undoubtedly a far more
considerable loss, than to loose the wife of thy bosom, or the sweetest child
that ever a tender parent laid in the grave.

Reader, If this be thy case, Thou have reason to challenge the first place
among the mourners. Its better for thee to bury ten sons, than to remit one
degree of love or delight in God. The end of God in smiting, was to win thy
heart nearer to him, by removing that which estranged it; How then do thou
cross the very design of God in this dispensation? Must God then lose his
delight in thy fellowship, because thou have lost thine in the creature? Surely
when thy troubles thus accompany thee to thy closet, they are sinful and
extravagant troubles.

Fourthly, Then you may also conclude your sorrows to be excessive and sinful,
When they so overload and oppress your bodies, as to endanger your lives, or
render them useless and unfit for service.

Worldly Sorrow works death, 2 Cor. 7. 10. that is, Sorrow after the manner of
worldly men, sorrow in a mere carnal natural Tristitia mundi est tristitia
secundum, mundum, quae ex amore mundi nascitur. Estius in Loc.
way, which is not relieved by any spiritual reasonings and considerations:
This falls so heavysometimes upon the body, that it sinks under the weight, and
is cast into such diseases as are never more wrought off, or healed in this
world. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop, says Solomon, Prove. 12.
25. The stoutest body must stoop under heart pressures.

It is with the mind of man (says one) as with the stone Tyrhenus: as long as
its whole it swimeth, but once broken it sinks presently. Grief is a moth which
getting into the mind, will in short time, make the body, be it never so strong
and well wrought a piece, like an old seary garment.

Philosophers and Physicians generally reckon sorrow among the chief causes of
shortning life. Christ was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, and
this some think was the reason, that he appeared as a man of fifty, when he was
little more than thirty years old, Joh. 8. 57. But his sorrows were of another
kind. Haec tibi scribo qui tam immodice flevi ut (quod minime velim) inter
exempla sim eorum quos dolor vicit: hodie tamen factum meum damno. Seneca Ep.
63. p. mihi 637.


Many a man's Soul is to his Body, as a sharp knife to a thin sheath, which
easily cuts it through; and what do we by poreing and pondering upon our
troubles, but whet the knife that it may cut the deeper and quicker? Of all the
Creatures that ever God made (Devils only excepted) man is the most able and
apt to be his own tormentor.

How unmercifully do we load them in times of affliction? How do we not only
waste their strength by sorrow, but deny relief and necessary refreshment? They
must carry the load, but be allowed no refreshment: If they can eat the bread
of affliction, and drink tears, they may feed at full; but no pleasant bread,
no quiet sleep is permitted them. Surely you would not burden a beast, as you
do your own bodies; you would pity and relieve a bruit beast groaning and
sinking under an heavy burden, but you will noc pity not relieve your own
bodies.

Some men's souls have given such deep wounds to their bodies, that they are
never like to enjoy many easy or comfortable days more whilst they dwell in
them.

Now this is very sinful, and displeasing to God; for if he have such a tender
care for our bodies, that he would not have us swallowed up, of over much
grief, no though it be for sin, 2 Cor. 2. 7. but even to that sorrow sets
bounds. How much less with outward sorrow for temporal losses? May not your
stock of natural strength be employed to better purposes think you than these?
Time may come, that you may earnestly wish you had that health and strength
again to spend for God, which you now so lavishly waste, and prodigally cast
away upon your troubles to no purpose, or advantage.

It was therefore an high point of wisdom in David, and Recorded no doubt for
our immitation, who when the child was dead, ceased to mourn, but arose, washed
himself, and eat bread, 2 Samuel 12. 20.

Fifthly, When affliction sowres the Spirit with discontent, and makes it
inwardly grudge against the hand of God, then our trouble is full of sin, and
we ought to be humbled for it before the Lord.

Whatever God does with us or ours, still we should maintain good thoughts of
him. A gracious heart cleaves nearer and nearer to God in affliction, and can
justify God in his severest strokes, acknowledging them to be all just and
holy. Psalm. 119. 75, I know also that thy Judgments are right, and that thou
in faithfulness have afflicted me. And hereby the soul may comfortably evidence
to it self its own uprightness, and sincere love to God. Yea, it has been of
singular use to some souls, to take right measures of their love to God in such
trials; to have lovely and well pleased thoughts of God even when he smites us
in our nearest and dearest comforts; argues plainly that we love him for
himself, and not for his gifts only: And that his interest in the heart is
deeper, than any creature interest is. And such is the comfort that has
resulted to some from such discoveries of their own hearts by close smarting
afflictions; that they would not part with it, to have their comforts, whose
removal occasioned them, given back in lieu of it.

But to swell with secret discontent, and have hard thoughts of God, as if he
had done us wrong, or dealt more severely with us than any. O this is a vile
temper, cursed fruit springing from an evil root; a very carnal, ignorant,
proud heart; or at least from a very distempered if renewed heart. So it was
with Jonah when God smote his Gourd, Tea, (says he) I do well to be angry even
unto death, Jonah 4. 9. Poor man, he was highly distempered at this time and
out of frame; this was not his true temper or ordinary frame, but a surprise;
the effect of a paroxisme of temptation, in which his passions had been
overheated.

Few dare to vent it in such language, But how many have their hearts
imbittered by discontent, and secret risings against the Lord? which if ever
the Lord open their eyes to see, will cost them more trouble than ever that of
affliction did, which gave the occasion of it.

I deny not, but the best heart may be tempted to think and speak frowardly
concerning these works of the Lord, that envious adversary the Devil, will blow
the coals, and labor to blow up our spirits at such time into high
discontents. The temptation was strong even upon David himself, to take up hard
thoughts of God, and to conclude, Uerily I have cleansed my heart in vain. q.
d. How little privilege from the worst of evils has a man by his godliness?
but he soon suppressed such motions. If I should say thus, I should offend
against the generation of thy children: Meaning, that he should condemn the
whole race of godly men through the whole world; for who is there among them
all, but is, or has, or may be afflicted as severely as my self?

Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more, Job 34. 31. Whatever God does with you, speak well, and think
well of him, and his works.

Sixthly, Our sorrows exceed due bounds, when we continually excite and provoke
them by willing irritations.

Grief like a Lion loves to play with us before it destroy us. And strange it
is that we should find some kind of pleasure in rouzing our sorrows. Its In est
quidam dulce tristitiae, cum occurant sermones eorum jucundi, conversatio
hilaris officiosa pietas: tunc occuli velut in gaudio relaxantur. Sen. Ep. 806.
Seneca's observation, and experimentally true, that even sorrow it self has a
certain kind of delight attending it.

The Jews that were with Mary in the house to comfort her, When they saw that
she went out hastily, followed her, saying, she goes to the grave to weep
there, Joh. 11. 32. As they do (says Calvin) that seek to provoke their Ex
eorum more qui luctus sui irritamenta querunt. Calv.
troubles by going to the grave, or often looking upon the dead body.

Thus we delight to look upon the relics of our deceased friends, and often to
mention their actions and sayings, not so much for any matter of holy and
weighty instruction or imitation; for that would warrant and commend the
action; but rather to rub the wound, and fetch fresh blood from it, by piercing
our selves with some little trivial, yet wounding circumstances. I have known
many that will sit and talk of the features, actions and sayings, of their
children, for hours together, and weep at the rehearsal of them, and that for
many months after they are gone: So keeping the wound continually open, and
excruciating their own hearts without any benefit at all by them. A lock of
hair or some such trifle must be kept for this purpose to renew their sorrow
daily by looking on it. On this account Jacob would not have his Son called
Benoni, least it should renew his sorrow, but Benjamin.

I am far from commending a brutish oblivion of our dear Relations, and condemn
it as much as I do this childish and unprofitable remembrance. Oh friends we
have other things to do under the rod than these. Were it not better to be
searching our hearts and houses, when Gods rod is upon us, and studying how to
answer the end of it, by mortifying those corruptions which provoke it? Surely
the rod works not kindly till it come to this.

Seventhly, Lastly. Our sorrows may then be pronounced sinful, when they deafen
our ears to all the wholesome and seasonable words of counsel and comfort
offered us for our relief and support.

Jer. 31. 15. A voice was heard in Ramah, Lamentation and bitter weeping;
Rachel weeping for her children, would not be comforted for her children,
because they were not. She will admit no comfort, her disease is curable by no
other means but the restoration of her children; give her them again and she
will be quiet, else you speak into the air, she regards not what ever you say.

Thus Israel in the cruel bondage in Egypt, Moses brings them the glad tidings
of deliverance, But they hearkened not to him, because of the anguish of Spirit,
and their cruel bondage, Exodus 6. 9.

Thus obstinately fixed are many in their trouble, that no words of advice or
comfort find any place with them: yea, I have known some exceeding quick and
ingenious, even above the rate of their common parts and abilities in inventing
shifts, and framing objections to turn off comfort from themselves; as if they
had been hired to plead against their own interest: and if they be driven from
those pleas, yet they are settled in their troubles too fast to be moved: say
what you will they mind it not; or at most it abides not upon them. Let proper
seasonable advice or comfort be tendered they refuse it, your council is good,
but they have no heart to it now. Thus Psalm. 77. 10. My foul (says he) refused
to be comforted.

To want comfort in time of affliction, is an aggravation of our affliction;
but to refuse it, when offered us, wants not sin. Time may come, when we would
be glad to receive comfort, or hear a word of support, and shall be denied it.

O, it is a mercy to the afflicted to have a Barnabas with him, an interpreter,
one among a thousand; and it will be the great sin, and folly of the afflicted
to spill those excellent cordials prepared and offered to them, like water upon
the ground, out of a froward, or dead spirit, under trouble. Say not with them,
Lam. 3. 18, 19. My hope is perished from the Lord, remembering mine affliction
and my misery, the wormwood and the Gall. Its a thousand pitties the wormwood
and gall of affliction should so disgust a Christian, as that he should not at
any time be able to relish the sweetness that is in Christ, and in the
promises. And thus I have dispatched the first part of my design, in showing you
wherein the sin of mourners does not lie, and in what it does.

Secondly, Having cleared this, and shown you wherein the sin and danger lies;
my way is prepared to the second thing proposed: namely, to dissuade Mourners
from these sinful excesses of sorrows, and keep the golden bridle of moderation
upon their passions in times of affliction. And O that my words may be as
successful upon those pensive souls that shall read them, as Abigalls were to
David, 1 Samuel 25. 32. who when he perceived how proper and seasonable they
were, said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet
me, and blessed be thy advice.

I am sensible how hard a task it is I here undertake; to charm down, and allay
mutinous, raging, and tumultuous passions; to give check to the torrent of
passion is ordinarily but to provoke it, and make it rage and swell the more.

The work is the Lords, and wholly depends upon his power and blessing. He that
says to the Sea, when the waves thereof roar, be still; can also quiet and
compose the stormy and tumultuous Sea that rages in the breasts of the
afflicted, and casts up nothing but the froth of vain and useless complaints of
our misery, or the dirt of sinful and wicked complaints of the dealings of the
Lord with us.

The rod of affliction goes round and visits all sorts of persons without
difference: It is upon the Tabernacles of the just and of the unjust, the
righteous and the wicked, both are mourning under the rod.

The godly are not so to be minded, as that the other be wholly neglected, they
have as strong and tender, though not as regular affections to their Relations,
and must not be wholly suffered to sink under their unrelieved burdens.

Here therefore I must have respect to two sorts of persons, whom I find in
tears upon the same account; I mean the loss of their dear Relations, the
Regenerate, and the unregenerate, I am a debtor to both, and shall endeavor
their support and assistance; for even the unregenerate call for our help and
pity, and must not be neglected Nil miserius misero non miser ante seipsum.
and wholly slighted in their afflictions. We must pity them, that cannot pity
themselves. The Law of God commands us to help a beast, if fallen under its
burden; How much more a man sinking under a load of sorrow?

I confess uses of comfort to the unregenerate are not (ordinarily) in use
among us; and it may seem strange whence any thing of support should be drawn
for them, that have no special interest in Christ, or the promises.

I confess also, I find my self under great disadvantages for this work, I
cannot offer them those reviving cordials that are contained in Christ, and the
covenant for Gods afflicted people; but yet such is the goodness of God even to
his enemies, that they are not left wholly without supports, or means to allay
their Sorrow.

If this therefore be thy case, who read these lines; afflicted and
unsanctified, mourning bitterly for thy dead friends, and more cause to mourn
for thy dead soul; Christless, and graceless, as well as childless or
friendless: no comfort in hand, nor yet in hope, full of trouble, and no vent
by prayer or faith to ease thy heart.

Poor creature, thy case is sad, but yet do not wholly sink, and suffer thy
self to be swallowed up of grief, thou have laid thy dear one in the grave, yet
throw not thy self headlong into the grave after him; that will not be the way
to remedy thy misery: but sit down a while and ponder these three things:

First, That of all persons in the World, thou have most reason to be tender
over thy life and health, and careful to preserve it; for if thy troubles
destroy thee, thou art eternally lost, undone for ever. Worldly sorrow (says
the Apostle) works death. And if it works thy death, it works thy damnation
also; for Hell follows that pale horse, Revel. 6. 8. If a believer dies,
there is no danger of Hell to him, the second death has no power over him; but
woe to thee if it overtake thee in thy sin; beware therefore what thou do
against thy health and life. Don't put the candle of sorrow too near that
thread by which thou hangest over the mouth of Hell.

O its far better to be childless, or friendless on earth; than hopeless, and
remediless in hell.

Secondly, Own and admire the bounty and goodness of God manifested to thee in
this affliction; that when death came into thy family to smite and carry off
one, it had not fallen to thy lot to be the person; thy Husband, Wife, or Child
is taken, and thou art left: Had thy name been in the Commission, thou had
been now past hope.

O the sparing mercy of God! the wonderful long suffering of God toward thee!
Possibly that poor creature that is gone, never provoked God as thou have done;
thy poor child, never abused mercies, neglected calls, treasured up the
thousandth part of that guilt thou have done: So that thou might well
immagine it should rather have cut thee down, that had so provoked God, than
thy poor little one.

But oh the admirable patience of God! Oh the riches of long suffering! Thou
art only warned, not smitten by it: Is there nothing in this worth thy thankful
acknowledgement? Is it not better to be in black for another on earth, than in
the blackness of darkness for ever? Is it not easier to go to the grave with
thy dead friend, and weep there; than to go to hell among the damned where
there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth?

Thirdly, This affliction for which thou mournest, may be the greatest mercy to
thee that ever yet befell thee in this world. God has now made thy heart soft
by trouble, showed thee the vanity of this World; and what a poor trifle it is
which thou made thy happiness: There is now a dark cloud spread over all thy
worldly comforts. Now, O now, if the Lord would but strike in with this
affliction, and by it open thine eyes to see thy deplorable state, and take off
thy heart for ever from the vain world which thou now see has nothing in it;
and cause thee to choose Christ the only abiding good for thy portion. If now
thy affliction may but bring thy sin to remembrance, and thy dead friend may
but bring thee to a sense of thy dead soul, which is as cold to God and
spiritual things, as his body is to thee; and more loathsome in his eyes than
that corpse is, or shortly will be to the eyes of men: Then this day is
certainly a day of the greatest mercy that ever yet thou saw. O happy death,
that shall prove life to thy soul.

Why, this is sometimes the way of the Lord with men, Job 36. 8, 9. If they be
bound in fetters, and helden in cords of affliction, then he shows them their
work and their transgression, that they have exceeded: he opens also their
ear to discipline, and commands them that they return from iniquity.

O Consider poor pensive creature, that which stole away thy heart from God is
now gone: That which eat up thy time and thoughts, that there was no room for
God, soul, or eternity in them, is gone: All the vain expectations thou
raisedst up to thy self, from that poor creature which now lies in the dust,
are in one day perished. O what an advantage have thou now for heaven, beyond
what ever thou yet had! If God will but bless this rod, thou will have cause
to keep many a thanksgiving day for this day.

I pray let these three things be pondred by you: I can bestow no more comforts
upon you, your condition bars the best comforts from you; they belong to the
people of God, and you have yet nothing to do with them.

I shall therefore turn from you to them, and present some choicer comforts to
them to whom they properly belong, which may be of great use to you in reading;
if it be but to convince you of the blessed privilege and state of the people
of God in the greatest plunges of troubles in this world; and what advantages
their interest in Christ gives them for peace and settlement beyond that state
you are in.

And here I do with much more freedom and hope of success apply my se^lf to the
work of councelling and comforting the afflicted. You are the fearers of the
Lord, and tremble at his word; the least sin is more formidable to you than the
greatest affliction. Doubtless you would rather choose to bury all your children
than provoke and grieve your heavenly Father. Your Relations are dear, but
Christ is dearer to you by far.

Well then let me persuade you to retire a while into your closets, redeem a
little time from your unprofitable sorrows, ease and empty your hearts before
the Lord, and beg his blessing upon the following quieting and heart composing
considerations that follow, some of which are more general and common, some
more particular and special, but all of them such, as through the blessing of
God may be very useful at this time to your souls.

1. Consid. Consider in this day of sorrow, who is the framer and author of
this rod by which you now smart, Is it not the Lord? and if the Lord have done
it, it becomes you meekly to submit. Psalm. 46. 10. Be still and know that I am
God.

Man and man stand upon even ground, if your fellow creature do any thing that
displeases you, you may not only enquire Who did it, but Why he did it? You may
demand his grounds and reasons for what he has done; but you may not do so
here: It is expected that this one thing, The Lord has done it, should without
any farther disputes or contests silence and quiet you, what ever it be that he
has done, Job 33. 13. Why do thou strive against him? for he gives not an
account of any of his matters. The supreme being must needs be an unaccountable
and uncontrollable being.

Its a shame for a child, to strive with his Father; a shame for a servant to
contend with his Master: but for a creature to quarrel and strive with the God
that made him, O how shameful is it? Surely it is highly reasonable that you be
subject to that will whence you proceeded, and that he who formed you and
yours, should dispose of both as seems him good. It is said, 2 Samuel 3. 36.
That whatsoever the King did, pleased all the people: and shall any thing the
Lord does displease you? He can do no wrong. If we pluck a Rose in the bud as
we walk in our Gardens, Who shall blame us for it, it is our own, and we may
crop it off when we please; Is not this the case? Thy sweet bud which was cropped
before it was fully blown, was cropped off by him that owned it, yea by him that
formed it. If his dominion be absolute, sure his disposal should be acceptable.

It was so to good Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good. And it was so to David, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth; because thou did it. O let it be for ever remembered, That he whose
name alone is Jehovah, is the most high over all the earth, Psalm. 83. 18.

The glorious sovereignty of God is illustriously displayed in two things, his
decrees, and his providence. With respect to the first he says, Romans 9. 15. I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. Here is no ground of disputing with
him; for so its said, ver. 20. Who art thou O man, that replyest against God?
Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
Has not the potter power over the clay?

And as to his Providence, wherein his Sovereignty is also manifested. Its
said, Zech. 2. 13. Be silent O all flesh before the Lord, for he is raised up
out of his habitation. Its spoken of his providential working in the changes of
Kingdoms, and desolations that attend them.

Now seeing the case stands thus, that Lord has done it, it is his pleasure to
have it so; and if it had not been his will, it could never have been as it is:
He that gave thee, (rather lent thee thy Relation) has taken him. O how quiet
should this consideration leave thee! If your Landlord who has many years
suffered you to dwell in his house, do at last warn you out of it, though he
tell you not why; you will not contend with him, or say he has done you wrong:
much less if he tell you, it will be more for his profit and accommodation to
take it into his own hand, than let it to you any longer.

Doubtless reason will tell you, you ought quietly to pack up and quit it. Its
your great Landlord from whom you hold (at pleasure) your own, and your
Relations lives, that has now warned you out from one of them, it being more
for his glory (it may be) to take it in hand by death; And must you dispute the
case with him?

Come Christian, this no way becomes thee, but rather, The Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Look off from a dead
creature, lift up thine eyes to the Sovereign, wise, and holy pleasure that
ordered this affliction: Consider who he is, and what thou art; yea, pursue
this consideration till thou can say, I am filled with the will of God.

2. Consid. Ponder well the quality of the comfort you are deprived of, and
remember, that when you had it, it stood but in the rank and order of common
and inferior comforts.

Children and all other Relations are but common blessings, which God
indifferently bestows upon his friends and enemies, and by the having or losing
of them, no man knows either love or hatred. It is said of the wicked, Psalm.
77. 14. That they are full of children; yea, and of children that do survive
them too; for, They leave their substance to their babes. Full of sin, yet full
of children, and these children live to inherit their parents sins and estates
together.

It is the mistaking of the quality and nature of our enjoyments, that so
plunges us into trouble when we lose them. We think there is so necessary a
connection betwixt these creatures and our happiness, that we are utterly undone
when they fail us.

But this is our mistake, there is no such necessary connection or dependence,
we may be happy without these things. It is not father, mother, wife, or child,
in which our chief good and felicity lies, we have higher, better, and more
enduring things than these, all these may perish, and yet our soul secure and
safe, yea and our comfort in the way, as well as end; may be safe enough though
these be gone. God has better things to comfort his people with than these,
and worse rods to afflict you with than the removal of these: had God let your
children live and flourish, and given you ease and rest in your Tabernacle; but
in the mean time inflicted spiritual Judgments upon your souls, How much more
sad had your case been?

But as long as your best mercies are all safe, the things that have salvation
in them remain, and only the things that have vanity in them are removed: you
are not prejudiced, or much hindered as to the attainment of your last end by
the loss of these things.

Alas, it was not Christ's intent to purchase for you a sensual content in the
enjoyment of these earthly comforts, but to redeem you from all iniquity; purge
your corruptions, sanctify your natures, wean your hearts from this vain
world; and so to dispose and order your present condition, that finding no rest
and content here, you might the more ardently pant and sigh after the rest
which remains for the people of God. And are you not in as probable a way to
attain this end now, as you were before? Do you think you are not as likely by
these methods of providence to be weaned from the world, as by more pleasant
and prosperous ones? Every wise man reckons that station and condition to be
best for him, which most promotes and secures his last end and great design.

Well then, reckon you are as well without these things as with them; yea, and
better too, if they were but clogs and snares upon your affections, you have
really lost nothing, if the things wherein your eternal happiness consists be
yet safe. Many of Gods dearest children have been denied such comforts as
these, and many have been deprived of them, and yet never the farther from
Christ and heaven for that.

3. Consid. Always remember that how soon and unexpected soever your parting
with your Relations was, yet your Lease was expired before you lost them, and
you enjoyed them every moment of the time that God intended them for you.

Before this Relation whose loss you lament, was born, the time of your
enjoyment and separation was unalterably fixed and limited in heaven, by the
God of the spirits of all flesh; and although it was a secret to you, whilst
your friend was with you: yet now it is a plain and evident thing, that this
was the time of separation before appointed; and that the life of your friend
could by no means be protracted or abreviated, but must keep you company just
so far, and then part with you.

This position wants not full and clear Scripture authority for its foundation,
how pregnant and full is that Text, Job 24. 5, 6. Seeing his days are
determined, the number of his months are with thee: Thou have appointed him
his bounds which he cannot pass.

The time of our life as well as the place of our habitation was prefixed
before we were born.

It will greatly conduce to your settlement and peace to be well established in
this truth: That the appointed time was fully come, when you and your dear
Relation parted; for it will prevent and save a great deal of trouble which
comes from our after Reflections.

O if this had been done, or that omitted; had it not been for such
miscarriages and over-sights; my dear husband, wife, or child, had been alive
at this day? No, no, the Lords time was fully come, and all things concurred
and fell in together to bring about the pleasure of his will; let that satisfy
you; had the ablest physicians in the world been there, or had they that were
there, prescribed another course, as it is now, so it would have been, when
they had done all. Only it must be precaution'd, that the decree of God no way
excuses any voluntary sinful neglects or miscarriages. God overrules these
things to serve his own ends, but no way approves them: but it greatly relieves
against all our involuntary and unavoydable oversights and mistakes about the
use of means, or the timing of them; for it could not be otherwise than now it
is.

Object. But many things are alleged against this position, and that with much
seeming countenance from such Scriptures as these, Psalm. 54. 25. Blood thirsty
men shall not live out half their days. Eccles. 7. 18. Why should thou dye
before thy time. Psalm. 102. 24. O my God, take me not away in the midst of my
days. Isa. 38. 10. I am deprived of the residue of my years. And Prove. 10. 27.
The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be
shortened. It is demanded what tolerable sense we can give these Scriptures
whilst we assert an unalterable fixation of the term of death.

Sol. The sense of all these Scriptures will be cleared up to full satisfaction
by distinguishing death and the Terms of it.

First we must distinguish death into, Natural and Violent

The wicked and blood thirsty man shall not live out half his days: (i. e.)
half so long as he might live according to the course of nature, or the vigor
and soundness of his natural constitution; for his wickedness either drowns
nature in an excess of riot and luxury, or exposes him to the hand of justice,
which cuts him off for his wickedness before he has accomplished half his
days.

Again we must distinguish of the Term or limit set for death, which is either,
General or Special.

The general limit is now seventy or or eighty years, Psalm. 90. 10. The days
of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of strength they be
fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow. To this short limit
the life of man is generally reduced since the flood; and though there be some
few exceptions, yet the general rule is not thereby destroyed.

The special limit is that proportion of time which God by his own counsel and
will has allotted to every individual person; and it is only known to us by the
event: This we affirm to be a fixed and unmovable term, with it all things
shall fall in, and subserve the will of God in our dissolution at that time.
But because the general limit is known, and this special limit is a secret hid
in Gods own breast; therefore man reckons by the former account, and may be said
when he dies at thirty or forty years old to be cut off in the midst of his
days; for it is so, reckoning by the general account: though he be not cut off
till the end of his days, reckoning by his special limit.

Thus he that is wicked dies before his time; (i. e.) the time he might attain
to in an ordinary way: but not before the time God had appointed. And so in all
the other objected Scripture.

It is not proper at all in a Subject of this nature to digress into a
controversy. Alas, the poor Mourner, overwhelmed with grief has no pleasure
in that; it is not proper for him at this time; and therefore I shall for
present wave the controversy, and wind up this consideration with an humble
and serious motion to the afflicted; that they will wisely consider the matter,
the Lords time was come. Your Relations lived with you every moment that God
intended them for you, before you had them.

O Parents! mind this I beseech you; the time of your child's continuance in the
womb, was fixed to a minute by the Lord; and when the parturient fullness of
that time was come, Were you not willing it should be delivered thence into the
world? The tender Mother would not have it abide one minute longer in the womb
how well soever she loved it: And is there not the same reason we should be
willing when Gods appointed time is come, to have it delivered by death out of
this state, which in respect of the life of Heaven is but as the life of a
child in the womb, to its life in the open world.

And let none say that the death of children is a premature death. God has
ways to ripen them for Heaven, whom he intends to gather thither betimes,
which we know not: In respect of fitness they dye in a full age, though they be
cut off in the bud of their time.

He that appointed the seasons of the year, appointed the seasons of our
comfort in Relations; and as those seasons cannot be altered, no more can
these: All the course of providence is guided by an unalterable decree; what
falls out casually to our apprehension, yet falls out necessarily in respect of
Gods appointment.

O therefore be quieted in it, this must needs be as it is.

4. Consid. Has God smitten your darling, and taken away the delight of your
eyes with his stroke? Bear this stroke with patience and quiet submission; for
how know you but your trouble might have been greater from the life, than it is
now from the death of your children?

Sad experience made a holy man once to say, Its better weep for ten dead
children, than for one living child: a living child may prove a continual
dropping, yea, a continual dying to the parents heart. What a sad word was that
of David to Abishai, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Behold, says he, my Son which came out of
my bowels seeks my life. I remember Seneca in his consolatory Epistle to his
friend Marullus, brings in his friend thus aggravating the death of his child:

O says Marullus, Had my child lived with me, to how great modesty, gravity,
and prodence, Senecas Epist. p. 84.
might my discipline have formed and molded him? But, says Seneca, (which is
more to be feared) he might have been as others mostly are; for look (says he)
what children come even out of the worthiest families; such who exercise both
their own and others lusts; in all whose life there is not a day without the
mark of some notorious wickedness upon it.

I know your tender love to your children will scarce admit such jealousies of
them; they are for present sweet, lovely, innocent companions; and you doubt
not but by your care of their education, and prayer for them, they might have
been the joy of your hearts.

Why, doubtless Esan, when he was little and in his tender age, promised as
much comfort to his parents as Jacob did; and I question not but Isaac and
Rebecca (a gracious pair) spent as many prayers, and bestowed as many holy
councels upon him as they did upon his brother: But when the child grew up to
riper years, then he became a sharp affliction to his Parents; for its said in
Genesis 26. 34. That when Esau was forty years old, he took to wife Judith the
daughter of Berith the Hittite, which was a grief of mind to Isaac and Rebecca.
The word in the original, comes from a root that signifies (...) erant
amaritudo animi.
to imbitter: This child imbittered the minds of his parents by his rebellion
against them, and despising their counsels.

And I cannot doubt but Abraham disciplined his family as strictly as any of
you, never man received an higher encomium from God upon that account, Genesis 18.
19. I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him;
and they shall keep the way of the Lord. Nor can I think but he bestowed as
many and as frequent prayers for his children; and particularly for his
Ishmael, as any of you: We find one, and that a very pathetical one recorded,
Genesis 17. 18. O that Ishmael might live before thee: and yet you know how he
proved, a son that yielded him no more comfort, than Esau did to Jacob and
Rebeccah.

O how much more common is it for parents to see the vices and evils of their
children, than their virtues and graces? And where one parent lives to rejoice
in beholding the grace of God shining forth in the life of his child; there are
twenty, it may be an hundred, that live to behold, to their vexation and grief,
the workings of corruption in them.

It is a note of Plutarch, in his Morals, Niocles (says Plut. Moral. p. 222.
he) lived not to see the noble Victory obtained by Themistocles his Son. Nor
Miltiades to see the battle his Son Cimon wan in the field. Nor Zantippus to
hear his Son Pericles Preach, and make Orations. Ariston never heard his Son
Plato's lectures and disputations. But men (says he) commonly live to see
their children fall a Gaming, Revelling, Drinking, and Whoring; multitudes live
to see such things to their sorrow. And if thou be a gracious soul, O what a
cut would this be to thy very heart! to see those (as David spoke of his
Absalom) that came out of thy bowels to be sinning against God; that God whom
thou love, and whose honor is dearer to thee than thy very life!

But admit, they should prove civil and hopeful children, yet might thou not
live to see more misery come upon them, than thou could endure to see? O
think what a sad and doleful sight was that to Zedekiah, Jer. 50. 10. The King
of Babylon brought his children and slew them before his eyes. Horrid
spectacle! and that leads to the

5. Consid. How know you but by this stroke which you so lament, God has taken
them away from the evil to come?

It is Gods usual way when some extraordinary calamities are coming upon the
world, to hide some of his weak and tender ones out of the way by death, Isa.
57. 1, 2. He leaves some, and removes others, but takes care for the security
of all. He provided a grave for Methuselah before the flood. The grave is an
hiding place to some, and God sees it better for them to be under ground, than
above ground in such evil days.

Just as a careful and tender Father, who has a Son abroad at school, hearing
the Plague is broken out in, or near the place, sends his Horse presently to
fetch home his Son before the danger and difficulty be greater. Death is our
Fathers pale Horse, which he fends to fetch home his tender children, and carry
them out of harms way.

Surely, when National calamities are drawing on, its far better for our
friends to be in the grave in peace, than exposed to the miseries and distresss
that are here, which is the meaning of Jer. 22. 10. Weep not for the dead,
neither bemoan him; but weep for him that goes away, for he shall return no
more, nor see his native Country.

And is there not a dreadful sound of troubles now in our ears? Do not the
clouds gather blackness? Surely all things round about us seem to be preparing
and disposing themselves for affliction. The days may be nigh in which you
shall say, Blessed is the womb that never bare, and the paps that never gave
suck.

It was in the day wherein the faith and patience of the Saints were exercised,
that John heard a voice from heaven saying to him, Write, Blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord from benceforth.

Thy friend hy an Act of favor is disbanded by death, whilst thou thy self art
left to endure a great fight of affliction: And now if troubles come, thy cares
and fears will be so much the less, and thy own death so much the easier to
thee; when so much of thee is in heaven already. In this case, the Lord by a
merciful dispensation is providing both for their safety, and thy own easier
passage to them.

In removing thy friends before hand, he seems to say to thee as he did to
Peter, Joh. 13. 7. What I do thou know not now, but hereafter thou shall
know it. The eye of Providence has a prospect far beyond thine; it would be in
probability an harder task for thee to leave them behind, than to follow them.

A tree that's deeply rooted in the earth, requires many strokes to fell it, but
when its roots are loosned before hand, then an easy stroke lays it down upon
the earth.

6. Consid. A parting time must needs come, and why is not this as good as
another? You knew before hand, your child or friend was mortal, and that the
thread that linked you together, must be cut. If any one (says Basil) had asked
you, when your Aequo animo excipenecessaria, quam multi post luctum tuum
lugent? Sen. Ep. 99.
child was born, What is that which is born? What would you have answered?
Would you not have said it is a man? and if a man, than a Mortal vanishing
thing. And why then are you surprised, with wonder to see a dying thing dead?

He (says Seneca) who complains that one is Seneca's Ep. 804.
dead, complains that he was a man. All men are under the same condition, to
whose share it falls to be born, to him it remains to dye.

We are indeed distinguished by intervalls, but equalized in the Issue, It is
appointed to all men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27. There is a statute Law of heaven
in the case.

Possibly you think this is the worst time for parting that could be; had you
enjoyed it longer, you could have parted easier, but how are you deceived in
that? The longer you had enjoyed it, the lother still you would have been to
leave it: the deeper it would have rooted it self in your affection.

Had God given you such a privilege as was once granted to the English
Parliament; that the union betwixt you and your friend should not be dissolved,
till you your self were willing it should be dissolved; When think you would
you have been willing it should be dissolved?

Its well for us and ours, that our times are in Gods hand, not in our own. And
how immature soever it seemed to be when it was cut down; yet it came to the
grave in a full age, as a shock of corn in its season, Job 5. 26. They that are
in Christ, and in the Covenant, never dye unseasonably whenever they dye.
(Says one upon the Text) They dye in a good old age; yea, Car. in Loc.
though they dye in the spring and flower of youth, they dye in a good old age.
(i. e.) They are ripe for death when ever they dye. When ever the godly dye,
its harvest time with him: though in a natural capacity he be cut down while he
is green, and cropped, in the bud or blossom; yet in his spiritual capacity he
never dies before he is ripe; God can ripen his speedily, he can let out such
warm rays and beams of his spirit upon them, as shall soon maturate the seeds
of grace into a preparedness for glory.

It was doubtless the most fit and seasonable time for them that ever they
could dye in; and as it is a fit time for them, so for you also. Had it lived
longer, it might either have engaged you more, and so your parting would have
been harder; or else have puzzled and stumbled you more by discovering its
natural corruption: And then what a stinging aggravation of your sorrow would
that have been?

Surely the Lord of time, is the best Judge of time; and in nothing do we more
discover our folly, and rashness, then in presuming to fix the times either of
our comforts or troubles: as to our comforts, we never think they can come to
soon, we would have them presently, whether the season be fit or not, as Numb.
12. 13. Heal her now Lord. O let it be done speedily; we are in post have for
our comforts; and as for our afflictions, we never think they come late enough;
not at this time Lord, rather at any other time than now.

But its good to leave the timing both of the one and other to him, whose works
are all beautiful in their seasons, and never does any thing in an improper
time.

7. Consid. Call to mind in this day of trouble, the Covenant you have made
with God, and what you solemnly promised him in the day you took him for your
God.

It will be very seasonable and useful for thee Christian at this time to
reflect upon those transactions, and the frame of thy heart in those days,
when an heavier load of Sorrow pressed thy heart, than thou now feel.

In those your spiritual distresses, when the burden of sin lay heavy, the
curse of the Law, the fear of hell, the dread of death and eternity beset thee
on every side; and shut thee up to Christ, the only door of hope: Ah what good
news would thou then have accounted it, to escape that danger with the loss
of all earthly comforts!

Was not this thy cry in those days, Lord give me Christ, and deny me what
ever else thou please. Pardon my sin, save my soul; and in order to both,
unite me with Christ, and I will never repine or open my mouth. Do what thou will with me; let me be friendless, let me be childless, let me be poor, let me
be any thing rather than a Christless, graceless, hopeless soul.

And when the Lord hearkened to thy cry, and showed thee mercy, when he drew
thee off from the world into thy closet, and there treated with thee in secret,
when he was working up thy heart to the terms of his Covenant, and made thee
willing to accept Christ upon his own terms: O then how heartily did thou
submit to his yoke as most reasonable and easy, as at that time it seemed to
thee.

Call to mind these days, the secret places where Christ and you made the
bargain. Have not these words, or words to this sense, been whispered by thee
into his ear with a dropping eye, and melting heart?

Lord Jesus, here am I a poor guilty sinner, deeply laden with sin, fear and
trouble upon one hand, and there is a just God, a severe Law, and everlasting
burnings on the other hand; but blessed be God, O blessed be God for Jesus the
Mediator, who interposeth betwixt me and it. Thou art the only door of hope at
which I can escape, thy blood the only means of my pardon and salvation. Thou
have said, Come unto me all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden. Thou have
promised that he that comes to thee shall in no wise be cast out.

Blessed Jesus, thy poor creature comes to thee upon these encouragements: I
come, O but it is with many staggerings, with many doubts and fears of the
Issue, yet I am willing to come, and make a Covenant with thee this day.

I take thee this day to be my Lord, and submit heartily to all thy disposals:
Do what thou will with me or with mine: let me be rich or poor, any thing or
nothing in this world, I am willing to be as thou would have me. And I do
likewise give my self to thee this day to be thine, all I am, all I have shall
be thine; thine to serve thee, and thine to be disposed at thy pleasure. Thou
shall henceforth be my highest Lord, my chiefest good, my last end.

Now Christian, make good to Christ what thou so solemnly promisedst him. He, I
say, He has disposed of this thy dear Relation as pleased him; and is thereby
trying thy uprightness in the Covenant which thou made with him: Now where is
the satisfaction and content thou promisedst to take in all his disposals?
Where is that Covenanted submission to his Will? Did thou except this
affliction that is come upon thee?

Did tell him, Lord I will be content thou shall when thou please take any
thing I have, save only this Husband, this Wife, or this dear child; I reserve
this out of the bargain: I shall never endure that thou should kill this
comfort. If so, thou did in all this but prove thy self an hypocrite: If thou
wast sincere in thy Covenant, as Christ had no reserves on his part, so thou
had none on thine.

It was all without any exception thou then resignedst to him, and now will thou go back from thy word, as one that had out promised himself, and repents
the bargain? Or at least as one that has forgotten these solemn transactions
in the days of thy distress. Wherein has Christ failed in one tittle that he
promised thee? Charge him if thou can with the least unfaithfulness: He has
been faithful to a tittle on his part, O be thou so upon thine; this day its
put to the proof, remember what thou have promised him.

8. Consid. But if thy Covenant with God will not quiet thee; yet methinks Gods
Covenant with thee might be presumed to do it.

Is thy family which was lately hopeful and flourishing, a peaceful Tabernacle,
now broken up and scattered? Thy posterity from which thou raisedst up to thy
self great expectations of comfort in old age cut off? So that thou art now,
like, neither to have a name or memorial left thee in the earth.

Do thou sit alone and mourn to think whitherto thy hopes and comforts are
now come?

Do read over these words of Job, Chap. 29. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and comment upon
them with many tears, O that I were as in months past, as in the day when God
preserved me! when his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I
walked through darkness! As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of
God was upon my Tabernacle, when the Almighty was yet with me, when my children
were about me.

Yet let the Covenant God has made with thee comfort thee in this thy desolate
condition.

You know what domestic troubles holy David met with in a sad succession, not
only from the death of children: but which was much worse, from the wicked
lives of his children. There was Incest, Murder, and Rebellion in his Family; a
far sorer trial, than death in their infancy could have been: And yet see how
sweetly he relieves himself from the Covenant of grace, in 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my salvation, and my
desire, although he make it not to grow.

I know this place principally refers to Christ, who was to spring out of
David's Family according to Gods Covenant made with him in that behalf: And yet
I doubt not but it has another, though less principal aspect upon his own
family; over all the afflictions and troubles whereof the Covenant of God with
him, did abundantly comfort him.

And as it comforted him, although his house did not increase, and those that
were left were not such as he desired: So it may abundantly comfort you also,
whatever troubles or deaths be upon your families, who have an interest in the
Covenant. For,

First, If you be Gods Covenant people, though he may afflict, yet he will
never forget you, Psalm. 3. 5. He is ever mindful of his Covenant. You are as
much upon his heart in your deepest afflictions, as in the greatest flourish of
your prosperity.

You find it hard to forget your child, though it be now turned to an heap of
corruption and loathsome rottenness; O how does your mind run upon it night and
day! your thoughts tire not upon that object: Why, surely its much more easy
for you to forget your dear child whilst living and most endearing, much more
when dead and undesireable; than it is for your God to forget you. Isa. 49. 15.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion upon
the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee.

Can a woman, the more affectionate sex, forget her sucking child; her own
child, and not a nursing child: her own child whilst it hangs on the breast, and
together with the milk from the breast, draws love from its mothers heart: Can
such a thing as this be in nature? Possibly it may; for creature love is fickle
and variable: But I will not forget thee, its an everlasting Covenant.

Secondly, As he will never forget you in your troubles; so he will order all
your troubles for your good; Its a well ordered Covenant, or a Covenant orderly
disposed: So that every thing shall work together for your good.

The Covenant so orders all your trials, ranks, and disposes your various
troubles so, as that they shall in their orders and places sweetly cooperate
and join their united influences to make you happy.

Possibly you cannot see how the present affliction should be for your good, you
are ready to say with Jacob, Genesis 42. 36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not; and
ye will take Benjamin away; all these things are against me. But could you once
see how sweetly and orderly all these afflictions work under the blessing and
influence of the Covenant to your eternal good; you would not only be quiet,
but thankful for that which now so much afflicts and troubles you now.

Thirdly, This Covenant is not only well ordered in all things, but sure; the
mercies contained in it, are called the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. Now
how sweet, how seasonable a support does this consideration give to Gods
afflicted under the rod! You lately made your selves sure of that
creature-comfort which has forsaken you. It may be you said of your child
which is now gone, as Lamech said of his Son Noah, Genesis 5. 29. This same shall
comfort us concerning our work, and toil of our hands. Meaning that his Son
should not only comfort them by assisting them in the work of their hands, but
in enjoying the fruit of their toil and pains for him.

Probably such thoughts you have had, and raised up to your selves great
expectations of comfort in your old age from it; but now you see you built upon
the sand; And where were you now, if you had not a firmer bottom to build upon?
But blessed be God, the Covenantmercies are more sure and solid: God, Christ,
and heaven, never start or fade as these things do.

The sweetest creature enjoyments you ever had or have in this world, cannot
say to you as your God does, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. You must
part with your dear Husbands, how well soever you love them; you must bid adieu
to the wife of your bosom, how nearly soever your affections be linked, and
heart delighted in her. Your children and you must be separated, though they be
to you as your own soul.

But though these vanish away, blessed be God there is something that abides.
Though all flesh be as grass, and the goodliness of it as the flower of the
grass; though the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades because the
spirit of the Lord blows upon it; yet the word of our God shall stand for
ever, Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8. There is so much of supported contain in this one
consideration, that could but your faith fix here, to reallize, and apply it, I
might lay down my pen at this period, and say the work is done, there needs no
more.

9. Consid. The hope of the Resurrection should powerfully restrain all
excesses of sorrow in those that do profess it.

Let them only mourn without measure, who mourn without hope. The husbandman
does not mourn when he casts his seed-corn into the earth, because he sows in
hope; and commits it to the ground with an expectation to receive it again with
improvement. Why thus stands the case here, and just so the Apostle states it,
1 These. 4. 13, 14. But I would not have you to be ignorant brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope;
for if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also which sleep
in Jesus will God bring with him.

Q. D. Look not upon the dead as a lost generation: Think not that death has
annihilated and utterly destroyed them. O no, they are not dead, but only
asleep; and if they sleep, they shall awake again. You don't use to make
outcries and Lamentations for your children and friends when you find them
asleep upon their beds. Why? Death is but a longer sleep, out of which they
shall as surely awake as ever they did in the morning in this world.

I have often wondered at that Golden sentence in Seneca, My thoughts of the
dead (says Habui enim illos tanquam amissurus amisi tanquam habeam. Seneca Ep.
63.
he) are not as others are; I have fair and pleasant apprehensions of them; for
I enjoyed them as one that reckoned I must part with them, and I part with
them, as one that makes account to have them.

He speaks no doubt of that enjoyment of them, which his pleasant
contemplations of their virtuous actions could give him; for he was wholly
unacquainted with the comfortable and heart-supporting doctrine of the
Resurrection. Had he known the advantages which result thence, at what a rate
may we think he would have spoken of the dead and of their state? But this you
profess to believe, and yet sink at a strange rate. O suffer not Gentilism to
out-vye Christianity: Let not Pagans challenge the greatest believers to outdo
them in a quiet and cheerful behavior under afflictions.

I beseech thee, Reader, if thy deceased friend have left thee any sollid
ground of hope that he dyed interessed in Christ, and the Covenant; that thou will distinctly ponder these admirable supports, which the doctrine of the
Resurrection affords.

First, That the same body which was so pleasant a spectacle to thee, shall be
restored again; yea, the same numerically, as well as the same specifically: so
that it shall not only be the what it was, but the who he was: These eyes shall
behold him, and not another, Job 19. 27. etc. The very same body you laid, or
are now to lay in the grave, shall be restored again; Thou shall find thine own
husband, wife, child, or friend again: I say the self same and not another.

Secondly, And farther, this is supporting, that as you shall see the same
person that was so dear to you: So you shall know them to be the same that were
once endeared to you on earth in so near a tie of Relation.

Indeed, you shall know them no more in any carnal Relation, death dissolved
that bond: But you shall know them to be such as once were your dear Relations
in this world, and be able to single them out among that great multitude, and
say, This was my Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, or Child: This was the person
for whom I wept and made supplication, who was an instrument of good to me, or
to whose salvation God then made me instrumental.

For we may allow in that state all that knowledge which is cumulative and
perfective, whatsoever may enlarge and heighten our felicity and satisfaction,
as this must needs be allowed to do. Luthers judgment in this point, being by
his friends asked at supper the evening before he dyed; replied thus, What
(said he) befell Melchior Adam in vita Luth.
Adam? He never saw Eve; but was in a deep sleep when God formed her; yet when
he awaked and saw her, he asked not, What she was, nor whence she came? But
says, she was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: now how knew he that?
He being full of the holy Ghost, and endued with the knowledge of God, spoke
thus. After the same manner we also shall be in the other life renewed by
Christ, and shall know our parents, our wives and children.

And this among other things was that with which Augustine comforted the Lady
Italica after Aug. Ep. 6.
the death of her dear husband, telling her that she should know him in the
world to come, amongst the glorified Saints. Yea, and a greater than either of
these, I mean Paul, comforted himself that the Thessalonians, whom he had
converted to Christ should be His joy and Crown of rejoicing in the presence of
the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 These. 2. 19, 20. which must needs imply
his distinct knowledge of them in that day, which must be many hundred years
after death had separated them from each other. Whether this knowledge shall be
by the glorified eyes discerning any lineaments or property of individuation
remaining upon the glorified bodies of our Relations? or whether it shall be by
immediate revelation as Adam knew his wife; or as Peter, James, and John, knew
Moses and Elias in the Mount, as it is difficult to determine, so it is
needless to puzel our selves about it.

It is the concurrent judgment of sound Divines, and it wants not countenance
from Scripture and reason, that such a knowledge of them shall be in Heaven:
and then the sadness of this parting will be abundantly recompensed by the joy
of that meeting. Especially considering,

Thirdly, That at your next meeting, they shall be unspeakably more desirable
sweet and excellent than ever they were in this world. They had a desirableness
in them here; but yet they were not altogether lovely, and in every respect
desirable; they had their infirmities, both natural, and moral; but all these
are removed in Heaven, and for ever done away. No natural infirmities hang
about glorified bodies; nor sinful ones upon perfected spirits of the just. Oh
what lovely creatures will they appear to you then, when that which is sown now
in dishonor shall be raised in honor, 1 Cor. 15. And then to Crown all.

Fourthly, You shall have an everlasting enjoyment of them in Heaven, never to
part again. The children of the Resurrection can dye no more, Luke 20. 36. You
shall kiss their pale lips and cold cheeks no more; you shall never fear
another parting pull, but be together with the Lord for ever, 1 These. 4. 17.
And this the Apostle thought an effectual Cordial in this case, when he
exhorted the Thessalonians to comfort one another with these words.

10. Consid. The present felicity into which all that dye in Christ are
presently admitted, should abundantly comfort Christians over the death of such
as either carried a lively hope out of the world with them, or have left good
grounds of such an hope behind them.

Some there are that carried a lively hope to heaven with them, who could
evidence to themselves and friends their interest in Christ and in the
Covenant. Yea, though they had dyed in silence, yet their conversations would
speak for them, and the tenor of their lives leave no ground of doubting
touching their death: others dying in their infancy or youth, though they
carried not such an actual hope with them, yet they have left good grounds of
hope behind them.

Parents now ponder these grounds; you have prayed for them, you have many
times wrestled with the Lord on their behalf; you have taken hold of Gods
Covenant for them, as well as for your selves, and dedicated them to the Lord,
and they have not by any actions of theirs destroyed those grounds of your
hope, but that you may with much probability conclude they are with God.

Why, if the case be so, what abundant reason have you to be quiet and well
satisfied with what God has done? Can they be better than where they are? Had
you better provisions and entertainments for them here, than their heavenly
Father has above.

There is no Christian parent in the world but would rejoice to see his child
outstrip and get before him in grace, that he may be more eminent in parts and
service than ever he was; And what reason can be given, why we should not as
much rejoice to see our children get before us in glory as in grace? They are
gotten to heaven a few years before you, and is that matter of mourning? Would
not your child (if he were not ignorant of you) say as Christ did to his
friends a little before his death, when he saw them cast down at the thoughts
of parting, Joh. 14. 28. If ye loved me ye would rejoice because I go unto the
Father. q. d. Do you value your own sensible comfort from my bodily presence
with you, before my glory and advancement in heaven? Is this love to me? Or is
it not rather self-love?

So would your departed friend say to you: you have professed much love all
along to me, my happiness seemed to be very dear to you; How comes it to pass
then, that you mourn so exceedingly now? This is rather the effect of a fond
and fleshly, than of rational and spiritual love: If ye loved me with a pure
spiritual love, ye would rejoice that I am gone to my Father. It Is infinitely
better for me to be here, than with you on earth, under sin and sorrow. Weep
not for me, but for your selves.

Alas, though you want your friends company, he wants not yours: Your care was
to provide for this child, but Jesus Christ has provided infinitely better for
it than you could; you intended an Estate, but he a Kingdom for it: you thought
upon such or such a match, but Christ has forbid all others, and married your
child to himself. Would you imagine an higher preferment for the fruit of your
bodies?

A King from heaven has sent for your friend, and do you grudge at the
journey? O think, and think again, what an honor it is to you, that Christ
has taken them out of your bosom, and laid them in his own: stripped them out of
those garments you provided, and clothed them in white robes washed in the
blood of the Lamb. Let not your hearts be troubled, rather rejoice exceedingly,
that God made you instruments to replenish heaven, and bring forth an heir for
the Kingdom of God.

Your child is now glorifying God in an higher way than you can; and what
though you have lost its bodily presence for a time; yet I hope you don't
reckon that to be your loss, which turns to Gods greater glory.

When Jacob heard his Joseph was Lord of Egypt, he rather wished himself with
Joseph, than his Joseph with him, in wants and straights: So should it be with
you. You are yet rolling and tossing upon a tempestuous Sea, but your friend is
gone into the quiet harbor; desire rather to be there, then that he were at
Sea again with you.

II. Consid. Consider how vain a thing all your trouble and self-vexation is;
it no way betters your case, nor eases your burden.

As a Bullock by wrestling and sweating in the furrow, may make his yoke to be
more heavy, gall his neck, and spend his strength the sooner, but no way helps
himself by that. Why thus stands the case with thee, if thou be as a Bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke. What Christ says of caring, we may say of grieving
(Mat. 6. 27.) Which of you by taking thought can add one Cubit to his stature?

Cares may break our sleep, yea, break our hearts; but they cannot add to our
stature either in a natural, or in a civil notion: So your sorrowing may sooner
break your hearts, than the yoke God has laid on you.

Alas what is all this, but as the fluttering of a bird in the net, which
instead of freeing, does but the more entangle it self? It was therefore a wise
resolve of David in this very case, when the will of God was signified in the
death of his child, 2 Samuel 12. 23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast?
Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Can I bring him back again? No, I can no more alter the purpose and work of
God, than I can change the seasons of of the year, or alter the course of Sun,
Moon, and Stars, or disturb the order of day and night; which are all
unalterably established by a firm constitution and ordinance of heaven.

As these seasons cannot be changed by man: so neither can this course and way
of his providence be changed, Job 23. 13. He is of one mind, and who can turn
him? And what his soul desires even that he does. Indeed whilst his pleasure
and purpose are unknown to us, there is room for fasting and prayer to prevent
the thing we fear; but when the purpose of God is manifested in the Issue, and
the stroke is given, then it is the vainest thing in the world to fret and vex
our selves, as David's servants thought he would do, as soon as he should hear
the child was dead: but he was wiser than so, his tears and cries to God
before, had the nature and use of means to prevent the affliction; but when it
was come and could not be prevented, then they were of no use, to no purpose in
the world. Wherefore should I fast? q. d. To what end, use, or purpose will it
be now?

Well then, cast not away your strength and spirits to no advantage, reserve
them for future exercises and trials. Time may come that you may need all the
strength you have, and much more to support greater burdens than this.

12. Consid. The Lord is able to restore all your lost comforts in Relations
double to you, if you meekly submit to him, and patiently wait upon him under
the rod.

When Esau had lost his blessing, he said, Have thou but one blessing my
Father? Genesis 27. 38. But your Father has more blessings for you than one; his
name is The Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. He can beget and create as many
mercies for you as he pleases; Relations and the comforts of them are at his
command.

It is but a few months or years past, and these comforts whose loss you now
lament were not in being; nor did you know whence they should arise to you, yet
the Lord gave the word, and commanded them for you: and if he please he can
make the death of these but like a sithe to the Meadow that is mown down, or a
razor to the head that is shaved bare; which though it lay you under the
present trouble and reproach of barrenness, yet does but make way for a double
increase, a second spring with advantage.

So that as it was with the Captive Church in respect of her spiritual
Children, in the day of her Captivity and reproach, the Lord made up all with
advantage to her, even to her own astonishment, Isa. 49. 20. The children which
thou shall have after thou have lost the other, shall say again in thine ears,
the place is too straight for me, give place to me that I may dwell.

Thus may he deal with you as to your natural children and Relations: So that
what the man of God said to Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. may be applied to the case
in hand, Amaziah said to the man of God, but what shall we do for the hundred
Talents? And the man of God answered, the Lord is able to give thee much more
than this.

O say not what shall I do for friends and Relations? Death has robbed me of
all comfort in them. Why, the Lord is able to give you much more. But then, as
ever you expect to see your future blessings multiplied, look to it, and be
careful that you neither dishonor God, or grieve him, by your unsubmissive and
impatient carriage under the present Rod.

God took away all Jobs children, and that at one stroke, and the stroke
immediate and extraordinary: and that when they were grown up, and planted (at
least some of them) in distinct families: Yea, whilst they were endearing each
other by the mutual expressions of affection. This must be yielded to be an
extraordinary trial; yet he meekly receives, and patiently bears it from the
hand of the Lord.

You have heard of the patience of Job (says the Apostle, Jam. 5. 11.) and
seen the end of the Lord. Not only the gracious end or intention of the Lord in
all his afflictions, but the happy end and Issue the Lord gave to all his
afflictions, of which you have the account, Job 42. 10. The Lord gave Job twice
as much as he had before. The number of his children was not double to what he
had, as all his other comforts were: but though the Lord only restored the same
number to him again that he took away, yet it is like the comfort he had in
these latter children was double to what he had in the former. There Is nothing
lost by waiting patiently, and submitting willingly to the Lords dispose.

It is as easy with the Lord to revive, as it is to remove your comforts in
Relations. There is a sweet expression to this purpose in Psalm. 18. 28. For
thou Lord wilt light my candle, the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness.

Every comfortable enjoyment, whether it be in Relations, Estates, Health, or
Friends, is a candle lighted by Providence for our comfort in this world, and
they are but candles, which will not always last, and those that last longest
will be consumed and wasted at last; but often times it falls out with them as
with candles, they are blown out before they are half consumed; yea, almost as
soon as lighted up, and then we are in darkness for the present.

It Is a dark hour with us when these comforts are put out: but David's faith
did, and ours may comfort us with this, That he that blew out one candle, can
light up another. Thou Lord shall light my candle, the Lord my God shall
enlighten my darkness, that is, the Lord will renew my comforts, alter the
present sad estate I am in; and chase away that trouble and darkness which at
present lies upon me. Only beware of offending him at whose beck your lights
and comforts come and go. Michall displeased the Lord, and therefore had no
child unto the day of her death, 2 Samuel 6. 23.

Hanah waited humbly upon the Lord for the blessing of children, and the Lord
remembered her, he enlightened her condition with that comfort, when she was as
a Lamp despised. There Is no comfort you have lost, but God can restore it, yea,
double it in kind, if he see it convenient for you. And if not then

13. Consid. Consider, though he should deny you any more comforts of that
kind, yet he has far better to bestow upon you: such as these deserve not to
be named with.

You have an excellent Scripture to this purpose in Isa. 56. 4, 5. For thus
says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things
that please me, and take hold of my Covenant; even to them will I give in my
house, and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of
daughters: I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.

Men's names are said to be continued in their Issue, in their male Issue
especially, and consequently Vide English Annotations in Loc.
to fail in such as wanted Issue, Numb. 17. 4. And a numerous Issue is deemed
no small honor, Psalm. 127. 4, 5. God therefore promises here to supply and
make good the want of Issue, and of whatsoever either honor here, or memorial
hereafter might from it have accrued to them; by bestowing upon them matter of
far greater honor, and more durable; a name better or before the name of Sons
and Daughters.

It Is a greater honor to be a child of God, than to have the greatest honor
or comfort that ever children afforded their parents in this world.

Poor heart, thou art now dejected by this affliction that lies upon thee, as
if all joy and comfort were now cut off from thee in this world.

A cloud dwells upon all other comforts, this affliction has so imbittered thy
soul, that thou tastest no more in any other earthly comfort, than in the white
of an egg. O that thou did but consider the consolations that are with God
for such as answer his ends in affliction, and patiently wait on him for their
comfort! He has comforts for you far transcending the joy of children.

This some have found when their children have been cut off from them, and that
in so eminent a degree, that they have little valued their comfort in children
in comparison with this comfort.

I will here set down a pregnant instance of the point in hand, as I find it
recorded by the grave and worthy Author of that excellent book entitled, The
fulfilling of Fulfilling of the Scripture, p. 491.
the Scripture.

Another notable instance of grace, with a very remarkable passage in his
condition, I shall here mention. One Patrick Mackewrath who lived in the West
parts of Scotland, whose heart, in a remarkable way, the Lord touched, and
after his conversion (as he showed to many Christian friends) was in such a
frame so affected with a new world, wherein he was entered, the discoveries of
God, and of a life to come; that for some months together he did seldom sleep,
but was still taken up in wondering. His life was very remarkable for
tenderness, and near converse with God in his walk; and which was worthy to be
noticed, one day after a sharp trial, having his only Son suddenly taken away
by death, he retired alone for several hours, and when he came forth did look
so cheerfully, that to those who asked him the reason thereof, and wondered at
the same in such a time; he told them, He had got that in his retirement with
the Lord, that to have it afterward renewed, he would be content to lose a Son
every day.

Oh what a sweet exchange had he made! Surely he had Gold for brass, a pearl
for a pebble; a treasure for a trifle; for so great, yea, and far greater is
the disproportion betwixt the sweet light of Gods Countenance, and the faint
dim light of the best creature-enjoyment.

Would it please the Lord to make this sun arise and shine upon you: now when
the stars that shined with a dim and borrowed light are gone down, you would
see such gain by the exchange, as would quickly make you cast in your votes
with him we now mentioned, and say, Lord, let every day be such as this funeral
day, let all my hours be as this, so that I may see and taste what I now do.
How gladly would I part with the dearest and nearest creature-comfort I own in
this world.

The gracious and tender Lord has his divine Cordials reserved on purpose for
such sad hours: these are sometimes given before some sharp trial to prepare
for it, and sometimes after to support under it.

I have often heard it from the mouth, and found it in the Diary of a sweet
Christian now with God, That a little before the Lord removed her dear husband
by death, there was such an abundant outlet of the love of God into her soul,
for several days and nights following; that when the Lord took away her husband
by death, though he were a gracious, sweet tempered, and by her most tenderly
beloved husband; she was scarce sensible of the stroke, but carried quite above
all earthly things, their comforts, and their troubles; so that she had almost
lost the thoughts of her husband in God. And had not the Lord taken this course
with her, she concluded that blow had not been possible to be born by her, she
must have sunck without such a preparative.

A Husband, a Wife, a Child, are great, very great things, as they stand by
other creatures, but surely they will seem little things, and next to nothing,
when the Lord shall set himself by them before the soul.

And how know you, but God has bid these earthly comforts stand aside this
day, to make way for heavenly ones? It may be God is coming to communicate
himself more sweetly, more sensibly than ev^r to your souls; and these are the
providence which must cast up and prepare the way of the Lord. Possibly Gods
meaning in their death is but this, Child stand aside thou art in my way, and
fillest my place in thy parents heart.

14. Consid. Be careful you exceed not in your grief for the loss of earthly
things, considering that Satan takes the advantage of all extremes.

You cannot touch any extreme, but you will be touched by that enemy; whose
greatest advantages lie in assaulting you there.

Satan is called the Ruler of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12. (i. e.)
his Kingdom is supported by darkness. Now there is a twofold darkness, which
gives Satan great advantage: the darkness of the mind, viz. ignorance, and the
darkness of the condition, viz. trouble and affliction. Of the former the
Apostle speaks chiefly in that Text: but the latter also is by him often
improved, to carry on his designs upon us: When it is a dark hour of trouble
with us, then is his fittest season to tempt.

That cowardly spirit falls upon the people of God when they are down and low
in spirit, as well as state. Satan would never have desired that the hand of
God should have been stretched out upon Jobs Person, Estate, and children; but
that he promised himself a notable advantage therein to poison his spirit with
vile thoughts of God: Do this (says he) and he will curse thee to thy face.

What the Psalmist observes of natural, is as true of metaphorical darkness,
Psalm. 104. 20. Thou make darkness and it is night, wherein all the beasts of
the forest do creep forth, the young Lions roar after their prey.

When its dark night with men, its noonday with Satan (i. e.) our suffering
time, is his busiest working time, many a dismal suggestion he then plants and
grafts upon our affliction, which are much more dangerous to us than the
affliction it self.

Sometimes he injects desponding thoughts into the afflicted soul. Then said I,
I am cut off from before thine eyes, Psalm. 31. 22. and Lam. 3. 18, 19. My hope
is perished from the Lord, remembering my affliction and my misery, the wormwood
and the gall.

Sometimes he suggests hard thoughts of God, Ruth 1. 20. The Lord has dealt
very bitterly with me. Yea, that he has dealt more severely with us than any
other, Lam. 1. 12. See and behold if there be any sorrow, like unto my sorrow
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his
fierce anger.

And sometimes murmuring and repining thoughts against the Lord, the soul is
displeased at the hand of God upon it. Jonah was angry at the hand of God, and
said, I do well to be angry even unto death, Jonah 4. 9. What dismal thoughts
are these? And how much more afflictive to a gracious soul than the loss of any
outward enjoyment in this world?

And sometimes very irreligious and Atheistical thoughts, as if there were no
privilege to be had by Religion, and all our pains, zeal and care about Duty,
were little better than lost labor, Psalm. 73. 13, 14. Verily I have cleansed
my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence; for all the day long I have
been plagued, and chastened every morning.

By these things Satan gets no small advantage upon the afflicted Christian;
for albeit these thoughts are his burden, and God will not impute them to the
condemnation of his people, yet they rob the soul of peace, and hinder it from
duty, and make it act uncomely under affliction to the stumbling and hardening
of others in their sin; beware therefore lest by your excesses of sorrow ye
give place to the Devil: we are not ignorant of his devices.

15. Consid. Give not way to excessive sorrows upon the account of affliction,
if ye have any regard to the honor of God and Religion, which will thereby be
exposed to reproach.

If you slight your own honor, don't slight the honor of God and Religion
too. Take heed how you carry it in a day of trouble, many eyes are upon you. It
is a true observation that a late worthy Author has made upon this case. What
will the Atheist, and what will the profane scoffer say, M. M. his Appendix to
Solomon's prescription. p. 112.
when they shall see this? So sottish and malicious they are, that if they do
but see you in affliction, they are straightway scornefully demanding; Where is
your God?

But what will they say, if they should hear you your selves unbelievingly cry
out; where is our God? Will they not be ready to cry; This is the Religion they
make such boast of, which you see how little it does for them in a day of
extremity: they talk of promises, rich and precious promises; but where are
they now? Or to what purpose do they serve? They said they had a treasure in
heaven. What ails them to mourn so then if their Riches be there?

O beware what you do before the world; they have eyes to see what you can do,
as well as ears to hear what you can say. And as long as your carriage under
troubles is so much like their own, they will never think your principles are
better than theirs. Carnal worldlings will be drawn to think that whatever fine
talk you might have about God and heaven, your hearts were most upon the same
things that theirs were, since your grief for their removal is as great as
theirs.

They know by experience, what a stay it is to the heart to have an able,
faithful friend to depend upon, or to have hopes of a great Estate shortly to
fall to them; and they will never be persuaded you have any such ground of
comfort; if they see you as much cast down, as they that pretend to no such
matter.

By this means the precepts of Christ to constancy and contentment in all
Estates, will come to be looked upon (like those of the Stoics) only as
magnifica verba, brave words, but such as are impossible to be practiced; and
the whole of the Gospel will be taken for an airey notion, since they that
profess greatest regard to it, are no more helped thereby.

O What a shame is it that Religion should in this case make no more difference
betwixt man and man? Wherefore show to the world (whatever their common
censures are) that it is not so much your care to differ from them in some
opinions, and little strictness, as in humility, meekness, contempt of the
world, and heavenly mindedness; and now let these graces display themselves by
your cheerful patient deportment under all your grievances.

Wherefore has God planted those excellent graces in your souls, but that he
might be glorified, and you benefited by the exercises of them in tribulation?
Should these be suppressed and hid, and nothing but the pride, passion, and
unmortified earthliness of your hearts set on work and discovered in time of
trouble, what a slur, what a wound will you give to the glorious name which is
called upon by you? And then if your hearts be truly gracious, that will pierce
you deeper than ever your affliction which occasioned it did.

I beseech you therefore be tender of the name of God, if you will not be so of
your own peace and comfort.

16. Consid. Be quiet and hold your peace, you little know how many mercies lie
in the womb of this sharp affliction.

Great are the benefits of a sharp rouzing affliction to the people of God at
sometimes, and all might have them at all times were they more careful to
improve them. Holy David thankfully acknowledges, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted.

And surely there is as much good in them for you, as for him; if the Lord
sanctify them to such ends and uses as his were sanctified unto.

Such a smarting rod as this came not before there was need enough of it, and
possibly you saw the need of some awaking providence your selves; but if not,
the Lord did; he took not up the rod to smite you, till his faithfulness, and
tender love to your souls called upon him to correct you.

You now sit pensive under the rod, sadly lamenting and deploring the loss of
some earthly comfort, your heart is surcharged with sorrow, your eyes run down
upon every mention and remembrance of your dear friend. Why, if there were no
more, this alone may discover the need you had of this rod; for does not all
this sorrow at parting, plainly speak how much your heart was set upon, how
fast your heart was glewed to this earthly comfort?

Now you see that your affections were sunk many degrees deeper into the
creature than you were aware of: and what should God do in this case by you?
Should he suffer you to cleave to the creature more and more? Should he permit
it to purloin and exhaust your love and delight, and steal away your heart from
himself? This he could not do and love you. The more impatient you are under
this affliction, the more need you had of it.

And what if by this stroke the Lord will awaken your drowzy soul, and recover
you out of that pleasant, but dangerous spiritual slumber you were fallen into,
whilst you had pillowed your head upon this pleasant, sensible
creature-enjoyment? Is not this really better for you, than if he should say,
sleep on? He is joined to Idols, let him alone, he is departing from me the
fountain, to a broken Cistern, let him go?

Yea, What if by this stroke upon one of the pleasantest things you had in this
world, God will discover to you, more sensibly and effectually than ever, the
vanity both of that, and all other earthly comforts, so as that you shall from
henceforth never let forth your heart, your hope, your love and delight to any
of them as you did before? you could talk before of the creatures vanity; but I
question whether ever you had so clear and convincing a sight of its vanity as
you have this day: And is not this a considerable mercy in your eyes?

Now, if ever, God is weaning you from all fond opinions, and vain expectations
from this world; by this your Judgment of the creatures is rectified, and your
affections to all other enjoyments on earth moderated: And is this nothing? O
doubtless it is a greater mercy to you, than to have your friend alive again.

And what if by this rod your wandering, gadding heart shall be whipped home to
God? Your neglected duties revived, your decayed Communion with God restored, a
spiritual heavenly frame of heart recovered? What will you say then?

Surely you will bless that merciful hand which removed the obstructions, and
adore the divine wisdom and goodness, that by such a device as this recovered
you to himself. Now you can pray more constantly, more spiritually, more
affectionately than before. Oh blessed rod which buds and blossoms with such
fruits as these! Let this be written among your best mercies; for you shall
have cause to adore and bless God eternally for this beneficial affliction.

17. Consid. Suffer not your selves to be transported by impatience, and
swallowed up of grief; because God has excercised you under a smart rod; for
as smarting as it is, it is comparatively a gentle stroke to what others as good
as your selves have felt.

Your dear Relation is dead; be it so; here is but a single death, before you,
but others have seen many deaths contrived into one upon their Relations, to
which yours is nothing.

Zedekiah saw his children murdered before his eyes, and then had those eyes
(alas too late) put out. The worthy Author of that excellent book
forementioned, tells The fullfilling of the Scriptures.
us of a choice and godly Gentlewomanin the North of Ireland, who when the
Rebellion brake out there, fled with three children, one of them upon the
breast; they had not gone far before they were stripped naked by the Irish, who to
admiration spared their lives (its like, concluding that cold and hunger would
kill them) afterward going on, at the foot of a River which runs to Locheach,
others met them, and will have them cast into the River: but this godly woman,
not dismayed, asked a little liberty to pray; and as she lay naked on the
frozen ground, got resolution not to go on her own feet to so unjust a death,
upon which having called her, and she refusing, was dragged by the heels along
that rugged way to be cast in with her little ones and company.

But she then turned, and on her knees says, you should I am sure be
Christians, and men I see you are; in taking away our miserable lives you do us
a pleasure: But know that as we never wronged you, nor yours; you must remember
to dye also your selves, and one day give an account of this cruelty to the
Judge of heaven and earth, hereupon they resolved not to murder them with their
own hands, but turned them all naked upon a small Island in the River without
any provision, there to perish.

The next day the two boys, having crept aside, found the hide of a beast which
had been killed, at the root of a tree; which the Mother cast over them lying
upon the Snow. The next day a little boat goes by, unto whom she calls for Gods
sake to take them out, but they being Irish refused: they desired a little
bread, but they said they had none: then she begs a coal of fire which she
obtained, and thus with some fallen chips made a little fire, and the children
taking a piece of the hide laid it on the coals, and began to gnaw the Leather;
but without an extraordinary divine support, what could this do?

Thus they lived ten days without any visible means of help, having no bread,
but ice and snow, nor drink except water. The two boys being near starved, she
pressed them to go out of her sight, not able to see their death: yet God
delivered them as miraculously at last, as he had supported them all that while.

But, judge whether a natural death, in an ordinary way, be comparable to such
a trial as this! And yet thus the Lord did by this choice and eminently
gracious woman.

And Mr. Wall in his none-but-Christ, relates as sad a passage of a poor Family
in Germany, who were driven to that extremity in the famine, that at last the
Parents made a motion one to the other to sell one of the children for bread to
sustain themselves and the rest: but when they came to consider which child it
should be, their hearts so relented and yerned upon every one, that they
resolved rather all to dye together. Yea we read in Lam. 4. 10. The hands of
the pitiful women have sodden their own children.

But what speak I of these extremities; how many parents, yea, some godly ones
too, have lived to see their children dying in profaneness, and some by the
hand of Justice, lamenting their Rebellions with a rope about their necks?

Ah, Reader, little do thou know, what stings there are in the afflictions of
others! Surely you have no reason to think the Lord has dealt more bitterly
with you than any. It Is a gentle stroke, a merciful dispensation if you compare
it with what others have felt.

18. Consid. If God be your God, you have really lost nothing by the removal of
any creature-comfort.

God is the Fountain of all true comfort; creatures, the very best and
sweetest, are but Cisterns to receive and convey to us what comfort God is
pleased to communicate to them; and if the Cistern be broken, or the pipe cut
off, so that no more comfort can be conveyed to us that way; he has other
ways and mediums to do it by, which we think not of; and if he please, he can
convey his comforts to his people without any of them; and if he do it more
immediately, we shall be no losers by that; for no comforts in the world are so
delectable and ravishingly sweet, as those that flow immediately from the
fountain.

And it is the sensuality of our hearts that causes us to affect them so
inordinately, and grieve for the loss of them so immoderately, as if we had not
enough in God without these creature-supplements.

Is the fullness of the Fountain yours? and yet do ye cast down your selves,
bebecause the broken Cistern is removed. The best Creatures are no better, Jer.
2. 13. Cisterns have nothing but what they receive, and broken ones cannot hold
what is put into them. Why then do ye mourn as if your life were bound up in
the creature? You have as free an access to the Fountain, as you had before. It
is the advice of an Heathen, (and let them take the Quem amabas extulisti
quaere quem ames: satius est amicum reparare quam flere. Seneca's Ep. p. 637.
comfort of it) to repair by a new earthly comfort, what we have lost in the
former.

Thou have carried forth him whom thou lovedst (says Seneca) seek one whom
thou may love in his stead: it is better to repair, than bemoan thy loss.

But if God never repair your loss, in things of the same kind, you know he can
abundantly repair it in himself.

Ah Christian! Is not one kiss of his mouth, one glimpse of his countenance,
one seal of his spirit, a more sweet and substantial comfort than the sweetest
Relation in this world can afford you! If the stream fail, repair to the
Fountain, there is enough still, God is where he was, and what he was, though
the creature be not.

19. Consid. Though you may want a little comfort in your life, yet surely it
may be recompensed to you by a more easy death.

The removal of your friends before you may turn to your great advantage, when
your hour is come that you must follow them. Oh how have many good souls been
clogged and ensnared in their dying hour, by the loves, cares, and fears they
have had about those they must leave behind them in a sinful evil world!

Your love to them might have proved a snare to you, and caused you to hang
back as loath to go hence; for these are the things that make men loath to dye.
And thus it might have been with you, except God had removed them before hand,
or should give you in that day such sights of Heaven, and tastes of Divine love,
as should master and mortify all your earthly affections to these things.

I knew a gracious person, now in heaven, who for many weeks in her last
sickness complained, that she found it hard to part with a dear Relation, and
that there was nothing proved a greater clog to her soul than this. It Is much
more easy to think of going to our friends, who are in heaven before us, than
of parting with them, and leaving our desirable and dear ones behind us.

And who knows what cares and distracting thoughts you may then be pestred and
distracted with upon their account? What shall become of these when I am gone!
I am now to leave them God knows to what wants, miseries, temptations, and
afflictions, in the midst of a deceitful, defiling, dangerous world.

I know its our duty to leave our fatherless children, and friendless Relations
with God; to trust them with him that gave them to us: And some have been
enabled cheerfully to do so when they were parting from them, Luther could say,
Lord, thou have given me a wife and children, I Melchior Adam in vita Lutheri.
have little to leave them; nourish, teach, and keep them; O thou Father of the
fatherless, and Judge of widows. But every Christian has not a Luthers faith.
Some find it an hard thing to disentangle their affections at such a time: but
now, if God have sent all yours before you, you have so much the less to do.
Death may be easier to you than others.

20. Consid. But if nothing that has been yet said will stick with you; then,
Lastly, remember, that you are near that state and place which admits no
sorrows nor sad reflections upon any such accounts as these.

Yet a little while and you shall not miss them, you shall not need them, but
you shall live as the Angels of God. We now live partly by faith, partly by
sense, partly upon God, and partly upon the creature. Our state is mixed,
therefore our comforts are so too: but when God shall be all in all, and we
shall be as the Angels of God in the way and manner of our living; How much
will the case be altered with us then, from what it is now!

Angels neither marry nor are given in marriage; neither shall the children of
the Resurrection; when the days of our sinning are ended, the days of our
mourning shall be so too. No graves were opened till sin entered, and no more
shall be opened when sin is excluded.

Our glorified Relations shall live with us for ever, they shall complain no
more, dye no more; yea, this is the happiness of that state to which you are
passing on, that your souls being in the nearest conjunction with God the
fountain of Joy, you shall have no concernment out of him. You shall not be put
upon these exercises of patience; nor subjected to such sorrows as now you feel
any more. It is but a little while and the end of all these things will come.
Oh therefore bear up as persons that expect such a day of Jubilee at hand.

And thus I have finished the second general Head of this Discourse, which is a
disswasive from the sin of immoderate sorrow.

3. I now proceed to the third thing proposed, namely to remove the Pleas and
excuses for this immoderate grief. It s natural to men, yea to good men to
justify their excesses, or at least extenuate them, by pleading for their
passions, as if they wanted not cause and reason enough to excuse them. If
these be fully answered, and the soul once convinced, and left without Apology
for its sin, it is then in a fair way for its cure, which is the last thing
designed in this Treatise.

My present business therefore is to satisfy those Objections, and answer
those Reasons which are commonly pleaded in this case, to justify our
excessive grief for lost Relations. And though I shall carry it in that line of
Relation to which the Text directs, yet its equally applicable to all other.

1. Plea.
You press me by many great considerations to meekness and quiet submission
under this heavy stroke of God: but you little know what stings my soul feels
now in it.

This child was a child of many prayers, it was a Samuel begged of the Lord, and
I concluded when I had it, that it brought with it the returns and answers of
many prayers. But now I see it was nothing less: God had no regard to my
prayers about it; nor was it given me in that special way of mercy as I
imagined it to be. My child is not only dead, but my prayers in the same day
shut out and denied.

1. Answ.
That you prayed for your children before you had them was your duty, and if
you prayed not for them submissively, referring it to the pleasure of God to
give or deny them, to continue or remove them, as should seem good to him; that
was your sin; you ought not to limit the holy one of Israel, nor prescribe to
him, or capitulate with him, for what term you shall enjoy your outward
comforts. If you did so, it was your evil, and God has justly rebuked it by
this stroke: if you did pray conditionally, and submissively, referring both
the mercy asked, and continuance of it to the will of God as you ought to do;
then there is nothing in the death of your child, that crosses the true scope
and intent of your prayer.

2. Answer.
Your prayers may be answered, though the thing prayed for be withheld, yea, or
though it should be given for a little while and snatched away from you again.
There are four ways of Gods answering prayers: by giving the thing prayed for
presently, Dan. 9. 23. or by suspending the answer for a time, and giving it
afterward, Luke 18. 7. or by withholding that mercy which you ask, from you,
and giving you a much better mercy in the room of it, Deuteronomy. 3. 24. compared
with Deuteronomy. 34. 4, 5. or lastly, by giving you patience to bear the loss or want
of it, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

Now if the Lord have taken away your child or friend, and in lieu thereof
given you a meek quiet submissive heart to his will, you need not say he has
shut out your cry.

2. Plea.
But I have lost a lovely obliging and most endearing child, one that was
beautiful and sweet; it is a stony heart that would not dissolve into tears for
the loss of one so desirable, so engaging as this was. Ah its no common loss!

1. Answer.
The more lovely and engaging your Relation was, the more excellent will your
patience and contentment with the will of God in its death be; the more
loveliness, the more self-denial, and the more self-denial, the more grace. Had
it been a thousand times more endearingly sweet than it was, it was not too
good to deny for God. If therefore obedience to the will of God do indeed
master natural affections; and that you look upon patience and contentment as
much more beautiful than the sweetest and most desirable enjoyment on earth, it
may turn to you for a testimony of the truth and strength of grace; that you
can, like Abraham, part with a child whom you so dearly love, in obedience to
the will of your God whom you love infinitely more.

2. Answer.
The loveliness and beauty of our children and Relations though it must be
acknowledged a good gift from the hand of God; yet it is but a common gift, and
oftentimes becomes a snare, and is in its own nature but a transitory vanishing
thing; and therefore no such great aggravation of the loss as is pretended.

I say it is but a common gift; Eliab, Adonijah, and Absalom, had as lovely a
presence as any in their generation. Yea, it is not only common to the wicked,
with the godly, but to bruit animals as well as men, and to most that excel in
it, it becomes a temptation; the souls of some had been more beautiful and
lovely, if their bodies had been less so. Beside, it is but a flower which
flourishes in its month, and then fades. This therefore should not be reflected
on as so great a circumstance to aggravate your trouble.

3. Answer.
But if your Relation sleep in Jesus, he will appear ten thousand times more
lovely in the morning of the Resurrection, than ever he was in this world. What
is the exactest purest beauty of mortals, to the incomparable beauty of the
Saints in the Resurrection: Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun, in
the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13. 43. In this hope you part with them,
therefore act sutably to your hopes.

3. Plea.
O but my child was nipt off by death in the very bud, I did but see, and love,
and part: had I enjoyed it longer, and had time to suck out the sweetness of
such an enjoyment, I could have born it easier, but its months or years with me
were so few, that they only served to raise an expectation, which was quickly,
and therefore the more sadly disappointed.

1. Answer.
Did your friend dye young, or was the bond of any other Relation dissolved
almost as soon as made? let not this seem so intolerable a load to you; for if
you have ground to hope they died in Christ, then they lived long enough in
this world. It Is Vide Mr. Baxter's Epistle to the life of Mr. John Janeway.
truly said, he has sailed long enough, that has won the Harbor; and he has
fought long enough that has obtained the victory; he has run long enough,
that has touched the Gole; and he has lived long enough on earth, that has
won heaven, be his days here never so few.

2. Answer.
The sooner your Relation dyed, the less sin has been committed, and the less
sorrow felt: What can you see in this world but sin or sorrow? A quick passage
through it to glory, is a special privilege. Surely the world is not so
desirable a place that Christians should desire an hours time longer in it for
themselves or theirs, than serves to fit them for a better.

3. Answer.
And whereas you imagine the parting would have been easier, if the enjoyment
had been longer, it is a fond and groundless suspicion. The longer you had
enjoyed them, the stronger would the endearments have been. A young and tender
plant may be easily drawn up by a single hand, but when it has spread and
fixed its roots many years in the earth, it will require many a strong blow and
hard tug to root it up. Affections like those underground roots are fixed and
strengthened by nothing more than consuetude, and long possession; it is much
easier parting now, than it would be hereafter, whatever you opine. However,
this should satisfy you, that Gods time is the best time.

4. Plea.
O but I have lost all in one, it is my only one, I have none left in its room
to repair the breach, and make up the loss; if God had given me other children
to take comfort in, the loss had not been so great, but to lose all at one
stroke, is insupportable.

1. Answer.
Religion allows not to Christians a liberty of expressing the death of their
dear Relations by so hard a word as the loss of them is. They are not lost but
sent before you. Non amittuntur, sed praemittuntur.
And it is a shameful thing for a Christian to be reproved for such an uncomely
expression by an Heathen. It Is enough to make us blush to read what an Heathen
said in this case, Never say thou have lost any thing (says Epictetus) but
that it is returned. Is thy Son Epict. Enchiri. Cap. 15.
dead? he is only restored. Is thy inheritance taken from thee? It is also
returned. And a while after he adds, (...). (i. e.) Let every thing be as the
Gods will have it.

2. Answer.
It Is no fit expression to say you have lost all in one, except that one be
Christ, and he being once yours, can never be lost. Doubtless your meaning is,
you have lost all your comfort of that kind; And what though you have? are
there not multitudes of comforts yet remaining of a higher kind, and more
precious and durable nature? If you have no more of that sort, yet so long as
you have better, what cause have you to rejoice?

3. Answer.
You too much imitate the way of the world in this complaint; they know not how
to repair the loss of one comfort, but by another of the same nature, which
must be put in its room, to fill up the vacancy: But have you no other way to
supply your loss? Have you not a God to fill the place of any creature that
leaves you? Surely this would better become a man whose portion is in this
life, than one that professes God is his all in all.

5. Plea.
O but my only One is not only taken away, but there remains no expectation or
probability of any more: I must now look upon my self as a dry tree, never to
take comfort in children any more, which is a cutting thought.

1. Answer.
Suppose what you say, that you have no hope or expectation of another child
remaining to you; yet if you have a hope of better things than children, you
have no reason to be cast down: bless God for higher and better hopes than
these, in Isa. 56. 4, 5. the Lord comforts them that had no expectation of sons
or daughters, with this, That he will give unto them in his house, and within
his walls a place, and a name better than of Sons or of Daughters; even an
everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. There are better mercies, and
higher hopes than these; though your hopes of children, or from children should
be cut off; yet if your eternal hopes be secure, and such as shall not make you
ashamed, you should not be so cast down.

2. Answer.
If God will not have your comfort to lie any more in children, then resolve to
place them in himself, and you shall never find cause to complain of loss by
such an exchange. You will find that in God which is not to be had in the
creature: one hours communion with him shall give you that, which the happiest
Parent never yet had from his children; you will exchange brass for gold,
perishing vanity, for solid and abiding excellency.

6. Plea.
But the suddenness of the stroke is amazing, God gave little or no warning to
prepare for this trial: Death executed its commission, as soon as it opened it.
My dear Husband, Wife, or Child, was snatched unexpectedly out of my arms, by a
surprising stroke; and this makes my stroke heavier than my complaint.

1. Answer.
That the death of your Relation was so sudden and surprising, was much your
own fault; who ought to have lived in the daily sense of its vanity, and
expectation of your separation from it: you knew it to be a dying comfort in
its best estate; and it is no such wonderful thing to see that dead, which we
knew before to be dying: Besides, you heard the changes ringing round about you
in other families; you frequently saw other Parents, Husbands, and Wives
carrying forth their dead; And what were all these but warnings given you to
prepare for the like trials?

Surely then it was your own security and regardlesness that made this
affliction so surprising to you, and who is to be blamed for that, you know.

2. Answer.
There is much difference betwixt the sudden death of infants, and that of
grown persons: The latter may have much work to do, many sins actually to
repent of, and many evidences of their interest in Christ to examine and clear,
in order to their more comfortable death; and so sudden death may be deprecated
by them.

But the case of Infants who exercise not their reason, is far different, they
have no such work to do; but are purely passive; all that is done in order to
their salvation, is done by God immediately upon them; and so it comes all to
one, whether their death be more quick, or more slow.

3. Answer.
You complain of the suddenness of the stroke, but another will be ready to
say, had my friend died in that manner, my affliction had been nothing to what
it now is; I have seen many deaths contrived into one: I saw the gradual
approaches of it upon my dear Relation, who felt every tread of death as it
came on toward him, who often cried with Job, Chap. 3. 20. Wherefore is light
given to him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? which long for
death but it comes it not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures: which
rejoice exceedingly and are glad, when they can find the grave.

That which you reckon the sting of your affliction, others would have reckoned
a favor and privilege. How many tender Parents, and other Relations who loved
their friends as dearly as your selves, have been forced to their knees upon no
other errand but this, to beg the Lord to hasten the separation, and put an end
to that sorrow, which to them was much greater than the sorrow for the dead.

7. Plea.
You press me to moderation of sorrows, and I know I ought to show it; but you
don't know how the case stands with me, there is a sting in this affliction,
that none feels but my self; And oh how intolerable is it now! I neglected
proper means in season to preserve life, or miscarried in the use of means. I
now see such a neglect or such a mistake about the means, as I cannot but judge
greatly to contribute to that sad loss which I now (too late) lament.

O my negligence, O my rashness and inconsiderateness! How does my Conscience
now smite me for my folly! and by this aggravate my burden beyond what is
usually felt by others. Had I seasonably applied my self to the use of proper
means, and kept strictly to such courses and counsels as those that are able
and skilful might have prescribed. I might have now had a living Husband, Wife,
or Child: whereas I am now not only bereaved, but am apt to think I have
bereaved my self of them. Surely, there is no sorrow, like unto my sorrow.

1. Answer.
Though it be an evil to neglect and slight the means ordained by God for
recovery of health, yet it is no less evil to ascribe too much to them, or rely
too much on them. The best means in the world are weak and ineffectual without
Gods assistance and concurrence, and they never have that his assistance or
concurrence, when his time is come; and that it was fully come in your friends
case, is manifested now by the event. So that if your friend had had the most
excellent helps the world affords, they would have availed nothing. This
consideration takes place only in your case, who see what the will of God is by
the issue, and may not be pleaded by any whilst it remains dubious and
uncertain, as it generally does in time of sickness.

2. Answer.
Do you not unjustly charge and fault your selves, for that which is not really
your fault or neglect? How far you are chargeable in this case will best
appear, by comparing the circumstances you are now in, with those you were in
when your Relation was only arrested by sickness; and it was dubious to you
what was your duty and best course to take.

Possibly you had observed so many to perish in Physicians hands, and so many
to recover without them, that you judged it safer for your friend, to be
without those means, than to be hazarded by them.

Or if diverse methods and courses were prescribed and persuaded to, and you
now see your error in preferring that which was most improper, and neglecting
what was more safe and probable; yet as long as it did not so appear to your
understanding at that time; but you followed the best light you had to guide
you at that time, it were most unjust to charge the fault upon your selves, for
choosing that course that then seemed best to you, whether it were so in it self
or not.

To be angry with your selves for doing or om^t^ing what was then done, or
omitted according to your best discretion and judgment; because you now see it
by the light of the event far otherwise than you did before; is to be troubled
that you are but men, or that you are not as God, who only can foresee Issues,
and events; and that you acted as all rational creatures are bound to do,
according to the best light they have, at the time and season of action.

3. Answer.
To conclude, times of great affliction are ordinarily times of great
temptation, and it is usual with Satan then to charge us with more sins than we
are really guilty of, and also to make those things seem to be sins, which upon
impartial examination will not be found to be so.

Indeed, had your neglect or miscarriage been knowing and voluntary; or had you
really preferred a little money (being able to give it) before the life of your
Relation; so that you did deliberatly choose to hazard this, rather than part
with that; no doubt then but there had been much evil of sin mixed with your
affliction: and your Conscience may justly smite you for it as your sin. But in
the other case which is more common, and I presume yours; it is a false charge,
and you ought not to abet the design of Satan in it.

Judge by the sorrow you now feel for your friend, in what degree he was dear to
you, and what you could now be content to give to ransom his life, if it could
be done with money. Judge I say by this how groundless the charge is, that Satan
now draws up against you; and you are but too ready to yield to the truth of it.

8. Plea.
But my troubles are upon a higher score, and account. My child or friend is
passed into Eternity, and I know not how it is with its soul. Were I sure that
my Relation were with Christ, I should be quiet; but the fears of the contrary
are overwhelming, O it is terrible to think of the damnation of one so dear to
me.

1. Answer.
Admit what the objection supposes, that you have real grounds to fear the
eternal condition of your dear Relation, yet it is utterly unbeseeming you, even
in such a case as this, to dispute with, or repine against the Lord.

I do confess it is a sore and heavy trial, and that there is no case more sad,
and sinking to the spirit of a gracious person. Their death is but a trifle to
this; but yet, if you be such as fear the Lord, methinks his indisputable
Sovereignty over them, and his distinguishing love and mercy to you, should at
least silence you in this matter.

First, His indisputable Sovereignty over them, Romans 9. 20. Who art thou, O
man, that disputest with God? He speaks it in the matters of eternal election
and reprobation. What if the Lord will not be gracious to those that are so
dear to us; Is there any wrong done to them or us thereby? Aarons two Sons were
cut off in an act of sin by the Lords immediate hand, and yet he held his
peace, Levit. 10. 3. God told Abraham plainly that the Covenant should not be
established with Ishmael, for whom he so earnestly prayed, O let Ishmael live
before thee! and he knew that there was no salvation out of the Covenant; and
yet he sits down silent under the word of the Lord.

Secondly, But if this do not quiet you, yet, methinks, his distinguishing love
and mercy to you should do it. O what do you owe to God, that root and branch
had not been cast together into the fire! that the Lord has given you good
hope through grace, that it shall be well with you for ever. Let this stop your
mouth, and quiet your spirit: though you should have grounds for this fear.

2. Answer.
But pray examine the grounds of your fear, whether it may not proceed from the
strength of your affections to the eternal welfare of your friend, or from the
subtilty of Satan designing hereby to over-whelm and swallow you up in sorrow,
as well as from just grounds and causes? In two cases it is very probable your
fear may proceed only from your own affection or Satan's temptation.

First, If your Relation died young, before it did any thing to destroy your
hopes. Or,

Secondly, If grown and in some good degree hopeful; only he did not in life,
or at death manifest and give evidence of grace, with that clearness as you
desired.

As to the case of Infants in general, it is none of our concern to judge their
condition, and as for those that sprang from Covenanted parents, it becomes us
to exercise Charity toward them: the Scripture speaks very favorably of them.

And as for the more adult, who have escaped the polutions of the world, and
made Conscience of sin and duty, albeit they never manifested what you could
desire they had; yet in them as in young Abijah, may be found some good thing
toward the Lord, which you never took notice of. Reverence of your authority,
bashfulness and shamefacedness, reservedness of disposition, and many other
things may hide those small and weak beginnings of grace that are in children,
from the observations of the Parents. God might see that in them that you never
saw; he despises not the day of small things.

However it be, it is now out of your watch, your concernment rather is to
improve the affliction to your own good, than judge and determine their
condition; which belongs not to you, but God.

9. Plea.
O but I have sinned in this Relation, and now God has punished my sin in
dissolving it. O says one, my heart was set too much upon it, I even idolized
it, that was my sin. And says another, I wanted due affections, and did not
love my Relation, at least not so spiritually as I ought, that was my sin. Now
God is visiting me for all the neglects and defects that have been in me
toward my Relation.

1. Answer.
There is no man so thoroughly sanctified, as not to fail and come short in many
things pertaining to his relative duties. And to speak as the thing is, the
corruptions of the holiest persons are as much discovered in this, as in any
other thing whatsoever. And it is a very common thing for Conscience, not only
to charge these failures upon us, but to aggravate them to the uttermost when
God has made the separation. So that this is no more than what is usual and
very common with persons in your case.

2. Answer.
Admit that which the Objection supposes, that God has afflicted you for your
sin, and removed that comfort from you which you Idolized and too much doted
on; yet there is no reason you should be so cast down under your affliction;
for all this may be, and probably is the fruit of his love to, and care over
your soul. Rev. 3. 19. He tells the afflicted for their comfort, Whom I love, I
rebuke and chasten. How much better is it to have an Idolized enjoyment taken
from you in mercy, than if God should say concerning you as he did of Ephraim,
Hos. 4. 17. He is joined to Idols, let him alone.

O it is better for you that your Father now reckons with you for your follies
with the Rod in his hand, than to say as he does of some, let them go on, I
will not hinder them in, or rebuke them for their sinful courses; but will
reckon with them for all together in Hell at last.

3. Answer.
And as to what you now charge upon your self, that the neglect of duty did
spring from the want of love to your Relation. Your sorrows at parting may
evidence that your Relation was rooted deep in your affection: but if your love
was not so spiritual and pure, to love and enjoy them in God; that was
undoubtedly your sin, and is the sin of most Christians; for which, both you,
and all others ought to be humbled.

10. Plea.
God has blessed me with an Estate, and outward comforts in the world, which I
reckoned to have left to my posterity, and now I have none to leave it with,
nor have I any comfort to think of it; the purposes of my heart are broken off,
and the comfort of all my other enjoyments blasted by this stroke, in one hour.
How are the pains and cares of many years perished!

1. Answer.
How may are there in the world, yea, of your own acquaintance, whom God has
either denied, or deprived both of the comforts of children and Estates too? If
he have left you those outward comforts you ought to acknowledge his goodness
therein, and not to slight these because he has deprived you of the other.

2. Answer.
Though your children be gone, yet God has many children left in the world
whose bowels you may refresh with what he has bestowed upon you; and your
charity to them will doubtless turn to a more comfortable account, than if you
had left a large Estate to your own posterity.

Surely we are not sent into this world to heap up great estates for our
children; and if you have been too eager in this design, you may now read Gods
just rebuke of your folly. Bless God you have yet an opportunity to serve God
eminently by your Charity: and if God deny you other Executors, let your own
hands be your Executors, to distribute to the necessity of the Saints; that the
blessings of them that are ready to perish may come upon you.

11. Plea.
O but the remembrance of its witty words and pretty actions is wounding.

1. Answer.
Let it rather lift up your heart to God in praise that gave you so desirable a
child, than fill your heart with discontent at his hand in removing it. How
many Parents are there in the world whose children God has deprived of reason
and understanding, so that they only differ from Beasts in external shape and
figure? And how many show betimes so perverse a temper, that little comfort can
be expected from them?

2. Answer.
These are but small circumstances and trivial things in themselves; but by
these little things, Satan manages a great design against your souls, to deject
or exasperate it: And surely this is not your business at this time; you have
greater things than the words and actions of children to mind: To search out
Gods end in your affliction: To mortify the corruption it is sent to rebuke, to
quiet your heart in the will of God: This is your work.

12. Plea.
Lastly, It Is Objected, O but God hides his face from me in my affliction, it is
dark within as well as without, and this makes my case most deplorable, greatly
afflicted, and sadly deserted.

1. Answer.
Though you want at present sensible comfort, yet you have reason to be
thankful for gracious supports. Though the light of Gods countenance shine not
upon you; yet you find the everlasting arms are underneath you; the care of God
works for you, when the consolations of God are withdrawn from you.

2. Answer.
To have God hide his face in time of trouble is no new, or unusual thing.
God's dearest Saints, yea his own Son has experienced it; who in the deeps of
inward and outward trouble, when wave called unto wave, felt not those sweet
sensible influences of comfort from God which had always filled his soul
formerly. If Christ cry in extremity, My God, my God, why have thou for saken
me? Then sure we need not wonder, as if some strange thing had happened to us.

3. Answer.
May not your unsubmissive carirage under the rod provoke God to hide his face
from you? Pray consider it well, nothing is more probable than this, to be the
cause of Gods with-drawment from you. Could you in meekness and quietness
receive that cup your Father has given you to drink; accept the punishment of
your iniquities: say good is the word of the Lord, it is the Lord let him do
what he will. You would soon find the case altered with you: but the comforting
spirit finds no delight nor rest in a turbulent and tumultuous breast.

And thus I have satisfied the most considerable Pleas urged in justification
of our Excesses.

4. I come now to the last thing proposed, namely, the means of curing and
preventing these sinful excesses of sorrow for the death of our dear Relations.

And although much has been said already to dissuade from this evil; and I
have enlarged already much beyond my first intention; yet I shall cast in some
farther help and assistance toward the healing of this distemper, by
prescribing the following Rules:

1. Rule.
If you would not mourn excessively for the loss of creature comforts, then
beware that you set not your delight and love excessively or inordinately upon
them whilst you enjoy them.

Strong affections make strong afflictions, the higher the Tide, the lower the
Ebb. According to the measure of our delight in the enjoyment, is our grief in
the loss of these things. The Apostle knits these two graces Temperance and
Patience together in the Precept, 2 Pet. 1. 16. And it is very observable how
Intemperance and Impatience are inseparably linked in experience, yea, the
experience of the best men. You read Genesis 37. 3. How Israel loved Joseph more
than all his children, because he was the son of his old age; and he made him a
coat of many colors.

This was the darling, Jacobs heart was exceedingly set upon him, his very life
was bound up in the life of the Lad. Now when the supposed death of this child
was brought to him; How did he carry it? See Ver. 34, 35. And Jacob rent his
clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his Son many days:
And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused
to be comforted; and he said, for I will go down into the grave to my Son
mourning: Thus his Father wept for him.

Here as in a glass, the effects of excessive love to a child are represented.
Here you may see what work immoderate love will make, even in a sanctified
heart.

O therefore let your moderation be known to all men, in your delights and
sorrows about earthly things; for ordinarily the proportion of the one is
answerable to the other.

2. Rule.
If you would not be overwhelmed with grief for the loss of your Relations, be
exact and careful in discharging your duties to them while you have them.

The testimony of your Conscience that you have labored in all things to
discharge the duties you owed to your Relations whilst they were with you, will
prove an excellent allay to your sorrows for them, when they are no longer
yours. It Is not so much the single affliction, as the guilt charged upon us in
times of affliction, that makes our load so heavy.

O what a terrible thing is it to look upon our dead, whilst Conscience is
accusing and upbraiding us for our duties neglected, and such or such sins
committed? O you little think how dreadful a spectacle this will make the dead
body of thy friend to thee.

Conscience if not quite stupid, or dead, will speak at such a time. O
therefore as ever you would provide for a comfortable parting at death, or meet
again at Judgment; be exact, punctual and circumspect in all your relative
duties.

3. Rule.
If you would not be overwhelmed by trouble for the loss of your Relations,
then turn to God under your trouble, and pour out your sorrows by prayer into
his bosom.

This will ease and allay your troubles: Blessed be God for the ordinance of
prayer; How much are all the Saints beholding to it at all times, but
especially in heart sinking and distressful times! It Is some relief, when in
distress we can pour out our trouble into the bosom of a Wife, or faithful
Friend; How much more when we leave our complaint before the gracious, wise and
faithful God? I told you before of that holy man, who having lost his dear and
only Son, got to his Closet; there poured out his soul freely to the Lord, and
when he came down to his friends that were waiting below to comfort him, and
fearing how he would bear that stroke; he came from his duty with a cheerful
countenance, telling them, he would be content to bury a Son (if it were
possible) every day, provided he might but enjoy such comfort as his soul had
found in that private hour.

Go thy way, Christian, to thy God, get thee to thy knees in the cloudy and
dark day; retire from all Creatures that thou may have thy full liberty with
thy God, and there pour out thy heart before him, in free, full and
brokenhearted confessions of sin: Judge thy self worthy of Hell as well as of
this trouble: Justify God in all his smartest strokes; beg him in this
distress to put under thee the evering arms: entreat one smile, one gracious
look to inlighten thy darkness and cheer thy drooping spirit. Say with the
Prophet, Jer. 17. 17, Be not then a terror to me, thou art my hope in the day
of evil. And try what relief such a course will afford thee. Surely if thy
heart be sincere in this course, thou shall be able to say with that holy man,
Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts which I had within me, thy
comforts have delighted my soul.

4. Rule.
If you would bear the loss of your dear Relations with moderation, eye God in
the whole process of the affliction more, and secondary causes and
circumstances of the matter less.

I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9.
Consider the hand of the Lord in the whole matter: And that

First, As a Sovereign hand, which has right to dispose of thee and all thy
comforts without thy leave or consent, Job 33. 13.

Secondly, As a Fathers hand correcting thee in love and faithfulness, Prove. 3.
11. Whom the Lord loves he corrects, as a Father the Son in whom he
delights. O if once you could but see affliction as a rod in a Fathers hand,
as proceeding from his love, and intended for your eternal good; How quiet
would you then be!

And surely if it draw your heart nearer to God, and mortify it more to this
vain world; it is a rod in the hand of special love: If it end in your love to
God, doubt not but it comes from Gods love to you.

Thirdly, As a just and righteous hand: Have thou not procured this to thy self
by thy own folly? Yea, the Lord is just in all that is come upon thee: Whatever
he has done, yet he has done thee no wrong.

Fourthly, Lastly, As a moderate and merciful hand that has punished thee less
than thine iniquities deserve; he has cast thee into affliction, he might
justly have cast thee into Hell. It Is of the Lords mercy that thou art not
consumed. Why does the living man complain?

5. Rule.
If you would bear your affliction with moderation, compare it with the
affliction of other men, and that will greatly quiet your spirits.

You have no cause to say God has dealt bitterly with you, and that there is
no sorrow like your sorrow: Look round about you and impartially consider the
conditions that others are in: and they nothing inferior to you in any
respect. You have one dead child, Aaron had two at a stroke, Job all at one
stroke: and both these by an immediate stroke from the hand of God. Some godly
Parents have lived to see their children dye in their sin by the hand of
Justice: others have seen them live to the dishonor of God, and breaking of
their own spirits: and would have esteemed it a mercy if they had dyed from the
womb, and given up the ghost when they came out of the belly, as Job speaks.

In what misery, have some Parents seen their children lie? God holding them as
so many terrible spectacles of misery before their eyes; so that they have
begged the Lord with importunity, to let loose his hand and cut them off. Death
being in their esteem, nothing to those continual agonies in which they have
seen them lie sweltering from day to day. Oh you little know what a bitter cup
others have had given them to drink! Surely if you compare, you must say, the
Lord has dealt gently and graciously with you.

6. Rule.
Carefully shun and avoid whatsoever may renew your sorrow, or provoke you to
impatience.

Increase not your sorrow by the sight of, or discourses about sad objects, but
labor to avoid them as occasions presented by the enemy of your souls, to draw
forth the corruptions of your hearts.

I told you before, why Jacob would not have the child of which Rachel dyed
called after the name his wife had given, Benoni, the Son of my sorrow; lest it
should prove a daily occasion of renewing his trouble for the loss of his dear
Wife; but he called his name Benjamin.

Your impatience is like tinder, or Gunpowder, so long as you can prevent the
sparks from falling on it, there is no great danger: But you that carry such
dangerous prepared matter in your own hearts, cannot be too careful to prevent
them. Do by murmuring as you do by blasphemous thoughts, think quite another
way, and give no occasion.

7. Rule.
In the day of your mourning for the death of your friends, seriously consider
your own death as approaching, and that you and your dead are distinguished but
by a small interval and point of time.

2 Samuel 12. 23. I shall go to him. Surely the thoughts of your own death, as
approaching also, will greatly allay your sorrows for the dead, that are gone
before you.

We are apt to fancy a long life in the world, and then the loss of those
comforts which we promised our selves so much of the sweetness and comfort of
our lives from, seems an intolerable thing.

But would you reallize your own deaths more, you would not be so deeply
concerned for their death as you are. Could you but look into your own graves
more seriously, you would be able to look into your friends grave more
composedly.

And thus I have finished what I designed from this Scripture. The Father of
mercies, and God of all comfort, whose sole Prerogative it is to comfort them
that are cast down, write all his truths upon your hearts, that they may abide
there, and reduce your disordered affections to that frame which best suits the
will of God, and the profession you make of subjection and resignation
thereunto.

FINIS.

