The Confession of Edward Fitz-Harys Esquire, Written with his own Hand, and
delivered to Dr. Hawkins Minister of the Tower, July 1. 1681. being the day of
his Execution: Together with his last Speech.
I Edward Fitzharys, having been Indicted of High Treason, for endeavoring to
dethrone the KING, was thereupon found Guilty, and Sentence of Death passed
upon me. I the aforesaid Edward Fitz-harys do voluntarily and freely, without
any hopes to save my Life, but as a Dying Man, and to discharge my Conscience
toward God, and for the better satisfaction of the World, make this
Declaration following, in the presence of God, and unto Doctor Francis Hawkins,
Chaplain of the Tower of London.

I do profess and declare my Religion in the general to be that which has been
truly and anciently delivered in the first Four General Councils; and in
particular, my Belief is that true Faith of a Christian briefly contained in
those three Creeds commonly called The Apostles Creed, St. Athanasius's, and
the Nicene Creeds: And I die a Member, and in the Communion of Christ's Holy
Catholic Church, hoping for Mercy through the alone Merits of the Passion of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I do also confess and declare, as to the Crimes which I die for, I was no
further concerned in the Libel, than as employed to give the King notice of
what Libels or other Accusations there were against him; and to this Intent,
and no other, I endeavored to get this Libel: which at length I did from Mr.
Everard, all written under his own Hand, and carried it to Mrs. Wall, by whose
means I conveyed all Matters of this or the like nature to the King. I told her
I had a Business of great consequence to acquaint the King with: But she
answered me, That my Lord Sunderland being out, there would be no Money had for
Secret Service, and advised me to go to the Lord Clarendon or Hyde: But before
I could do this, I was taken As for that part of the Libel which I left with
Everard, as a Pledge to assure him I would not betray him, I received it of the
Lord Howard: And the Money I received from the King, was for bringing a Libel
called The King Vnvail'd, and the Lady Portsmouths Articles. I call God to
witness. I never had a Farthing Charity from the King.

I do further confess and declare, That the Lord Howard told me of a Design to
seize upon the King's Person, and to carry him into the City, and there detain
him till he had condescended to their Desires. Heyns and my self were privy to
this Design, and had several Meetings, with the Lord Howard; and as an
Encouragement, the Lord Howard assured us of breaking the Settlement of
Ireland, taking off the Additional Revenue of the Bishops, Forty nine Men, and
Grantees, whose Estates were to be shared amongst the Party.

I do confess and declare, That while I was in Newgate, the Sheriffs, Bethel
and Cornish, came to me, with a Token from the Lord Howard, which I knew to be
true, and brought Heads with them from Everard, wherein he accused me of being
a Court-Emissary, or Yorkist, put on by the King to put the Libel into
Protestants Houses, to trepan them. But I declare upon my death I had no such
intent, nor do I know any such thing. The Sheriffs likewise told me, I was to
be tried within three or four Days, that the People would prosecute me, and the
Parliament would Impeach me, and that nothing would save my Life but
discovering the Popish Plot; and then the Sheriffs aforesaid gave me great
Encouragement from my Lord Howard, that if I would declare that I believed so
much of the Plot as amounted to the introducing the R. C. or if I could find
out any that could Criminate the Queen, R. H. or make so much as a plausible
Story to confirm the Plot, that the Parliament would restore me to my Fathers
Estate, with the Profits thereof since His Majesty's Restoration. I finding my
self in the condition I was, in Newgate, Fettered, Moneyless and Friendless, my
Wife ready to Ly-in, without any subsistence, my Children in a miserable
condition, and must needs be in a worse by my death, and I could see no other
Refuge for life, but complying with them; so, not with ambitious intent, but to
save my life, I did comply. The Sheriffs brought Instructions, which they said
came from the Lords and Commons, who met that day in order to Address to the
King in my behalf (if I should confirm the Instructions;) and they made use of
the Lord Shaftsbury's Name, and others, what Advantage I might have thereby. At
the first I made a formal Story concerning the Plot, which was not prejudicial
to any body, but most relating to general Heads known publicly; upon which Mr.
Cornish told me, These were things cried about the Streets two years ago: I
replied, I could say no more. Mr. Sheriff said, he was sorry for me with all
his heart, but thought I could say more if I would, and pressed me hard to
speak to several Heads, unto which unless I spoke, he said, there was no hopes
of life; the Heads which I was to speak to, is what the Examination taken by
Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby contains, and a great deal more that I
did not say then, relating to the Queen, R. H. Earl of Danby, declaring French
Pensioners, Lords Hallifax, Hyde, Clarendon, Ferversham, Seymer, and others;
the burning the Fleet, Forts and Governments in Popish hands, Meal-Tub-Plot,
Prentices Plot, the Contrivance of the Libel on the Lady Portsmouth, being a
French Design to destroy Protestants. These and many other Heads were brought
to me by the Sheriffs.

I do further confess and declare, That Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby
coming to me to examine me, Sir Robert Clayton asked me what I could say
concerning Godfrey's Murder? I answered, Something. He replied It may be I was
in a Confusion; recollect your self. And what I said concerning Father Patrick,
was forced out of me, and what I said concerning him is not true. Sir George
Treby was with me three hours, or there bouts, and pressed to say concerning
Godfrey's Death: And said, Unless I could speak to that Murder, I could say
nothing; Whereupon, I said something I had from others. He asked me if I could
say no more? I replied, Is not this enough to save my Life? Am I not Rogue
enough? The Recorder hereupon swear, 'Zourds, what were you ever but a Rogue?
Then the Recorder ended upon the Heads of the Examination; which being done, he
told me, All this would not save my Life, unless I would speak to the Libel,
which was a Court-trick; And it was not for nothing that I had been seen so
often at the Lady Portsmouth's. The Lord Shaftsbury said, You know more of
these matters than any man. Sir George would have me speak to the Consult; that
the Duke was at it, the Lords Bellasis, Arundel and Powis were at it, You have
seen them go to it at St James 's; without doubt they were there; Do you but
say it, we have those that will swear it.

I do further declare and confess, That what I said against the Queen and the
Duke, I was put upon, in the matter of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder; And do
further declare, That what I swear against the Earl of Danby; the threatening
words that were uttered I did (to the best of my remembrance) hear, but whom
they concerned I could not well know, by what my Lord himself said. And what de
Puis told me concerning my Lord of Danby, I do believe was spoken out of ill
will; And what I said against him, was to stave off my Trial till a Parliament;
and they were the more desirous to accuse the Lord Danby of Godfrey's Murder,
because the Crime of Murder is not inserted in his Pardon. I am sorry for what
I said against the Queen, his Royal Highness, and the Earl of Danby; I desire
God to forgive me the wrong I did them, and do heartily beg their Pardon.

I do further declare and protest. That this Confession and Declaration of
mine, I own sincerely, as a dying man, and not to save my Life; And I call God
and all his Angels to witness the Truth of it, And I renounce Mercy at the
Hands of God Almighty, if this be not true.

And I do further declare and protest, as a dying man unto James Walmesly,
Edward Pattel and Mary Walmesly, That I have made this Confession and
Declaration unto Dr. Hawkins, freely, and of my own voluntary accord, without
any manner of promise made, or hops given me by him from the King of saving my
Life by this Confession; I having given him to understand beforehand they were
matters of Consequence, and such as chiefly concerned the good of the King and
Kingdom.

I give the Doctor my hearty Thanks for all his Prayers, Counsel and Charitable
Offices he has done me, and I pray God to bless him for ever for it. I forgive
all the World, and desire all the World to forgive me; And the Lord have mercy
on my Soul.

Edward Fitz-Harys.
This Protestation was made by Mr. Fitz-Harys, July 1. between the hours of 7
and 8 in the morning, in the presence and hearing of us whose Names are here
underwritten.

James Wolmesly, Edward Pattel, Mary Walmesly.




I Do hereby declare, That Mr. Fitz-Harys, before he began to write any part of
this Narrative, was, more than once, assured by me that there was no hope of
his life, that I know of, whatever he should say; nor of his Salvation, if he
should say any thing that he knew to be false: of which he being thoroughly
sensible, and perfectly convinced, proceeded to write the Narrative aforesaid.
And I continuing to admonish him upon every point that was material, not to say
anything but what was exactly true, he took occasion, at several periods of his
Narrative, to kneel down, and solemnly to Protest the Truth of every word
therein contained. And this I again declare upon the Faith of a Christian, and
the word of a Minister of the Gospel.

Francis Hawkins.

Mr. Fitz-Harys's Speech at his Execution.
GOod People, This Infamous kind of Death is much more irksom to me, than Death
it self: Such a Judgment as this my Sins against God may justly bring upon me,
and I do most humbly submit unto it. But as to the Crimes which I now die for,
I take God to witness, I was no further concerned in the Libel, than to
discover to the King what Practices of that kind were against him, being
employed for that end, though those that employed me refused to do me Justice
at my Trial. And I call God to Witness, I never had a Farthing of Money of the
King in my life, but on the account of the like Service. And as to the
Witnesses that have Sworn against me, I do here solemnly declare, now at my
Death, that I have not seen the French Ambassador since the beginning of the
breaking out of the Plot, neither have I had any acquaintance with him. And as
to his Confessor, I never spoke with him in my life; neither have I had any
dealing, either directly or indirectly, in my life with them, though Sir
William Waller and the rest Swore most falsely to the contrary. And how like it
is that the French Ambassador would give three thousand Crowns for writing that
Libel, I leave the world to Judge. What I might further declare, I have left
with Doctor Hawkins. I forgive all the World, and do hope that God will forgive
me. I beg the Prayers of all good People for a happy Passage into the other
World.

Edw. Fitz-Harys.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty. Anno DOM. 1681.


