THE Balm of the Covenant Applied to the BLEEDING WOUNDS OF Afflicted Saints.

First Composed for the Relief of a Pious and Worthy Family, Mourning over the
Deaths of their Hopeful CHILDREN; and now made Public for the Support of all
Christians, Sorrowing on the same or any other Account.

To which is added, A Sermon Preached for the Funeral OF THAT Excellent and
Religious Gentleman John Vpton of Lupton Esquire

By JOHN FLAVELL, Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon.

London: Printed for I. Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey. 1688.

To the Virtuous And much Honored MADAM VRSVLA VPTON OF Lupton in Devon.
MADAM,
IF I find it an hard Task to write on such a doleful Subject, it cannot be
imagined but your part must be abundantly harder, who feel over and over what
is here written. Could I tell how to administer Counsels and Comforts to you,
without exasperating your Sorrows, I would certainly take that way; but seeing
the one (in this case) cannot be done without the other, it is our Duty to
submit to the method Providence has prescribed to us.

The design of the ensuing Discourse, is to evince the truth of what seems a
very great Paradox to most men, namely, that the Afflictions of the Saints can
do them no hurt, and that the Wisdom of Men and Angels cannot lay one
circumstance of their condition (how uneasy soever it seems to be) better, or
more to their advantage than God has laid it. I attempt not by a flourish of
Rhetoric to persuade you against the Demonstrations you can fetch from Sense
and Feeling to the contrary, but to overthrow the false Reasonings of Flesh and
Sense, by the allowed Rules of Scripture and sure Principles of Religion.

And methinks you, and every Christian, should gladly entertain that
comfortable conclusion, when you shall find the foundation of it as strong, as
the influences thereof are sweet and comfortable.

Certainly, Madam, the intent of the Redeemer's undertaking was not to purchase
for his People Riches, Ease, and Pleasures on Earth; but to mortify their
Lusts, heal their Natures, and spiritualize their Affections, and thereby to
fit them for the eternal fruition of God. Upon this supposition the truth of
this conclusion (how strange soever it seems) is firmly built.

It was not without divine direction, that the subject of the ensuing Discourse
was as pertinently, as seasonably, recommended to me by your dear Husband, in
the day of your sorrows for your only Son. He took, I hope, his Portion of
Comfort out of it before he died, and it is now left as a Spring of Comfort to
you, who then mourned with him, and now for him.

Heavy Pressures call for strong Support, and fainting Seasons for rich
Cordials. Your Burden is indeed heavy, yet I must say it is much our own fault
they are so heavy as we feel them to be: for according to the measure of our
delight in, and expectation from the Creature, is our sorrow and disappointment
when we part from it. The highest Tides are always followed with the lowest
Ebbs. We find Temperance and Patience knit together in the same Precept, and
Intemperance and Impatience as inseparably connected in our own Experience. It
may be we did not suspect our selves of any sinful excess in the time of their
enjoyment, but it now appears the Creature was gotten deeper into our hearts
than we imagined by the pain we feel at parting: Did we not lean too hard upon
it, there would not be such shakings as we feel when it is slipped from us.

But, Madam, it is high time to recall your thoughts and bound your sorrows,
which the following Considerations would greatly assist you in.

1. What is the very ground and reason of our excessive sorrows for the ^oss of
earthly Comforts? ^s it not this, that they are perishing and transitory? that
is, that you find them to be as God made them. And can you expect that God
should alter the Laws of Nature to please and humor us? It is as natural to
our Relations to die, as it is to Flowers to wither, or the Moon to wane. 2.
That there is no such necessary connection betwixt these things, and our
comfort, that whenever God removes the one, he must needs remove the other with
it. Christ and Comfort are indeed so united, but nothing beside him is or can
be so. I hope you will shortly experience the truth of this Conclusion, by the
Comforts God will give you in the absence of those Comforts you have lost. Can
you not now have as free access to God as before? Yea, do not these very
Afflictions send you oftener into his presence? And if God meet you in those
duties (as in days of distress he uses to meet his People) then it will be
evident to you that your Joy and Comfort lives, though your Husband and
Children be laid in their Graves. 3. That the removin^ of your earthly Comforts
hinders not but that yo^ may still pursue the great end and business of you^
life, and carry on all you^ designs for Heaven as successfully as ever. Indeed,
Madam, had we been sent into this World to raise Estates, contract Relations,
and then sit down in the midst of them, as our Portion, then our design had
been utterly dashed and disappointed; but you know this is not your main end, or
great business upon Earth, but to honor God by an holy fruitful life here, and
make ^eady for the full enjoyment of him hereafter. And what hinders, but you
^ay as prosperously ma^age and carry on this ^our design as ever? You ^o not
think the Travel^er is disabled for his Jour^ey, because he has few^r clogs
and hindrances ^^an before. I think few Christians find much fur^^erance
Heavenward by ^^eir multiplicity of En^agements or Enjoyments (...) this World.
Your ^^res and fears about these ^^ings, will now lie in a ^arrower compass
than they did before, and there by you may have yo^ thoughts more about yo^ to
attend the great co^^cerns of Gods glory an^ your own salvation. 4. But above
all, yo^ will certainly find yo^ relief and consolation (...) lie in the
everlasting C^^venant of God. Then^ it was that David fetc^ his support under a
mu^^ heavier Burden adn sma^^ter Rod than yours: f^^ your Relations were su^^
as gave you comfort their lives, and left y^^ many grounds of hope their
deaths; but his we^ taken away in their sins. But though the grounds of his
sorrow (blessed be God) are not yours, yet I hope the grounds of his comfort in
the Text are fully yours.
I confess I have prepared these things in too much have, and distraction of
thoughts, which in this juncture was unavoidable; nor have I bestowed much of
Art or Language upon them: and if I had, they would have been never the more
effectual to your relief for that. But such as they are, I humbly present them
to you, with my hearty Prayers, That God would make them a Sovereign Balm, by
the blessing of his Spirit on them to your wounded Spirit, and to all other
godly Families groaning under the like Strokes of God with you, and remain,

MADAM, Tour most faithful Sympathizing Friend and Servant, Jo. Flavell.

THE Balm of the Covenant Applied to the BLEEDING WOUNDS OF Afflicted Saints.
TEXT.
2 Samuel 23. v. 5. Although my house be not so with God, yet has he made with
me an everlasting Covenant; ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow.


THese are part of David's last words. The last words of dying Saints, but
especially of dying Prophets, are ponderous, memorable, and extraordinarily
remarkable; and such are these acknowledged to be, by all Expositors: it is a
golden Sentence, a divine Oracle, fit to be the last words of every dying
Saint, as well as of David.

They are called his last words, not simply, and absolutely, as though he
breathed them forth with his last breath; (for he spoke many things afterward)
but either they are the last he spoke as a Prophet, by divine inspiration, or
because he had them often in his mouth, to his last and dying day. They were
his Epicedium, his sweet Swan like Song, in which his Soul found singular
Refreshment, and strong Support, amidst the manifold A^^^ictions of his Life,
and against the Fears of his approaching Death.

The whole Chapter is designed for a Coronis or honorable Close of the Life of
David, and gives us an account both of the worthy Expressions that dropped from
him, and of the renowned Worthies that were employed by him: but all the
heroic Achievements recorded to the honor of their Memories, in the
following part of the Chapter, are trivial and inglorious things, compared with
this one divine Sentence recorded in my Text; in which we have two things to
consider, viz. 1. The Preface, which is exceeding solemn. 2. The Speech it
self, which is exceeding weighty.


1. In the Preface, we have both the instrumental and principal efficient Cause
of this divine Sentence, distinctly set down, ver. 1. and the Efficient, or
Author of it, v. 2.

The Instrument or Organ of its conveyance to us, was David; described by his
Descent or Lineage, the Son of Iesse; by his eminent Station, the man that was
raised up on high, even to the top and culminating point of Civil and Spiritual
Dignity and Honor, both as a King, and as a Prophet; by his Divine Unction,
The anointed of the God of Jacob; and lastly, by the flowing sweetness of his
Spirit, and style in the divine Psalms that were penned by him, whence he here
gets the Title of The sweet Psalmist of Israel, the pleasant one in the Psalms
of Israel, as some read it.

The principal efficient Cause of this excellent passage, is here likewise
noted, and all to commend it the more to our special observation and
acceptance: w. 2.
The spirit of God spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue. This stamps my
Text expressly with divine Authority. The Spirit of God spoke by David; he was
not the Author, but only the Scribe of it. Thus the ensuing Discourse is
prefaced. Let us next see,

2. The Matter or Speech it self, wherein we shall find the Maxims, and general
Rules of Government prescribed, and the Felicity of such a Government elegantly
described. v. 3.
He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Princes being
in Gods place, must exalt the Righteousness of God, in the government of men;
and when they do so, they shall be as the Light of the Morning when the Sun
rises, even a morning without Clouds, etc. What Halycon days shall that happy
People see, whose Lot is cast into such times and places! All this is typically
spoken of David, and those pious Princes who succeeded him; but mystically and
eminently points at Christ, who was to rise out of David's Seed, Romans 1.3. and
to sit upon his Throne, Acts 2.30. So that in this he was raised on high, to an
Eminency of Glory and Dignity indeed; He was so in his ordinary natural Seed; a
Royal Race, deriving it self from him, and sitting upon his Throne in a Lineal
Succession, till the Babylonish Captivity, which was about four hundred and
thirty years. And after that, the Jews had Governors of his Line, at least
rightful Heirs to that Crown, till the promised Messiah came. But that which
was the top of David's Honor, the most sparkling Jewel in his Crown, was this,
that the Lord Jesus was to descend from him, according to the Flesh, in whom
all the glorious Characters, before given, should not only be exactly answered,
but abudantly exceeded. And thus you find the natural Line of the Messiah is
drawn down by Matthew, from David to the Virgin Mary, Matthew. 1. and his Legal
Line by Luke, from David to Joseph, his supposed Father, Luke 3.23.

Now though the illustrious Marks and Characters of such a righteous, serene,
and happy Government, did not fully agree to his day, nor would do so in the
Reigns of his ordinary natural Successors, his day was not without many Clouds
both of Sin and Trouble; yet such a blessed day he foresaw and rejoiced in,
when Christ, the extraordinary Seed of David, should arise and set up his
Kingdom in the World, and with the expectation hereof, he greatly chears and
encourages himself: Although my house be not so with God, yet has be made with
me an everlasting Covenant, etc. In which words four things are eminendy
remarkable.

1. Here is a sad Concession of Domestic Evils. 2. A singular Relief from Gods
Covenant with him. 3. The glorious Properties of this Covenant displayed. 4.
The high esteem and dear regard his house had unto it.
1. Here is David's sad and mournful Concession of the Evils of his House, both
Moral, and Penal. Although my house be not so with God, (i. e.) neither so
holy, nor so happy, as this description of a righteous and flourishing
Government imports; alas, it answers not to it: for though he was eminent for
Godliness himself, and had solemnly dedicated his House to God, Psalm. 30.
as soon as it was built, yea, though he piously resolved to walk in the midst
of it with a perfect heart, and not to suffer an immoral person within his
Walls; yet great miscarriages were found even in David's House, Psalm. 101.2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.
and Person, which God chastized him for, by a thick succession of sharp and
sore Afflictions. Tamar was defiled by her Brother Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.23. Amnon
was barbarously murdered thereupon, by the advice of Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.28.
Absalom unnaturally rebels against his Father David, and drives him out of the
Royal City, and perishes in that Rebellion, 2 Samuel 15.1. Then Adonijah, another
Darling-Son, grasps at the Crown settled by David upon Solomon, and perishes for
that his Usurpation, 1 King. 2.25. O what an heap of Mischiefs and Calamities
did this good man live to see within his own Walls! besides the many foreign
Troubles that came from other hands. How many flourishing Branches did God ^op
off from him, and that in their sins too? so that his day was a day of Clouds,
even from the morning unto the evening of it; Psalm. 132.1. Lord, remember
David, and all his afflictions. Well might he say, His house was not so with
God. But what then, does he faint and despond under these manifold Calamities?
Does he refuse to be comforted, because his Children are gone, and all things
involved in trouble? No, but you find,

2. He relieves himself by the Covenant God had made with him: Yet has he made
with me a Covenant. Plus est quam haec domus mea ante deum. Jon.
He looks to Christ, there is more in the Covenant than this my House before
God, as the Chaldee turns it. This little word yet, wraps up a great and
sovereign Cordial in it. Though Amnon, Absalom, and Adonijah be gone, and gone
with many smarting aggravations too; yet has he made with me a Covenant, yet I
have this Sheet-Anchor left to secure me. Gods Covenant with me, in relation to
Christ, this under-props and shores up my heart.

This Covenant was, without controversy, a Gospel Covenant. It was David's
Gospel: for all his salvation and all his desire were in it; which could never
be, except Christ had been in it, who is the salvation of all the ends of the
Earth, and the desire of all Nations.

It Is true, it was a more obscure and imperfect Edition of the Covenant of
Faith, yet clearer than those that were made before it; it came not up to the
fullness and clearness of the discoveries made by Jeremy and Ezekiel: but yet in
this Covenant with David, God revealed more of Christ, than had been ever
revealed before; for the Light of Christ, like that of the Morning, increased
still more and more, till it came to a perfect day. It is worthy our
observation, how God made a gradual discovery of Christ, from Adam, down along
to New Testament-times. It was revealed to Adam, that he should be the Seed of
the Woman, but not of what Nation, till Abraham's time; nor of what Tribe, till
Jacob; nor of what Sex and Family, till David; nor that he should be born of a
Virgin, till Isaiah; nor in what Town, till Micah. The first Revelation of this
Covenant with David, 2 Samuel 7.12, 13, 14.
was by Nathan the Prophet; afterward enlarged and confirmed, Psalm. 89. By it
he knew much of Christ, and wrote much of him. He spoke of his Person, Psalm.
45.6.11. Psalm. 8.4, 5, 6. of his Offices, both Prophetical, Psalm. 40.8, 9, 10.
Priestly, Psalm. 110.4. and Kingly, Psalm. 2.6. of his Incarnation, Psalm. 8.5. of
his Death on the Cross, Psalm. 22.16, 17. of his Burial, Psalm. 16.8, 9, 10.
Resurrection, Psalm. 2.7. and triumphant Ascension, Psalm. 68.18. there was sum
of the Gospel discovered, though in dark and typical terms and forms of
Expression; but if out of this Covenant, as obscure as its Revelation was,
David fetched such strong Support and Consolation, amidst such an heap of
Troubles, then the Argument is good, a fortiori: What Support and Comfort may
not we draw thence, who live under the most full and perfect display of it, in
all its Riches and Glory? Enough has been said to prove it a Gospel Covenant;
but if any doubt should remain of that, it will be fully removed, by
considering,

3. The eximious Properties and Characters of the Covenant, as we find them
placed in the Text; and they are three, viz. (1.) Everlasting. (2.) Ordered in
all things, and (3.) Sure.


(...).
(1.) It is an Everlasting Covenant, or a perpetual Covenant, a Covenant of
Eternity; not in the most ^trict, proper, and absolute sense: for that is the
incommunicable property of God himself, who neither has beginning, nor end;
but the meaning is, that the Benefits and Mercies of the Covenant are durable
and endless to the People of God: for Christ being the principal Matter and
Substance of the Covenant, there must be in it everlasting Righteousness, as it
is called, Dan. 9.24. everlasting Kindness, Isai. 54.8. everlasting
Forgiveness, Ier. 31.34. and in consequence to all these, everlasting
Consolation, Isai. 51.11. In all which, the riches and bounty of Free Grace
shine forth in their greatest glory and splendour.

(2.) It is a Covenant ordered in all things, (...) ordinavit, disposuit,
aptavit.
or orderly prepared, disposed, and set, as the word imports. Every thing being
here disposed and placed in the most comely order, both persons and things here
keep their proper place: God the Father keeps the place of the most wise
Contriver and bountiful Donor of the invaluable Mercies of the Covenant; and
Christ keeps the proper place both of the Purchaser and Surety of the Covenant,
and all the Mercies in it; and Believers keep their place, as the unworthy
Receivers of all the gratuitous Mercies and rich Benefits thereof, and the most
obliged Creatures in all the World to Free Grace, saying, Although my house,
yea, although my heart and my life be not so with God, yet has he made with me
an everlasting Covenant. And as Persons, so Things, all things in this Covenant
stand in the most exquisite order, and exact correspondence to each other. O
it is a ravishing sight to behold the habitude and respect of the Mercies in the
Covenant, to the sins and wants of all that are in it! Here are found full and
suitable supplies to the wants of all Gods People. Here you may see Pardon in
the Covenant, for guilt in the Soul; Joy in the Covenant, for sorrow in the
Heart; Strength in the Covenant, for all defects and weaknesses in the
Creature; Stability in the Covenant, for mutability in the Creature. Never did
the Wisdom of God shine forth more in any contrivance in the World, (except
that of Christ, the Surety and principal Matter of the Covenant) than it does
in the orderly dispose of all things in their beautiful order, and comely
proportions in this Covenant of Grace.

(3.) It is a sure Covenant, (...) custodivit ser^avit.
or a Covenant safely laid up and kept, as the word imports; and upon this
account the Mercies of it are called, The sure mercies of David, Isai. 55.3.
And so, Psalm. 89.28. speaking of this very Covenant, God says, My Covenant
shall stand fast with him, there shall be no vacillancy, no shaking in this
Covenant: and ver. 34. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips. Every thing is as its foundation is. Now, Gods Covenant
being founded in his unchangeable counsel and purpose, wherein there can be no
lubricity, and Christ being the Surety of it, it must needs b^ as the Text
calls it, a sure Cov^^nant, wherein the faithfulness o^ God is as illustriously
displayed, ^ his Bounty and Wisdom are in the two former properties of it. An^
such a Covenant as this so eve^^lasting, aptly disposed, and sure must needs
deserve that preciou^ Respect and high Esteem from e^very believing soul, which
Davi^ here does pay it in.

4. The singular and high valua^tion he had of it, when he says This is all my
salvation, and all my desire, (...)
or as some translate, all my delight, or pleasure; (i. e.) here I find all
repaired with an infinite overplus, that I have lost in the Creature: Here is
life in death fullness in wants, security in dan^gers, peace in troubles. It is
al^ my salvation, for it leaves nothing in hazard that is essential to my
happiness; and all my desire, for i^ repairs whatever I have lost, or can lose:
it is so full and complete a Covenant, that it leaves nothing to be desired out
of it. O it is a full Fountain! Here I repose my weary soul with full
satisfaction, and feed my hungry desires with sweetest delights; so that my
very soul is at rest and ease, in the bosom of this blessed Covenant. Thus you
have the parts and sense of the Text. The Notes from it are three.

Observation I.
That Gods Covenant People may be exercised with many sharp Afflictions in
their Persons and Families.

Even David's House was the House of Mourning. Although my house be not so with
God, though he make it not to grow. All sorts of outward Afflictions are
incident to all sorts of men. Eccl. 9.2.
All things (says Solomon) come alike to all: there is one event to the
righteous, and to the wicked; to the clean, and unclean; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. The Providence seem one and the
same, though the subjects on whom the^ fall be vastly different. Estate and
Children, Health, and Libe^ty, will still be like themselv^^ vanishing
Comforts, whoever the Owners of them. No ma^^ spiritual Estate can be known b^
the view of his temporal Estat^^ A godly Family cannot be a mis^rable, but it
may be a mournful F^mily. Religion secures us from the Wrath, but it does not
secur^ us from the Rod of God. The Lord has chosen another way o^ expressing
his love to his people than by temporal and externa^ things: therefore all
things come alike to all. The Covenant exclude^ the Curse, but includes the
Cros^^ If his children forsake my Law, etc then will I visit their iniquity
with the rod, and their sin with stripes nevertheless my loving kindness will
not utterly take away.

Nor indeed would it be the privilege of Gods Covenanted People, to be exempt
from the Rod; a mark of Bastardy can be no man's felicity: Heb. 12.8. to go
without the chastising discipline of the Rod, were to go without ^he needful
instructions and blessed fruits that accompany and result from the Rod, Psalm.
94.12.

Let us not therefore say, as those ^rreligious persons did in Mal. 3.14. It is
in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances,
and walked mournfully before him? Surely none serve him in vain, but those that
serve him vainly. Godliness cannot secure you from Affliction, but it can and
will secure you from Hell, and sanctify your Afflictions to help you to
Heaven. But I stay not here.

Observation II.
A declining Family is a sore stroke from the hand of God, and so to be
acknowledged, wherever it falls.

It was a growing sorrow to David, that his House did not grow; and he eyed the
hand of God in it: He made it not to gro^ as he speaks in the Text. He fe^ as
many Deaths as he had de^ Children. It is God that buil^ and destroys Families;
he enla^^geth, and straighteneth them ^^gain. A Family may decline tw^ ways,
viz. either, 1. By the Death: or, 2. By the Degeneracy of i^ Offspring.


1. By their Death, when Go^ lops off the hopeful springin^ Branches thereof;
especially the last and only Prop of it, in whom not only all the care and
love, bu^ all the hope and expectation of the Parents is contracted and boun^
up. For, Virgil.
Omnis in Aseanio stat chari cur^ parentis.
The hearts of tender Parents are usually bound up in the life of an only Son.
As a man's Wife is but himself divided, so his Children ^re but himself
multiplied; and ^hen all love and delight, hope and expectation, is reduced to
one, ^^e affection is strong, and that ^akes the affliction so too. If it ^ere
not an unparalled grief a^ong all earthly griefs and sor^ows, the Spirit of
God would never have chosen and singled it out ^om among all other sorrows, to
^lustrate sorrow for sin by it, yea, ^orrows for that special sin of ^iercing
Christ, as he does. They ^all look upon him whom they have ^ierced, Zech. 12.10.
and shall mourn for him, as ^^e that mourns for an only son. How naked are
those Walls, and ^ow unfurnished is that House, ^here the Children (its best
Or^aments) are taken down and re^oved by Death! It is natural to ^ll men, to
desire the continuance ^f their Names and Families in ^he Earth; and therefore
when God cuts off their expectations in that kind, they look upon themselves as
dry Trees, or as the wi^hering Stalks in the Fields, when ^he Flowers are
fallen off and blown ^way from them.

2. Or which is yet much wo^^ a Family may decline by the (...) generacy of its
Offspring. Wh^ the Piety, Probity, and Vert^^ of Ancestors descend not wi^^
their Lands to their Posterit^ here the true Line of Honor cut off, and the
glory of a Fam^^ly dies, though its Children liv^^ the Family is ruined, though
the^ be a numerous Offspring. Su^^ly it were better mourn for (...) dead
Children, than for one su^^ living Child.

How many such wretched F^^milies can England show this da^ how has Atheism
and Debauc^^ry ruined and subverted ma^^ great and once famous Familie^ O it
were better the Arms of tho^^ Families had been reversed, a^^ their Lands
alienated, yea, bett^^ had it been a Succession had fa^^^ed, and that their
Names had bee^ blotted out, than that Satan should rule by Profaneness in the
plac^ where God was once so serious^^ and sweetly worshipped.

Whenever therefore God shall ^ther of these ways subvert a Fa^ily, it
becomes them that are ^oncerned in the Stroke, not only (...) own and
acknowledge the ^and of God in it, but to search ^^eir Hearts and Houses to
find ^ut the sins which have so provo^ed him: yet not so as to fall ^^to an
unbecoming despondency ^f Spirit, but withal to relieve ^^emselves, as David
here does ^^om the Covenant of God; Yet ^ath he made with me an everlasting
^ovenant. Which brings us to the ^hird and principal point I shall insist on.

Observation III.
That the everlasting, well ordered, and sure Covenant of Grace, affords
^verlasting, well ordered, and sure Relief to all that are within the bond ^f
it, how many or how great soever their personal or domestic trials and
^ffictions are.

This point will be cleared t^ your Understandings, and pre^^pared for your
use, by clearin^ and opening three Proposition^ which orderly take up the sum
an^ substance of it, viz.

Proposition I.
That the minds of men, yea, the best men, are weak and feeble thing under the
heavy pressures of affliction and will reel and sink under them except they be
strongly relieved an^ under-propp'd.

A bowing Wall does not more need a strong Shore or Butteress than the mind of
man needs ^ strong Support and Stay from Heaven, when the weight of Affliction
makes it incline and lea^ all one way. Psalm. 119.92.
Unless thy Law ha^ been my delights: I should then have perished in my
affliction. Q. d. Wha^ shift other men make to stand the shock of their
afflictions, I know not; but this I know, that if God had not seasonably sent
me the relief of a promise, I had certainly gone away in a faint fit of
Despondency. O how seasonably did God administer the Cordials of his Word to my
drooping sinking Soul!

This weakness in the mind, to support the burdens of Affliction, proceeds from
a double cause, viz. 1. From the sinking weight of the Affliction. 2. From the
irregular and inordinate workings of the thoughts under it.


1. From the sinking weight that is in Affliction, especially in some sorts of
Afflictions: they are heavy pressures, ponderous burdens in themselves. So Job
speaks, O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, Job 6.2, 3.
and my calamity laid in the balances together: for now it would be heavier
than the sand of the sea, therefore my words are swallowed up. Q. d. If all the
Sand that lies upon all the shores in the World, were shovelled up into one
heap, and cast into one scale, and my sorrow^ into the other, my grief would
weigh it all up. How heavy are the hearts of the afflicted! what insupportable
sorrows do they feel* and groan under, especially when God smites them in the
dearest and nearest concerns they have in the World!

2. But especially the reelings and staggerings of the mind, are occasioned by
the inordinate and irregular workings of its own thoughts. Were it but possible
to keep the mind in a serene, sedate, and ordinate frame, our burdens would be
comparatively light to what we now feel them to be* but the falling of the
thoughts into confusions and great distractions spoils all. Upon this account
i^ is, that Afflictions are compare^ to a stupifying Dose, which cas^ the Soul
into amazement. Psalm. 60.3.
Th^^ have showed thy people hard things thou have made us to drink the wi^ of
astonishment. Afflictions are called the Wine of Astonishment, from their
effects upon the mind: for under a great and sudden stroke of God, it is like a
Watch wound up above its due height, so that for a time it stands still,
neither Grace nor Reason move at all: and when it begins to move again, O how
confused and irregular are its motions! It is full of murmurs, disputes, and
quarrels: these aggravate both our sin and misery. It Is our own thoughts which
take the Arrow God shot at us, (which did but stick before in our Clothes, and
was never intended to hurt us, but only to warn us) and thrust it into our very
hearts.

For T1houghts, as well as Ponyards, can pierce and wound the hearts of men.
Luke 2.35. A sword shall pierce through thine own soul; (i. e.) thy thoughts
shall pierce thee. They can shake the whole fabric of the Body, and loose the
best compacted and strongly joynted parts of the Body. Dan. 5.6. His thoughts
troubled him, and the joints of his loins were loosed. And thus a man's own mind
becomes a Rack of Torment to him; a misery which no Creatures, except men and
Devils, are subjected to. O how many Bodies have been destroyed by the Passions
of the Soul! they cut through it, as keen Knife through a narrow Sheath.
Worldly sorrow works death, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Proposition II.
The merciful God, in condescension to the weakness of his people, has
provided the best supports and reliefs for their feeble and afflicted Spirits.

Psalm. 94.19.
In the multitude of the thoughts I had within me, thy comforts delight my
Soul. Carnal men seek their relief, under trouble, from carnal things; when one
Creature forsakes them, they retreat to another which is yet left them, till
they are beaten out of all, and then their hearts fail, having no acquaintance
with God, or special interest in him: for the Creatures will quickly spend all
that allowance of comfort they have to spend upon us. Some try what relief the
Rules of Philosophy can yield them, supposing a neat sentence of Seneca may be
as good a remedy as a Text of David or Paul; but alas, it will not do:
submission from fatal necessity, will never ease the afflicted mind, as
Christian resignation will do. It is not the eradicating, but regulating of the
affections, that composes a burdened and distracted Soul. One word of God will
signify more to our peace, than all the famed and admired Precepts of men.

To neglect God, and seek relief from the Creature, is to forsake the Fountain
of living Waters, and go to the broken Cisterns, Jer. 2.13.
which can hold no water. The best Creature is but a Cistern, not a Fountain;
and our dependence on it makes it a broken Cistern, strikes a hole through the
bottom of it, so that it can hold no water. I, even I (says God) am he that
comfort thee. Isai. 57.12.
The same hand that wounds you, must heal you* or you can never be healed. Ou^
compassionate Savior, to assuage our sorrows, Joh. 14.18
has promised he wi^^ not leave us comfortless. Our God will not contend for
ever, lest the Spirit fail before him, Isai. 57.16. He knew how ineffectual all
other comforts and Comforters would be, even Physicians of no value* and
therefore has graciously prepared comforts for his distressed ones, that will
reach their end.

Proposition III.
God has gathered all the material^ and principals of our relief into the
Covenant of Grace, and expects that (...) betake our selves unto it, in times
o^ distress, as to our sure, sufficient, and only Remedy.

As all the Rivers run into the Sea, and there is the Congregation of all the
Waters; so all the Promises and Comforts of the Gospel, are gathered into the
Covenant of Grace, and there is the Congregation of all the sweet streams of
Refreshment that are dispersed throughout the Scriptures. The Covenant is the
Storehouse of Promises, the Shop of Cordials and rare Elixirs, to revive us in
all our Faintings; though alas most men know no more what are their Virtues, or
where to find them, than an illiterate Rustic, put into an Apothecary's Shop.

What was the Cordial God prepared to revive the hearts of his poor Captives
groaning under hard and grievous Bondage both in Egypt and in Babylon? Was it
not his Covenant with Abraham? And why did he give it the solemn confirmation
by an Oath, but that it might yield to him, and all his believing Seed, Heb.
6.17* 18.
strong consolation, the very spirit of joy amidst all their sorrows?

And what was the relief God gave to the believing Eunuchs that kept his
Sabbaths, took hold of his Covenant, and chose the things in which he
delighted. To them (says he) will I give in my house, and within my walls,
Isai. 56.4.
a place, and a nam^ better than that of sons or of Daughters. Though they were
deprived of those comforts other men have in their Posterity, yet he would not
have them look upon themselves as dry Trees; a Covenant Interest would answer
all, and recompense abundantly the want of Children, or any other earthly
comfort.

Certainly therefore, David was at the right door of relief and comfort, when
he repairs to the Covenant, as here in the Text, Yet has he made with me an
everlasting Covenant. There, or nowhere, the Relief of Gods Afflicted is to be
found.

Now, to make any thing become a complete any perfect relief to an afflicted
Spirit, these three Properties must concur and meet in it, else it can never
effectually relieve any man.

I. It must be able to remove all the causes and grounds of troubles. II. It
must be able to do so at all times. III. It must be capable of a good personal
security to us.
For if it only divert our troubles, (as Creature Comforts use to do) and do
not remove the ground and cause of our trouble, it is but an Anodine, not a Cure
or Remedy. And if it can remove the very ground and cause of our trouble for a
time, but not for ever, then it is but a temporary relief; our troubles may
return again, and we left in as bad case as we were before. And if it be in it
self able to remove all the causes and grounds of our trouble, and that at all
times, but not capable of a personal security to us, or our well-established
interest in it, all signifies nothing to our relief.

But open your eyes and behold, O ye afflicted Saints, all these Properties of
a complete relief meeting together in the Covenant, as it is displayed in the
Text. Here is a Covenant able to remove all the grounds and causes of your
trouble; for it is ORDERED i^ all things, or aptly disposed by the wisdom and
contrivance of God, to answer every cause and ground of trouble and sorrow in
our hearts. It is able to do this at all times; as well in our day, as in
David's or Abraham's day: for it is an Everlasting Covenant; its virtue and
efficacy is not decayed by time. And lastly, it is capable of a good personal
security or assurance to all Gods afflicted people; for it is a Sure Covenant.
The concurrence of these three Properties in the Covenant, makes it a complea^
Relief, a perfect Remedy, to which nothing is wanting in the kind and nature of
a Remedy. These three glorious Properties of the Covenant are my proper
Province to open and confirm, for your support and comfort in this Day of
Trouble.

I.
That the Covenant of Grace is able to remove all the causes and grounds of a
Believers trouble, be they never so great or many. This I doubt not will be
convinceingly evidenced and demonstrated by the following Arguments, or
undeniable Reasons.

Argument I.
Whatsoever disarms Afflictions of the only sting whereby they wound us, must
needs be a complete Relief and Remedy to the afflicted Soul.

But so does the Covenant of Grace, it disarms Afflictions of the only sting by
which they wound us.

Therefore the Covenant of Grace must needs be a complete Relief and Remedy to
the afflicted Soul.

The sting of all Afflictions, is the guilt of sin; when God smites, Conscience
usually smites too: and this is it that causes all that pain and anguish in the
afflicted. It Is plainly so in the Example of the Widow of Zarephath, 1 King.
17.18.
when her son, her only son, and probably her only child died, how did that
stroke of God revive guilt in her Conscience, and made the affliction piercing
and intolerable! as appears by her passionate Expostulation with Elijah, who
then sojourned in her house: What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God?
art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? Q. d.
What injury have I done thee? Did thou come hither to observe my sins, and
pray down this Judgment upon my Child for them? The death of her son revived
her guilt, and so it generally does, even in the most holy men.

When Job looked upon his wasted body under Afflictions, every wrinkle he saw
upon it, seemed to him like a witness rising up to testify against him. Job
16.8.
Thou have filled me with wrinkles which is a witness against me, and my
leaness rising up in me, bears witness to my face.

Affliction is like a Hue and Cry after sin in the ears of Conscience, and this
is the envenomed poisonous sting and Affliction: pluck out this, and the
afflicted man is presently eased, though the matter of the affliction still
abide with him, and lie upon him. He is afflicted still, but not cast down by
affliction; the anguish and burden is gone, though the matter of trouble remain.

This is plain both in Scripture, and in Experience. Suitable hereunto is that
strange, but sweet Expression, The inhabitant shall not say I am sick, Isai.
33.24.
the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquities. It Is not to
be imagined these people had found such a fortunate Island, o^ happy Climate,
where no Disease could touch or invade their Bodies; no, sickness will find o^
the Bodies of the best men, where ever they live; wherever sin ha^^ been,
sickness and death will fo^^low it. Heaven is the only pr^^viledg'd place from
these miseries but the meaning is, though the^ be sick, they shall not feel the
pains and burdens of sickness they shall not say they are sick: An^ why so?
because their iniquitie^ are forgiven. Plainly confirmin^ what was before
asserted, that the anguish of an Affliction is gone as soon as ever the sting
of guil^ is plucked out. And hence par^doning of the Soul, and healing o^ the
Body, are put together as co^^jugate mercies: Psalm. 103.1.3.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, who forgiveth all thine iniquities and heals all
thy diseases. When the soul is at ease, the pains of the body are next to
nothing: sick^ness can cloud all natural joys, but not the joy of a Pardon.

Nay, which is yet more; pluck out but the sting of sin, and there is no
horror in Death, the King of Terrors, and worst of all outward Evils. See how
the pardoned Believer triumphs over it: O death, 1 Cor. 15.55.
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? the sting of death is sin.
They are words of defiance, as men use to deride and scorn a boasting insulting
Enemy, when they see him cast upon his back, and his sword broken over his
head. Heus! uhi nunc fastus, altaque verba jacent? Ovid.

Where are your boasts and menaces now? O Death, thou have lost thy sting and
terror together. Thus the pardoned Believer, with an holy gallantry of spirit,
derides and contemns his disarmed Enemy Death: so then it is manifest, that
whatever plucks out the poisonous sting of Affliction, must needs be an
effectual Remedy and Cure to the afflicted person.

But this the Covenant of Grace does, it reveals and applies Gospel-remission
to them that are within the blessed bond of it. This shall be the Covenant that
I wi^^ make with the house of Israel; Jer. 31.33, 34.
I wi^^ forgive their iniquity, (...) It respects the propitiatory expiation of
sin by Christ, who is therefore called (...).
and I will remember their sin no more. Behol^ here a gracious, full, and
irrevo^cable Pardon! I will forgive, o^ be propitiously merciful, as tha^ word
imports; pointing plainly t^ Christ our Propitiation, our sin^ are forgiven us
for his Names sake And a Pardon as full as it is free iniquity and sin, 1 John
2.2. and Romans 3.25.
smaller and grea^ter, are here forgiven: for Go^ in the remission of his
peoples sins having respect to the propitiatin^ Blood of Christ, he pardons all
as well as some, that Blood deser^ving and purchasing the most ful^ and
complete Pardons for his Peo^ple. 1. Joh. 1.7. The blood of Christ cleanses us
from all sin.

And this Covenant-pardon is a firm, as it is free and full. So ru^ the
expressions in the Grant, I wi^ remember their sin no more: or in the Apostles
words, Heb. 8.13. (...). I will not remember them again. That is, not so
remember as to impute them, o^ condemn my pardoned ones for them: for the
pardoned persons come no more into condemnation, Ioh. 5.24. their sins are cast
into the depths of the Sea, Mica. 7.19. Sooner shall the East* and the West,
the two opposite points of Heaven, meet, than the pardoned soul and its sins
meet again in condemnation, Psalm. 103.12.

Now, the case standing thus with all Gods Vovenant People, all their sins
being graciously, fully, and irrevocably forgiven them, how convincingly and
sweetly does this conclusion follow, that the Covenant is a complete Remedy to
all afflicted Believers? As nothing can befall us before Christ and Pardon be
ours, which is sufficient to raise us, so nothing can befall us afterward,
which should deject and sink us. This is the first benefit afflicted Believers
receive from the Covenant, and this alone is enough to heal all our sorrows.

Argument II.
As the Covenant of Grace d^^ arms all the Afflictions of Bel^^vers of the only
sting by whi^^ they wound them; so it al^^ the very nature and property (...)
their Afflictions, and turns the^^ from a Curse into a Blessing (...) them: and
in so doing it becom^ more than a Remedy, even a choi^^ Benefit and Advantage
to them.

All Afflictions in their own n^^ture, are a part of the Curse; the^^ are the
consequents and punis^^ments of sin; they work naturall^ against our good: but
when on^ they are taken into the Covenan^ their nature and property is
alte^^ed. As Waters in their subterr^^nean passages meeting some ver^tuous
Mineral in their course, a^^ thereby impregnated and endow^ed with a rare
healing property (...) the Body; so Afflictions passing through the Covenant,
receive from it an healing Virtue to our souls. They are in themselves sour
and harsh, as wild Hedge-Fruits; but being ingrafted into this stock, they
yield the pleasant Fruits of Righteousness. If his children break my Statutes,
Psalm. 89.30, 31.
and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their iniquity with the rod,
and their sins with stripes: nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly
take away, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Here you may see all the Rods of
Affliction put into the Covenant, as Aaron's Rod was into the Ark. And hence
two things necessarily follow.

(1.) That such Afflictions can do the Children of God no hurt. They may
affright, but cannot hurt them: We may meet them with fear, but shall part from
them with joy: An unsanctified Rod never did any man good, and a sanctified Rod
never did any man hurt: He may afflict our Bodies with sickness, deny, or cut
off our comfort in Children, impoverish our Estates, let loose persecutors upon
us; but in all this he really does us no hurt, as he speaks in I^^ 25.6. no
more hurt than a skil^ Surgeon does in saving his P^^tients life, by cutting
off a mor^^fied gangrened Member: no mo^^ hurt than Frosts and Snow do t^ Earth
in killing the rank Wee^ that exhausted the sap and streng^^ of it, and
preparing and mello^ing it to produce a fruitful crop ^ Corn. By these he
recals o^ minds from vanity, weans o^ fond and ensnaring affections from the
World, discovers and mortifi^^ those lusts, which gentler method and essays
could not do: and ^ this for our hurt?

I confess Gods thoughts an^ ours often differ upon this case^ We measure the
good and evil o^ Providence by their respect t^ the ease and pleasure of our
flesh^ but God sees this is the way to cas^ our Spirits into a dead formality
and in removing them, he dot^ but deprive us of the occasions and instruments
of spiritual mischief^ and miseries, in which certainly he does us no hurt.

(2.) But that is not all. Af^^ictions once put into the Covenant, must promote
the good of ^he Saints: they are beneficial, as well as harmless things. We
know ^saith the Apostle) that all things work together for good to them that
love God. This Promise is the Compass which sets the course and directs the
motion of all the Af^^ictions of the People of God; and no Ship at Sea obeys
the Rudder so exactly, as the troubles of the Righteous do the direction of
this Promise. Possibly we cannot discern this at present, but rather pre^udge
the works of God, and say all these things are against us; but hereafter we
shall see, and with ^oy acknowledge them to be the happy instruments of our
salvation.

How often has Affliction sent ^he People of God to their knees, with such
Language as this! O my God, how vain and sensual has this heart of mine been
under prosperity! How did the love of the Creature, like a sluice, cut in the
bank of a River, draw away the stream of my affect^ons from thee! I had gotten
soft a Pillow of Creature-comfort under my head, and I easily fel^ asleep, and
dreamed of nothin^ but rest and pleasure, in a stat^ of absence from thee; but
now thy Rod has awakened me and reduced me to a right sen^^ of my condition. I
was negl^gent or dead-hearted in the course of my duty, but now ^ can pray more
fervently, feelingly, and frequently than before. O it was good for me, that I
have been afflicted. O, says God, how well was this Rod bestowed which has
done my poor Chil^ so much good! Now I have more of his heart, and more o^ his
time and company than ever. Now I hear the voice, and see the gracious workings
of the Spirit of my Child after me again, as in the days of his first love. The
sum of all this you may see in the ingenuous meltings of Ephraim under a
sanctified Rod, Ier. 31. 19,20. and the sounding of the ^owels of mercy over
him. 'Ephraim mourns at Gods feet, and God falls upon Ephraim's neck. I have
been as a Beast, says Ephraim: Thou art a dear son, a pleasant child, says
God. My bowels are troubled and pained for sin, says Ephraim: And my bowels
are troubled for thee, and my compassions rolled together, says God. O blessed
fruits of ^anctified Rods! such precious ef^ects as these richly repay you for
^ll the pain and anguish you feel. And thus, as the wound of a Scor^ion is
healed by applying its own Oil, so the evil of Affliction is cured by the
sanctified Fruits that ^t produces when it is once put unto the Covenant.

Argument III.
The Covenant does not only alter the nature and property of the Saints
Afflictions, but it also orderl^ disposes and aptly places them in the frame of
Providence, among the other means and instruments (...) our salvation; so that
a Counc^ of Angels could never place them or the least circumstance belonging
to them, more aptly and a^vantageously than it has done* The knowledge of this
must need quiet and fully relieve the afflicted soul: and who can doubt it that
believes it to be a Covenan^ ordered in all things, as the Te^ speaks? Here all
things, yea, the most minute-circumstances that be^fal you, are reduced to
their proper Class, and place of service; s^ exactly ordered, that all the
wi^dom of men and Angels know not how to mend or alter any thing to your
advantage.

If a small Pin be taken out of the frame of a Watch, and placed any where
else, the motion is either presently stopped, or made irregular. And as Gallen
observes of the curious Fabric of an humane Body, that if the greatest
Naturalist should study an hundred years to find out a more commodious
situation, or configuration of any part thereof, it could never be done. It Is
so here: No man can come after God, and say, this or that had been better
placed or timed, than it is, if this Affliction had been spared, and such an
enjoyment stood in the room of it, it had been better. All God's Providence
are the results and issues of his infinite Wisdom: for he works all things
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. The Wheels, (i. e.) the
motions and revolutions of Providence, are full of Eyes; Ezekiel. 1.18.
they are well advised, and judicious motions, Non caeco impetu volvuntur
rotae; they run not at random. The most regular and excellent working, must
needs follow the most deep and perfect counsel. Isai. 28* 29. He is deep in
counsel, and excellent in working.

Now every Affliction that befalls Gods covenanted People, being placed by the
most wise and infinite counsel of God, in tha^ very order, time, and manner in
which they befall them, this very Affliction, and not that, at this very time,
and not at another, (it being always a time of need* 1 Pet. 1.6.) and ushered
in by such fore-running occasions and circumstances; it must follow, that they
all take the proper places* and nick exactly the fittest seasons* and if one of
them were wanting, something would be defective in the frame of your happiness.
As they now stand, they work together for your good, which displaced, they
would not do.

It Is said, Ier. 18.11. Behold ^ frame evil, and I devise a devi^* It Is spoken
of the contrivance and frame of Afflictions, as the proper work of God. The
project of i^ is laid for his glory, and the eternal good of his People. It
turns to their salvation, 1 Phil. 19. But oh how fain would we have this or
that Affliction scrued out of the frame of Providence, conceiving it would be
far better out than in. O if God had spared my Child, or my Health, it had been
better for me than now it is. But this is no other than a presumptuous
correcting and controlling of the Wisdom of God; and so he interprets it, Job
40.2. He that reproves God, let him answer it. God has put every Affliction
upon your Persons, Estates, Relations, just where you find and feel it; and
that whole frame he has put into the Covenant, in the virtue whereof it works
for your salvation: and therefore let all disputings and reasonings, all
murmurs and discontents cease, nothing can be better for you, than as God has
laid it; and this one would think should heal and quiet all. You your selves
would mar all, by presuming to mend any thing. Who has directed the spirit of
the Lord, Isai. 40.13, 14.
or being his counselor, has taught him? With whom took he counsel, and who
instructed him, and taught him the path of judgment? and taught him knowledge,
and showed him the way of understanding? Well then, be satisfied it is best as
it is; and nothing can be so advantageous to you, as God's project and
contrivance, which you are so uneasy under, and dissatisfied about.

Argument IV.
As the Covenant sorts and ranks all your troubles into their proper Classes
and places of service, so it secures the special gracious presence of God with
you, in the deepest plunges of distress that can befall you; which presence is a
full relief to all your troubles, or else nothing in the World is or can be so.

The very Heathens thought themselves well secured against all evils and
dangers, if they had their petty household Gods with them in their Journeys: but
the great God of Heaven and Earth has engaged to be with his People, in all
their afflictions and distresses. As a tender Father sits up himself with his
sick Child, and will not leave him to the care of a Servant only; so God thinks
it not enough to leave his Children to the tutelage and charge of Angels, but
will be with them himself, and that in a special and peculiar way: so run the
express words of the Covenant, Jer. 32.40.
I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into
their hearts; and they shall not depart from me. Here he undertakes for both
parts, himself and them. I will not, and they shall not.

Here is the Saints security for the gracious presence of God with them, a
presence which dispels all the Clouds of affliction and sorrow, as the Sun
scatters the morning Mists. The God of all consolation is with you, O poor
dejected Believers, and will not such a presence turn the darkness into light
round about you? There is a threefold presence of God with his Creatures.

1. Essential, which is common and necessary to all. 2. Gracious, which is
peculiar to some on Earth. 3. Glorious, which is the felicity of Heaven.
The first is not the privilege here secured; for it is necessary to all, good
and bad: in him we all live, and move, and have our being. The vilest Men on
Earth, yea the Beasts of the Field, and the very Devils in Hell are always in
this presence of God, but it is their torment, rather than their privilege.
The last is proper to the glorified Saints and Angels. Such a presence
imbodied, Saints cannot now bear; but it is his special gracious presence which
is made over and secured to them in the Covenant of Grace: and this presence of
God is manifested to them two ways.

1. Internally, by the Spirit. 2. Externally, by Providence.
1. Internally, by the Spirit of Grace dwelling and acting in them, this is a
choice privilege to them in the day of affliction: for hereby they are
instructed and taught the meaning of the Rod. Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest, and teach him out of thy law. O it is a blessed thing
to be taught so many Lessons by the Rod, as the Spirit teaches them! Surely
they reckon it an abundant recompense of all that they suffer. Psalm. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.
Yea, he refreshes as well as teaches, and no Cordials revive like his. Psalm.
94.19.
In the multitude of the thoughts I had within me, thy comforts delight my
soul. Yea, by the presence and blessing of his Spirit, our Afflictions are
sanctified to subdue and purge out our corruptions. Isai. 27.9.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away sin. Now if a man be instructed in the ends and designs of the Rod,
refreshed and comforted under every stripe of the Rod, and have his sins
mortified and purged by the sanctification of the Spirit upon his Afflictions;
then both the burthensomness and bitterness of his Afflictions are removed and
healed by the internal presence of the Spirit of God with his afflicted ones.
But,

2. Besides this, God is providentially present with his People, in all their
troubles, in a more external way; ordering all the circumstances of their
troubles to their advantage. He orders the degree and extent of our
Afflictions, still leaving us some mercies and comforts to support and refresh
us, when others are cut off. In measure does he debate with his Covenant
People, Isai. 27.8.
staying the rough wind in the day of the East wind. He might justly smite all
our outward Comforts at once, so that Affliction should not rise up the second
time: for what comfort soever has been abused by sin, is thereby forfeited
into the hand of Judgment. But the Lord knows our inability to sustain such
strokes, and therefore proportions them to our strength. We have some living
Relations to minister comfort to us, when mourning over our dead: He makes not
a full end of all at once. Yea, and his Providence supports our frail Bodies,
enabling them to endure the shocks and storms of so many Afflictions, without
ruin. Surely there is as much of the care of Providence manifested in this, as
there is in preserving poor crazy leaking Barks, and weather-beaten Vessels at
Sea, when the Waves not only cover them, but break into them, and they are
ready to founder in the midst of them.

O what a singular mercy is the gracious presence of God with men! even the
special presence of that God, Ephesians. 4 6.
who is above all, and through all, and in you all, as the Apostle speaks.
Above all, in Majesty and Dominion; through all, in his most efficacious
Providence; and in you all, by his Grace and Spirit. As he is above all, so he
is able to command any Mercy you want, with a word of his mouth; as he is
through all, so he must be intimately acquainted with all your wants,
straights, and fears; and as he is in you all, so he is engaged for your
support and supply, as you are the dear Members of Christ's mystical Body.

Object. But methinks I hear Gideon's Objection rolled into the way of this
sovereign Consolation. If God be with us, why is all this Evil befallen us?

Sol. All what? If it had been all this rebellion and rage against God, all
this apostasy and revolting more and more, all this contumacy and hardness of
heart under the Rod; then it had been a weighty and stumbling Objection indeed:
but to say, If God be with us, why are all these chastening corrections and
temporal crosses befallen us? why does he smite our Bodies, Children, or
Estates? is an Objection no way fit to be urged by any that are acquainted with
the Scriptures, or the nature and tenor of the Covenant of Grace. Is
afflicting and forsaking, all one with you? must God needs hate, because he
scourges you? I question whether Satan himself has impudence enough to set
such a Note or Comment upon Heb. 12.6. For Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth,
and scourges every son whom he receives.

No, no, Christian, it is not a chastening Rod, but the denying of such a
favor, and suffering men to sin with impunity, and go on prosperously in the
way of their own hearts, that speaks a rejected man, as the next words, ver. 7.
informs you. As he never loved you the better for your prosperity, so you may
be confident he loves you never the less for your adversity: and will not this
close and heal the wounds made by Affliction? What, not such a Promise as this,
I will be with him in trouble, Psalm. 91.15. Will not such a presence revive
thee? What then can do it? Moses reckoned that a Wilderness with God, was
better than a Canaan without him. Exodus 33.15.
If thy presence go not with me (says he) then carry us not hence. And if
there be the Spirit of a Christian in thee, and God should give thee thine own
choice, thou would rather choose to be in the midst of all these Afflictions
with thy God, than back again in all thy prosperity, and among thy Children and
former Comforts, without him.

Argument V.
As this Covenant assures you of Gods gracious and special presence, so it
fully secures all the Essentials and Substantials of your Happiness, against
all hazards and contingencies; in which security lies your full Relief and
complete Remedy against all your troubles for the loss of other things.

There be two sorts of things belonging to all God's People, viz. 1.
Essentials. 2. Accidentals.


1. They have somethings which are essential to their Happiness; such are the
loving kindness of God, the pardon of sin, union with Christ, and eternal
salvation. And they have other things which are Accidentals, that come and go,
live and die, without affecting or altering their Happiness; such are Health,
Estates, Children, and all sorts of Relations and earthly Comforts. These are
to our Happiness, as Leaves are to the Tree which fade and fall away without
endangering the Tree; but the other as the vital Sap, without which it withers
and dies at the very root. Now if it can be made out that the Covenant fully
secures the former; then it will strongly follow, that it therein abundantly
relieves us under all our sorrows for the latter: and that it does so, will
evidently appear, by reviewing the Covenant, wherein you shall find all these
substantial and essential Mercies of Believers, fully secured against all
hazards and contingencies whatsoever.

There the loving kindness of God is secured to their Souls, whatever
Afflictions he lays upon their Bodies. Psalm. 89.33.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not take away. And their pardon is as
safe as the favor of God is; it is safely locks up in that Promise, Jer. 31.34.
I will remember their sins no more. Yea, Heaven, together with our
perseverance in the way to it, are both put out of hazard by that invaluable
Promise, They shall never perish, Joh. 10.28.
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.

Thus are all the Essentials of a Believers Happiness secured in the Covenant;
and these being safe, the loss of other enjoyments should not much affect or
wound them, because if he enjoy them, they add nothing to his Happiness; and if
he lose them, he is still happy in God without them. And this unriddles that
AEnigmatical Expression of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.10.
As having nothing, and yet possessing all things; (i. e.) the substraction of
all external things cannot make us miserable, who have Christ for our portion,
and all our happiness entire in him.

If a man traveling on the Rode fall into the hands of Thieves who rob him of
a few shillings, why this does not much affect him: for though he have lost his
spending Money, yet his stock is safe at home, and his Estate secure, which
will yield him more. Or if a man have been at Court, and there obtained a
Pardon for his Life, or a Grant of a Thousand pound per annum, and returning
home should chance to lose his Gloves or his Handkerchief, sure if the man be
in his wits, he will not take on or mourn for the loss of these Trifles, whilst
the Pardon or Grant is safe. Surely these things are not worth the mentioning.

It Is true, the loss of outward earthly things, are to a Believer real Trials,
yet they are but seeming Losses: and therefore they are expressed in the
Apostles phrase with a Tanquam, 2 Cor. 6.9.
sicut: As chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. And
if your losses be but as it were losses, your sorrows should be but as it were
sorrows: Much like a Physic sickness, which we do not call a proper sickness,
but as it were a sickness, because it conduces to the health, and not the hurt
of the Person; as all God's medicinal Afflictions on his People also do.

Indeed, if the stroke of God were at our Souls, to cut them off from Christ
and Heaven, to raze our Names out of the Covenant, or revoke the pardon of sin;
then we had cause enough to justify the extremity of sorrow; cause enough to
weep out our eyes, and break our hearts for such a dismal blow as that would
be. But blessed be God you stand out of the way of such strokes as these; let
God strike round about you, or lay his hand upon any other comforts you
possess, he will never smite you in these essential things, which is certainly
enough to allay and relieve all your other sorrows.

My Name is blotted out of the Earth, but still it is written in Heaven. God
has taken my only son from me, but he has given his only Son for me, and to
me. He has broken off my hopes and expectations as to this World, but my hopes
of Heaven are fixed, sure, and immovable for ever. My house and heart are both
in confusion and great disorder, but I have still an everlasting Covenant
ordered in all things, and sure. I cannot say my son lives, ^ut I can still
say I know that my Redeemer lives. The grass wither^th, and the flower fades;
but the word of the Lord abides for ever, Isai. 40.8.

Argument VI.
As God strikes none of the sub^stantial Mercies of his covenan^ People, so
when he does smi^^ their external and accidental Com^forts, the Covenant of
Grace (...) sures them, that even those stroke^ are the strokes of Love, and m^
Wrath; the Wounds of a Frien^ and not of an Enemy: which another singular
relief to the affl^^cted soul.

The most frightful thing in an Affliction, is the mark or characte^ of God's
Wrath which it seems (...) bear: take away that, and the Affl^^ction is
nothing. Psalm. 6.1.
O Lord, rebuke (...) not in thine anger, neither chasten (...) in thy hot
displeasure. He does no^ deprecate the rebukes, but the a^^ger of God; not his
chastening but his hot displeasure. Gods a^^ger is much more terrible than hi^
rebuking, and his hot displeasur^ than his chastening. Therefore he entreats,
that whatever God di^ to him in the way of affliction, he would do nothing in
the way of wrath; and then he could bear any thing from him. A mark of divine
anger engraven upon any Affliction, makes that Affliction dreadful to a
gracious soul.

But if a man be well satisfied that whatever anguish there be, yet there is no
anger, but that the Rod is in the Hand of Love: O how it eases the soul, and
lightens the burden! Now this desirable point is abundantly cleared in the
Covenant; where we find a clear Consistence, yea, a necessary Connection
betwixt the Love and the Rod of God, Psalm. 89.31. and Heb. 12.6. nay, so far
are the Afflictions of the Saints from being marks of his Wrath, that they are
the Fruits and Evidences of his Fatherly Love.

Two men walking through the Streets, see a company of Boys ^ighting, one of
them steps forth and singles out one of those Boys, and carries him home to
correct ^im; which of the two think you is that Child's Father? The c^^ standing
thus with all Gods People, surely there is no reason for their despondencies
whatever the^^ Afflictions be.

Argument VII.
Lastly, the Covenant does no^ only discover the consistence an^ connection
betwixt the Love an^ the Rod of God, but it also giv^ full satisfaction to the
Saints, th^^ whatsoever temporary Mercy the^ are deprived of, which was with in
the Bond of the Covenan^ when they enjoyed it, is no^ lost, but shall certainly
be restore^ to them again with a rich im^provement, and that they shall en^joy
it again to all eternity.

What a rare Model or Platfor^ of Consolatory Arguments ha^^ the Apostle laid
down, to antido^^ our immoderate sorrows for the death of our dear Relatives
which died interested in Christ and the Covenant! I would not have yo^^
^gnorant, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
brethren, concerning them which are asleep, v. 13. They are not dead, but
asleep. Sleep is but (...) Parenthesis to the Labors and Travels of this Life;
and it is but a partial privation, not of the ha^it, but acts of Reason, to
which upon awaking the soul returns again. Just such a thing is that which in
believers is commonly ^alled Death. And we do not ^se to bewail our Friends,
because ^hey are fallen asleep: And there^^re it no way becomes us to sor^ow as
those that have no hope, or to look upon them as lost; (...) (as he strongly
argues and concludes, v. 14) their restora^ion to their Bodies, yea, and to
^ur enjoyment again, is fully se^^red both to them and us by the Resurrection
of Jesus from the ^ead. The influence of his Re^^rrection is by the Prophet
Isaiah ^ompared to the Morning-dew, Isai. 26.19.
(...) show that what virtue there is (...) the Morning-dew to cause the
^nguishing Plants of the Earth to ^ive and flourish, that, and much more there
is in the Resurrection of Christ, to revive and quicke^ the dead bodies of
these Saints, their Bodies shall be restored by virtue of the warm animating
dew or influence of his Resurrection.

Obj. But the mavelous change which the Resurrection makes up on glorified
Bodies, and the long separation of many Ages betwi^^ us and them, seems to make
it in possible for us to know them (...) those that were once related to (...)
upon Earth; and if so, then tha^ comfort which resulted from them as in
relation to us, is perishe^ with them at death.

Sol. Whatever change the R^surrection shall make on their B^dies, and the
length of time betwixt our parting with them (...) Earth, and meeting them
again in Heaven, shall be; neither the one or other seem sufficient to i^form
the grounds of our hope, th^^ we shall know them to be the ver^ persons that
were once so dear t^ us upon Earth. There may remai^ ^ome lineament or property
of in^ividuation whereby the acute ^lorified eye may possibly discover ^ho they
were; or if not, yet ^one can doubt but it may be discovered to us by
revelation from God: and that one way or other ^t will be discovered, is highly
pro^able, because nothing will be denied to that perfect State which may
contribute to, or complete ^he joy and happiness thereof, as ^e cannot but
think this know^edge will do. If Adam knew Eve to be flesh of his flesh, and
^one of his bone, in the state of ^nnocence; and if the Apostles knew Moses and
Elias upon the Mount; yea, if Dives in Hell ^new Abraham and Lazarus in Heaven:
sure we may well allow that knowledge to the glorified ^aints in Heaven, which
we find ^n the State of Innocence, or in ^he sinful State on Earth, or in ^he
State of the Damned in Hell.

And if so, then the Covenanted Parents shall be able to say in that day, This
was our Child for who^ we prayed and traveled again, ti^^ Christ was formed in
him; th^^ is he whom we educated for God* and trained up in the Nurture an^
Admonition of the Lord; and now we see the fruit of our Prayers, Counsels,
Catechisings, (...) Child of so many Prayers perishe^ not. And the Covenanted
Chil^^ shall say, This was my pious ^^^ther, who took such care for my Soul;
and this my tender Mother who, like another Monica, was ze^^lously concerned
for my etern^^ happiness. These are they th^^ sowed so many Prayers, which God
gave them not time (...) reap the fruits of on Earth, b^^ now they shall reap
the fruit an^ comfort of them for ever. O joy^ful meeting in the Kingdom o^
God! The joy of such a meeting abundantly recompenses for a^^ the tears and
groans of a dolorou^ parting.

Now, put all this together, an^ value the Arguments produced to make good the
first thing pro^pounded, namely the sufficiency of the Covenant to relieve and
remedy all the sorrows and losses of Believers, be they never so many, or so
great; this cannot be doubted, since it has been proved, that it Disarms all
their Afflictions of the only sting by which they wound; Alters the very nature
and property of their Afflictions, turning them from Curses into Blessings;
Ranks and Disposes them into their proper class and place of service, so as the
counsel of men and Angels could never lay them better to our advantage; Engages
the gracious and special presence of God with you in all your troubles; Secures
all your essential and substantial Mercies from all hazards and contingencies;
Discovers a consistency, yea a connection betwixt the Rod and the Love of God;
and Assures you, that whatever temporal Mercy you ever enjoyed in, and by
virtue of the Covenant, shall be restored to you again with an admirable
improvement, and singular advantage. It is by all this, I say abundantly
proved, that the Covenant is a sovereign and effectua Remedy to all the sorrows
o^ Gods People; and that it was no^ Hyperbole in David's Encomium, when he
called it his Salvation, and all his Desire. But then, as I hinted before.

II.
It must be able to do these things at all times, and in all Ages, or else it
will be but a temporary relief to some only, and not to all. Now that the
Covenant has this ability in all Ages, and is as able to relieve us now, as it
was to relieve David in his day, fully appears by the Epithet given it in the
Text, it is an EVERLASTING COVENANT. Yet has he made with me an everlasting
Covenant.

Time is the measure of other things; but Everlastingness is the measure of the
Covenant. When the Lord espouseth a People to himself in Covenant, he betroths
them to himself for ever, Hos. 2.19. and from that day forward they may say on
good grounds, This God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even
unto death, as it is in Psalm. 48.14. Nothing in nature is so firmly established
as the Covenant is. Hills and Mountains shall sooner start from their basis and
center, and fly like wandering Atoms up and down in the Air, than this
Covenant shall start from its sure and steadfast foundation, Isai. 54.10.

The Causes and Reasons of the immutability of the new Covenant, are 1. The
unchangeable purpose of God, which is a sure and steadfast foundation. 2 Timothy
2.19. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the
Lord knows who are his. The first act of Gods love to the creature is that by
which he chooses such a one to be his, and is therefore called the foundation
of God, as being that on which he lays the super-structure of all other
Mercies. And this stand sure, there can be no vacillancy or slipperiness in
such a foundation: for he knows who are his; he knows them as his Creatures,
and as his new Creatures in Covenant with him; as his by Election, and his by
Covenant, Transaction and Compact. The purpose of his Grace before time, gave
being to the Covenant of Grace in time, and is the foundation of it. 2. The
Free Grace of God in Christ, is that which gives immutability to this Covenant.
It is not built upon Works, but Grace: Therefore it is of faith, Romans 4.16.
that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed. This Covenant is not founded as the first was, upon the variable and
inconstant obedience of man, but upon Grace which is a steady and firm
foundation. 3. The suretiship of Christ gives everlasting stability to this
Covenant. Heb. 7.22. He was made the surety of a better Testament, or Covenant:
(...) ab. (...) pro mittere qua si (...), in manibus.
for (...), signifies both, he struck hands, or engaged himself for the whole
Covenant, and every condition in it, and that both on Gods part and ours; to
undergo all our punishments, to pay all our debts, and to work in us all that
God required of us in the Covenant of Grace: and all this under the penalty
that lay upon us to have undergone. And this not as other Sureties, who enter
into one and the same Bond with the principal, so that the Creditor may come
upon which he will; but he lays all upon Christ, and relies wholly upon him for
satisfaction, knowing he was able to perform it; and so under the Type of Gods
Covenant with David, Christ is brought in, Psalm. 89.19. Thou spakest in vision
to thy holy one, and said, I have laid help on one who is mighty. Q. d. I
know thy ability, my Son, thou art able to pay me, and therefore lay all upon
thee.


It follows strongly from what has been said, that the virtue of the Covenant
decays not by time, as other things do, but it is at this day, and will be to
the end of the World, as potent and efficacious a Relief to all Gods People, as
ever it was to David, or any of the Believers of the first Ages.

And if so, certainly nothing can be more strongly supporting, or sweetly
relieving in such a changeable World, than this he has made with me, an
everlasting Covenant. What David speaks of the natural Heavens, will be found
true, of things overspread and covered by them. Psalm. 102.26, 27.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure, and all of them shall wax old like a
garment: and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.
But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. The Creature was, and
is not; but my Covenant God is the same; his name is I Am, and his Covenant is
the same that ever it was; which is the second Property or Ingredient of this
complete Remedy to the Saints Afflictions. The Covenant has not only all
Power, Virtue, and Efficacy in it self to relieve a distressed Christian, but
it has it in all Ages, as well for one as for another. The third and last
follows, namely,

III.
That it is a sure Covenant. So David styles it in my Text. The certainty of
the Covenant, is the glory of the Covenant, and the comfort of all that are in
it. The certainty of it in it self is past all doubt, by what has been said
before. It is certain God did make such an everlasting Covenant with his People
in Christ, and it must remain an eternal Truth, that such a Covenant there is
betwixt God and them. It is as impossible that this everlasting Covenant should
not be made with them, as it is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. If he
might make himself not have covenanted, everlastingly with them, when once he
had so covenanted, such a supposition would turn up the foundation of all Faith
and Certainty, and overthrow the Apostles consequence on which the Faith and
Comfort of Believers is built. Nor is it any infringement of the Almighty
power, to say, God himself cannot do that which implies a plain contradiction,
as factum infectum reddere, to make that which was done, not to be done.

But of this there is no doubt; it is a sure Covenant in it self: That which
makes to my purpose here, is to prove it capable of a personal security and
certainty to us. David had, and all the Federates, as well as he, may have a
subjective or personal certainty also. He speaks categorically and positively
in the Text, Yet has he made [with me] an everlasting Covenant.

Object. If it be said, he might have a personal certainty of it, because it
was revealed to him in an extraordinary way by the Prophet Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.12,
13, 14. and extraordinaria non currunt in exemplum, this was a peculiar favor,
which we may not expect.

Sol. I reply, And why may not we know it with as full a certainty to whom God
is pleased to make it known in his ordinary way? Think you his Word and Spirit
cannot ratify it as fully and firmly to our souls, as Nathan's discovery of it
did to David's soul? God give me but such a Seal of it in his ordinary method
and way of confirmation, and I will desire no more of him in this World for my
relief and comfort, whatever Afflictions it shall please him to lay upon me.

And thus you see all the Properties of a complete Remedy in the Covenant, and
of it every Believer may say, This is all my salvation, and all my desire,
though he make not my house to grow. And now what hinders, but that all Gods
afflicted should say from henceforth, Psalm. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee. I have all the desires of my heart in the Covenant of God, though he take
away the desire of mine eyes upon earth with his stroke. In this Covenant my
soul is at rest, and my very heart is centred. No Affliction can be great
enough to make the Consolations of the Almighty seem small in mine eyes.
Worldly sorrows may swallow up worldly comforts, but no sorrows upon Earth can
swallow up the consolations of the Covenant.

I know many Christians droop and are dejected under the Rod, notwithstanding
such sovereign Cordials are prepared for them in the Covenant; but this is not
for want of Efficacy in the Covenant, but for want of Faith to clear their
interest, and draw forth the virtue of it to their relief. Some are ignorant of
their privileges, and others disfident about their interest. It is with many
of Gods Children, as it is with our Children in their infancy, they know not
their Father, nor the Inheritance they are bo^n unto.

That which remains, is the improvement of this Truth to our actual comfort and
relief in the day of trouble. And this I shall assist you in as God shall
assist me, by way of, 1. Information. 2. Exhortation. 3. Examination, and 4.
Consolation.


USE I.
For information, in three Corolaries.

Corolary I.
By what has been discoursed from this Text, it appears, That God governs the
spiritual part of the World by Faith, and not by Sense. He will have them live
upon his Covenant and Promises, and fetch their relief and comforts thence,
under all their sorrows and distresses in this Life.

God never intended temporal things for his Peoples Portion, therefore from
them they must not expect their relief in times of trouble. He will have us
read his love to us by things within us, not by things without us. He has
other ways of expressing his love to his People, than by the smiles of his
Providence upon them. How would earthly things be over-valued and idolized, if
beside their convenience to our Bodies, they should be the marks and evidences
of Gods love to our souls! A Christian is to value himself as the Merchant, or
the Husbandman does. The Merchant values himself by his Bills and Goods abroad,
not by the ready Cash that lies by him. And the Husbandman by his Deeds and
Leases, and so many Acres of Corn he has in the ground, and knows he has a
good Estate, though sometimes he be not able to command twenty shillings.
Christian, thy Estate also lies in good Promises and new Covenant-securities,
whether thou have more or less of earthly comforts in thy hands.

Every Creature feeds according to its nature; the same Plant affords food to
several sorts of Creatures: the Be feeds upon the Flower, the Sheep upon the
Branch, the Bird upon the Seed, and the Swine upon the Root. One cannot live
upon what the other does. So it is here: A Christian can feed upon the
Promises, and make a sweet meal upon the Covenant, which the carnal mind cannot
relish. The life that I now live, I live by the faith of the son of God, Gal.
2.21.
says the Apople.

This is that mysterious and excellent life of Faith, and the Test of true
Christianity, to relieve our selves by our hopes of things to come, against
present Evils; to balance the sorrows and losses of this life, with the
promises and expectations of the next. Thus did the renowned Believers of the
first Age; whenever they felt a faint pang or qualm upon their hearts, under
their trials and sorrows from the World, they would presently run to their
Cordial, the Promises, and a sip of Faith from that Bottle would refresh and
invigorate their souls with new life and powers. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.
We faint not, whilst we look not at the things which are seen, for they are
temporal; but at the things which are not seen, for they are eternal. And truly
so must we also, when our hearts are faint within us in days of affliction, or
our Spirits will fail, and we shall go away in a faint fit of despondency.

Corolary II.
Learn hence the sovereign efficacy of the word, and what a choice privilege
it is to have these lively Oracles of God in our hands, in a day of distress
and trouble.

It Is no ordinary Mercy to be born in a Land of Bibles and Ministers; to have
these choice Supports and Reliefs at hand, in all our fainting hours. Psalm.
119.50.
This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has quickened me. It was no
small Mercy gained by the Reformation, that it put the Oracles of God into our
hands. It opened a Shop of Cordials for the support of our ^ouls. For this,
among other great and excellent uses, the Scriptures were written, Romans 15.4.
That we, through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. In
other parts of the World it is a sealed Book; bless God it is not so to you.
All Creature Comforts have a double defect, they are neither suitable nor
durable; but the word is so. Compare the Arguments that have been urged from
the Covenant, with such as these. It Is in vain to trouble our selves about what
we cannot help: we are not alone in trouble, others have their losses and
afflictions as well as we. Alas, what dry and ineffectual comforts are these!
they penetrate not the heart, as pardon of sin, peace with God, and
sanctification of troubles to our salvation do.

And no less is the Mercy of an able New Testament Ministry, to open, apply,
and inculcate the consolations of the Scriptures to be esteemed. It is no
common favor to the afflicted soul, to have with, or near him, an INTERPRETER,
one among a thousand, Job. 33 23.
to show unto him his uprightness. O England, prize and improve these Mercies,
and provoke not thy God to bereave thee of them.

I can find no such settlement made of the Gospel and Ministry upon any place
or People, but that God may remove both, upon their abuse of them; and if he
do, sad will the case of such a People be, especially when a day of distress
and trouble shall be upon them. It Is sad to be in a storm at Sea, without a
Compass or Pilot to direct and advise the distressed Passengers. Much so is the
case of the afflicted, when deprived of the Word and Ministry.

Let it therefore be your care to hide the Word in your hearts, and get the
Teachings of the Spirit; that whatever changes of Providence be upon the World,
you may have the light and comfort of the Scriptures to direct and cheer your
souls. Sanctification is the writing of Gods Law in your hearts; and what is
written there, is secure and safe. The Word within you, is more secure, sweet,
and effectual, than the Word without you. Ierom says of Nepotianus, that by
long and assiduous meditation of the Scriptures, his Breast was at last become
the Library of Christ. O that the Breast of every Christian were so too.

Corolary III.
How sad and deplorably miserable is their condition, who have no title to, ^or
comfort from the Covenant of God, when a day of affliction and great ^istress
is upon them!

Unrelieved Miseries are the ^ost intolerable Miseries. To be over-weighed with
troubles o^ Earth, and want support and com^fort from Heaven, is a dism^^ state
indeed; yet this is the ca^^ of multitudes in the World. If ^ Believer be in
trouble, his God bears his burden for him, yea, he bears up him and his burden
too but he that has no Covenant i^^terest in God, must say as it is Jer.
10.19. This is my affliction, an^ I alone must bear it.

There are but two ways the^ can take for relief, either to di^vert their
troubles by that whi^^ will inflame them, or rest their burdened Spirits upon
that which will fail them. To run to the Tavern or Alehouse, instead of the
Closet, is to quench the fire, by pouring on Oil; and to run from one Creature
which is smitten and withered, to another which yet continues with us, is to
lean upon a broken Reed, which not only deceives us, but wounds and pierces
us. What a miserable plight was Saul in, and how doleful was his cry and
complaint to ^amuel, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sore ^istressed, for the Philistines
make war against me, and God is departed from ^e, and answers me no more.
Heaven and Earth forsook him at once.

Reader, if this be thy case, I advise thee to rest no longer in so miserable a
condition. Thy very distress seems by an happy necessity to put thee upon God,
and drive thee to him for refuge: And ^^ seems to be the very aim and design of
God in blasting all thy earthly comforts, to necessitate thee to come to him,
which thou would never be persuaded to do, whilst thou had any
Creature-prop to stay and rest upon. And think not that thou shall be rejected,
because thou art brought by a plain necessity to him; come sincerely, and thou
shall not be upbraided, because a necessity threw thee upon him.

USE II.
Seeing then that the Covena^^ of God is the great relief and su^^port of all
the afflicted people, I^ the afflicted soul go to this blesse^ Covenant; study
and apply it i^ all distresses. It is in it self a s^ veraign Cordial, able to
revive ^ gracious Spirit at the lowest ebb^ but then it must be studied an^
applied, or it will never give fort^^ its consolations to our refreshment^
Extreme sorrows are apt to deafen^ our Ears to all voices of comfort^ The loud
cries of Affliction too often drown the sweet still voice of spiritual
Consolation; but either here or nowhere our redress is to be found. Why seek
we the living among the dead? comfort from things that cannot yield it? The
Covenant can discover two things which are able to pacify the most discomposed
heart, viz. 1. The good of Affliction. 2. The end of Affliction.


1. It will discover to us the good of Affliction, and so rectify our mistaken
judgments about it. God is not undoing, but consulting our interest and
happiness in all these dispensations. It will satisfy us, that in all these
things he does no more than what we our selves allow and approve in other
cases. It is not merely from his pleasure, but for our profit, that these
breaches are made upon our Families, and Comforts, Heb. 12.10. Who blames the
Mariner for casting the Goods over board to save Ship and life in a storm? or
the Surgeon for lancing, yea, or cutting off a Leg or Arm to preserve the
life of his Patient? or Soldiers for burning or beating down the Suburbs, to
save the City in a siege? And why must God only be censured, for cutting off
those things from us which he knows will hazard us in the (...) of temptation?
he sees the less^ have of entanglement, the m^^ promptness and fitness we (...)
have to go through the trials (...) are coming upon us; and that the comforts
he cuts off from (...) Bodies, goes to the profit and (...) vantage of our
Souls.

2. Here you gain a sight (...) only of the good of Affliction, (...) also of
the comfortable end (...) issue of Affliction. This clou^ and stormy morning
will wind (...) in a serene and pleasant evenin^ There Is a vast difference
betw^^ our meeting with Afflictions, (...) our parting from them. Jam. 5.11.
You ha^^ heard of the patience of Job, and (...) seen the end of the Lord. O
get (...) Job's Spirit under Affliction, an^ you may see as happy an end (...)
them as he did.

Had Naomy seen the end of (...) Lord in taking away her Husband and starving
her out of Moab, (...) would not have changed her name or said the Lord had
dealt bitter with her, in grafting her Daughte^ by that Providence into the
Noble Line, out of which the Savior of the World was to rise; and could you
but see that good in order to which all this train of troubles is said, you
would not murmur or ^espond as you do.

Object. 1. O but this is a grievous Stroke; God has smitten ^e in the apple
of mine Eye, and written bitter things against me. No sorrow is like my sorrow;
it is a mourning for an only Son; I have lost all in one.

Sol. 1. You can never lose all in one, except that one be Christ; and he being
yours in Covenant, can never be lost. But your meaning is, you have lost all of
that kind in one: no more Sons to build up your House, and continue your Name.

2. But yet Religion will not allow you to say, that your dead Children are a
lost Generation. Praemittuntur, non amittuntur: They are sent before, but not
lost. For they are a Covenant-seed, by you dedicated to the Lord: They were
Children of many Prayers a great stock of Prayers was lai^ up for them; in them
also yo^ and all that knew them, discerne^ a teachable Spirit, pious
inclina^tions, and Conscience of secret du^ties, some good things toward the
Lord God of Israel, as was sai^ of young Abijah, 1 King. 14.1^ So that you
parted from them u^ on far easier terms than good D^^vid parted from his Amnon,
Abs^^lom, or Adonijah, who died in the^^ sins and open rebellions. Ther^ was a
sting in his troubles which you feel not; and if he comfort himself
notwithstanding in the Covenant of his God, in this r^^spect may you much more.

Object. 2. O but my Son w^ cut off in the very Bud, just wh^^ the Fruits of
Education were re^^dy to disclose and open.

Sol. Let not that consideration so incense your sorrows: Go^ knows the fittest
time both to giv^ and to take our comforts; an^ seeing you have good grounds
(...) hope your Child died interest^^ in the Covenant of God, you have the less
reason to insist upon that afflicting circumstance of an immature death. He
that dies in Christ, has lived long enough both for himself and us. That
Mariner has sailed long enough, that has gained his Port: and that Soldier
fought long enough, that has won the Victory: and that Child lived long
enough, that has won Heaven, how early soever he died.

Beside, the sooner he died, the less sin he has committed, and the less
misery he saw and felt in this wretched World, which we are left to behold and
feel. And it is but a vanity to imagine that the parting pull with him would
have been easier, if the enjoyment of him had been longer: for the long
enjoyment of desirable Comforts, does not use to weaken, but abundantly to
strengthen and fasten the ties of affection.

Submit your Reason therefore, as is meet, to the Wisdom of God, who certainly
chose the fittest season for this Affliction.

O but, -- No more Buts and Objections, I beseech you. Enough has been offered
from the Covenant of your God, to silence all your Objections, and to give you
the ease and pleasure of a resigned Will. And what are all our Buts and
Objections, but a spurning at Divine Sovereignty, and the thrusting in the
Affliction deeper into your own hearts, which are wounded but too deep already?

I persuade you not to put off, but to regulate natural Affections: To be
without them, would deservedly rank us among the worst of Heathens; but rightly
to bound and manage them, would set you among the best of Christians.

I cannot imagine what ease or advantage holy Basil gained by such a particular
and heart piercing account, Filius mihi erat Adolescens, solus vitae successor,
solatium senectae, gloria generis, flos aequalium, sulcrum domus, aetatem
gratiosissiman agebat, etc.
as he gave of a like Affliction with this; nor to what purpose it can be to
you, to recall and recount those things which only incense and aggravate your
troubles: Doubtless your better way were to turn your thoughts from such
subjects as these, to your God in Covenant, as David in the Text did, and to
recount the many great and inestimable mercies that are secured to you therein;
which death shall never smite, or cut off from you, as it does your other
enjoyments.

Quest. But yet unless we can in some measure clear our Covenant Interest, all
these excellent Cordials prepared, will signify no more to our relief, than
water spilt upon the ground: help us therefore to do that, or else all that
has been said is in vain? How may a person discern his Covenant-right and
interest?

Answ. This indeed is worthy of all consideration, and deserves a serious
answer, forasmuch as it is fundamental to your comfort, and all actual
refreshment in times of trouble; and will bring us to the next Use, which is
for trial of our Covenant Interest.

USE III.
The great Question to be decided, is, Whether God be our Covenant-God, and we
his People? A Question of the most solemn nature, and such as requires awful
attention.

We cannot expect satisfaction in this matter by such an extraordinary way as
David had it, but we may know it by, First, Our Covenant-Engagements. Secondly,
Our Covenant-Impressions. Thirdly, Our Covenant-Conversations.


First, By our Covenant-Engagements, or Dedications of our selves to God;
sometimes called our joining our selves to the Lord, Zech. 2.11. our yielding
our selves to him, Romans 6.19. our giving our selves to him, 2 Cor. 8.5. The
soul that freely and deliberately consents to take or choose the Lord to be his
God, may warrantably conclude the Lord has taken or chosen him: for our choice
of God is but the result of his choice of us. Joh. 15.16. You have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you; (i. e.) you could never have chosen me, but in
consequence to, and by virtue of my first choice of you.

Well then, let it be seriously considered, whether you have duly consented to
take the Lord for your God, and Christ for your Redeemer. This includes two
things in it.

1. Your relinquishing of all things inconsistent with him. 2. Your acceptance
of all that promotes the glory and enjoyment of him.
1. Your relinquishing of all things that are inconsistent with an interest in
him. Except we let these go, God cannot be our God, nor Christ our Redeemer.
The things to be relinquished for Christ are in short, both our sinful and our
righteous self. Sinful-self must be disclaimed and renounced: for we cannot be
the Servants of sin, and the Servants of Christ too, Romans 6.14.18. and
righteous self must be renounced also, or we can have no part or interest in
his Righteousness, Romans 10.3. These are two difficult points of self-denial to
part with every beloved Lust, and to give up our own Righteousness. Thousands
chufe rather to be damned for ever, than to do either of these.

2. Your acceptance and embracing of all things that promote his glory, and
further the enjoyment of him. As all the painful ways of duty, hearing,
praying, meditating, and all this with the intention of the inner man, and
offering up of the soul to God in these duties, and the more painful ways of
suffering for God, and enduring all losses, reproaches, torments, and death for
him, if his glory require it, and you be thereunto called. All this is included
in your choosing God to be your God. And upon our understanding, and free
consent, and sealing to these Articles, we have right to call him our God. Mat.
16.24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross and follow me. Now have you considered the terms of the Covenant, weighed
and balanced all the conveniences and inconveniences of Godliness, and then
determined for Christ and Holiness, let the cost be what it will; then you have
chosen him aright for your God. Many think they have chosen God for their God,
that never understood or deliberated these terms. But Non consentit, qui non
sentit: He that neither knows nor ponders them, is not capable of giving a due
consent.

Secondly, We may discern our Covenant Interest, in the Covenant-Impressions
that are made upon our souls. All Gods Covenant People have a double mark or
impression made upon them, viz. 1. Upon their Minds. 2. Upon their Hearts.


1. Upon their Minds, in a more spiritual and efficacious knowledge of God:
Jer. 31.33. They shall all know me, from the greatest of them, even to the
least of them. This knowledge is said to be given, not acquired by the mere
strength of natural Abilities and humane Aids; and given us in the face of
Christ, not by the footsteps of the Creatures only, as he speaks, 2 Cor. 4.6.
it is the choice teaching of the anointing, 1 Ioh. 2.27. a knowledge springing
from inward experience, and spiritual sense; as we know the sweetness of Honey
by tasting, better than by all the descriptions and reports that can be made of
it.

2. Upon their Hearts, in that gracious tenderness and meltings of it for sin,
or the discoveries of Free Grace in the pardon of it. So you read in Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh.

It is as easy to melt the obdurate Rocks into sweet Syrup, as it is to melt
the natural heart into a penitential and tender melting for sin; but now there
is a principle or habit of tenderness implanted in the soul, whereby it is
disposed and inclined to relent and thaw ingenuously upon any just occasion.

Thirdly, Our Covenant Interest may be evidenced in and by our Covenant-
Conversations. All the knowledge which is communicated to our Minds, and all
the tenderness given to our Hearts, do respect and tend to this: Ezekiel. 36.27. I
will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. Habits and
Principles are for action and practice: Grace in the heart is for Obedience and
Holiness in the life.

It is true, that as our Graces are imperfect, so is our Obedience also.
Perfect working is not to be expected from imperfect Creatures. God's own
Covenanted People do often grieve him, and provoke him to bring them under the
Rod of Affliction; but those their Infirmities break not the Bond of the
Covenant, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. Care and Watchfulness ordinarily goes before
them, Conflicts and Resistance accompanies them, and Shame, Grief, and renewed
Care usually follows them. 2 Cor. 7.11. By these things (which deserve a more
copious discourse than my present design can allow) we may be helped to clear
our interest in the Covenant of Grace: and that being done, it should be out of
the power of all the Afflictions in the World to sink your Spirits. Let me
therefore in the last place add,

USE IV.
A word of Consolation to your dejected and drooping hearts, upon this sad and
mournful occasion. Why are you so troubled? and why do Thoughts arise in your
Hearts? Methinks there has been so much of Support and Comfort already
discovered to you in this blessed Covenant, that could your Faith but once fix
upon it, and realize and apply it, I might lay down my Pen at this period, and
say the Work is done, there needs no more; but knowing how obstinate deep
sorrows are, and how difficult a Task the comforting of an afflicted mind is, I
will for a close, superadd a few Considerations more, to all that has been
urged and argued before.

Consideration I.
God, even our own God shall bless us, Psalm. 67.6. When you feel your hearts
wounded with such a thought as this, I cannot embrace my Children in my arms,
they are now out of my reach; then bless and admire God, that the arms of your
Faith can embrace so great, so glorious a Savior, and that you can say, My
beloved is mine, and I am his.

Consideration II.
Consider what evil days are coming on, Isai. 57.1, 2. There are two sorts of
Evils to come, viz. Evils of Sin, and Evils of Suffering; and it is no small
favor to be set out of the way of both. The Grave is the hiding place where
God secures some from the dangers of both.

We are apt to promise our selves times of Tranquillity, and then it cuts us to
think that our dear Ones shall not partake with us in that Felicity: but if we
wisely consider the sins or the signs of the times, we have more cause to
rejoice that God has set them out of harms way.

All things seem to conspire and work toward a day of great Temptation and
Tribulation. Now as Christ told his Disciples, who were so dejected because he
was to leave them, Ioh. 14.28. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I
said, I go to the Father: so truly you would much better express and manifest
your love to your Children, in your satisfaction in the will and appointment of
God, in taking them into rest and safety, than in your dejections and sorrows
for their removal. Surely they are better where they are, than where they were,
whom God has housed in Heaven out of the storm and tempest. And could your
dead Friends that are with Christ, have any more intercourse with this World,
and see your tears, and hear your sighs for them, they would say to you, as
Christ did to those that followed him wailing and mourning, Weep not for us,
but for your selves, and such as remain in the World with you, to see and feel
the calamities that are coming on it.

Consideration III.
Consider how near you are to that blessed State your selves, III.
where God shall be all in all, and you shall feel no want of any
Creature-comfort, 1 Cor. 15.28.

Creature Comforts are only accommodated comforts to this animal life we now
live, but shortly there will be no need of them; for God will be all in all:
that is, all the Saints shall be abundantly satisfied in and with God alone. As
there is water enough in one Sea to fill all the Rivers, Lakes, and Springs in
the World; and Light enough in one Sun to enlighten all the Inhabitants of the
World: so there is enough in one God eternally to fill and satisfy all the
blessed Souls in Heaven, without the addition of any Creature-comfort. God is
complete satisfaction to all the Saints, in the absence (I cannot say want) of
Wives and Children, Meats and drinks, Estates and sensitive Pleasures: There
will be no more need of these things, than of Candles at Noonday. You shall be
as the Angels of God, who have no concernment for Relations.

Your fullness of years, infirmities of Body, and I hope I may add your
improvements in Grace, speak you not far short of this blessed State: and
though you may seem to need these comforts in the way, your God shall supply
all your wants.

Consideration IV.
IV.
To conclude, whatsoever your troubles, wants, fears, or dangers are, or may be
in your passage to this blessed State, the Covenant of Grace is your security,
and by virtue thereof your troubles shall open and divide, as Jordan did, to
give you a safe passage into your eternal Rest.

Look as when the Israelites came near the Land of Promise, there was a
swelling Jordan betwixt it and them, which seemed to forbid their farther
passage and progress; but it is said, Josh. 3.17. The Priests that bore the Ark
of the Covenant of the Lord, stood firm on the ground in the midst of Jordan;
and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were
passed clean over Jordan. Just so it is here: The Covenant of Grace stands on
firm ground in the midst of all the deep Waters of Tribulation you are to pass
through, to secure unto you a safe passage through them all. Rejoice therefore,
and triumph in the fullness and firmness of this blessed Covenant, and
whatsoever Affliction your God shall please to lay upon you, or whatsoever
Comfort he shall please to remove from you, still comfort and encourage your
selves, as David here does, Yet has he made with me an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my
desire; although he make it not to grow.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached for the Funeral OF THAT Excellent and Religious GENTLEMAN
JOHN VPTON OF LUPTON, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for I. Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey. 1688.

TEXT.
2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25. His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and
put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem,
and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchers of his fathers: and all
Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. Ver. 25. And Jeremiah lamented for
Josiah, and all the singing men, and the singing-women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and behold they
are written in the Lamentations.


IN this Context we have the History of the Pious Life, and Tragical Death of
good King Josiah. The History of his Life gives u^ an account of both what he
was, and what he did. As to his Personal Endowments and Qualifications, they
were singular and eximious, as appears by the fourfold Character by which he is
described in the Context: for, First, He espoused the interest of Religion
betimes, even in his Youth; cap. 34. ver. 3. For in the eighth year of his
reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his
father: And that under the great disadvantage of an ill Education, such a
Morning promised a glorious Day. Secondly, He hated all corruptive mixtures in
the Worship of God, and was answerably zealous for Reformation; ibid. And in
the twelfth year he began to purge Iuda^ and Jerusalem from the high places,
and the groves, etc. as knowing well he and his people might expect no more of
Gods blessing on the Ordinances, than there was of his presence in them; and no
more of his presence can rationally be expected, than there is of his own Order
and Institution. Thirdly, He was of a very tender impressive heart, mourning
for public sins and dangers; ver. 26, 27. Because thy heart was tender, and
thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his words against
this place, and against the inhabitants thereof; and humbledst thy self before
me, and did rend thy clothes, and weep before me, etc. He was not so intent
upon his own pleasures (though in the sprightly vigor of Youth) nor on the
weighty concerns of the Kingdom, as to forget the interest of God, and the
greater concerns of his Glory. Fourthly, He was exceeding careful to propagate
the interest of Religion, and spread it far and wide among his People. Though
he could not infuse the inward Principle, (that was the work of God) yet he did
enjoin the external practice of it upon all his Subjects, which was his part
and duty; ver. 33. He made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to
serve the Lord their God. And all his days they departed not from following the
God of their Fathers.


But yet good Josiah had his mistakes and failings. The best of men are but men
at best* He was too rash and hasty in resolving, and too stiff and obstinate
when resolved; and this was the occasion of his ruin. The case was thus:

Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, was at that time making War upon Charchemish, a
place that belonged to him, but was taken from him by the King of Assyria, so
the War of Necho was a just War; and Judah lying between him and Charchemish,
and being at peace with Judah, he requests leave of Josiah to march his Army
peaceably through his Country to the seat of the War: Josiah takes an Alarm
from this Message, and arms against him. Hereupon Necho send Ambassadors to
Josiah, chap. 35. ver. 21. saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of
Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have
war: for God commanded me to make have: forbear thee from meddling with God, who
is with me, that he destroy thee not.

Expositors conceive Necho had this discovery of the mind of God, from the
Prophet Jeremiah, Ierom a lapide. Justin Martyr.
Per oraculum non scriptum, sed viva voce editum: even by word of mouth. If so,
no doubt Jeremiah also dissuaded Josiah from going out against him: However,
this is clear, Josiah did not consult the mind of God about that expedition, as
he ought, and was too hasty and resolute therein; ver. 22. Nevertheless Josiah
would not turn his face from him, etc. By this means this excellent man came to
a tragical end, and that in the very flower of his days. He dies in that
unhappy Expedition, from which he would not be diverted; is brought home to
Jerusalem in the second Chariot; dies, and is buried in the Sepulcher of his
Fathers, to the universal sorrow of all good men in Israel, as you read in the
Text; wherein we have these two parts to consider.

I. The Nature and Quality of the Lamentation. II. The Cause and Ground of it.
1. For the Lamentation here made, it was extraordinary; never such cries heard
before in Israel at any Funeral, whether we consider it either, 1. Extensively,
2. Intensively, or 3. Protensively.


1. Extensively, all Judah and Jerusalem, that is, City and Country mourned
that day; not every Individual, but all that had any sense of the worth of the
man, the good that he did, or the evils that followed upon his removal. No
doubt the Priests of Baal, their Abettors, and Associates, secretly rejoiced at
his fall; but all good men mourned. But among all the Mourners, one only is
specified by name, and that is Jeremiah the Prophet, in whom all the faithful
Ministers of God were included. To them he was a true and faithful Friend; and
in him they lost a Father, and a famous Instrument of Reformation.

2. Consider it Intensively, as to the degree of the sorrow, it was a bitter
Lamentation: so pungent, intense, and deep* that the Mourning of the Jews for
Christ, at the time of their conversion to him, is compared to this Mourning
for Josiah. Zach. 12. ver. 11. In that day there shall be a great mourning in
Jerusalem, ^s the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. This
Hadadrimmon was a little Town in the Valley of Megiddon near the place of this
fatal Battle, whose Inhabitants receiving the first tidings of the fall of
Josiah, made the Town ring with doleful Outcries and Lamentations.

3. Lastly, Consider it Protensively, in its continuance and duration, it was
made an Ordinance in Israel; and accordingly the singing-men and singing-women
spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day: i. e. Whenever any solemn
Funeral or public Calamity was solemnized in Israel, those persons that were
skilful in Lamentations, brought in the story of Iosiah's death, as the burden
of that doleful Song or Funeral-Elegy.

II. Let us consider the Cause and Ground of this Lamentation, which certainly
was great and weighty enough to justify that sorrow, as great and bitter as it
was: for in him they lost a faithful, public, useful, zealous, and
tenderhearted Instrument, whose Life had been eminently useful to the Church
of God, and whose Death opened the gap to all the following Calamities upon
Judah.

Now considering Josiah, here especially in his religious capacity, as so
faithful, industrious, and useful an Instrument for the Church of God, rather
than in his political capacity as a King, the Note from it will be this.

Doctrine.
That faithful, Doctr.
active, and public spirited men in the Church of God, should not be laid in
their Graves, without great Lamentations.

When Jacob was buried, a man famous for Religion, a great and sore lamentation
was made for him, Genesis 50. v. 10. And when Aaron died, all the House of Israel
mourned for him 30 years, Number. 20. v. 29. When Stephen the Proto-Martyr died,
devout men carried him to his Grave with great lamentations, Acts 8.2. and
indeed for any good man to be laid in his Grave, without lamentation, is
lamentable. The living Saints have ever paid this respect and honor to dead
Saints, as men sensible of their worth, and how great a loss the World sustains
by their removal.

I know the departed souls of Saints have no concernment in these things, yet
respect is due to their very Bodies, as the Temples wherein God has been
served and honored, as they are related to Christ who will one day put great
glory and honor upon them.

In the Explication and Confirmation of this point, I will show you, 1.
Negatively, on what account the death of good men is not to be lamented. 2.
Positively, on what account Tears and Lamentations are due to them, with the
grounds and reasons thereof.


1. Negatively, there is not a Tear or Sigh due to the death of any good man,
upon the account of any real loss or detriment that he sustains thereby. No,
no, in this case all Tears are restrained, all Sorrows prohibited, by the
Principles and Rules of Christianity, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14. Religion differences
the sorrows, as well as the joys, of its Professors, from the common joys and
sorrows of the World. Dead Saints are better where they are, than where they
were; to be with Christ is far better; Death to them is gain and infinite
advantage, Phil. 1.21.23. This World is the worst place that ever God designed
his People to live in: for if a state of perfect Holiness and Purity, be better
than a state of Temptation and Corruption; if a state of Rest and Peace, be
better than a state of Labor and Sorrow; if it be better to be triumphing
above, than sighing and groaning beneath: then it is better for departed
Christians to be where they are, than where they were. And could they now
communicate their minds to us by words, as they lately did, they would say to
us as Christ said, Luke 23.28. Daughter of Jerusalem, weep not for us, but weep
for (...) selves, and for your children. Or as he spoke to his Disciples under
their sad resentments of his departure, Ioh. 14.28. If ye loved me, ye would
rejoice, because I go to the Father. So then no tears or sorrows are due to
them, or becoming us, upon the account of any real loss or detriment they
receive by death.

2. Positively, But the true grounds and causes of our Lamentations, are upon
diverse other weighty accounts: as,

1 Reason.
First, Because so much of the Spirit of God as dwelt in them when amongst us,
is now recalled and gathered up from this lower World. Those precious Graces
which they exercised among us, in Prayer, Conference, and other beneficial
Duties, are now gone with them to Heaven.

The Church had the benefit of them during their abode with men, but now no
more, except only what the remembrance of their holy Words and instructive
Examples (whereby they still speak to us, though dead) may afford unto us.

There are choice effusions of the Spirit at the time of our Sanctification, of
which the Church reapeth the benefit whilst we live; but all these are recalled
at our dissolution, and thenceforth we can be no farther useful in this lower
World: for as the Soul is the subject in which these precious Graces inhere, so
they accompany and go along with the Soul into glory.

Now as it is a real loss to a Company when any Merchant withdraws a great
Stock, he had running in Trade, out of the Bank; so certainly it is a great
loss to the Church of God, when the precious gifts and graces of the Spirit,
dwelling in the Saints, are drawn out by Death; so as the Church can have no
farther benefit by them, their Prayers for us, and with us, are now ended;
Abraham knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us.

Secondly, 2 Reason.
The death of the Saints deserves a bitter lamentation, because thereby a
breach is made, a gap opened, to let in the Judgments of God upon the Remnant
that is left. It is said of Moses, Psalm. 106.23. Therefore he said, that he
would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach,
lest he should destroy them. A Metaphor from a besieged City, when a breach is
made in the Walls, and an Enemy ready to enter; but some Champion stands in the
breach to defend the City. Such a Champion was Moses, who by his constant and
fervent Prayers, put a stop to the inundation of God's Judgments against
Israel. And such another was Lot, Genesis 19.22. whose Prayers for that wicked
place he lived in, bound up the hand of Judgment insomuch as the Lord told him,
I can do nothing till thou art gone. But when the Lord by death removes such
men, he thereby makes a way to his anger, as the expression is, Psalm. 78.50.
Hence the death of eminent Saints, especially when many are taken away at or
near the same time, has been ever looked upon as a direful Omen, and dreadful
Presage of ensuing Judgments, and that not without good Scripture-authority,
Isai. 57.1. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful
men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the
evil to come.

Thus Methusalah, whose very Name signified a Flood comes, died the year
before the Flood. Augustine, a little before the sacking of Hyppo. Pareus, a
little before the taking of Hydelberg. And Luther, before the Wars brake out in
Germany. Death as a Pioneer, clears the way to a Troop of Miseries following
after. This therefore is a just and weighty ground of our lamentations for the
death of useful and goodly men.

Thirdly, 3 Reason.
The beauty and ornaments of the places they lived in, is defaced and removed
by their death; they look not like themselves, when the godly are removed out
of them: for as wicked men are the spots and blemishes, so good men are the
beauty and ornaments of their Country. A good man was wont to say of Mr.
Barrington of Barrington-Hall in Essex, Methinks the Town is not at home, when
Mr. Barrington is out of Town. How desolate and dismal does a Family look
(whatever other Ornaments be about it) when the Religious Governor of it is
gone! Take away good men from their Families, and Country, and what are they
but like a Vineyard when the Vintage is past? as the Prophet speaks, Micha 7.1.

4 Reason.
Fourthly, The death of good men deserves a bitter Lamentation, because thereby
the passage of the Gospel, and propagation of Religion, is obstructed in the
places from whence they are removed. Of how great use in a Country may one
zealous publick-spirited man be? Hundreds may have cause to bless God for such
a man. It was the Apostles desire to the Thessalonians, To pray that the word
of the Lord may have its free course, that it might run and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. The removal of such a person as naturally took care for the souls
of those that were about him, to provide food for them, is no small loss, nor
lightly to be passed over.

Fifthly, 5 Reason.
The consideration of the time in which good men die, aggravates the loss, and
justly incenses the sorrow of them that remain, and that upon a threefold
account. (1.) That it falls out in the declining state of Religion, when the
Spirit and power of Godliness is so much weakened and impoverished. This is like
the loss of good Blood in a consumptive Body, which must bring it very low.
(2.) That it falls out also in a time when the numbers of the Godly are so much
thinn'd and lessened, not when the Churches Children say in her Ears, The place
is too straight, give place that we may dwell; but when they are everywhere
lamenting, the paucity and scarcity of good men, as the Psalmist did, Psalm.
12.1. Help, Lord, for the godly man cease, for the righteous fail from among
the children of men. At a time when they are bewailing themselves in the
language of the Prophet, Micah 7.1. Woe is me, for I am as when they have
gathered the summer-fruits, as the grape-gleanings of the vintage: there is no
cluster to eat; my soul desired the first ripe fruit. Alluding to a hungry man
that goes into a Vineyard to refresh his spirits with the fruit thereof; but
alas, there is not one pleasant bunch to be found, none but sower Grapes, to
increase his Hunger, and set his Teeth on edge. (3.) And that which much more
aggravates the loss, is this: when it falls in a time wherein the spring and
succession of good men is obstructed. In this case Death, like a storm of Wind,
overturns the fairest, pleasantest, and most fruitful Trees in the Orchard,
when there is no Nursery from whence others may be taken to plant in their
rooms.

Lastly, 6 Reason.
There is just cause to lament the removal of public and pious men, when we
consider what influence our sins and provocations have had upon those Judgments
and Calamities; our unworthiness of them, unthankfulness for them, and non
improvements of such mercies, have bereaved us of them. I look upon every good
man, as a good Book, lent by its Owner to another to read and transcribe the
excellent Notions and golden Passages that are in it, for his own benefit, that
they may remain with him, when the Owner shall call for the Book again: but in
case this excellent Book be thrown into a corner, and no use made of it, it
justly provokes the Owner to take it away in displeasure.

Thus you see upon what account our sorrows for the death of good men are
restrained, and upon what accounts and reasons they are due debt to the death
of eminent and useful Instruments for God. What remains, is the Application of
this point. And,

1 Use.
First, The Point before us justly reproves three sorts of men.

1. The worst of men, such as secretly rejoice, and are inwardly glad at the
removal of such men; they took no delight in them while they lived, and are
glad they are rid of them when they are dead. Those that persecuted and hated
them when alive, may be presumed to be pleased and gratified with their death.
But alas, poor Creatures, they know not what they do! The innocent preserve the
Island. Except the Lord of hosts (says the Prophet) had left us a small
remnant, we had been as Sodom, we had been like unto Gomorrah, Isai. 1.9. It Is
a Proverb among the very Jews, Sine Supplicationibus non staret Mundus: The
World stands by the Prayers of the godly. Let the World think what they will of
them, I tell you these men are a Screen, a Partition Wall, betwixt them and
destruction. 2. It reproves the insensibleness of good men, who are apt too
slightly to pass over such tremendous strokes of God: for this it was that God
reproved his own People, Isai. 57.1. No man lays it to heart. Where the want
of affection is charged upon the want of consideration, none considering their
worth, their use, or the consequences of their fall. Such Rebukes of God do
certainly call for a deeper sense and sorrow, than is found in most men. 3. It
reproves the very best of men, who though they do bewail and lament the loss of
such men, yet they do not lament it in the due manner. They lament it one to
another, saying, Alas, alas, such a Worthy is fallen, such an eminent
Instrument in the Church or State is dead; but they do not lament it in Prayer
to the Lord, they mourn not over the matter to him, as David did, Psalm. 12.1.
Crying, Help, Lord, for the godly man cease. Help, Lord, the remnant that is
left; help, Lord, to repair the breach made by their death; let the God of the
Spirits of all flesh raise up a Man to fill the room and supply the want. Alas,
how insignificant are the Lamentations of most men upon this account!
2 Use.
Secondly, This point invites us all this day to bewail the stroke of God that
is upon us. I could wish that he that looks upon this Text, and then upon the
countenance of this Assembly, might be able to discern the agreeableness of the
one to the other, in such a sad and solemn occasion.

O let all that love Sion, lament this day the fall of one of her true Friends
and Lovers. I know Funeral Panegyricks are apt to be suspected of flattery; but
as I want a Rhetorical Tongue for such a work, so if I had it, it should never
be saleable for so base a use and purpose. I am sure by sending the generality
that die to Heaven, many are confirmed in the way to Hell. Nor can I but think
of that serious Line in Chrysostom, What a poor comfort is it, to be praised
where a man is not, and to be tormented where he is. But yet the righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. Expect nothing from me on
this occasion, but what may be spoken with greatest assurance of truth, and
that intended for the benefit and imitation of all that hear it. Some may think
it a strain too high, to compare a private person with such a glorious King as
Josiah was; but if Christ compared and preferred the very Grass of the Field,
to Solomon in all his glory, I know no reason why we may not compare and
parallel the precious Graces of a private person with a royal Saint, especially
since the comparison is only made in the religious, not in the civil capacity.

I am sure the Graces and gracious Performances of David, Hezekiah, and Josiah,
with all the other dignified Saints, were intended and propounded as Patterns
for our imitation; and no doubt but private Christians may measure by their
Pattern. Beside, it is abundantly more safe to relate the Virtues of the Saints
when they are dead, than whilst they were alive: for now there is no danger of
provoking pride and vainglory in them that are praised, but much hope of
provoking an holy emulation and imitation in them that hear them.

Well then, Absit invidia verbis: Suffer me this day to erect a Pillar to
perpetuate the Memory of this deceased Worthy, to pay the tribute of my Tears
due to that mournful Hearse, and to engage you to imitate those Excellencies of
his, which I shall with equal truth and modesty display this day, that we also
may be duly affected with the Rebuke of God upon us, and mourn over it before
him.

If when an eminent Commander in any Army falls, the whole Army is affected and
concerned with his death; The mourning Drum, the Lance and Ensigns trail'd;
The Robes of Honor all in Sables veiled.
Let it not be thought much, Christians should express their sense and sorrow
in sighs and tears, for so useful and worthy a man as God has this day removed
from among us, whose Character I shall give you in the following immitable
particulars.

1. That worthy man whose fall we lament this day, was seasoned with Religion
in his Youth, by God's blessing upon his pious Education; in this he had the
advantage of Josiah. His Progenitors were men of Piety, and himself a Child of
many Prayers: and, as Monica said of her Son Austin, it was not likely that a
Child of so many Prayers should perish. How importunately did they request the
fervent Prayers of their pious Friends for him, in the time of his Education?
nor was it in vain, for they were manifestly answered in him. He soon
discovered that Probity and Piety in his Youth, which justly raised great
expectations from him in his riper years.

2. Nor did he frustrate those hopes; for as soon as ever God had fixed him in
a proper Sphere of Activity, (I mean, a Family of his own) those Graces that
were in him shone forth, to the comfort and benefit of all that were about him.
Joshua's pious resolution was his; As for me, I and my house will serve the
Lord.

He kept up the Worship of God in his Closet, as well as in his Family. And
truly if Religion languish in the Closet, it will quickly die in the Family.
His House was a Temple consecrated to God; there the Morning and
Evening-Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises were offered up. He called his
Children and Servants to those Duties, not reckoning that time lost to him,
which was spent for God. The Lord had endowed him with an excellent Spirit of
Prayer himself: I have sometimes accidentally heard him praying in his Family,
with such solidity of Judgment, pertinency of Expression, and holy warmth of
Affection, that has at once edified, refreshed, and reproved me in hearing him.

He constantly read the Scriptures in course before Prayer, and oft-times with
a Commentary upon them, for his own and his Families Edification.

The Lords day he sanctified not only in more public attendance on the
Ordinances, but in the Duties of Reading, Repeating, Singing, and Catechizing
all his Children and Servants about him. And all this before he allowed himself
or them any bodily Refreshments, lest the edge of their Affections should be
blunted in Duty, by the clogging of Nature with Creature-repasts. And thus did
he, as Job, continually: to this course he was severe and constant, no incident
occasions, how great or many soever, could divert him from it.

3. Neither was his holy Zeal and Christian care limited and circumscribed
within his own Family, but was extended to the Souls of all in his
Neighborhood, who desired helps and means in the way of salvation.

His House was seldom without a godly Minister in it, and loath he was to eat
his pleasant Morsel^ alone. It was the joy of his hear^ to see his house filled
on this account: How many Witnesses to the truth of this are here this day Like
another Joseph, he provide^ food for your souls; he loved, honored, received,
and incourage^ the Ministers of the Gospel in their deepest sufferings; gave
them op^portunities of service, when some durst not own them, and other
violently persecuted them.

4. When God called him to public Employments in the Commonwealth, he neither
purchased nor abused that Trust; but with a true English, rather a Christian
zeal and courage, he dedicated himself to the service of God and his Country.
Cheerfully quitting all domestic concerns, spent his Estate, time, and pains,
to heal the breaches of England. I know not a man whose zeal for the common
good, would have carried him nearer to the Example of that noble Roman, who
when a Chasm was made by an Earthquake, and the Oracle had declared, that it
could never be closed, except something of value was thrown into it, cast in
himself to close it.

I could truly have said, had there been convenience and opportunity for it,
when he was laid in his Grave, Here lies a man that never betrayed nor deserted
the Public, for any private interest of his own.

5. He was a man that came as near Josiah in tenderness of heart, as ever I had
the happiness to be acquainted with. The Churches troubles were his troubles,
they all met in him as lines in a center; he even lived and died with the
interest of Religion: and of him I will say, as the Apostle said of Timothy, 2
Phil. 20.21. I have no man like minded who will naturally care for your state,
for all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Naturally, in
this place, is not opposed to Spiritually, but to Artificially. Many can
artificially act the part of a Zealot, when their own interest lies in it; but
he naturally, and therefore freely, cheerfully, and constantly.

6. But though these Excellencies were in him, he had his Naevi, blemishes, and
imperfections. Elias was a man of like passions and weaknesses of Spirit. All
these I doubt not but God has covered, and he is now perfectly freed from them
all.

There is now no passion left within him to be stirred by temptation, no
despondencies and sinkings of Spirit under dismal aspects of Providence. His
Graces are perfected, and his Corruptions finally eradicated.

7. To conclude, he was a man of great Afflictions, as well as tender
Affections. And as the Lord greatly honored him in the course of active
obedience, so he greatly proved and tried him in a course of passive obedience.
He not only gave the Cross in his Coat, but bear it upon his Shoulders: for
besides those troubles which were properly sympathetical, he had his
Idiopathetical sufferings also, and that both from the hands of men, and from
the hand of God. His Piety made and marked him for an Object of Persecution;
the Archers shot at him, and sorely grieved him; he and his Family were hunted
with a Net; the Lord lay it not to their charge: Et hinc illae lachrymae. The
sad effects thereof, I chose rather at this time to pass over with a sigh, than
in this place to commemorate.

And as the hand of man was upon him, so the hand of his God also. First,
lopping off all the pleasant Branches that sprang from him, and that one after
another; when come to the endearing age, opening and disclosing the Bud: And as
the Complement and Issue of all, breaking his constitutional strength with a
long languishing Disease, which at last extinguished this bright Lamp, and has
left his Family and Neighborhood in darkness and sorrow. His poor Heart was
the Anvil on which many Hammers of Affliction had been a long time beating; and
no wonder it appeared relaxed and tumified, when it was inspected, having
endured so many successive strokes of sorrow.

And now what the Lord spoke of Israel in Ier. 11.16. is fulfilled upon this
worthy person, The Lord called thy name a green Olive Tree, fair and of goodly
fruit, with the noise of a great tumult he has kindled a fire upon it, and the
branches of it are broken.

Thirdly, 3 Use.
I shall wind up the whole in several seasonable and necessary Counsels: Some
more general, others more particular, and some most particularly and especially.

First, Counsel to all in general, to awaken themselves, and recover a due
sense of such sore Rebukes of God as this is. When Saul fell, David lamented
it, saying, The beauty of Israel was slain on thy high places.

God has this day stripped off an Ornament from this Country. Such Dispensations
of Providence speak indignation coming on. It requires almost an Age to breed
and furnish a man with due qualifications for the service of the Church and
Commonwealth. England does not so abound with pious, zealous, and faithful
Gentlemen at this time, but that it may sensibly feel the loss of such a man.

Secondly, More particularly, let the Ministers of Christ lament his fall, as
Jeremiah did the fall of Josiah in the Text. He was a true Friend to Christ's
faithful Ministers, and had them in honor for their work sake. It Is true, he
has no more need of us, he is now wiser than his Teachers; but we greatly need
him, and men of his Spirit, in such a dull degenerate Age as we live in.

Thirdly, And most particularly, I shall apply and close all with a few words
of Counsel to the dear and now desolate Relict of this Worthy Person, whose sad
lot it is this day to over-live the mercies and comforts she once enjoyed in
him.

Madam, God has this day covered you with Sables, written bitter things
against you, broken you with breach upon breach. Your sorrows need not be
excited, but regulated. It Is my trouble, that I cannot discharge my duty to the
memory of your dear Husband, without exasperating your Griefs, which alas were
too acute before; but Rods have their voices: Blessed is the man whom God
corrects and teaches him out of his Law. Hear you the Rod, and who has
appointed it; and oh that your Soul may this day take in these necessary
Counsels and Cautions, without which your Afflictions cannot be sanctified to
the advantage of your Soul. And,

1. Learn from hence the vanity of the Creature, the emptiness and nothingness
of the best things here below. How has God made your best comforts on Earth to
shrink up and vanish into nothing? How do our fancies varnish and guild over
these empty Bubbles? What great expectations are we apt to raise from them? How
apt to fall asleep in the bosoms or laps of earthly Enjoyments? and say with
Job, I shall die in my nest, and multiply my days as the sand. When lo, in a
moment the projects and expectations of many years are over-turned. Oh what a
difference will you find betwixt hope founded in Christ, Comforts drawn out of
the Promises, and the flattering Comforts and vain hopes founded in the
Creature whose breath is in its Nostrils?

It Is time for you and for us all to wean off from this vain World; mortify
our Fancies and Affections to it, and place them where they shall not be
capable of disappointment.

2. Guard carefully, I beseech you, against those Temptations which probably
may accompany this Affliction. It may be Satan will suggest to your heart, what
he once put into their lips. Mal. 3.14. What profit is it that we have kept his
ordinances, and walked mournfully before him? Where is the fruit of Prayer?
What good have I seen of Fasting? What has Religion availed? Do not prayerless
and ungodly Families thrive and prosper? Beware of this. Madam, I doubt not but
you will acknowledge there have been sins and provocations within your walls,
yea within your heart, for which God may as justly and severely judge your
house as he did Ely's. Remember the rewards of Religion are not in this World;
and should we speak thus, we shall offend against the generation of his
Children. All we must expect from Religion, is to save our souls by it.

3. Call not the love of God into question to your self, or yours, because of
these severe strokes of God upon you and them: You know Josiah was dear to God,
yet he died in the prime of his days, by a violent hand, remote from his own
home, and was brought home in the second Chariot to Jerusalem, a Spectacle of
far greater sorrow, than your dear Husband was; and yet notwithstanding all
these sad circumstances of his death, the Promise of his God was punctually
performed to him, that he should die in peace, and not behold the Evil that was
to come. There is a vanity, says Solomon, which is done upon the earth, that
there be just men unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked:
again, there be wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the
righteous, Eccles. 8.14. But then remember, that it is but in the Earth; here,
or nowhere, God must chastize his Children.

4. See that you maintain that holy course of Religious Exercises in your
Family, and in your Closet, wherein he walked so exemplarily before you. Let
Religion live, though he be dead; and convince the World, I pray you, that it
was Gods influence, and not your Husbands only, which was the Spring and
Principle of this holy Course.

5. Strive not with your Maker, nor fret against the Lord, under this irksome
and painful Dispensation. Remember there is a Woe hanging over this sin: Isai.
45.9, 10. Woe to him that striveth with his Maker. There is a twofold striving
of men with God, one lawful and commendable, when we strive with him upon the
knee of importunity in Prayer, thus Jacob wrestled with God and prevailed, Hos.
12.4. the other is highly sinful and dangerous, when we presume to censure or
accuse any of his works as defective in wisdom or goodness. He that reproves
God, let him answer it, (i. e.) at his peril be it. This sinful striving with
God is twofold, either Vocal or Mental.

1. Vocal, when men in bold blasphemous language, arraign the Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, or Faithfulness of the Lord at the bar of their own Reason, and there
condemn them, setting their mouths against the Heavens, Psalm. 73.8, 9. this is
the sin of the wicked, yea of the firstborn sons of wickedness.

2. Mental, in inward frets, murmurs, repinings against God; Prove. 19.3. The
foolishness of man perverts his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.
The heart may cry out impatiently against God, when the tongue is silent: And
if the frets and murmurs of the heart be (as indeed they are) interpretatively
no better than a striving with our Maker, then this sin will be found more
common among good men in the Paroxisms of Affliction, than we imagine. It will
be necessary therefore, for your sake, and the sakes of many more in a like
state of Affliction with you, to stay a while upon this head, and consider
these following Queries.

Query 1. How far we may enquire, expostulate, and complain in times of
Affliction, without sin? Query 2. Wherein lies the sinfulness and danger of
exceeding these bounds? Query 3. What Considerations are most proper and
powerful to restrain the afflicted soul from this sinful excess?
Query 1. How far we may enquire of God, expostulate with him, and complain to
him in time of Affliction, without sin?
1. We may humbly enquire into the causes and reasons of Gods displeasure
against us, not to seek matter for our Justification, but Direction in the work
of our Humiliation. So David enquired about the three years Famine, and the
Lord informed him for whose sake and for what sin it was, 2 Samuel 21.1. And thus
Job addressed to him in the day of his Affliction, Job 10.2. Show me wherefore
thou contendest with me; (i. e.) convince me what special sin it is for which I
am thus afflicted. This is so far from being our sin, that it is both our duty,
and the excellency of our Spirits; it is a Child-like temper, willing to know,
that we may be particularly humbled for that sin, and for ever the more careful
to shun it. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I
will do no more, Job 34.32. Thus far we are safe.

2. We may plead by Prayer, and put him in mind of his Mercies, Relations, and
Promises, in order to the change of his providential Dispensations toward us:
we may say to him under the smartest Rod, as the Church did, Doubtless thou art
our Father, Psalm. 74.20. Have respect to the Covenant, or as Jacob, Genesis
32.9.12. Thou said, I will surely do thee good.

3. We may complain to God under our sufferings, and spread them before him in
all their circumstances and aggravations, as Job, He^an, Asaph, Hezekiah, and
David did. He allows his Children to complain to him, but not of him. I poured
out my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble, Psalm. 142.2. To
whom should a Child make his complaint, but to his Father? So far we are safe.

4. We may submissively pray for the removal of his hand from us, and entreat
that his anger may cease; that he will turn again and heal us and our Families,
and not draw forth his anger for ever. So did David, Psalm. 39.10. Remove thy
stroke away from me, I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. Q. d. Ah, Lord, I
am not able to endure another stroke. All this while we are safe, within the
bounds of our Duty. But then,

Query 2. Wherein lies our sin and danger, in exceeding these bounds? I answer,
Sol. When forgetting God's Sovereignty, and the desert of our Iniquities, we
arrogantly censure his effecting, or permitting Providence, as if they had no
conducency to his own glory, or our good. This is both sinful and dangerous:
for,

1. This is a proud exalting of our own Reason and Understanding, above the
infinite Wisdom of God. God has made our Reason a Judge and Arbitor in matters
within its own Sphere and Province; but when it comes to summon God to its Bar,
and article against Heaven, it is an insufferable arrogance, and we do it at
our own peril. God will have all men know that he is an unaccountable being,
Job 33.13. yea, he will have us to know, that the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, 1 Cor. 1.25. that is, that those very works of God which man's proud
Reason adventures to censure, as not so wise a method as their own would be,
has more wisdom in it, than all the deep-laid designs of the greatest
Politicians in the World. And it is strange that men should dare to attempt
such a wickedness as this, after God has so severely punished it in the fallen
Angels.

2. It is no less than a spurning at the Sovereignty of God, from whose
pleasure we derive our Beings and all our Mercies, Rev. 4.11. In these
quarrellings of Providence, and frets at divine appointments, we invade his
Throne, and control his sovereign Pleasure. How monstrous were it to hear a
Child quarrelling with his Father, that he is not so and so figured, or the
Clay to chide the Potter for moulding it as it is?

3. It Is destructive to our own inward peace and tranquillity of mind, which is
part of the punishment of this sin; and a smart stripe, a sore rebuke it is
from the hand of God upon us.

Contention is uncomfortable, though but with a Neighbor, worse with a near
Relation; but a quarrel with God is destructive to all comfort in the World.
Afflictions may disturb a good man's peace, but a mutinous Spirit against God,
destroys and stabs it at the very heart. What is the sin and torment of the
Devils, but their rage against the Lord, and swelling against the methods of
his Grace? He seeks rest, but finds none, Mat. 12.33. The peace of our
Spirits is a choice Mercy, and might be maintained amidst all our Afflictions,
were but our interest in his Promises, and the true level of his Providence
cleared to us.

4. It Is irrational, and highly unjust, to give the cause, and quarrel at the
effects. God has righteously and inseparably linked penal with moral evils;
sin and sorrow by the Laws of Heaven are tackt and united together; he that
does evil, shall feel evil, Genesis 4.7. We adventure upon sin, and then fret at
Affliction: Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of a man perverts his way, and his
heart fretteth against the Lord. Is this becoming a reasonable Creature? Does
not every man reap as he sows? Can the seed of sin bring forth a crop of
peace and comfort? Why does the living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sins, Lam. 3.39. Search your hearts, and search your houses, and you
will quickly find that all your Afflictions in this World, were they ten
thousand times more and heavier than they are, do not come near to the desert
of one sin. All sorrows, losses, afflictions on this side Hell are quite below
the value of sin, the meritorious and provoking cause of them all.

5. It Is foolish and vain, to strive against God, and contest perversely with
him. Can our discontents relieve us? or our murmurs ease us? Will they turn God
out of his way? No, no; He is in one mind, and who can turn him aside? Job
23.13. The Wheels of Providence go straight forward, and turn not when they go,
Ezekiel. 1.17. We may bring them over us to crush us, by standing thus in their
way, but cannot turn them out of their way. Impatiens oegrotus, crudelem facit
medicum.
If ye still walk contrary to me, (...) temere ambulabo.
then will I walk contrary to you, and punish you yet seven times for your
sins, Lev. 26.13, 14. or I will walk in the rashness of mine anger, smiting you
without moderation, as men do in the height of their rage and fury. This is all
we shall get by fretting against God. Never expect relief under, or release
from the Yoke God has laid on your necks, till you be brought to accept the
punishment of your iniquities, Lev. 26.41.

6. It Is a sin full of odious ingratitude toward your God: Which appears (1)
in murmuring because it is so bad, when we should be admiring that it is no
worse. Are there not millions in Hell that never sinned at higher rates than
you have done? Is this Affliction as bad as Hell? Has God pardoned you, and
saved you, and yet does he deserve to be thus requited by you! (2) In murmuring
that our condition is so bad, when we may every day see others in a far worse
case who are equal with us by nature, and were equal with them in guilt and
provocation. If we speak of outward Afflictions, certainly others would be glad
to exchange conditions with us, and account themselves happy in our
circumstances. Consider the description given of those persons, Job 30.3, 4, 5.
and how little they differ in the manner of life from bruit Beasts: and if we
speak of inward troubles, compare your own with those of Heman, and Asaph, in
Psalm. 77. and Psalm. 88. and if of both together, and that in an intense degree,
consider Job 6.4. and you will soon find your condition full of sparing Mercy:
these excellent persons that were so much above you in Grace, were yet plunged
so much deeper than you into Affliction. And is it not then vile ingratitude in
you, thus to mutiny and charge your God foolishly? (3) But especially here lies
our ingratitude, in quarrelling and censuring those Providence, whose very end
and errand is our eternal good; Heb. 12.10. But be for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness.

7. It Is a sin that deprives us of the fruits and benefits of our Afflictions:
a tumultuous raging Spirit reaps no good by the Rod. The fruits of Affliction
are called the peaceable fruits, Heb. 12.11. because they are always gathered
and reaped down by the afflicted soul in a quiet and peaceful temper. Anima
sedendo, and quiescendo fit sapiens: Blossoms and Flowers open not in the
boisterous storms of Winter, but in the mild and gentle Spring.

Well then, be convinced of the sin and danger of a discontented Spirit under
the hand of God, and instead of mourning over lost Relations, now mourn for the
loss of Patience, the want of Submission, and for the pride and arrogance of
your own Reason, that presumes to correct the works of the Almighty, and say to
God, as Joseph did to his Father, when he wittingly crossed his hands in
blessing Ephraim and Manassah, Not so, my Father? This is not fit.

Query 3.
But how may these Evils be prevented or cured, and the tempestuous soul calmed
under the the Rod? How shall all strifes betwixt God and his People be ended,
and the soul made quiet at his feet?

Reply, This blessed frame of Spirit may in a great degree and measure be
attained in the use of the following Directions. I say, ^n their use and
application, not by the prescription or simple knowledge of them. And,

Rule 1.
The first Rule or Direction, is this: Study well the glorious sovereignty of
God over you, and aw your hearts with the consideration of it. From his mere
pleasure you and all that is yours proceeded, on his pleasure you depend, and
into that good pleasure of his will your wills therefore ought to be resolved:
Whatever the Lord pleased that he did, in heaven and in earth, in the sea and
in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. Man and man stand on equal ground, and if our
Reason be not satisfied about the equity of men's dealings with us, we may ask
who did it, and demand the reasons why he did it; but when we have to do with
God, we mus^ not dispute his pleasure. Let the Potsherd strive with the
Potsherd of the Earth, but let not the Clay dispute with the Potter. Now the
Sovereignty of God is gloriously displayed in his Decrees, Laws and
Providence. (1.) In his Decrees, appointing the Creatures to their ends,
whether to be Vessels of Mercy, or of Wrath, Romans 9.18, 19, 20. In this case
there must be no disputing with God. (2.) In his Laws, appointing the work and
duty of the Creature, as also the Rewards and Punishments; Jam. 4.12. There is
one Lawgiver, that is able to save and to destroy. In this case his
Sovereignty immediately and indispensably binds the Conscience of man, and no
humane Authority can dissolve that Obligation: Nor must we snuff at the
severest command. (3.) The glorious Sovereignty of God is displayed in his
providential administrations, appointing every man to that station and
condition he is in in this world; whether it be high or low, prosperous or
afflicted. Psalm. 75.6. I said to the fools, Deal not foolishly, etc. for
promotion comes not from the east, or the west; but God is Judge: he puts
down one, and sets up another. Let not them that are at the top of the
world, be lifted up; nor those that are at the bottom, be dejected: for God
cast every man's lot, and changes their condition at his pleasure; a word of
his mouth plucks down the lofty, and exalts the lowly; he wounds, and his
hands make whole. Hence it becomes the afflicted to be still, and know that he
is God, Psalm. 46.10. to put his mouth in the dust, and quietly to wait for his
salvation. All our fretting and struggling cannot shake off the Yoke which he
has put upon us, but a weak and quiet submission to his will, and compliance
with his designs, is the best expedient to procure our freedom. There is not
one circumstance of trouble befalls you, without his order; nor can you expect
deliverance, but by order from him.

Rule 2.
Study the transcendant evil of sin, and what the demerit of the least sin that
ever you committed is. This will becalm your tempestuous Spirits, and at once
work them into Contentation with your present state, and Admiration that it is
no worse, Lam. 3.22.39, 40.

Consider, thou querulous and discontented Soul, that the wages of sin is
death, Romans 6. ult. that tribulation, anguish, and wrath, are due by Law, to
every soul of man that does evil; that so often as we have sinned, so often
have we deserved Hell: and shall we then charge God with severity, for
scourging us with the Rods of gentle fatherly chastizements? Is this Hell? Dare
you say the severest affliction that ever was upon you, is above the demerit of
your sin?

It Is true indeed, the Lord tells Jerusalem, that she had received of his hands
double for all her sins, Isai. 40.2. But that is not the language of strict
Justice, but of Compassions rolled together. There is not a gracious soul in
all the world, but will readily subscribe Ezra's Confession, that God has
afflicted it less than its iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13. Oh if once we measure
our afflictions by our sins, we shall admire they are so few, so mild and
gentle, as they are.

Rule 3.
Consider what a difference there is betwixt the Saints meeting with
afflictions, and their parting with them. You meet them with trembling and
astonishment, but you shall part with them with praise and thanksgiving,
blessing God for the manifold blessings they have instrumentally conveyed to
your souls. It is good for me, says David, that I have been afflicted. By
these things sin is prevented, discovered, and mortified, the ensnaring World
imbittered, and the Rest to come sweetened.

Many other excellent Rules may be added; try these, and the blessing of the
Spirit accompany them.

To conclude, be not swallowed up of sorrows for what you have lost, but
balance all the troubles of this life, with the hopes of the next. Your dear
Children are gone, your sweet Husband is gone; but consider who took them, and
whither. It is said of Enoch, Genesis 5.24. He walked with God, and was not; for
God took him. Mr. Upton is not, and yet he is: He is not with men, he is with
God: He ceases not to be, though he cease to breathe: He is taken away, but God
took him: He is better where he is, than where he was: Though he be not in your
Bosom, he is in Christ's.

Imitate his Zeal, Plain-heartedness, diligence in Duties, and you shall
shortly meet him again, and never part any more. For this we say by the word of
the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain to the coming of the Lord, shall
not prevent them which are asleep. 1 Thessalonians. 4.15, 16, 17, 18.
For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the
voice of the archangel, and the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with
the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with these words. Did you but know the
deep Emphasis of these words, ever with the Lord, I doubt not but you would
find Comfort enough in them for your self, and a great overplus for the
comforting of others.

FINIS.

