A Saint Indeed: OR The great work of a Christian, Opened and Pressed; from
Prove. 4. 23. BEING A seasonable and proper expedient for the recovery of the
much decayed Power of Godliness, among the Professors of these times.

By John Flavell M. of the Gospel.

Unusquisque a deo constitutus est sui cordis tanquam castri custos and
defensor, contra suos hosts: Si argo non implorato auxilio, non exspectato
succursu, adeo ad primam obsidionis castrametationem castrum tradat hosti
crimen admittit prodition is manifestum: quid igitur dicendum de traditione
clavium, bujus castri, antequam obsidione prematur? clavis est cogitato, haec
enim cor aperit; cogitationem velvere est clavem cordis ad apertionem ipsius
torquere, ut tandem re seratur.

Ames. de Conscien. p. 154. LONDON, Printed by W. R. and are to be sold by
Robert Boulter, at the Turks head in Bishops-gate street, near the Great James.
1668.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To my dearly beloved and longed for, the Flock of Jesus Christ in Dartmouth,
over whom the Holy Ghost has made me an Overseer: sound judgment, true zeal,
and unstained purity is heartily wished.
My Dear Friends.
THere are three sad sights with which our eyes should continually affect our
hearts. The (1) Is to behold in every place, so many profane and dissolute
ones who bear the very image of Satan: the face of whose conversation plainly
discovers, what they are, and whither they are going, Philip. 3. 18. 19. These
look like themselves, the Children of wrath: The (2) is to see so many cursed
hypocrites artificially disguising themselves, and with mavelous dexterity
acting the parts of Saints, so that even a judicious eye may sometimes mistake
the Similar Workings of the Spirit on them, for his saveing workings on others:
to hear such a person conferring, praying; bewailing his corruptions, and
talking of his experiences; would easily persuade a man to believe, that he
has the heart as well as the face of a sincere Christian: For Sic oculos, sic
ille manus, sic ora ferebat. So the people of God do speak, so they pray, and
even so they open their conditions: these look like Saints, but are none. The
(3) Is to see so many real Saints in whom the Spirit of truth is, who get
through the impetuous workings of their corruptions, and neglecting of the
watch over their hearts, do often fall into such scandalous practices, that
they look like hy pocrits though they are not so.

These are 3 sad sights indeed, and oh that my head were waters and mine eyes
fountains of tears, that I might weep abundantly over them all!

For the first I would mourn heartily, considering that they (so continsing)
must be damned eternally, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6. 9.

For the second, I would both weep and tremble, considering that they (so
abideing) must be damned doubly, Matthew. 24. 51

And for the third, no less than any of the rest because, though they
themselves may and shall be saved, yet their examples make fast the bonds of
death upon both the former; Matthew. 18. 7. 2 Samuel 12. 13. 14.

Alas! that ever they should shed the blood of others souls, for whom Christ
shed his own blood! that ever they should be cruel to others, who have found
Christ so kind to them! I know they dare not do it directly and intentionally,
but so it proves occasionally and eventually: suffer me here to digress a
little, and expostulate with these prejudiced and hardened Souls, I will
presently return to you again. O why do you mischief your own Souls by other
men's examples? because they stumble and break their shins, will you fall and
break your necks? I desire all such as harden themselves by these things, and
take up a good opinion of their own deplorable condition; would soberly
consider and answer these three Queries.

1. Qu. Does religion any way countenance or patronize the sinful practices of
its professors, or does it not rather impartially and severely condemn them? it
is the glory of the Christian Religion that it is pure and undefiled, Jam. 1.
27. no doctrine so holy Psalm. 19. 8. nor does any make more provision for an
holy life, Titus 2. 11, 12. Indeed there is a case wherein we may charge the
evil practices of men upon their principles, but that is when their practices
naturally flow from, and necessarily follow their principles: as for example,
if I see a Papist sin boldly, I may charge it upon his principles, for they set
pardons to sale, and so make way for looseness. If I see an Arminian ^light the
grace of God, and proudly advance himself, I may cry shame upon his principles,
which directly lead to it: but can I do so where such practices are condemned
and provided against by their own avowed principles that commit them?

2. Qu. Is it not a most irrational thing to let fly at religion because of the
scandalous ways of some, whilst in the mean time you wholly slight and overlook
the holy and heavenly conversations of many others? are all that profess
godliness loose and careless in their lives? no, some are an ornament to their
profession, and the glory of Christ: and why must the innocent be condemned
with the guilty? why the eleven for one Judas?

3. Qu. If you condemn religion because of the scandalous lives of some that
profess it: must you not then cast off all religion in the world and turn
downright Atheists? surely this is the consequent of it: for what religion is
there, but some that profess it walk contrary to that their profession: and
then as Constantine told the Novatian, you must set up your ladder and go to
heaven by your self.

But alas! it is not our printed apologies for religion, but the vi^ible
reformations of its professors that must both salve its honor and remove those
fatal stumbling blocks at which the blind world strikes and falls into eternal
perdition.

Now there are two ways by which this may be effected. First, by convincing the
consciences of professors of their miscarriages, and the evil and agravations
of them. Secondly by medicateing the heart, and cleansing the fountain whence
they proceed: in the first of these a worthy and eminent servant of Christ bath
lately labored, holding a clear Gospel glass before the faces of professors
which truly represents their spots and blemishes. See Gospel Glass.
If he that reads it, will consider, apply, and practice, it shall doubtless
turn to his salvation, but if it turn to no good account to him that reads it;
I know it shall turn to a testimony for him that wrote it. The second is a
principal design of this small treatise, the subject whereof is exceeding
weighty and of daily use to the people of God: though the manner of handling it
be attended with many defects and weaknesses: every one cannot be excellent who
yet may be useful.

I will exercise your patience no longer than whilst I tell you.

1. Why I published it to the view of the world.

2. Why I direct it particularly to you.

First for the publication of it, take this sincere and brief account, that as
I was led to this subject by a special providence, so to the publication of it
by a kind of necessity: the providence at first leading me to it was this, A
dear and choice friend of my intimate acquaintance being under much inward
trouble upon the account of some special heart disorder, opened the case to me,
and earnestly requested some rules and helps in that particular, whilst I was
bending my thoughts to that special case, diverse other cases of like importance
(some of which were dependent upon that under consideration) occurred to my
thoughts, and this scripture which I have insisted upon, presented it self asa
fit foundation for the whole discourse, which being lengthned out to what you
see: diverse friends requested me to transcribe for their use; diverse of the
cases here handled: and some others begd me to publish the whole, to which I
was in a manner necessitated to save the pains of transcribing, which to me is
a very tedious and tiresome work: and just as I had almost finished the copy an
opportunity presented (and that somewhat strangely) to make it public. So that
from first to last I have been carried beyond my first intentions in this thing.

Ob. If any say the world is even cloyed with books, and therefore though the
discourse be necessary, yet the publication is needless.

Sol. 1. I answer, there are multitudes of books indeed, and of them many
concern not themselves about root truths, and practical godliness, but spend
their strength upon impracticable notions, and frivolous controversies: many
also strike at root truths, and endeavor to undermine the power of godliness:
and some there are that nourish the root, and tend to clear and confirm, to
prepare and apply the geart truths of the gospel that they may be bread for
souls to live and feed on: now, though I could wish, that those that have
handled the pen of the scribe, had better employed their time and pains then to
obtrude such useless discourses upon the world, yet for books of the latter
rank, I say, that when husbandmen complain of too much corn, let Christians
complain of too many such books.

2. And if you be so highly conceited of your own furniture and ability, that
such books are needless to you: if you let them alone they will do you no
hurt, and other poor hungry souls will be glad of them, and bless God for what
you despise and leave.

Ob. If it be said that several of the cases here handled touch not your
condition, I answer.

Sol. 1. That which is not your condition may be another condition. If you be
placed in an easy, full, and prosperous state, and so have no need of the
helps here offered to support your heart under pinching wants, others are
forced to live by faith for every days provision: If you be dandled upon the
knee of providence, some of your Brethren are under its feat. If you have
inward peace, and tranquillity of Spirit, and so need not the Councels here
given to ward off those desperate conclusions that poor afflicted souls are
ready to draw upon themselves at such a time; yet it may be a word in season to
them, and they may say as David to Abigail, blessed be thou of the Lord, and
blessed be thy advice.

2. That may be your condition shortly, which is not your condition for
present: say not thy Mountain stands strong, thou shall never be moved: there
are changes in the right hand of the most High, and then those truths which are
little more esteemed than Hedge -- fruits, will be as Aples of Gold in Pictures
of Silver: In Jer. 10. 11. The Prophet there teaches the Jews (who then divelt
in their own Houses) how to defend their Religion in Babylon, and what they
should say to the Caldeans there, and therefore that verse is written in
Caldee: So much for the reasons of its Publication: Next for the Dedication of
it to you, I was induced thereto by the Consideration. (1.) Of the relation I
have to you above all the people in the world: I look upon my gifts as yours;
my time as yours, and all the Talents I am entrusted with as yours: It is not
with you as with a woman whose Husband is dead, and so is freed from the Law of
her Husband, the relation still continues, and so do all the mutual duties of
it. (2.) By the consideration of my necessitated absence from you, I would not
that personal absence should by insensible degrees, untwist (as usually it
does) the cord of friendship, and therefore have endeavored (as absent friends
use to do) to preserve and strengthen it by this small remembrance. It was
Vespatian's answer to Apollonius when be desired access for two Philosophers:
My Doors (said Vespatian) are always open to Philosophers, but my very Breast
is open to thee. I cannot say with him, my Doors are open for the free access
of friends, being by a sad Providence shut against my self; But this I can say,
my very breast is still open to you; you are as dear to me as ever. (3.)
Another inducement (and indeed the main) was the perpetual usefulness and
necessity of these truths for you, which you will have continual need of: and I
know few of you have such happy memories to retain, and I cannot be always
with you to inculcate these things, but litera scripta manet; I was willing to
leave this with you as a Legacy, as a testimony of sincere love for, and care
over you: This may council and direct you when I cannot: I may be rendered
useless to you by a civil or natural Death; but this will out -- live me, and
Oh that it may serve your souls when I am silent in the Dust!

To hasten now to a conclusion, I have only these three requests to you, which
I carnestly beseech you not to deny me; Yea, I charge you, as ever you hope to
appear with comfort before the great Shepherd, do not dare to slight these
requests. (1.) Above all other studies in the world, study your own hearts:
waste not a minute more of your precious time about frivolous and sapless
controversies: it is repoted even of Bellarmine (how truly I examine not) quod
a studiis scholasticae theologiae averteretur fere nauseabundus, Fuligattus in
vita Bellarm.
quoniam succo carebant liquidae pietatis, (i. e.) ^e turned with loathing from
the study of School Divinity, because it wanted the sweet juice of piety: I had
rather it should be said of you as one said of Caput regulatum illi defuit, cor
bonum non defuit.
Swinckfeedius (He wanted a regular head, but not an honest heart) then that
you should have regular heads, and irregular hearts: My dear Flock, I have
according to the grace given me, labored in the course of my ministry among
you, to feed you with the heart -- strengthening bread of practical doctrine,
and I do assure you, it is far better you should have the sweet and saving
impressions of Gospel Truths, feelingly, and powerfully conveyed to your
hearts; then only to understand them by a bare ratiocination, or a dry
syllogistical inference: Leavetrifling studies to such as have time lying on
their hands, and know not how to employ it: Remember you are at the door of
Eternity, and have other work to do; those hours you spend upon heart-work in
your closets, are the golden spots of all your time, and will have the sweetest
influence into your last hour: Never forget those Sermons I preached to you
upon that subject, from 2. Kings 20. 2. 3. Heart work is weighty and difficult
work, an error there may cost you your souls: I may say of it, as Augustine
speaks of the Doctrine of the Trinity, Nihilo facilius aut periculosius
erratur; a man can err in nothing more easily, or more dangerously: O then,
study your hearts. (2.) My next request is, that you will carefully look to
your Conversations, and be accurate in all your ways, hold forth the Word of
life: be sure by the strictness and holiness of your lives, to settle your
selves in the very consciences of your enemies. Remember that your lives must
be produced in the great day, to judge the world. 1 Cor. 6. 2. Oh then what
manner of persons ought you to be! You have many eyes over you, the Omniscient
eye of God, that searches the heart and reins, Rev. 2. 23. The vigilant eye of
Satan, Job 1. 7, 8. The envious eyes of enemies, that curiously observe you,
Psalm. 5. 8. The quick and observant eye of Conscience, which none of your
actions escape, Romans 9. 1.

Oh then be precise, and accurate in all manner of conversation: keep up the
power of godliness in your Closets and Families, and then you will not let it
fall in your more public employments, and converses in the world: I have often
told you, that it is the honor of the Gospel, that it makes the best Parents
and Children; the best Masters and Servants; the best Husbands and Wives in the
world.

My third and last request is, that you pray for me: I hope I can say, and I am
sure some of you have acknowledged, that I came at first among you, as the
return and answer of your Prayers: And indeed so it should be, see Luke 10. 2.
I am persuaded also, I have been carried on in my work by your prayers: it is
sweet when it is so, see Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. And I hope by your prayers to receive
yet a farther benefit, even that which is mentioned, Heb. 13. 18, 19. Philem.
22. And truly it is but equal you should pray for me, I have often prayed for
you: Let the Pulpit, Family, and Closet witness for me: and God forbid I should
sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you.

Yea, Friends, your own interest may persuade to it: what mercies you obtain
for me, redound to your own advantage, if God preserve me, it is for your use
and service: the more gifts and graces a Minister has, the better for them
that shall wait on his Ministry: the more God gives in to me, the more I shall
be able to give out to you. I will detain you no longer, but to entreat you to
accept this small testification of my great love, and have recourse to it,
according as the exigencies of your condition shall require: Read it
consideringly, and obediently; Judge it not by the dress and style, but by the
weight and savor of what you read. It Is a good rule of Bernard, in legendis
libris, non quaeramus scientiam sed saporem, (i. e.) in reading Books, regard
not so much the science, as the savor: That it may prove the savor of life
unto life to you, and all those into whose hands it shall come, is the hearty
desire of

Your loving and faithful Pastor, JOHN FLAVELL.
From my Study at Ley in Slapton, October. 7. 1667.
Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues
of Life.
THe Heart of man is his worst part before it be regenerate, and the best
afterward; It is the seat of Principles, and fountain of Actions. The eye of
God is, and the eye of the Christian ought to be, principally fixed upon it.

The greatest difficulty in Conversion is to win the heart to God* and the
greatest difficulty after Conversion is to keep the heart with God. Here lies
the very pinch and stress of Religion; here is that that makes the way to life a
narrow way, and the Gate of Heaven a straight Gate. Direction and help in this
great work, is the scope and sum of this Text; wherein we have.

1. An Exhortation, Keep thy he are with all diligence.

2. The Reason or Motive enforcing it, For out of it are the issues of Life.

In the Exhortation I shall Consider,

1. The Matter of the Duty.

2. The manner of performing it.

1. The Matter of the Duty; Keep thy Heart. Heart is not here taken properly
for that noble part of the Body which Philosophers call the primum vivens, and
ultimum moriens; the first that lives, and the last that dies; but by Heart in
a Metaphor, the Scripture sometimes understands some particular noble faculty
of the Soul, in Romans 1. 21. it is put for the understanding part, their foolish
Heart (i. e.) their foolish understanding was darkened. And Psalm. 119. 11. It
is put for the Memory, Thy Word have I hid in my Heart. And John 1. 3. 20 It is
put for the Conscience, which has in it both the light of the Understanding,
and the recognitions of the Memory: If our heart Condemn us, (i. e.) if our
Conscience; whose proper Office it is to condemn. But here we are to take it
more generally for the whole Soul or inner Man; for look what the Heart is to
the Body, that the Soul is to the Man: and what Health is to the Heart; that
Holiness is to the Soul: Quod sanit as in corport, id sanct it as in cord. The
state of the whole Body depends upon the soundness and vigor of the Heart, and
the everlasting state of the whole man upon the good or ill condition of the
Soul.

And by keeping the Heart understand, the diligent and constant use and
improvement of all holy Means and Duties to preserve the Soul from sin, and
maintain its sweet and free communion with God.

I say constant, for the reason added in the Text, extends the duty to all the
states and conditions of a Christians life, and makes it bind ad semper: If the
heart must be kept because out of it are the issues of life, then as long as
these issues of life do flow out of it, we are obliged to keep it.
Lavater in loc. will have the word taken from a besieged Garrison, begirt by
many Enemies without, and in danger of being betrayed by treacherous Citizens
within, in which danger the Soldiers upon pain of death are commanded to
watch: and whereas the expression, (keep thy heart) seems to put it upon us as
ourwork; yet it does not imply a sufficiency or ability in us to do it; we are
as able to stop the Sun in its course, or make the Rivers run backward, as by
our own skill and power to rule and order our hearts: we may as well be our own
Saviors, as our own Keepers, and yet Solomon speaks properly enough, when he
says, keep thy Heart, because the duty is ours, though the power be Gods. A
Natural man has no power, a gracious man has some; though not sufficient, and
that power he has depends upon the exciting and assisting strength of Christ;
Gratia gratiam postulat, Grace within us is beholding to Grace without us, John
15. 5. Without me ve can do nothing. So much of the matter of the Duty.

2. The Minner of performing it, is With all diligence; the Hebrew is very
Emphatical (...) cum omni custodia, keep with all keeping; q. d. keep, keep;
set double Guards, your hearts will be gone else: And this vehemence of
expression with which the duty is urged, plainly implies how difficult it is to
keep our Hearts, and how dangerous to let them go.

2. The Reason or Motive quickening to this Duty is very forcible and weighty,
For out of it are the issues of life. That is, it is the Source and Fountain of
all vital actions and operations; Hinc Fons boni and peccandi or go, says
Ierom; it is the Spring and Original both of good and evil-as the spring in a
Watch that sets all the Wheels in motion. The Heart is the Treasury, the Hand
and Tongue but the Shops, what is in these came from thense; the hand and
tongue always begins where the heart ends. The heart contrives, and the
members execute, Luke 6. 46. A good man out of the good treasury of his heart
brings forth good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasury of his
heart brings forth evil things; for out of the abundance of his heart his
mouth speaks. So then, if the heart err in its work, these must needs
miscarry in theirs; for heart-errors are like the errors of the first
concoction which cannot be rectified afterward: Or like the mis-placing and
inverting of the stamps and letters in the Press, which must needs cause so
many errata's in all the Copies that are printed off. O then! how important a
Duty is that which is contained in the following Proposition?

Doct. That the keeping and right managing of the heart in every condition, is
the great business of a Christians life.

What the Philosopher says of waters is as properly applicable to hearts, suis
terminis difficile continentur; it is hard to keep them within any bounds: God
has set bounds and limits to them, yet how frequently do they transgress. not
only the bounds of Grace and Religion, but even of Reason and common Honesty;
Hic labor hoc opus est, this is that which affords the Christian matter of
labor, fear and trembling to his dying day. It Is not the cleansing of the hand
that makes a Christian, for many a Hypocrite can show as fair a hand as he, but
the purifying, watching, and right ordering of the heart; this is the thing
that provokes so many sad complaints, and costs so many deep groans and brinish
tears. 'Twas the pride of Hizekiah's heart that made him ^ye in the dust
mourning before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. 'Twas the fear of Hypocrisy
invading the heart, that made David cry, Let my heart be sound in thy Statutes
that I be not ashamed, Psalm. 119. 80. 'Twas the sad experience he had of the
Divisions and Distractions of his own heart in the Service of God, that made
him pour out that Prayer, Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my heart to fear thy Name.

The Method in which I shall improve the Point, shall be this.

1. First I shall inquire what the keeping of the heart supposes and imports.

2. Secondly, Assign diverse Reasons, why Christians must make this the great
work and business of their lives.

3. Thirdly, Point at those special seasons which especially call for this
diligence in keeping the heart.

4. Fourthly and fastly, apply the whole in several uses.

1. What the keeping of the Heart supposes and imports.

To keep the heart necessarily supposes a previous work of Sanctification;
which has set the heart right by giving it a new Spiritual bent and
inclination, for as long as the heart is not set right by Grace, as to its
habitual frame, no Duties or Means can keep it right with God. Self is the
Poise of the unsanctified heart, which By asses and moves it in all its designs
and actions; and as long as it is so, it is impossible that any external means
should keep it with God.

Man by Creation was of one constant uniform frame and tenor of Spirit, held
one straight and even course; not one thought or faculty ravell'd or
disordered, his mind had a perfect illumination to understand and know the
will of God, his will a perfect compliance therewith, his sensitive appetite
and other inferior powers, stood in a most obedient subordination.

Man by degeneration is become a most disordered and rebellious Creature,
contesting with, and opposing his Maker, as the first cause, by self
dependence; as the chiefest good, by self-love; as the highest Lord, by self
will; and as the last end, by self-seeking; and so is quite disordered, and all
his acts irregular: His illuminated understanding is clouded with ignorance,
his complying will, full of rebellion and stubbornness; his subordinate
powers, casting off the dominion and government of the superior faculties.

But by Regeneration, this disordered Soul is set right again; Sanctification
being the rectifying, and due framing, or as the Scripture phrases it, the
renovation of the Soul after the Image of God, Ephesians. 4. 24. in which, self
dependence is removed by Faith; self-love, by the love of God; self will, by
subjection and obedience to the Will of God; and self-seeking, by selfdenyal.
The darkened understanding is again illuminated, Ephesians. 1. 18. the refractory will
sweetly subdued, Psalm. 110. 3. the rebellious appetite, or concupiscence,
gradually conquered, Romans 6. 7. per tot. And thus the Soul which sin had
universally depraved, is again by grace restored and rectified.

This being presupposed, it will not be difficult to apprehend, what it is to
keep the heart, which is nothing else but the constant care and diligence of
such a renewed man, to preserve his soul in that holy frame to which Grace has
reduced it, and daily strives to hold it.

For though grace has in great measure rectified the Soul, and given it an
habitual and heavenly temper; yet Sin often actually discomposes it again; so
that even a gracious heart is like a musical Instrument, which though it be
never so exactly tuned, a small matter brings it out of tune again; yea hang it
aside but a little and it will need setting again, before you can play another
Lesson on it: even so stands the case with gracious hearts; if they are in
frame in one duty, yet how dull, dead and disordered, when they come to
another: and therefore every duty needs a particular preparation of the heart,
Job 11. 13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands toward him:
Well then, to keep the hear, is carefully to preserve it from sin which
disorders it; and maintain that spiritual and gracious frame which fits it for
a life of communion with God: and this includes these fix acts in it.

1. First, frequent observation of the frame of the heart, turning in and
examining how the case stands with it, this is one part of the work. Carnal and
formal persons take no heed to this, they cannot be brought to confer with
their own hearts; there are some men and women that have lived forty or fifty
years in the world, and have scarce had one hours discourse with their own
hearts all that while: it is an hard thing to bring a man and himself together
upon such an account; but Saints know those Soliloquies and self-conferences to
be of excellent use and advantage. The Heathen could say, anima sedendo and
quiescendo fit sapiens, the Soul is made wise by fitting still in quietness;
though Bankrupts care not to look into their Books of account, yet upright
hearts will know whether they go backward or forward, Psalm. 77. 6. I commune
with mine own heart; The heart can never be kept, until its case be examined
and understood.

2. It includes deep humiliations for heart evils and disorders; thus Hezekiah
humbled himself for the pride of his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. Thus the people
were ordered to spread forth their hands to God in Prayer in a sense of the
Plague of their own hearts, 1 Kings 8. 38. Upon this account many an upright
heart has been laid low before God: O What an heart have I? they have in their
confessions pointed at the heart, the pained place, Lord here is the wounds,
here is the Plague Sore, it is with the heart Well kept, as it is with the eye,
which is a fit emblem of it, if a small dust get into the eye, it will never
leave twinkling and watering, till it have wept it out: So the upright heart
cannot be at rest till it have wept out its troubles, and poured out its
complaints before the Lord.

3. It includes earnest Supplications and instant Prayer for heart-purifying
and rectifying Grace, when sin has defiled and disordered it, so Psalm. 19. 12.
Cleanse thou me from secret faults, and Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my heart to fear
thy Name. Saints have always many such Petitions depending before the Throne of
Grace; this is the thing which is most pleaded by them with God: when they are
praying for outward mercies, happily their spirits may be more remiss, but when
it comes to the heart-case, then they intend their spirits to the utmost, fill
their mouths with Arguments, weep and make supplication; Oh, for a better
heart! Oh, for a heart to love God more! To hate Sin more, to walk more evenly
with God; Lord deny not to me such a heart, what ever thou deny me; Give me an
heart to fear thee, love and delight in thee, if I beg my bread in desolate
places. It Is observed of holy Mr. Bradford, that when he was confessing sin, he
would never give over confessing until he had felt some brokeness of heart for
that sin, and when praying for any Spiritual mercy, would never give over that
suite, till he had got some relish of that mercy; that is the third thing
included in keeping the heart.

4. It includes the imposing of strong engagements and bonds upon our selves to
walk more accurately with God, and avoid the occasions whereby the heart may be
induced to sin: Well composed, advised and deliberate Vows are in some cases of
excellent use to guard the heart against some special sin, So Job 31. 1. I made
a covenant with mine eyes; by this means, holy ones have overawed their souls,
and preserved themselves from desilement by some special heart-corruptions.

5. It includes a constant holy jealousy over our own hearts, quick-sighted
self-jealousie is an excellent preservative from sin, he that will keep his
heart, must have the eyes of his soul awake and open upon all the disorderly,
and tumultuous stirrings of his affections, if the affections break loose, and
the passions be stirred, the Soul must discover and suppress them before they
get to an height: O my Soul, do thou well in this? My tumultuous thoughts and
passions where is your Commission? State viri, quae causa viae? quive est is in
armis. Virg.

Happy is the man that thus ieareth always, Prove. 28. 14. By this fear of the
Lord it is that men depart from evil, shake off security, and preserve
themselves from iniquity, he that will keep his heart must feed with fear,
rejoice with fear, and pass the whole time of his sojourning here in fear, and
all little enough to keep the heart from Sin.

6. And lastly, To add no more, it includes the realizing of Gods Presence with
us, and setting the Lord always before us: this the people of God have found a
singular means O keep their hearts upright, and awe them from sin: when the eye
of our Faith is fixed upon the eye of Gods Omniscience, we dare not let out our
thoughts and affections to vanity: Holy Job durst not suffer his heartto yield
to an impure, vain thought, and what was it that moved him to so great a
Circumspection? Why he tells you, Job 31. 4. Does he not see my ways and count
all my steps? Walk before me (says God to Abraham) and be thou perfect, Genesis
17. 1. Even as Parents use to set their Children in the Congregation before
them, knowing that else they will be toying and playing; so would the heart of
the best man too, were it not for the eye of God.

In these and such like particulars, do gracious sou^s express the care they
have of their hearts; they are as careful to prevent the breaking loose of
their corruptions in times of temptation, as Seamen are to bind fast the Guns
that they break not loose in a storm; as careful to preserve the sweetness and
comfort they have got from God in any duty, as one that comes out of an hot
Bath, or great sweat is of taking cold, by going forth into the chill air;
this is the work, and of all works in Religion it is the most difficult,
constant, and important work.

1. It Is the hardest work; Heart-work is hard work indeed: To shuffle over
Religious-Duties with a loose and heedless Spirit, will cost no great pains,
but to set thy self before the Lord, and tie up thy loose and vain thoughts to
a constant and serious attendance upon him; this will cost thee something: to
attain a facility and dexterity of language in Prayer, and put thy meaning into
apt and decent expressions is easy, but to get thy heart broken for sin whilst
thou art confessing it; melted with free grace, whilst thou art blessing God
for it; to be really ashamed and humbled through the apprehensions of Gods
infinite holiness, and to keep thy heart in this frame, not only in, but after
Duty; will surely cost thee some groans, and traveling pains of soul: to
repress the outward acts of sin, and compose the external part of thy life in
a laudable and comely manner is no great matter, even carnal persons by the
force of common principles can do this; but to kill the root of corruption
within, to set and keep up an holy Government over thy thoughts, to have all
things lie straight and orderly in the heart, this is not easy.

2. It Is a Constant work, the keeping of the heart is such a work, as is never
done till life be done; this labor and our life end together: It is with a
Christian in this business as it is with Seamen, that have sprung a Leake at
Sea, if they tug not constantly at the Pump, the water increases upon them and
will quickly sink them: it is in vain for them to say the work is hard, and we
are weary: There is no time or condition in the life of a Christian, which will
suffer an interm^ssion of this work: It is in the keeping watch over our
hearts, as it was in the keeping up of Moses his hands, whilst Israel and
Amalek were fighting below, Exodus 17. 12. No sooner do Moses his hands grow
heavy and sink down, but Amalek prevails: You know it cost David and Peter many
a sad day and night for intermitting the watch over their own hearts but a few
minutes.

3. It Is the most important business of a Christians life; without this we are
but Formalists in Religion: all our Professions, Gifts and Duties, signify
nothing: My Son give me thine Heart, Pro. 23. 26. God is pleased to call that a
gift, which is indeed a debt; he will put this honor upon the Creature to
receive it from him in the way of a gift, but if this be not given him he
regards not what ever else you bring to him: there is so much only of worth and
value in what we do, as there is of Heart in it: Concerning the Heart, God
seems to say as Joseph of Benjamin, If you bring not Benjamin with you, you
shall not see my face. Among the Heathens when the Beast was cut up for
sacrifice, the first thing the Priest looked upon was the Heart, and if that
were unsound and naught, the Sacrifice was rejected. God rejects all duties
(how glorious soever in other respects) offered him without a heart: He that
performs duty without a heart, viz. heedlesly, is no more accepted with God
then he that performs it with a double heart, viz. hypocritically, Isa. 66. 3.
And thus I have briefly opened the nature of the Duty, what is imported in this
phrase, Keep thy heart.

2. Next, I shall give you some rational account, why Christians should make
this the great business of their lives, to keep their hearts?

The importance and necessity of making this our great and main business, will
manifestly appear in that, 1. The honor of God. 2. The sincerity of our
profession. 3. The beauty of our conversation. 4. The comfort of our Souls. 5.
The improvement of our graces: and 6. Our stability in the hour of temptation,
are all wrapped up in, and dependent on our sincerity and care in the management
of this work.

1. The Glory of God is much concerned therein; heart-evils are very provoking
evils to the Lord. The Schools do well observe, that outward sins are majoris
infamiae, sins of greater infamy, but heart-sins are majoris reatus, sins of
deeper guilt. How severely has the Great God declared his wrath from Heaven
against heart-wickedness? The great Crime for which the old World stands
indicted, Genesis 6. 5, 6, 7. is heartwickedness; God saw that every imagination
(or fiction) of their heart was only evil, and that continualiy: for which he
sent the dreadfullest Judgment that was ever executed since the World began:
And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the
earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of heaven,
for it repents me that I have made man, v. 7. We find not their murders,
adulteries; blasphemies, (though they were defiled with these) particularly
alleged against them; but the evils of their hearts: yea, that which God was
so provoked by, as to give up his peculiar Inheritance into the enemies hand,
was the evil of their hearts, Ier. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness that thou may be saved, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee? The wickedness and vanity of their thoughts God took special notice of;
and because of this the Caldean must come upon them as a Lion from his
thickets, v. 7. and tear them to pieces. For the very sin of thoughts it was
that God threw down the fallen Angels from Heaven, and keeps them still in
everlasting chains to the judgment of the great day; by which expression is not
obscurely intimated some extraordinary judgment to which they are reserved, as
prisoners that have most irons laid upon them, may be supposed to be the
greatest Malefactors: and what was their sin? Why, only spiritual wickedness,
for they having no bodily Organs could act nothing externally against God. Yea,
mere heart-evils are so provoking, that for them he r^jects with indignation
all the duties that some men perform unto him, Isa. 66. 3. He that kills an
Ox, is as if he flew a man, he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a
dogs neck, he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood, he that
burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol. In what words could the abhorrence
of a Creatures actions be more fully expressed by the holy God; Murder and
Idolatry are not more vile in his account than their Sacrifices, though
materially such as himself appointed: and what made them so? the following
words inform us, Their soul delights in their abominations.

To conclude, such is the vileness of mere heart-sins, that the Scriptures
sometimes intimate the difficulty of pardon for them. So in the case of Simon
Magus, Acts 8. 21. his heart was not right, he had vile thoughts of God, and
the things of God, the Apostle bids him repent and pray, if perhaps the
thoughts of his heart might he forgiven him. O then never slight heart-evils!
for by these God is highly wronged and provoked, and for this reason, let every
Christian make it his work to keep his heart with all diligence.

2. The sincerity of our profession much depends upon the care and conscience
we have in keeping our hearts; for it is most certain, that a man is but an
hypocrite in his profession how curious soever he be in the externals of
Religion, that is heedless and careless of the frame of his heart: you have a
pregnant instance of this in the case of Iehu, 2 King. 10. 31. But Jehu took no
heed to walk in the ways of the Lord God of Israel with his heart. That Context
gives us an account of the great service performed by Iehu against the house of
Ahab and Baal, as also of a great temporal reward given him by God for that
service, even that his Children to the fourth Generation should sit upon the
Throne of Israel. And yet in these words Iehu is censured for an hypocrite;
though God approved and rewarded the work, yet he abhorted and rejected the
person that did it as hypocritical: and wherein lay his hypocrisy? but in
this, that he took no heed to walk in the ways of the Lord with his heart, (i.
e) he did all insincerely and for self ends; and though the work he did were
materially good, yet he not purging his heart from those unworthy self-designs
in doing it, was an hypocrite: And Simon of whom we spoke before, though he
appeared such a person that the Apostle could not regularly refuse him, yet his
hypocrisy was quickly discovered: and what discovered it? but this, that
though he professed and associated himself with the Saints, yet he was a
stranger to the mortification of heart sins; Thy heart is not right with God,
Acts 8. 21. -- It Is true, there is a great difference among Christians
themselves, in their diligence and dexterity about heart-work; some are more
conversant and succesful in it then others are, but he that takes no heed to
his heart, he that is not careful to order it aright before God, is but a
hypocrite, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. And they come unto thee as the people comes, and
sit before thee [as my people] and they hear thy words, but they will not do
them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after
their covetousness. Here were a company of formal hypocrites, as is evident by
that expression [ as my people] like them, but not of them: and what made them
so? their outside was fair, here were reverent postures, high professions,
much seeming joy and delight in Ordinances, thou art to them as a lovely Song;
yea, but for all that, they kept not their hearts with God in those duties,
their hearts were commanded by their lusts, they went after their covetousness;
had they kept their hearts with God all had been well, but not regarding which
way their heart went in duty; there lay the coare of their hypocrisy.

Object, If any upright Soul should hence infer, then I am an hypocrite too,
for many times my heart departs from God in duty, do what I can, yet I cannot
hold it close with God.

Sol. To this I answer, the very Objection carries in it, its own Solution:
Thou say, do what I can, yet I cannot keep my heart with God. Soul, if thou
do what thou can, thou have the blessing of an upright, though God sees
good to exercise thee under the affliction of a discomposed heart. There
remains still some wildness in the thoughts and fancies of the best to humble
them; but if you find a care before to prevent them, and opposition against
them when they come, grief and sorrow afterward; you will find enough to clear
you from reigning hypocrisy. (1) This fore-care is seen partly in laying up
the word in thine heart to prevent them, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in
mine heart that I might not sin against thee: partly in our endeavors to
engage our hearts to God, Ier. 30. 21. and partly in begging preventing grace
from God in our on-sets upon duty, Psalm. 119, 36. 37. it is a good sign where
this care goes before a duty, And (2) it is a sweet sign of uprightness to
oppose them in their first rise, Psalm. 119. 113. I hate vain thoughts. Gal. 5.
17. The spirit lusts against the flesh. And (3) Thy after-grief discovers thy
upright heart; if with Hezekiah thou art humbled for the evils of thy heart,
thou have no reason from these disorders to question the integrity of it; but
to suffer sin to lodge quictly in the heart, to let thy heart habitually and
uncontrolledly wander from God, is a sad and dangerous symptom indeed.

3. The beauty of our Conversation arises from the heavenly frames, and holy
order of our spirits; there is a spiritual luster and beauty in the
conversation of Saints, The righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor,
they shine as the lights of the world; but whatever luster and beauty is in
their lives, comes from the excellency of their spirits; as the Candle within,
puts a luster upon the Lanthorn in which it shines. It is impossible that a
disordered and neglected heart, should ever produce a well-ordered
conversation; and since (as the Text observes) the issues or streams of life
flow out of the heart as their fountain, it must needs follow, that such as the
heart is, the life will be: hence 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. Abstain from fleshly lusts
-- having your conversation ho^est, * or beautiful * (...) as the Greek word
imports. So

Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts. His way notes the course of his life, his thoughts the frame of his
heart; and therefore since the way and course of his life flows from his
thoughts, or the frame of his heart, both or neither will be forsaken: the
heart is the womb of all actions, these actions are virtually and seminally
contained in our thoughts, these thoughts being once made up into affections,
are quickly made out into suitable actions and practices. If the heart be
wicked, then as Christ says, Matthew. 15. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, etc. Mark the order, first, wanton or revengeful
thoughts, then unclean or murderous practices.

And if the heart be holy and spiritual, then as David speaks from sweet
experience, in Psalm. 45. 1. My heart is [inditing] a good matter, I speak of
the things which [I have made] my tongue is as the pen of a ready writer.
Here Is a life richly beautified with good works; some ready made; I will speak
of the things which I have made: Others upon the wheel making king, my heart is
inditing, but both proceeding from the heavenly frame of his heart.

Put but the heart in frame, and the life will quickly discover that it is so.
I think it is not very difficult to discern by the duties and converses of
Christians, what frames their spirits are under; take a Christian in a good
frame, and how serious, heavenly, and profitable will his converses and duties
be! what a lovely companion is he, during the continuance of it! 'twould do any
ones heart good to be with him at such a time, Psalm. 37. 30. 31. The mouth of
the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment, the law of
his God is in his heart.

When the heart is up with God, and full of God, how dexterously and
ingeniously will he wind in spiritual discourse, improving every occasion and
advantage to some heavenly purpose, few words run then at the wast Spout.

And what else can be the reason, why the discourses and duties of many
Christians are become so frothy and unprofitable, their communion both with
God, and one another become as a dry stalk, but because their hearts are
neglected. Surely this must be the reason of it, and verily it is an evil
greatly to be bewailed, for as by this Christian-fellowship is become a sapless
thing, so the attracting beauty that was wont to shine from the Conversations
of the Saints upon the faces and consciences of the world, (which if it did not
allure and bring them in love with the ways of God; yet at least left a
testimony in their consciences of the excellency of those men and their way)
this is in a great measure lost, to the unspeakable detriment of Religion.

Time was, when Christians did carry it at such a rate, that the world stood at
gaze at them, as that word, 1 Pet. 4. 4. imports, (...)
their life and language was of a different strain from others, their tongues
discovered them to be Galileans where ever they came; but now since vain
speculations, and fruitless controversies have so much obtained, and
heart-work, practical godliness so much neglected among Professors, the case is
sadly altered, their discourse is become like other men's: if they come among
you now, they may (to allude to that, Acts 2. 6.) Hear every man speak in his
own language. And truly I have little hope to see this evil redressed, and the
credit of Religion again repaired; till Christians fall again to their old
work, till they ply heartwork closer: when the salt of heavenly mindedness is
again cast into the Spring, the streams will run clearer and sweeter.

4. The comfort of our Souls does much depend upon the keeping of our hearts,
for he that is negligent in attending his own heart, is (ordinarily) a great
stranger to assurance, and the sweet comforts flowing from it.

Indeed, if the Antinomian Doctrine were true, which teaches you to reject all
marks and signs for the trial of your conditions, telling you it is only the
spirit that immediately assures you by witnessing your adoption directly
without them, then you might be careless of your hearts, yea, strangers to
them, and yet no strangers to comfort: but since both Scripture and experience
do confute this dotage, I hope you will never look for comfort in that
unscriptural way. I deny not but it is the work and office of the Spirit to
assure you, and yet do confidently affirm, that if ever you attain assurance in
the ordinary way wherein God dispences it, you must take pains with your own
hearts, you may expect your comforts upon easier terms; but I am mistaken, if
ever you enjoy them upon any other: Give all diligence; prove your selves: this
is the Scripture way. I remember Mr. Roberts in his Treatise of the Covenant,
tells us, That he knew a Christian who in the infancy of his Christianity, so
vehemently panted after the infallible assurance of God's love, that for a long
time together he earnestly desired some voice from Heaven; yea, sometimes
walking in the solitary fields, earnestly desired some miraculous voice from
the Trees and stones there; this, after many desires and longings was denied
him; but in time, a better was afforded in the ordinary way of searching the
word, and his own heart. An instance of the like nature the learned Gerson
gives us, Of one that was driven by temptation upon the very borders of
desperation, at last being sweetly settled and assured, one asked him, How he
attained it? He answered, Non ex nova aliqua revelatione, etc. Not by any
extraordinary revelation, but by subjecting his understanding to the
Scriptures, and comparing his own heart with them. The Spirit indeed assures by
witnessing our adoption, and he witnesses two ways. (1) Objectively, ( i. e.)
by working those Graces in our Souls which are the Conditions of the Promise,
and so the Spirit and his Graces in us are all one; the Spirit of God dwelling
in us, is a mark of our Adoption. Now the Spirit cannot be discerned in his
essence, but in his operations; and to discern these is to discern the Spirit;
and how these should be discerned without serious searching and diligent
watching of the heart, I cannot imagine. (2) The other way of the Spirits
witnessing is effectively, ( i. e.) by irradiating the Soul with a
grace-discovering light, shining upon his own work; and this in order of nature
follows the former work: he first infuses the grace, and then opens the eye of
the Soul to see it. Now since the heart is the subject of that infused grace,
even this way of the Spirits witnessing also includes the necessity of keeping
carefully our own hearts: for (1) A neglected heart is so confused and dark,
that the little grace which is in it is not ordinarily discernable: the most
accurate and laborious Christians, that take most pains, and spend most time
about their hearts, do yet find it very difficult to discover the pure and
genuine workings of the Spirit there: how then shall the Christian which is
(comparatively) negligent and remiss about heart-work, be ever able to discover
it? Sincerity which is the quaesitum, the thing sought for, lies in the heart
like a small piece of Gold in the bottom of a River, he that will find it must
stay till the water be clear and settled, and then he shall see it sparkling at
the bottom; and that the heart may be clear and settled, how much pains and
watching care and diligence will it cost?

2. God does not usually indulge lazy and negligent Souls with the Comforts of
Assurance, he will not so much as seem to patronize sloth and carelessness, he
will give it, but it shall be in his own way: his Command has united our care
and comfort together; they are mistaken that think the beautiful Child of
Assurance may be born without pangs: Ah, how many solitary hours have the
people of God spent in heartexamination? How many times have they looked into
the Word, and then into their hearts? Sometime they thought they discovered
sinceri^y, and were even ready to draw forth the triumphant conclusion of
Assurance, then comes a doubt they cannot resolve, and dashes all again; many
hopes and fears, doubtings and reasonings they have had in their own breasts,
before they arrived at a comfortable settlement.

To conclude, Suppose it possible for a careless Christian to attain Assurance,
yet it is impossible he should long retain it; for it is with those whose hearts
are big with the joys of Assurance, as with a pregnant woman subject to
miscarriages; if extraordinary care be not used, it is a thousand to one if
ever she embrace a living Child: So it is here, a little pride, vanity,
carelessness, dashes all that for which thou have been laboring a long time in
many a weary duty. Since then the joy of our life, the comfort of our souls,
rises and falls with our diligence in this work; keep your hearts with all
diligence.

5. The improvement of our Graces depends on the keeping of our hearts; I never
knew Grace thrive in a negligent and careless Soul; the habits and roots of
grace are planted in the heart; and the deeper they are radicated there, the
more thriving and fl^urishing grace is: in Ephesians. 3. 17. we read of being rooted
in Grace: Grace in the heart is the root of every gracious word in the mouth,
and of every holy work in the hand, Psalm. 116. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 13. it is true,
Christ is the root of a Christian; but Christ is Origo originans, the
originating root and grace, Origo originata, a root originated, planted, and
influenced by Christ, according as this thrives under divine influences, so the
acts of grace are more or less fruitful and vigorous: Now in a heart not kept
with care and diligence, these fructify^ng influences are stopped and cut off,
multitudes of vanities break in upon it, and devour its strength; the heart is
as it were the pasture, in which multitudes of thoughts are fed every day; a
gracious heart diligently kept, feeds many precious thoughts of God in a day,
Psalm. ^39. 17. How precious are thy thoughts to me O God! how great is the sum
of them! if I should count them, they are more in number than the sand; and
when I awake, I am still with thee. And as the gracious heart seeds and
nourishes them, so they refresh and feast the heart, Psalm. 63. 5, 6. My soul is
filled as with marrow and fatness whilst I think upon thee, etc. But in the
dis-regarded heart, swarms of vain and foolish thoughts are perpetually
working, and justle out those spiritual Idea's and thoughts of God, by which
the Soul should be refreshed.

Besides, the careless heart makes nothing out of any Duty or Ordinance it
performs or attends on, and yet these are the Conduits of Heaven from whence
Grace is watered and made fruitful: a man may go with an heedless spirit from
Ordinance to Ordinance, abide all his days under the choicest teachings and
yet never be improved by them; for heart neglect is a leak in the bottom, no
heavenly influences how rich soever, abide in that Soul, Matthew. 13. 3, 4. The
heart that lies open and common like the highway, free for all passengers;
when the Seed fell on it, the fowls came and devoured it. Alas! it is not
enough to hear, unless we take heed how we hear: a man may pray, and never the
better, unless he watch unto prayer. In a word, all Ordinances, Means and
Duties are blessed unto the improvement of Grace, according to the care and
strictness we use in keeping our hearts in them.

6. Lastly, The stability of our Souls in the hour of temptation, will be much
according to the care and Conscience we have of keeping our hearts; the
careless heart is an easy prey to Satan in the hour of temptation, his main
Batteries are raised against that Fort-royal, the Heart; if he win that, he
wins all, for it commands the whole man; and alas, how easy a Conquest is a
neglected heart? it is no more difficult to surprise it, than for an enemy to
enter that City, whose Gates are open and unguarded: it is the watchful heart
that discovers and suppresses the temptation before it come to its strength.
Divines observe this to be the method in which temptations are ripened and
brought to their full strength; (...)
there is (1) The irritation of the Object, or that power it has to work upon
and provoke our corrupt nature, which is either done by the real presence of
the object, or else by Speculation, when the object (though absent) is held out
by the phantasy before the Soul. (2) Then follows the motion of the sensitive
appetite, (...)
which is stirred and provoked by the phantasy, representing it as a sensual
good, as having profit or pleasure in it. (...)
(3) Then there is a consultation in the mind about it, deliberating about the
likeliest means of accomplishing it. (...)
(4) Next follows the election or choice of the Will. (5) And lastly, (...)
The desire or full engagement of the Will to it; all this may be done in a few
moments, for the debates of the Soul are quick, and soon ended: when it comes
thus far, then the heart is won, Satan has entered victoriously, and displayed
his Colors upon the Walls of that Royal Fort; but had the Heart been well
guarded at first, it had never come to this height; the temptation had been
stopped in the first or second act; and indeed there it is stopped easily, for it is
in the motions of a tempted Soul to sin; as in the motion of a stone falling
from the brow of an Hill, it is easily stopped at first, but when once it is set a
going Vires acquirit eundo: and therefore it is the greatest wisdom in the world
to observe the first motions of the heart, to check and stop sin there: the
motions of sin are weakest at first; a little care and watchfulness may prevent
much mischief now, which the careless heart not heeding, is brought within the
power of temptation; as the Syrians were brought blindfold into the midst of
Samaria, before they knew where they were.

By this time Reader, I hope thou art fully satisfied how consequential and
necessary a work the keeping of thy heart is, it being a duty that wraps up so
many dear interests of the Soul in it.

3. Next, according to the method propounded, I proceed to point out those
special Seasons in the life of a Christian, which require and call for our
utmost diligence in keeping the heart: for though (as was observed before) the
Duty binds ad semper, and there be no time or condition of life in which we may
be excused from this work; yet there are some signal seasons, critical hours,
requiring more than a common vigilance over the heart.

And the first,

1. Season. Is the time of prosperity, when Providence smiles upon us, and
dandles us upon her knee. Now Christian, keep thy heart with all diligence; for
now 'twill be exceeding apt to grow secure, proud and earthly, Rara virtus est
humilitas honorata (says Bernard) to see a man humble under prosperity, is one
of the greatest rarities in the World* Even a good Hezekiah could not hide a
vain glorious temper, under this temptation, and hence that Caution to Israel
Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11, 12. and it shall be when the Lord thy God shall have brought
thee into the land which he swear to thy fathers, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
to give thee great and goodly Cities which thou bu^ldest not* and houses full
of all good things which thou filledst not, etc. Then beware lest thou forget
the Lord, and indeed so it fell out, for Iesurun waxed fat and kicked, Deu^.
32. 15. Now th^n, the first case will be this, viz.

1. Case. How a Christian may keep his heart from pride and carnal security
under the smiles of providence, and confluence of Creature comforts?

There are seven choice helps to secure the heart from the dangerous snares of
prosperity, the first is this.

1. To consider the dangerous insnaring temptations attending a pleasant and
prosperous Condition: few yea very few of those that live in the pleasures and
prosperity of this world, escape everlasting perdition, Matthew. 19. 24. it is
easier (says Christ) for a Came^ to pass through the eye of a needle, than for
a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and security in a prosperous
state. Heaven, and 1 Cor. 1. 26. not many mighty, not many noble are called. It
might justly make us tremble when the Scripture tells us in general, that few
shall be saved, much more when it tells us, that of that rank and sort of which
we are, but few shall be saved. When Ioshuah called all the Tribes of Israel to
lot upon them for the discovery of Achan, doubtless Achan feared; when the
Tribe of Judah was taken, his fear increased; but when the family of the
Zarhites was taken, it was time then to tremble. So when the Scripture comes so
near us as to tell us that of such a sort of men very few shall escape, it is
time to look about: miror s^ potest servari ali quis rectorum, says
Chrysostom, I should wonder if any of the Rulers be saved. Oh how many have
been Coached to Hell in the Chariots of earthly pleasures, whilst others have
been whipped to Heaven by the rod of affliction? How few like the daughter of
Tire come to Christ with a gift! how few among the rich entreat his favor.

2. It may yet keep us more humble and watchful in prosperity, if we consider
that among Christians many have been much the wors^for it; How good had it been
^ot some of them if they had never known prosperity: when they were in a low
condition, how humble spiritual and heavenly were they; but when advanced, what
an apparent alteration has been upon their spirits; 'twas so with Israel when
they were in a low condition in the Wilderness; then Israel was, Holiness to
the Lord, Ier. 2. 23. but when they came into Canaan and were fed in a fat
pasture, then, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee, ver. 31. outward
gains are ordinarily attended with inward losses, as in a low condition, their
civil employments were won^ to have a tang and savor of their duties, so in an
exalted condition, their Duties commonly have a tang of the World. He indeed is
rich in Grace, whose Graces are not hindered by his Riches, there are but few
Iehosaphats in the World, of whom its said 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6. He had silver and
gold in abundance, and his heart was lifted up in the way of Gods commands:
Will not this keep thy Heart humble in prosperity, to think how dear many godly
men have paid for their Riches, that through them they have lost that which all
the World cannot purchase: Then in the next place,

3. K^ep down thy vain heart by this Consideration, That God values no man a
jot the more for these things. God va^ues no man by outward excellencies but by
inward Graces, they are the internal ornaments of the Spirit, which are of
great price in Gods eyes, 1 Pet. 3. 4 he despises all worldly glory and accepts
no man's person but in every Nation, he that fears God and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts 1O. 35. Indeed if the Judgment of God
went by the same rule that man's does, we might value our selves by these
things, and stand upon them: but as one said (when dying) I shall not appear
before God as a Doctor, but as a man; tantus quisquis est, quantus est apud
Deum. So much every man is, and no more, as he is in the judgment of God. Does
thy heart yet swell? and will neither of the former considerations keep it
humble.

4. Then Fourthly, Consider how bitterly many persons have bewailed their folly
when they came to dye, that ever they set their hearts upon these things, and
heartily wish, that they had never known them. What a sad story was that of
Pius Quintus, who dying, cried out despairingly, when I was in a low condition,
I had some hopes of Salvation, but when I was advanced to be a Cardinal, I
greatly doubted it, but since I came to the Popedom, I have no hope at all.
Mr. Spencer also tells us a real, but sad story, of a rich oppressor, who had
s^taped up a great estate for his only Son; when he came to dye, he called his
Son to him, and said, Son, do you indeed love me? the Son answered, That
nature, besides his paternal indulgence, obliged him to that; then said the
Father express it by this, hold thy finger in the Candle as long as I am saying
a Pater noster; the Son attempted, but could not endure it; upon that the
Father brake out into these expressions, Thou can not suffer the burning of
thy finger for me, but to get this wealth, I have hazarded my soul for thee,
and must burn body and soul in Hell for thy sake, thy pains would have been but
for a moment, but mine will be unquenchable fire.

5. The Heart may be kept humble by considering of what a clogging nature
earthly things are to a soul heartily engaged in the way to Heaven, they shut
out much of Heaven from us at present, though they may not shut us out of
Heaven at last. If thou consider thy self under the notion of a stranger in
this world, traveling for Heaven, and seeking a better Country, thou have then
as much reason to be taken and delighted with these things, as a weary Horse
has with a heavy Cloakbag: there was a serious truth in that Atheistical scoff
of Julian, when he took away the Christians estates and told them, it was to
make them fitter for the Kingdom of Heaven.

6. Is thy Spirit for all this flatulent and lofty, then urge upon it the
consideration of that awful day of reckoning, wherein according to our receipts
of Mercies shall be our accounts for them: And methinks this should awe, and
humble the vainest heart that ever was in the breast of a Saint. Know for
certain, that the Lord records all the mercies that ever he gave thee, from the
beginning, to the end of thy life, Micah 6. 5. Remember O my people, from
Shittim unto Gilgal, etc. Yea, they are exactly numbered, and recorded, in order
to an account; and thy account will be suitable, Luke 12. 48. To whomsoever
much is given, of him much shall be required. You are but Stewards, and your
Lord will come to take an account of you; and what a great account have you to
make who have much of this world in your hands; what swift witnesses will your
mercies be against you, if this be the best fruit of them?

7. It is a very humbling consideration, That the Mercies of God should work
otherwise upon my Spirits than they use to do upon the Spirits of others, to
whom they come as sanctified Mercies from the love of God. Ah Lord! what a sad
consideration is this? enough to lay me in the dust: when I consider (1) that
their mercies have greatly humbled them; the higher God has raised them, the
lower they have laid themselves before God* Thus did Jacob when God had given
him much substance, Genesis 32. 5, 10, And Jacob said, I am not worthy of the
least of all thy mercies, and all the truth which thou have showed thy servant;
for with my staff (...) passed over this Jordan, and now am become two Bands.
And thus it was with holy David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. When God had confirmed the
Promise to him, to build him an house, and not reject him as he did Saul, he
goes in before the Lord and says, who am I? and what is my Fathers house, that
than have brought me hitherto? and so indeed God required Deuteronomy. 26. 5. when
Israel was to bring to God the first fruits of Canaan, they were to say, A
Syrian ready to perish was my father, etc. Do others raise God the higher for
raising them? and the more God raises me, the more shall I abuse him and exalt
my self? Oh what a sad thing is this! (2) others have freely ascribed the glory
of all their enjoyments to God, and magnified not themselves but him, for their
mercies: So David 2 Samuel 26. 26. Let thy name be magnified, and the house of
thy servant be established. He does not fly upon the mercy, and suck out the
sweetness of it, looking no farther than his own comfort; no, he cares for no
mercy except God be magnified in it. So Psalm. 18. 2. when God had delivered him
from all his enemies, the Lord (says he) is my strength, and my rock, he is
become my salvation. They did not put the Crown upon their own heads as I do.
(3) The mercies of God have been melting mercies unto others, melting their
Souls in love to the God of their mercies. So Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. 1. when she
received the mercy of a Son, my soul (says she) rejoices in the Lord, not in
the mercy, but in the God of the mercy: And so Mary, Luke 1. 46. My soul does
magnify the Lord, my spirit rejoices in God my Savior; the word signifies, to
make more room for God: Their hearts were not contracted, but the more enlarged
to God; (4) the mercies of God have been migh^y restraints to keep others from
sin. So Ezra 9. 13. Seeing thou our God have given us such a deliverance as
this, should we again break thy Commandments? ingenious Souls have felt the
force of the obligations of love and mercy upon them; (5) to conclude, the
mercies of God to others have been as oil to the wheels of their obedience,
and made them fitter for service, 2 Chro. 17. 5. Now if mercies work contrarily
upon my heart, what cause have I to be afraid that they come not to me in love?
I tell you, this is enough to damp the Spirit of any Saint, to see what sweet
effects they have had on others, and what sad effects on him.

2. Season. The second special Season in the life of a Christian requiring more
than a common diligence to keep his heart is the time of adversity; when
providence frowns upon you, and blasts your outward comforts, then look to your
hearts, keep them with all diligence from repining against God, or fainting
under his hand; for troubles, though sanctified, are troubles still; even sweet
bryar, and holy thistle have their prickeles. Jonah was a good man, and yet how
pettish was his heart under affliction? Job was the Mirror of patience, yet
how was his heart discomposed by trouble? you will find it as hard to get a
composed spirit under great afflictions, as it is to fix Quicksilver: Oh the
hurries and tumults which they occasion even in the best hearts! well then, the
second Case will be this.

2. Case. How a Christian under great afflictions may keep his heart from
repining or desponding under the hand of God? Now there are nine special helps
I shall here offer, to keep thy heart in this condition; and the first shall be
this, To work upon your hearts this great truth.

1. That by these cross Providence, God is faithfully pursuing the great
design of electing love upon the Souls of his people, and orders all these
afflictions as means sanctified to that end.

Afflictions fall not out by Casualty, but by Counsel. Job 5. 6. Ephesians. 1. 11. by
this Counsel of God they are ordained as means of much spiritual good to
Saints, Isai. 27 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, etc. Heb.
12. 10. But he for our profit, etc. Romans 8. 28. all things work together for
good, they are Gods workmen upon our hearts, to pull down the pride and carnal
security of them; and being so, their nature is changed; they are turn^d into
blessi^gs and benefits, Psalm. 119 71 It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. And sure then, thou have no reason to quarrel with, but rather to
admire that God should concern himself so much in thy good, to use any means
for the accomplishing of it, Philip. 3. 11. Paul could bless God* if by any
means he might attain the resurrection of the dead, my brethren (says James,
count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations, 1 Iam. 2. 3. My father
is about a design of love upon my soul, and do I well to be angry with him? all
that he does is in pursuance of, and reference to some eternal glorious ends
upon my Soul. O it is my ignorance of Gods design, that makes me quarrel with
him! he says to thee in this case, as to Peter, What I do thou know not
now, but hereafter thou shall know it.

2. Help. Though God has reserved to himself a liberty of afflicting his
people, yet he has tied up his own hands by promise, never to take away his
loving kindness from them. Can I look that Scripture in the face with a
repining di^contented spirit, 2 Samuel 7. 14. I will be his father, and he shall
be my Son; if he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and
with the stripes of the children of men: nevertheless my mercy shall not depart
away from him. O my heart, my naughty he^rt; do thou well to be discontented,
when God has given thee, the whole tree with all the clusters of comfort
growing on it; because he suffers the wind to blow down a few leaves?
Christians have two sorts of goods, the goods of the throne, and the goods of
the foot stool; movables and immoveables; if God have secured these, never
let my heart be troubled at the loss of those: indeed, i^ he had cut off his
love, or discovenanted my Soul, I had reason to be cast down; but this he has
not, he cannot do.

3. Help. It is of mavelous efficacy to keep the heart from sinking under
affliction, to call to mind; that thine own father has the ordering of them:
not a Creature moves hand or tongue against thee, but by his permission.
Suppose the cup be a bitter cup, yet it is the cup which thy Father has given
thee to drink, and can thou suspect poison to be in that cup, which he
delivers thee? foolish man, put home the case to thine own heart, consult with
thine own bowels; can thou find in thy heart to give thy Child, that which
would hurt, and undo him? no, thou would as soon hurt thy self as him; If
thou then being evil know how to give good gifts to thy children, how much
more does God, Math. 7. 11. the very consideration of his nature, a God of
love, pity and tender mercies, or of his relation to thee, as a father,
husband, friend; might be security enough, if he had not spoken a word, to
quiet thee in this case: and yet you have his word too, Ier. 25. 6. I will do
you no hurt. You lie too near his heart to hurt you, nothing grieves him more
than your groundless and unworthy suspicions of his designs do; would it not
grieve a faithful tender hearted Physician, when he has studied the case of
his Patient, prepared the most excellent receipts to save his life, to hear him
cry out; Oh he has undone me, he has poisoned me; because it gripes and pains
him in the operation? O when will you be ingenious!

4. Help. God respects you as much in a low, as in a high condition; and
therefore it need not so much trouble you to be made low; nay, to speak home,
he manifests more of his love, grace, and tenderness, in the time of affliction
than prosperity: as God did not at first choose you because you were high, so he
will not forsake you because you are low: men may look shie upon you, and alter
their respects as your condition is altered: when providence has blasted your
estates, your summer friends may grow strange, as fearing you may be troublesome
to them, but will God do so? No, no, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee,
Heb. 13. 5. indeed if adversity and poverty could bar you from access to God,
it were a sad condition; but you may go to God as freely as ever, my God (says
the Church) will hear me, Micah 7. poor David, when stripped out of all earthly
comforts, could yet encourage himself in the Lord his God, and why cannot you?
Suppose your husband or child had lost all at Sea, and should come to you in
rags; could you deny the relation? or refuse to entertain him? if you would
not; much less will God: Why then are you so troubled? though your condition be
changed, your fathers love and respects are not changed.

5. Help. And what if by the loss of outward comforts, God will preserve your
souls from the ruining power of temptation; sure then, you have little cause to
sink your hearts; by such sad thoughts about them. Are not these earthly
enjoyments, the things that make men shrink and warp in times of trial; for the
love of these many have forsaken Christ in such an hour, Matthew. 19. 22. he went
away sorrowful, for he had great possessions: and if this be Gods design; what
have I done in q^arrelling with him about it. We see Mariners in a storm, can
throw over board rich bayles of silk, and precious things, to preserve the
vessel and their lives with it, and every one says, they act prudently; we
know it is usual for Soldiers in a City besieged, to batter down or burn, the
fairest buildings without the walls in which the enemy may shelter in the
siege; and no man doubts but 'its wisely done: such as have gangrened legs or
arms, can willingly stretch them out to be cut off, and not only thank* but pay
the Surgeon for his pains; and must God only be repined at? for catting over
what would sink you in a storm? or pulling down that which would advantage your
enemy in the siege of tem^tation; for cutting off what would endanger your
everlas^^ng life? O inconsiderate, ungrateful man! are not these things for
which thou grievest, the very things that have ruined thousands of Souls? well,
what Christ does in this, thou know not now; but hereafter thou may.

6. Help. it would much stay the heart under adversity to consider, that God by
such humbling providence, may be accomplishing that, for which you have long
prayed, and waited; and should you be troubled at that: say Christian, have
thou not many prayers depending before God upon such accounts as these; that he
would keep thee from sin; discover to thee the emptiness and insufficiency of
the Creature? that he would kill and mortify thy lusts, that thy heart may
never find rest in any enjoyment but Christ? why now, by such humbling and
impoverishing strokes, God may be fulfilling thy desire: would thou be kept
from sin? lo, he has hedged up thy way with thorns: Would thou ^ee the
creatures vanity; thy affliction is a fair glass to discover it; for the vanity
of the creature is never so eff^ctually and sensibly discovered, as in our own
experience of it: would thou have thy corruptions mortified? this is the way:
Now God takes away the food and fuel that maintained them; for as prosperity
begat and fed them, so adversity when sanctified is a means to kill them.
Would thou have thy heart to rest no where but in the bosom of God? what
better way can thou imagine providence should take to accomplish thy desire,
than by pulling from under thy head, that soft pillow of creature delights on
which thou restedst before? and yet thou fret at this, peevish child how do
thou exercise thy Fathers patience! if he delay to answer thy prayers, thou art
ready to say he regards thee not; if he do that which really answers the scope
and main end of them, but not in the way thou expect^dst, thou quarrellest with
him for that; as if instead of answering he were crossing all thy hopes and
aims: is this ingenious? is it not enough that God is so gracious to do what
thou desire, but thou must be so impudent to exspect he should do it in the
way which thou prescribest?

7. Help. Again it may stay thy heart, if thou consider; That in these
troubles, God is about that work, which if thou did see the design of, thy
Soul would rejoice. We poor creatures are bemisted with much ignorance, and are
not able to discern, how particular providence work toward Gods end; and
therefore like Israel in the wilderness are often murmuring because providence
leads us about in a howling desert, where we are exp^sed to straits; though
yet, then he led them, and is now leading us, by the right way, to a City of
habitations: if you could but see how God in his secret Counsel has exactly
laid, the whole plot and design of thy salvation; even to the smallest means
and circumstances, this way, and by these means; such a one shall be saved, and
by no other; such a number of afflictions I appoint for this man, at this time,
and in this order; they shall befall him, thus, and thus they shall work for
him; could you I say but di^cern the admirable harmony of divine dispensations,
their mutual relations to each other; together with the general respect and
influence, they all have into the last end; of all the conditions in the world,
you would choose that you are now in; had you liberty to make your own choice.
Providence is like a curious piece of Arras, made up of a thousand shreds;
which single we know not what to make of, but put together and sticht up
orderly they represent a beautiful history to the eye: as God works all things
according to the counsel of his own will, So that counsel of God has ordained
this, as the best way to bring about thy salvation: such a one has a proud
heart, so many humbling providence I appoint for him, such a one an earthly
heart; so many impoverishing providence f^r him: Did you but see this, I need
say no more to support the most d^^^cted (...).

8. Help. F^rther, it would much conduce to the se^^lement of your hearts to
consider, that by fretting and disconte^t, you do your selves more injury, than
all the afflictions you lie under could do; Your own discontent is that which
arms your troubles with a sting, it is you that make your burden heavy; by
struggling under it: could you but lie qu^et under the hand of God, your
condition would be much easier, and sweeter than it is: impatiens aegrotus
crudelem facit Medicum. This makes God lay on more strokes, as a Father will
upon a stubborn child, that receives not correction.

Besides, it unfi^s the Soul to pray over its troubles; or take in the sense of
that good which God intends by them: ^ffliction is a pill which being wrapped up
in patience, and quiet submission, may be easily swallowed; but discontent
chews the pill, and so imbitters the Soul: God throws away some comfort which
he saw would hurt you, and you will throw away your peace alter it; he shoots
an arrow which sticks in your clothes* and was never intended to hurt, but only
to fright you from sin: and you will thrust it onward ^o the piercing of your
very hearts; by despondency, and discontent.

9. Help. Lastly, it all this will not do, but thy heart (like Rachel) still
refuses to be comforted, or quie^ed, then consider one thing m^re; which if
seriously pondered, will doubtless do the work; and that is this: compare the
condition thou art now in (and art so much dissatisfied with) with that
condition others are, and thy self deservest to be in: Others are roaring in
flames, howling under the scourge of vengeance, and amongst them I deserve to
be. O my Soul! is this hell? is my condition as bad as the damned? O what would
thousands now in Hell, give to change conditions with me? It is a famous
instance which Doctor Tailor gives us of the Duke of Condey, Great Exemp. p.
310.
I have read (says he) that when the Duke of Condey had entered voluntarily
into the inc^mmoditi^s of a religious poverty, he was one day espied and pityed
by a Lord of Italy, who out of tenderness wished him, to be more careful and
nutritive of his person: the good Duke answered, Sir, be not troubled; and
think not that I am ill provided of conveniences: for I send an harbinger
before me, who makes ready my lodgings, and takes care that I be royally
entertained. The Lord asked him, who was his harbinger? he answered, the
knowledge of my self, and the consideration of what I deserve for my sins,
which is eternal torments; and when with this knowledge I arrive at my lodging,
how unprovided soever I find it; me thinks it is ever better then I deserve.
Why does the living man complain? and thus the heart may be kept from
desponding or repining under adversity.

3. Season. The third Season calling for more than ordinary diligence to keep
the heart is, the time of Sions trouble: when the Church like the ship in which
Christ and his disciples were, is oppressed, and ready to perish in the waves
of persecution, then good Souls, are ready to sink and be shipwrackt too upon
the billows of their own fear. I confess most men rather need the spur than the
reyns in this case, and yet some sit down as overweighed with the sense of the
Churches troubles; the loss of the Ark cost old Eli his li^e, the sad posture
Jerusalem lay in, made good Nehemiahs countenance chang in the midst of all the
pleasures and accommodations of the Court Neh. 2. 2. ah this goes close to
honest hearts!

But though God allow, yea, command the most awakened apprehensions of these
calamities, and in such a day call to mourning, weeping, and girding with
sackloth, Isa. 22. 12. and severely threatens the insensible, Amos 6. 1. yet it
will not please him to see you sit like pensive Elijah under the Juniper tr^e,
1 King 19. 4. Ah Lord God! it is enough, take away my life also: no, mourners
in Sion you may, and ought to be; but self tormentors you must not be: complain
to God you may, but to complain of God (though but by an unsuitable carriage
and the language of your actions) you must not.



3. Case. The third Case that comes next to be spoken to is this, How public
and tender hearts may be relieved and supported when they are even overweighed
with the burdensome sense of Sions troubles? I grant, it is hard for him that
prefers Sion to his chief joy, to keep his heart that it sink not below the
due sense of its troubles; and yet this ought and may be done by the use of
such heart establishing directions as these.

1. Direct. Settle this great truth in your hearts, that no trouble befalls
Sion, but by the permission of Sions God; and he permits nothing out of which
he will not bring much good at last to his people.

There is as truly a principle of quietness in the permitting, as in the
commanding will of God. See it in David 2 Samuel 16. 10. let him alone, it may be
God has bidden him, and in Christ, John 19. 11. thou could have no power
against me, except it were given thee from above, it should much calm our
spirits, that it is the will of God to suffer it; and had not he suffered it,
it could never have been as it is.

This very consideration quieted Job, Eli, David, and Hezekiah, that the Lord
did it, was enough to them: and why should it not be so to us? if the Lord will
have Sion plowed as a field, and her goodly stones lie in the dust; if it be
his pleasure that Antichrist shall rage yet longer, and wear out the Saints of
the most high; if it be his will, that a day of trouble and of treading down,
and of perplexity by the Lord God of hosts shall be upon the valley of vision,
that the wicked shall devour the man that is more righteous than he, what are
we that we should contest with God? fit it is, that we should be resigned up to
that will whence we proceeded; and he that made us should dispose of us as he
pleases: he may do what seems him good without our consent: does poor man
stand upon equal ground, that he should capitulate with his Creator, or that
God should render him an account of any of his matters? it is every way as
reasonable we be content however God dispose of us, as that we be obedient to
what ever he commands us.

But then, if we pursue this argument further, by considering that Gods
permissions do all meet at last in the real good of his people, this will much
more quiet our spirits. Do the enemies carry away the good figgs, even the best
among the people into captivity? this looks like a sad providence: but yet, God
sends them thither for their good Ier. 24. 5. does God take the Assyrian as a
staff in his hand to beat his people with? those blows are smart, and make
them cry; but the end of his so doing is, that he may accomplish his whole work
upon Mount Sion, Isa. 10. 12. If God can bring much good out of the worst, and
greatest evil of sin; much more out of temporal afflictions, and it is as
evident that he will, as that he can do so. For it is inconsistent with the
wisdom of a common Agent, to permit any thing (which he might prevent if he
pleased) to cross his great design and end; and can it be imagined that the
most wise God should do so.

Well then, as Luther told Melancthon, desinat Philippus esse rector mundi: so
say I to you, let infinite wisdom, power and love alone; for by these, all
Creatures are swayed, and actions guided, in reference to the Church. Its none
of our work to rule the World, but to submit to him that does, non caeco impetu
volvuntur rotae, the motions of Providence are all judicious, the Wheels are
full of eyes: it is enough, that the affairs of Sion are in a good hand.

2. Direct. Ponder this heart-supporting truth, in reference to Sions trouble.
That how many troubles soever are upon her, yet her King is in her.

What? Has the Lord forsaken his Churches? has he sold them into the enemies
hand? Does he not regard what evil befalls them? that our hearts sink at this
rate? Is it not too shameful an undervaluing of the great God? and too much
magnifying of poor impotent man to fear and tremble at Creatures, whilst God
is in the midst of us? The Churches enemies are many and mighty, let that be
granted; yet that Argument with which Caleb and Joshua strove to raise their
own hearts, is of as much force now as it was then: The Lord is with us, fear
them not, Numb. 14. 9. The Historian tells us, that when Antigonus overheard
his soldiers reckoning how many their enemies were, and so discouraging one
another; he suddenly steps in among them with this Question, and how many (said
he) do you reckon me for? discouraged souls? how many do you reckon the Lord
for? is he not an over-match for all his enemies? is not one Almighty more than
many mighties? does his presence stand for nothing with us? If God be for us,
who can be against us? Romans 8. 31. What think you was the reason of that great
Exploration Gideon made in Judges 6. He questions verse. 12. 13. he desires a
sign v. 17. and after that another, v. 36. and what was the end of all this?
but that he might be sure the Lord was with him, and that he might but wri^e
this M^t^o upon his Ensign, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. So then, if
you can be well assured, the Lord is with his people, you will get thereby
above all your discouragements: and that he is so, you need not (with him)
desire a sign from Heaven, lo, you have a sign before you, even their
mavelous preservation am^dst all their enemies. If God be not with his
people, how is it they are not swallowed up quick? Do their enemies want
malice, power, or opportunity? no, but there is an invisible hand upon them.
Well then, as it is Exodus 33. 14. Let his presence g^ve us rest; and though the
Mountains be hurled into the Sea, though Heaven and Earth mingle together; fear
not, God is in the midst of her; she shall not be mo^ed.

3. Direct. Ponder the great advantages attending the people of God in an
^fflicted condition. If a low and an ^fflicted stare in the World be really
b^st for the Church, then your dejections are not only irrational, but
ungrateful: indeed, if ye estimate the happiness of the Church by its worldly
ease, splendour and prosperity, then such times will seem bad for it; but if you
reckon its glory to consist in its humility, faith, patience and heavenly
mindedness, no condition in the World abounds with advantages for these as an
afflicted condition does. It was not persecutions and prisons, but worldliness
and wantonness that was the poison of the Church; neither was it the earthly
glory of its Professors, but the blood of its Martyrs that was the seed of the
Church. The power of godliness did never thrive better than in affliction, and
never ran lower than in times of greatest prosperity; when we are left a poor
and an affl^cted people, then we learn to trust in the Name of the Lord, Zeph.
3. 12. What say ye Sirs? Is it indeed for the Saints advantage to be weaned
from the loves and delights of ensnaring worldly vanities? to be quickened and
pricked forward with more haste to Heaven, to have clearer discoveries of their
own hearts, to be taught to pray more fervently, frequently, spiritually to
look and long for the Rest to come, m^^e ardently? if this be for their
advan^^ge, experience teaches us, that no condition is ordinarily blessed with
such ^^uits as these, like an afflicted Condition.

And is it well done then to repine and droop because your father consu^ts more
the advantage of* your souls, than the pleasing of your humors? because he
will bring you a nearer way to Heaven than you are willing to go? Is this a due
requital of his love, who is pleased so much to concern himself in your
welfare? which is more than he will do for thousands in the World, upon whom he
will no^ lay a Rod, or spend an affliction for their good, Hos. 4. 17. Matthew.
15. 14. But alas! We judge by sense, and reckon things good or evil, according
to what we for the present can taste and feel in them.

4. Direct. Ta^e heed that you overlook not the many precious mercies which the
people of God enjoy amidst all their trouble.

It Is pity that our tears upon the account of our troubles, should so blear and
blind our eyes, that we should not see our mercies and grounds of comfort. I
will not insist upon the mercy of having your lives given you for a prey, nor
yet upon the many outward comforts, temporal conveniences, and accommodations,
which you enjoy even above what Christ and his precious servants, of whom the
world was not worthy, ever had.

But what say you to pardon of sin? interest in Christ? the Covenant of
Promises? and an eternity of happiness in the presence of God after a few days
are over? O that ever a people entitled to such mercies as these, should droop
under any temporal affliction, or be so much concerned for the frowns of men,
and loss of trifles! You have not the smiles of great men, but you have the
favor of the great God: You are it may be cast back in your estates, but
thereby farthered in spirituals. You cannot live so bravely, plentifully, and
easily as before, but still you may live as holy and heavenly as ever. Will you
then grieve so much for these circumstantials, as to forget your substantials?
shall light troubles make you forget weighty mercies? Remember the Churches
true Riches are laid out of the reach of all its enemies: they may make you
poor, but not miserable. What though God do not distinguish in his outward
Dispensations betwixt his own and others? yea, what though his Judgments single
out the best, and spare the worst? what though an Abel be killed in love, and a
Cain survive in hatred, a bloody Dio^ysius die in his bed, and a good I^siah
fall in Battle? What though the belly of the wicked be filled with hid
Treasures, and the teeth of the Saints broken with Gravel-stones, yet still
here is much matter of praise: for electing Love has distinguished, though
common Providence did not, and whilst prosperity and impunity slay the wicked,
even staying and adversity shall benefit and save the righteous.

5. Direct. Believe, that how low soever the Church be plunged under the waters
of adversity, it shall assuredly rise again. Fear not, for as sure as Christ
arose the third day, notwithstanding the Seal and Watch that was upon him; so
sure the Church shall arise out of all her troubles, and lift up its victorious
head above all its enemies: there is no fear of ruining that people that thrive
by their losses, and multiply by being diminished. O be not too quick to bury
the Church before she be dead! stay till Christ has tried his skill before you
give it up for lost; the Bush may be all in a flame, but shall never be
consumed, and that because of the good will of him that dwells in the Bush.

6. Direct. Record the famous instances of Gods care and tenderness over his
people in former straits. Christ has not suffered it to be devoured yet, for
above these 1600 years the Christian Church has lived in affliction, and yet
it is not consumed: many a wave of persecution has gone over it, and yet it is
not drowned; many designs to ruin it, and hitherto none has prospered: this
is not the first time that Hamans and Achitophels have plotted its ruin; that
an Herod has stretched out his hand to vex it. Still it has been preserved
from, supported under, or delivered out of all its troubles: and is it not as
dear to God as ever? is not he as able to save it now as formerly? though we
know not whence deliverance should arise, Yet the Lord knows how to deliver
the Godly out of temptations, 2 Pet. 2. 9.

7. Direct. If you can fetch no comfort from any of the former arguments, then
in the last place, try whether you cannot draw some comfort out of your very
trouble. Surely this trouble of yours is a good argument of your integrity;
union is the ground of sympathy, if you had not some rich adventure in that
ship, you would not tremble as you do when it is in danger: besides, this frame
of spirit may afford you this argument, that if you be so sensible of the
Churches troubles, Jesus Christ is much more sensible of, and sollicitous about
it than you can be; and he will cast an eye of favor upon them that mourn for
it, Isa. 57. 18.

4. Season. The fourth special Season of expressing our utmost diligence in
keeping our hearts is the time of danger and public distraction: in such times
the best hearts are but too apt to be surprised by sl^vish fear, it is not easy
to secure the heart against distraction in times of common destruction: if
Syria be confederate with Ephraim, how do the hearts of the house of David
shake, even as the trees of the wood which are shaken with the wind Isa. 7. 2.
when there are ominous signs in the heavens, on the earth distress of Nations,
with perplexity; the Sea and waves roaring, then the hearts of men fail for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth Luke
21. 25, 26. even a Paul himself may sometimes complain of fightings within,
when there are fears without, 2 Cor. 7. 5.

But my Brethren, these things ought not to be so; Saints should be of a more
raised Spirit: ^o was David when his heart was kept in a good frame, Psalm. 27.
^. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid: let none but the servants of
sin be the slaves of fear, let them that have delighted in evil, fear evil,
impius tantum metuit, quantum nocuit. O let not that which God has threatened
as a Judgment upon the wicked, ever seize upon the breasts of the righteous; I
will send (says God) faintness into their hearts in the land of their enemies,
and the sound of a shaking leaf shall chase them, Lev. 26. 36. O what poor
spirited men were these, to fly at a shaking leaf! which makes a pleasant, and
not a terrible noise, and is in it self a kind of natural music; but to a
guilty Conscience, the whistling leaves are Drums and Trumpets: but God has
not given us the spirit of fear, but of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
A sound mind as it stands there in opposition to the spirit of fear, is an
unwounded Conscience, not infirm'd by guilt: and th^s should make a man as bold
as a Lion. I know it cannot be said of a Saint, what God spoke of Levia^han,
that he is made without fear: there is a natural fear in every man, and it is as
impossible to be wholly put off, as the body it self is: it is a perturba^tion
of the mind, rising from the (...) of approaching danger; and as (...) can
approach us, we shall find some perturbations within us. It Is (...) my purpose
to commend to you a (...) apathy, nor ye^ to take you off from (...) ^ degree
of cautional preven^ve^car as may fit you for troubles, and be ^erviceable to
your souls. There is ^ ^rovident ^ear that opens our eyes to (...) danger and
quickens to a prudent and ^^wful use of means to preve^^ it; Such was Jacobs
fear, Genesis 32. 7, 9, 10, etc. but it is the fear of diffidence. I perswa^e you
to keep your hearts from that Tyrannical passion which invades the heart in
times of danger, distracts, weakens, and unfits the heart for duty, drives men
upon unlawful means, and brings a snare with it. Well then, the fourth Case
will be this.

4. Case. How a Christian may keep his heart from distracting and tormenting
fears in times of great and threatening dangers.

Now there are fourteen excellent Rules or helps for the keeping of the heart
from sinful fear when eminent dangers threaten us: and the first is this,

1. Rule. Look upon all the Creatures as in the hand of God, who manages them
in all their motions; limiting, restraining, and determining them all at his
pleasure.

Get this great truth well se^led by faith in your hearts; it will marvellously
gu^rd them against slavish fears, the I. of Ezekiel. contains an admirable scheam
or draught of Providence; there you may see the living Creatures who move the
wheels, viz. the great Affairs and turnings of things here below, coming unto
Christ, who sits upon the throne to receive new orders and instructions from
him, v. 24. 25, 26. and in Rev. 6. you read of white, black, and red Horses,
which are nothing else but the Instruments which God employs in executing his
judgments in the World, as Wars, Pestilence and Death, but when these Horses
are pra^sing and trampling up and down the World; here is that may quiet our
hearts, that God has the reins in his hand. Wicked men are sometimes like mad
Horses, they would stamp the people of God under their feet, but that the
bridle of Providence is in their lips, John 19, 11, 12. A Lion at liberty is
terrible to meet, but who is afraid of the Lion in the Keepers hand.

2. Rule. Remember that this God in whose hand all the Creatures are, is your
Father, and is much more tender over you than you are or can be over your
selves: He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, Zech. 2. 8. Let
me ask the most timorous woman, whether there be not a vast difference betwixt
the sight of a drawn sword in the hand of a bloody Russian, and the same sword
in the hand of her own tender Husband? as great a difference there is in
looking upon Creatures by an eye of sense, and looking on them as in the hand
of your God by an eye of Faith; that is a sweet Scripture to this purpose, Isa.
54. 5. The Maker is thine Husband, the Lord of Hosts is His Name, He is Lord of
all the Hosts of Creatures in the world: who would be afraid to pass through an
Army, though all the Soldiers should turn their Swords and Guns toward him,
if the General of that Army were his friend or Father? I have met with an
excellent Story of a religious young man, who being at Sea with many other
Passengers in a great storm, and they being half dead with fear, he only was
observed to be very cheerful, as if he had been but little concerned in that
danger; one of them demanding a reason of his cheerfulness, Oh, said he, it is
because the Pilot of the ship is my Father. Consider Christ, first as the King
and Supreme Lord over the Providential Kingdom, and then as your Head, Husband
and Friend, and thou will quickly say, Return unto thy rest, O my soul. This
truth will make you cease trembling, and fall a singing in the midst of
dangers, Psalm 47. 7. The Lord is King of all the earth, sing ye praise with
understanding, or as the Hebrew word is, every one that has understanding,
viz. of this heart reviving and establishing Doctrine of the Dominion of our
Father over all the Creatures.

3. Rule. Urge upon your hearts the express prohibitions of Christ in this
Case; and let your hearts stand in awe of the violations of them.

He has charged you not to fear, Luke 21. 9. When ye shall hear of Wars and
commotions, see that ye be not terrified. And P^il. 1. 28. In nothing be
terrified by your adversaries: yea in Matthew. 10. 26. 28, 31. and within the
compass of six verses, our Savior commands us thrice, not to fear men. Does
every big word of proud dust and ashes make thee afraid? does the voice of a
man make thee tremble? and shall not the voice of God? If thou art of such a
fearful and timorous spirit, how is it that thou fear not to disobey the
flat commands of Jesus Christ? Methinks the command of Christ should have as
much power to calm, as the voice of a poor worm to terrify thy heart, Isa. 51.
12, 13. I, even I am ^e that comfort you, who art thou that thou should
be afraid of a man that shall dye? and of the son of man that shall be made as
the grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker? We cannot fear Creatures sinfully
till we have forgotten God; did we remember what he is, and what he has said,
we should not be of such feeble spirits: bring thy heart then to this Dilemma
in timfs of danger; if I let into my heart the slavish fear of man, I must let
out the reverential awe and fear of God: and dare I cast off the fear of the
Almighty for the ^rowns of a man? Shall I lift up proud dust above the great
God? Shall I run upon a certain sin, to shun a probable danger? Oh keep thy
heart by that Consideration.

4. Rule. Remember how much needless trouble your vain fears have brought upon
you formerly, and how you have disquieted your selves to no purpose.

Isa. 51. 13. And have feared continually because of the oppressor, as if he
were ready to devour, and where is the fury of the Oppressor? He seemed ready
to devour, but yet you are not devoured; I have not brought upon you the thing
that ye feared; You have wasted your spirits, disordered your souls, and
weakened your hands, and all this to no purpose. You might have all this while
enjoyed your peace, and possessed your souls in patience. And here I cannot but
observe a very deep policy of Satan managing a design against the soul by these
vain fears: I call them vain in regard of the frustration of them by
Providence, but certainly they are not in vain as to the end Satan aims at in
ra^sing them, for herein he acts as Soldiers use to do in the Siege of a
Garrison, who on purpose to wear out the besieged by constant watchings, and
thereby unfit them to make resistance when they storm it in earnest, do every
night give them false Allarms, which though they come to nothing, yet do
notably serve this further design of the enemy. O when will you beware of
Satan's devices?

5. Rule. Consider solemnly, That though the things you fear should really fall
out, yet there is more evil in your own fear than in the thing feared.

And that not only as the least evil of sin, is worse than the greatest evil of
suffering; but as this sinful fear has really more torment and trouble in it
than is in that condition you are so much afraid of, fear is both a multiplying
and a tormenting passion; it represents troubles much greater than they are,
and so tortures and wracks the Soul much worse than when the suffering it self
comes. So it was with Israel at the red Sea, they cried out, and were sore
afraid till they put ^oot into the water, and then a passage was opened through
those waters which they thought would have drowned them. Thus it is with us, we
looking through the glass of carnal fear, upon the waters of trouble, the
swellings of Jordan, cry out, Oh they are unfoordable! we must needs perish in
them: but when we come into the midst of those Floods indeed, we find the
Promise made good, God will make a way to escape, I- C^r. 10. 13. Thus it was
with blessed Bil^^^, when he would make a trial by putting his finger to the
Candle, and not able to endure that, he cried out, What? ^^nn^t I bear the
burning of a finger? how t^en shall I be able to bear the burning of my whole
body to morrow? and yet when that morrow came, he could go cheerfully into the
flames with that Scripture in his mouth, Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3. Fear not, for I have
redeemed thee; I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine; when thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee, when thou walk through the fire
thou shall not be burnt.

6. Rule. Consult the many precious promises which are written for your support
and comfort in all dangers.

These are your Refuges to which you may fly and be safe: when the arrows of
danger fly by night, and destruction wastes at noon day. There are particular
Promises su^ted to particular Cases and exigencies, and there are general
Promises reaching all Cases and Conditions: such are these, Romans 8. 28. All
things shall work together for good, etc. And Eccl. 8. 12. Though a sinner do
evil an hundred times, and his da^es be prolonged, yet it shall be well with
them that fear the Lord, etc. Could you but believe the Promises, your hearts
should be established, 2 Chr. 20. 29. Could you but plead them with God, as
Jacob did, Genesis 32. 12. Thou said, I will surely do thee good, etc. they
would relieve you in every distress.

Object. But that pro^ise was made personally and by name to him, so are not
these to me.

Answ. If Jacobs God be your God, you have as good an interest in them as he
had. The Church a thousand years after that transaction betwixt God and Jacob,
applied that which God spoke to him, as if it had been spoken to themselves,
Hos. 12. 1. He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us.

7. Rule. Quiet your trembling hearts by recording and consulting your past
experiences of the care and faithfulness of God in former distresses.

These experiences are food for your Faith in a wilderness condition, Psalm. 74.
14. By this David kept his heart in time of danger, I Sam. 17. 37. and Paul
his, 2. Cor. 1. 10. It was sweetly answered by Silentiarius, when one told him,
that his enemies waylaid him to take away his life, Si Deus mei curam non
habet, quid vivo? if God take no care of me, how have I escaped hitherto? you
may plead with God old experiences to procure new ones, for it is in pleading
with God for new deliverances, as it is in pleading for new pardons. Now mark
how Moses pleads on that account with God, Numb. 14. 19. Pardon I beseech thee
the Iniquity of this people, as thou have forgiven them from Egypt until now.
He does not say as men do, Lord this is the first fault, thou have not been
troubled before to sign their pardon: but Lord, because thou have pardoned them
so often; I beseech thee pardon them once again. So in new straits, Lord thou
have often heard, helped and saved, in former fears, therefore now help again,
for with thee there is plenteous redemption, and thine arm is not shortened.

8. Rule. Be well satisfied that you are in the way of your duty, and that will
beget holy courage in times of danger.

Who wi^^ harm you, if you be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. 13.
Or, if any dare attempt it, you may boldly commit your selves to God in
well-doing, 1 Pet. 4, 19. 'I was this consideration that raised Luthers Spirit
above all fear: In the cause of God (said he) I ever am, and ever shall be
stout; herein I assume this Title, Cedo nulli, 2 good cause will bear up a man's
spirit bravely. Hear the saying of a Heathen to the shame of cowardly
Christians; When the Emperor Vespasian had commanded Fluidius Priscus not to
come to the Senate, Char. of Wisdom. p. 358.
or if he did, to speak nothing but what he would have him; The Senator
returned this noble Answer: That as he was a Senator, it was fit he should be
at the Senate; and if being there he were required to give his advice, he would
speak freely that which his Conscience commanded him; the Emperor threatening,
that then he should dye. He answered, Did I ever tell you that I was immortel?
Do you what you will, and I will do what I ought; it is in your power to put me
to death unjustly, and in me to dye constantly.

Righteousness is a Breast Plate, the Cause of God will pay all your expenses*
let them tremble whom danger finds out of the way of Duty.

9. Rule. Get your consciences sprinkled with the blood of Christ from all
guilt, and that will set your hearts above all fear.

It Is guilt upon the conscience that softens and cowardizes our spirits: The
righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. 'T was guilt in Cains Conscience that
made him cry, every one that meets me will stay me, Genesis 4. 14. A guilty
Conscience is more terrified with conceited dangers, than ^ pure Conscience is
with real ones. A guilty sinner carries a witness against himself in his own
bosom. 'T was guilty He^od cried out, John Baptist is rise^ from the dead. Such
a conscience is the Devils Anvil, on which he fabricates all those Swords and
Spears with which the guilty sinner pierces and wounds himself. Guilt is to
danger, what fire is to Gunpowder; a man ^eed not fear to walk among many
barrels of Powder if he have no fire about him.

10. Rule. Exercise holy trust in times of great distress.

Make it your business to trust God with your lives and comforts, and then your
hearts will be at rest about them. So did David, Psalm. 57. 3. At what time I am
afraid I will trus^ ^n thee, q. d. Lord, it at any time a storm rise, I will
make bold to shelter from it under the Covert of thy wings. Go to God by acts
of faith and trust, and never doubt but he will secure you, Isa. 62. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
truste^h in thee; God takes it well when thou come to him thus; Father, my
life, my liberty, or es^ate are hun^ed after, and I cannot secure them: O let
me leave them in thy hand; the poor leaves himself with thee: and does his God
fail him? no, Thou art the helper of the fatherless, Psalm. 10. 14. that is,
thou art the helper of the de^^^ute one, that has none to go to but God. And
that is a sweet Scripture, Psalm 112. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord: he does not say, his ear
shall be privileged from the report of evil tidings, he may hear as sad
tidings as other men; but his heart shall be privileged from the terror of
those tidings, his heart is fixed.

11. Rule. Consult the honor of Religion more, and your personal safety less.

Is it for the honor of Religion, (think you) that Christians should be as
timorous as Hares, to start at every sound? will not this tempt the World to
think, that whatever you talk, yet your principles are no better than other
men's? O what mischief may the discoveries of your ^ears before them do? 'Twas a
noble saying of Nehemiah, Chap. 6. 11. Should such a man as I flee? and who
being as I am would flee? Were it not better you should dye, than that the
World should be prejudiced against Christ by your example? for alas! how apt is
the World (who judge more by what they see in your practices, than by what they
understand of your principles) to conclude from your tim^r^usness, that how
much soever you commend Faith, and talk of Assurance, yet you dare trust to
these things no more than they, when it comes to the trial. O let not your
fears lay such a stumbling block before the blind World.

12. Rule. He that will secure his heart from fear, must first secure the
eternal interest of his soul in the hands of Jesus Christ.

When this is done, then you may say, now World do thy worst. You will not be
very sol^citous about a vile body, when you are once assured it shall be well
to all eternity with your precious souls. Fear not them (says Christ) that can
kill the body, and after that have no power that they can do. The assured
Christian may smile with contempt upon all his enemies, and say, is this the
worst that you can do? what say you Christians, are you assured that your souls
are safe, that within a few moments of your dissolution they shall be received
by Christ into everlasting habitatious? Well, if you be sure of that, never
trouble your selves about the instruments and means of your dissolution.

Object. O, but a violent death is terrible to Nature.

Answ. But what matter is it, when thy soul is in Heaven; whether it were let
out at thy mouth, or at thy throat? whether thy familiar friends, or barbarous
enemies stand about thy dead body, and close thine eyes? alas, it is not worth
the making so much ado about, nihil corpus sentit in nervo cum anima sit in
coelo, thy soul shall not be sensib^e in Heaven how thy body is used on earth;
no, it shall be swallowed up in life.

13. Rule. Learn to quench all slavish Creature fears, in the reverential fear
of God.

This is a cure by diversion: it is a rare piece of Christian Wisdom to turn
those passions of the soul which most predominate into spiritual Channels, to
turn natural anger into spiritual zeal, natural mirth into holy cheerfulness,
and natural fear into an holy dread and awe of God. This method of Cure Christ
prescribes in that forementioned place Mat. 10. like to which is that in Isa.
8. 12, 13. Fear not their fear: But how shall we help it? Why, sanctify the
Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear and your dread. Natural fear
may be allayed for present by natural reason, or the removal of the occasion,
but then it is but like a Candle blown out with a puff of breath, which is
easily blown in again, but it the fear of God extinguish it, then it is like a
Candle quenched in water, which cannot easily be re-kindled.

14. Rule. Lastly, Pour out those fears to God in Prayer, which the Devil and
your own unbelief, pour in upon you in times of danger.

Prayer is the best outlet to fear; where is the Christian that cannot set his
probatum est to this direction? I will give you the greatest Example in the
World to encourage you in the use of it, even the example of Jesus Christ, Mark
14. 32. when the hour of his danger and death dr^w nigh; he gets into the
Garden, separates from the Disciples, and there wrestles mightily with God in
Prayer, even unto an Agony: in reference to which the Apostle says, Heb. 5. 7.
Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong cries and tears, to him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that he feared: he was heard as to strength and
support to carry him through it, though not as to deliverance, or exemption
from it.

Now, Oh that these things might abide with you, and be reduced to practice in
these evil days, that many trembling souls may be established by them.

5. Seas. The fifth Season to exert this diligence in keeping the heart, is the
time of straits and outward pinching wants; although at such times we should
complain to God, and not of God, (the Throne of Grace being erected for a time
of need, H^b. 4. 16.) yet when the waters of relief run low, and wants begin to
pinch hard: how prone are the best hearts to distrust the Fountain! When the
Meal in the Barrel, and oylin the Cruse are almost spent, our faith and
patience are almost spent too: Now it is difficult to keep down the proud and
unbelieving heart in an holy quietude and sweet submission at the foot of God.
It Is an easy thing to talk of trusting God for daily bread while we have a
full Barn or Purse; but to say as the Propher, Hab. 3. 17. Though the Fig Tree
should not blossom, neither fruit be in the Vine etc. yet will I rejoice in
the Lord. Sure this is not easy. The fifth Case therefore shall be this.

5. Cafe. How a Christian may keep his heart from distrusting God, or repining
against him when outward wants are eith^r felt, or feared?

This Case deserves to be seriously pondred, and especially to be studied now;
since it seems to be the design of Providence to empty the people of God of
their creature-fulness, and acquaint them with th^se straits which hi^herto
they have been altogether strangers to.

N^w to secure the heart from the forementioned dangers attending this
condition these foll^wing Consi^erations through the blessing of the Spirit may
prove effectual. And the first is this,

1. Consid. That if God reduce you to straits and necessities, yet he deals no
otherwise therein with you* than he has done with some of the choicest and
holiest men that ever lived.

Your condition is not singular, though you have hitherto been strangers to
wants, other Saints have daily conversed, and been familiarly acquainted with
them. Hear what blessed Paul speaks, not of himself only, but in the names of
other Saints reduced to like exigencies, I Cor. 4. 11. Even to this present
hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked and buffetted, and have no
certain dwelling place. To see such a man as Paul going up and down the World
with a naked back, and empty belly, and not a house to put his head in, one
that was so far above thee in Grace and Holiness, one that did more service for
God in a day, than perhaps thou have done him all thy days, and yet thou
repine as if hardly dealt with! Have you forgot what necessities and straits
even a David has suffered? how great were his straits and necessities? I Sam.
25. 8. Give I pray thee, (says he to Nabal) whatsoever comes to thy hand, to
thy Servants and to thy Son David. Renowned Musculus was forced to dig in the
Town-ditch for a maintenance. Famous Ainsworth (as I have been credibly
informed) forced to sell the bed he lay on to buy bread. But what speak I of
these: behold a greater than any of them, even the Son of God. who is the heir
of all things, and by whom the worlds were made: yet sometime would have been
glad of any thing, having nothing to eat, Mark 11. 12. And on the morrow when
they were come from Bethany, he was hungry; and seeing a Fig Tree a far off
having leaves, he came if happily he might find [any thing] thereon.

Well then, Hereby God has set no mark of hatred upon you; neither can you
infer the want of love from the want of bread. When thy repining heart puts the
question, was there ever any sorrow like unto mine? Ask these Wo^thies, and
they will tell thee, though they did not complain and fret as thou do, yet
they were driven to as great straits as thou art.

2. Consid. If God leave you not in this necessitous condition without a
promise, you have no reason to repine or despond under it.

That is a sad condition indeed, to which no promise belongs. I remember Mr.
Calvin upon those words, Isa. 9. 1. Nevertheless, the dimnesse shall not be
such as was in her vexation, etc. Salves the doubt, in what sense the darkness
of the Captivity was not so great, as the lesser incursions made by Tiglath
Pileser. In the Captivity the City was destroyed and the Temple burnt with
fire; there was no comparison in the affliction; but yet the darkness should
not be such, and the reason (says he) is this, huic certam promissionem esse
additam, cum in prioribus nulla esset, (^. e.) there was a certain promise made
to this, but none to the other.

It Is better be as low as Hell with a Prom^se, than in Paradise without one.
Even the darkness of Hell it self would be comparatively no darkness at all,
were there but a promise to enlighten it. Now God has left many sweet Promises
for the faith of his poor people to feed on in this condition, such are these:
Psalm 34. 9. 10. O fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them
tha^ fear him; the Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord
shall want nothing that is good. Psalm 33. 18, 19. The eye of the Lo^d is upon
the righteous, to keep them alive in famine. Psalm 84. 11. N^ good thing will
be withold from them that walk upr^ghtly. R^m. 8. 32. He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? Isa. 41. 17. when the poor and the needy seek water and
there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear them,
I the God of Israel will not forsake them. Here you see, first their extreme
wants, water being put even for the necessaries of life, (2) their certain
relief, I the Lord will hear them; in which it is supposed, that they cry unto
him in their straits; and he hears their cry.

Having therefore these Promises, why should not your distrustful hearts
conclude like David's, Psalm 23. 1. The Lord is my shephered, I shall not want.

Object. But these Promises imply conditions, if they were absolute they would
afford more satisfaction.

Sol. What are those tacit conditions you speak of, but these. (1) That either
he will supply, or sanctify your wants; (2) That you shall have so much as God
sees fit for you, and does this trouble you? would you have the mercy whether
sanctified or no? whether God sees it fit for you or no? Methinks, the
appetites of Saints after earthly things should not be so ravenous, to seize
greedily upon any enjoyment, not careing how they have it.

But Oh, when wants pinch, and we see not whence supplies should come, then our
faith in the promise shakes, and we like murmuring Israel cry, He gave bread,
can he give water also? O unbelieving hearts! when did his promise fail? who
ever trusted them, and was ashamed? may not God upbraid thee with thine
unreasonable infidelity, as Ier. 2. 31. Have I been a wilderness unto you, etc.
or as Christ said to the Disciples, Since I was with you, lacked ye any thing?
Yea, may you not upbraid your selves, may you not say with good old Polycarp,
thus many years I have served Christ, and found him a good Master; indeed he
may deny what your wantonness, but not what your real wants call for: he will
not regard the cry of your lusts, nor yet despise the cry of your faith; though
he will not indulge and hum^ur your wanton appetites, yet he will not violate
his own faithful promises. T^ese Pr^mises are your best security for eternal
life; and it is strange it they should not satisfy you for daily bread:
remember ye the words of the Lord, and solace your hearts with them amidst all
your wan^s. It Is said of Epicurus, that in the dreadful fi^s of the Colic he
often refreshed himself o^ memoriam inventorum, by calling to mind his
inventions in Philosophy: and of Possidonius the Philosopher, that in a great
fit of the stone, he sollaced himself with discourses of moral Virtue: and when
the pain twinged him, he would say, nihilagis dolor quamvis sis molestus
nunquam confit^bor te esse malum: O pain, thou do nothing, though thou art a
little troubl^som, I will never confess th^e to be evil. If upon such grounds
as these they could support themselves under such grinding and racking pains,
and even delude their diseases by them; how much rather should the precious
promi^es of God, and the sweet Experiences which have gone along step by step
with them, make you to forget all your wants, and comfort you over every strait!

3. Consid. If it be bad now, it might have been worse; has God denied thee
the comforts of this life? he might have denied thee Christ peace and pardon
also, and then thy case had been ^oful indeed. You know God has done so to
millions in the World: how many such wretched objects may your eyes behold
every day, that have no comfort in hand, nor yet in hope, are miserable here,
and will be so to eternity; that have a bitter cup, and nothing to sweeten it,
no, not so much as any hope that it will be better. But it is not so with you,
though you be poor in this World, yet rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom
which God has promised, Iam. 2. 5. O learn to set spiritual riches over
against temporal poverty! Balance all your present troubles with your
spiritual privileges. Indeed, if God had denied your souls the Robes of
Righteousness to cloth them, the hidden Manna to feed them; the heavenly
Mansions to receive them, if your souls were left destitute, as well as your
bodies; you might well be pe^sive, but this consideration has enough to bring
the considering soul to rest under any outward strait. 'T was bravely said by
Luther, when want began to pinch him, let us be contented with our hard fare
(said he) for do we not feast wi^h Angels upon Christ the bread of Life: And
blessed be God (says Paul) who ha^h abounded unto us in all spiritual
blessings, Ephesians. 1. 3.

4. Consid. This afliction though great, is not such an affliction but God has
far greater, with which he chastises the dearly beloved of his soul in this
World, and should ^e remove this, and inflict those, you would account your
present state a very comfortable state, and bless God to be as now you are.

What think ye Sirs? should God remove your present troubles, supply all your
outward wants, give you the desire of your hearts in Creature Comforts, but
hide his face from you, shoot his arrows into your souls, and cause the venom
of them to drink up your spirits? Should he leave you but a few days to the
buffe^ing of Satan and his blasphemous injections? should he ^old your eyes but
a few nights waking with horrors of Conscience, t^ssing to and fro till the
dawning of the day? should he lead you through the Chambers of death? Show you
the visions of darkness? and make his terrors set themselves in array against
you? then tell me if you would not count it a choice mercy to be back again in
your former necessitous condition, with peace of Conscience; and count bread
and water, with Gods favor a happy state? O then! take heed of repining. Say
not God deals hardly with you, least you provoke him to convince you, by your
own sense and feeling, that he has worse Rods than these for unsubmissive and
forward Children.

5. Consid. If it be bad now, it will be better shortly.

O keep thy heart by that Consideration! the Meal in the Barrel is almost
spent, well, be it so; why should that trouble me, If I am almost beyond the
need and use of all these things. The Traveller has spent almost all his
money, but a shilling or two left; Well, (says he) though my money be almost
spent, yet my journey is almost finished too; I am near home, and then shall be
fully supplied. If there be no Candles in the house, yet it is a comfort to
think that its almost day, and then there will be no need of Candles. I am
afraid Christian thou mis-reckonest thy self, when thou think; my provision
is almost spent, and I have a great way to travel, many years to live, and
nothing to live upon; it may be not half so many as thou supposest; in this be
confident, if thy provision be spent, either fresh supplies are coming, (though
thou see not from whence) or thou art nearer thy journeys end than thou
reckonest thy self to be. Desponding soul, does it become a man or woman
traveling upon the Road to that heavenly City, and almost arrived there,
within a few days journey of his Fathers house, where all his wants shall be
supplied, to take on thus about a little meat, drink or clothes, which he fears
he shall want by the way? It was a noble saying of the 40 Martyrs, famous in the
Ecclesiastical Story, when turned out naked in a frosty night to be starved to
death; with these words they comforted one another (...) etc. the winter indeed
is sharp and cold, but Heaven is warm and comfortable; here we shiver for cold,
but Abraham's bosom will make amends for all.

Obj. I. But I may dye for want?

Sol. (1) Who ever did so? where were the Righteous forsaken? (2) If so, your
journey is ended, and you fully supplied.

Obj. 2. But I am not sure of that, were I sure of Heaven, it were another
matter.

Sol. Are you not sure of that? then you have other matters to trouble your
selves about than these: Methinks, this should be the least of all your cares;
I do not find that souls perplexed and troubled about the want of Christ,
pardon of sin, etc. are usually very anxious, or sollicitous about these
things. He that seriously puts such questions as these: what shall I do to be
saved? how shall I know my sin is pardoned? does not usually trouble himself,
with what, shall I eat, what shall I drink? or wherewithal shall I be clothed?

6. Consid. Does it become the children of such a Father to distrust his
all sufficiency, or repine against any of his Dispensations?

Do you well to question his care and love upon every new exigence; say, have
you not been ashamed of this formerly? has not your Fathers seasonable
provisions for you in former straits, put you to the blush? and made you
resolve never to question his love and care any more, and yet will you renew
your unworthy suspicions of him again? Dis-ingenious Child, reason thus with
thy self, if I perish for want of what is good and needful for me, it must
either be because my Father knows not my wants, or has not wherewith to supply
them; or else regards not what becomes of me. Which of these shall I charge
upon him; not the first; for, Mark 6. 32. My Father knows what I have need of,
my condition is not hid from him: Nor the second, for the earth is the Lords
and the fullness of it, Psalm 24. 1. His Name is God All-sufficient. Genesis 17. 1
Not the last, for, as a father pities his children, so the Lord pities them
that fear him: Psalm 103. 13. The Lord is exceeding pitiful and of tender
mercy, James 5. 11. He ^ears the young Ravens when they cry, Job 38. 41. and
will he not hear me? Consider (says Christ) the fowls of the air, Matthew. 6.
26. Not the fowls at the door, that are every day fed by hand, but the fowls
of the air, that have none to provide for them. Does he feed and clothe his
enemies, and will he forget his children? He heard the very cry of Ishmael in
distress, Genesis 21. 17. O my unbelieving heart! do thou yet doubt? Remember
Hagar and the Child.

7. Con^id. Your poverty is not your sin, but your affliction only! if by
sinful means ^ o^ have not brought it upon your selves; and if it be but an
affliction, it may be born the easier for that.

It Is hard indeed to bear an affliction coming upon us as the fruit and
punishment of sin, when men are under trouble upon that account; they use to
say, O! if it were but a single affliction coming from the hand of God by way
of trial, I could bear it, but I have brought it upon my self by sin, it comes
as the punishment of sin; the marks of Gods displeasure are upon it, it is the
guilt within that troubles and galls, more than the want without.

But it is not so here, and therefore you have no reason to be cast down under
it.

Object. But though there be no sting of guilt, yet this condition wants not
other stings: as first the discredit of Religion; I cannot comply with mine
engagements in the world, and thereby Religion is like to suffer.

Sol. It Is well you have an heart to discharge every duty, ^et if God disable
you by Providence, it is no discredit to your profession, because you do not
that which you cannot do, so long as it is your desire, and endeavor to do
what you can and ought to do, and in this case Gods will is that lenity and
forbearance be exercised toward you, De^t, 24. 12, 13.

2 Object. But it grieves me to behold the necessities of others, whom I was
want to relieve and refresh, but now cannot.

Sol. If you cannot, it ceases to be your duty, and God accepts the drawing out
of your soul to the hungry in compassion and desire to help them, though you
cannot draw forth a full purse to relieve and supply them.

3. Obj. But I find such a condition full of temptations, a sore clog in the
way to Heaven.

Sol. Every condition in the World has its clogs, and attending temptations;
and were you in a prosperous condition, you might there meet with more
temptations and fewer advantages than you now have: For though I confess
poverty has its temptations as well as prosperity, yet I am confident,
prosperity has not those excellent advantages that poverty has: for here you
have an opportunity to discover the sincerity of your love to God, when you can
live upon him, find enough in him, and constantly follow him, even when all
external inducements and motives fail. And thus I have showed you how to keep
your hearts from the temptations and dangers attending a poor and low condition
in the World, when want pinches, and the heart begins to sink, then improve,
and bless God for these helps to keep it.

6. Season. The sixth Season of expressing this diligence in keeping the heart
is the Season of Duty; when we draw nigh to God in public, private, or secret
Duties, then it is time to look to the heart; for the vanity of the heart
seldom discovers it self more than at such times. How often does the poor soul
cry out, O Lord how fain would I serve thee, but vain thoughts will not let me;
I came to open my heart to thee, to delight my soul in communion with thee, but
my corruptions have set upon me: Lord rare off these vain thoughts, and suffer
them not to prostitute the soul, which is espoused to thee, before thy face.
The sixth Case then is this.

6. Case. How the heart may be kept from distractions by vain thoughts, in the
time of Duty.

There is a twofold distraction or wandering of the heart in Duty: (1)
voluntary and habitual, Psalm 78. 8. They set not their hearts aright, and
their spirit was not steadfast with God. This is the case of Formalists, and it
proceeds from the want of an holy bent, and inclination of the heart to God;
their hearts are under the power of their lusts, and therefore it is no wonder
they go after their lusts, even when they are about holy things, Ezekiel, 33. 31.
(2) Involuntary and lamented distractions, R^m 7. 21, 24. I find then a law,
that when I would do good, evil is present with me, O wretched man that I am,
etc. This proceeds not from the want of a holy bent and aim, but from the
weakness and imperfection of grace. And in this case the soul may make the like
c^mplaint against its own corruptions that Abijah did against Jeroboam, 2 Chro.
13. 6, 7. Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat is risen up against his Lord, when
Re^oboham was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them, and there
are gathered unto him vain men the children of Belial. Grace has a dominion,
but lusts are mutinous and seditious, during the infancy thereof. But it is not
my business to show you how these distractions come into the heart, but rather
how to get, and keep them out of the heart; in order whereto take these ten
following Helps.

1. Help. Sequester your selves from all earthly employments, and set apart
some time for solemn preparation to meet God in duty: you cannot come seeking
hot out of the world into Gods presence, but you will find a tang of it in your
duties; it is with the heart a few minutes since plunged in the world, now at
the feet of God, just as with the sea after a storm, which still continues
working, muddy and disquiet, though the wind be laid and st^rm over: thy heart
must have some time to settle. There are few Musicians that can take down a
lure, or viol and play presently upon it, without some time to tune it; there
are few Christians can presently say as, Psalm. 57. 7. O God, my heart is fixed,
it is fixed. O when thou go to God in any duty, take thy heart aside and
say, O my Soul, I am now addressing my self to the greatest work that ever a
Creature was employed about: I am going into the awful presence of God about
business of everlasting moment.

Oh my Soul! leave trifling now, be composed, watchful, serious, this is no
common work, it is God work, Soul work, Eternity work, I am now going forth
bearing seed, which will bring forth fruit to life or death in the world to
come pause a while upon thy sins, wants, troubles, steep thy thoughts a while
in these before thou address thy self to duty. David first mused, and then
spoke with his tongue, Psalm. 39. 3, 4. So Psalm. 45. 1* my heart is enditing,
etc.

2. Help. Having composed thy heart by previous meditation, presently set a
guard upon thy senses; how often are poor Christians in danger of loosing the
eyes of their mind by those of their body, for this Job covenanted with his
senses, Chap. 31. 1. for this David prayed, Psalm. 119. 37. turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity, and quick^n thou me in thy way: this may serve to
exp^und that mystical Arabian proverb which advises to shut the windows, that
the house may be light: 'twere excellent if you could say in your on-sets upon
duty, as an holy one once did, when he came off from duty. Claudimini oculi mei
claudimini, etc. be shut O my eyes be shut! for it is impossible you should
ever see such beauty and glory in any Creature, as I have now seen in God. You
had need avoid all occasions of distraction from without, for be sure you will
meet enough from within, intention of spirit in the work of God locks up the
eve and ear against vanity. When Marcellus entered the gates of Syracuse,
Archimides was so intent about his Mathematical Scheame, that he took no notice
of the Soldiers when they entered his very study with drawn swords, a fervent,
cannot be a vagrant heart.

3. Help. Beg of God a mortisied fancy, a working fancy (says one) how much
soever it be extold among men, is a great snare to the Soul; except it work in
fellowship with right reason, and a sanctified heart: the fantasy is a power
of the Soul placed between the senses and the understanding, it is that which
first stirrs it self in the Soul, and by i^s motion the other powers are
stirred, it is the common shop where thoughts are first forged and framed, and
as this is, so are they; if imaginations be not first cast down, it is
impossible that every thought of the heart should be brought into obedience to
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. this fancy is naturally the wildest and most untameable
power in the Soul. Some Christians (especially such as are of hot and dry
constitutions) have much to do with it.

And truly, the more spiritual the heart is, the more it is troubled about the
vanity and wildness of it. O what a sad thing it is! that thy nobler Soul must
lackey up and down, after a vain roving fancy, that such a beggar should ride
on horseback and such a Prince run after it on foot; that it should call off
the Soul from attendance upon God, when it is most sweetly engaged in Communion
with him: to prosecute such vanities as it will start at such times before it!
beg earnestly of God that the power of sanct^fication may once come upon it.
Some Christians have attained such a degree of Sanctification of their fancies,
that they have had much sweetness left upon their hearts by the spiritual
workings of it in the night season: when thy fancy is more mortified, thy
thoughts will be more orderly and fixed.

4. Help. If thou would keep thy heart from those vain excursions realize to
thy self by faith, the holy and awful presence of God in duties.

If the presence of a grave man will compose us to seriousness, how much more
the presence of an holy God? think thou, thy Soul durst be so garish and
light, if the fence of a divine eye were upon it? remember the place where thou
art is the place of his feet, Isai. 60* 13. act faith upon the Omnisciency of
God, All the Churches shall know that I am he, that searches the heart, and
tries the reins, and will give to every one of you according to your works.
Rev. 2. 23. all things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have
to do Heb. 4. 12. realize his infinite holiness into what a serious composed
frame did the sight of God in his holiness put the spirit of the Prophet Isai
6. 5. labor to get also upthy heart due apprehensions of the greatness of God,
such as Abraham had, Genesis 18. 27. I that am but dust and ashes have taken upon
me to speak to God: And lastly remember the jealousy of God, how tender he is
over his worship, Lev. 10. 3. And Moses said unto Aaron, this is that the Lord
spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come high me, and before all
the people I will be glorified.

A man that is praying (says Bernard) should behave himself as if he were
entering into the Court of Heaven, where he sees the Lord upon his throne,
surrounded with ten thousand of his Angels, and Saints ministering unto him.
When thou come from a duty, in which thy heart has been toying and wandering,
thou may say, verily God was in this place, and I knew it not. Suppose all
the impertinencies and va^ities which have past through thine heart in a duty
were written out, and interlined with thy petitions, could thou have the face
to present it to God? should thy tongue but utter all the thoughts of thy heart
in prayer, would not men abhor thee? why, thy thoughts are vocal to God, Psalm.
139. 2. If thou were petitioning the King for thy life, would it not provoke
him* to see thee playing with thy b^ndstrings, or catching every fly that
lights upon thy clothes whilst thou art speaking to him about such serious
matters? O think sadly upon that Scripture, Psalm. 87. 7. God is greatly to be
feared in the assemblies of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that
are round about him. Why did God descend in thundrings and lightnings, and dark
clouds upon Sinai, Exo. 19. 16* 18. Why did the mountains smoke under him? the
people quake and tremble round about him, yea Moses himself not exempted, but
to teach the people that great truth, Heb. 12. 28. 29. Let us have grace;
whereby we may serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear, for our God
is a consuming fire: present God thus before thee, and thy vain heart will
quikly be reduced, to a more serious frame.

5. Help. Maintain a praying frame of heart in the intervals of duty; What is
the reason our hearts are so dull, careless and wandering, when we come to hear
or pray, but because there have been such long intermissions in our communion
with God; by reason whereof the heart is out of a praying frame: if that
spiritual warmth, those holy impressions we carry from God in one duty, were
but preserved to kindle another duty; it would be of mavelous advantage, to
keep the heart intent, and serious with God.

To this purpose those intermediate ejaculations, betwixt stated and solemn
duties, are of most sweet and excellent use; by these, one duty is as it were
linked to another, and so the Soul as it were wraps up it self in a chain of
duties. That Christian seldom misses his mark in solemn duty, that shoots up
many of these darts in the intervals of duty, it is an excellent commendation
Christ bestows upon the spouse, Cant. 4. 11. Thy lips O my spouse drop as the
honey comb: upon which text one gives this sweet note, the honey comb drops
actually but sometimes, but it always hangs full of sweet drops ready to fall:
if our ejaculations were more, our lamentations upon this account would be
fewer.

6. Help. Endeavor to engage and raise thy affections to God in duty, if thou
would have thy distractions cured.

A dropping eye, and a melting heart, are seldom troubled as others upon this
account: When the Soul is intent about any work, it gathers in its strength,
and bends all the thoughts about it; and when its deeply affected, it will be
intent, the affections command the thoughts to go after them, deadness causes
dist^action, and distraction increases deadness; could you but look upon duties
as the galleries of communion in which you walk with God, where your Souls may
be filled with those ravishing, and matchless delights that are in his
presence; your Soul would not offer to stir from thence.

It is with the heart in duty, as it is with those that dig for gold oar; they
try here, and finding none, try there; and so go from place to place till at
last they hit upon the rich vein, and there they sit down. If thy heart could
but once hit the rich vein in duty, it would dwell and abide there with
delight, and constancy. O how I love thy law, it is my meditation day and
night! Psalm. 119. 97. The Soul could dwell day and night upon its knees, when
once its delights, loves, and desires are engaged. What Is the reason your
hearts are so shufling, especially in secret duties? why are you ready to be
gone almost as soon as you are come into the presence of God? but because your
affections are not engaged.

7. Help. Mourn over the matter to God, and call in assistance from Heaven:
when vain thoughts assault thy heart in duty.

When the messenger of Satan buffeted Paul by wicked injections as is supposed,
he goes to God, and mourns over it before him, 2 Cor. 12. 8. never slight
wandering thoughts in duty as small matters, follow every vain thought with a
deep sigh, turn thee to God with such words as these, Lord I came hither to
speak with thee, and here a busy Devil, and a vain heart conspiring together
have set upon me. O my God? what an heart have I? shall I never wait upon thee
without distraction! when shall I enjoy an hour of free communion with thee?
help me my God this once, do but display thy glory before mine eyes; and my
heart shall quickly be recovered: Thou know I came hither to enjoy thee, and
shall I go away without thee! See, how the heart of thy poor child works
toward thee! strives to get near thee, but cannot: my heart is a ground, come
thou north wind, blow south wind, O for a fresh gale now from thy Spirit! to
set my affections, afloat! could thou but thus affectionately bewail thy
distractions to God, thou might obtain help and deliverance from them: He
would say to Satan, and thine imperious lusts as Ahashuerus said of Haman, what
will he force the Queen before my face? who are these, that set upon my child
in my work, and presence?

8. Help. Look upon the success and sweetness of thy duties, as very much
depending upon the keeping of thy heart close with God in them.

These two things, the success, and sweetness of duty, are as dear to a
Christian as his two eyes: and both of these must necessarily be lost, if the
heart be lost in duty, Job 35. 13. Surely God hears not vanity, neither does
the Almighty regard it: the promise is made to an heart engaged, Ier. 29. 13.
Then shall you seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your
heart. Well then, when thou find thy heart under the power of deadness and
distraction, say to thy Soul, O what do I lose by a careless heart now* my
praying times are the choicest parts, the golden spots of all my time: could I
but get up this heart with God, I might now obtain such mercies as would be
matter for a song to all eternity.

9. Help. Look upon it as a great discovery of the sincerity, or hypocrisy of
your hearts according as you find them, careful, or careless in this matter.

Nothing will star^le an upright hear^ more than this: What, shall I give way
to a customary wandering of heart from God? shall the spot of the hypocrit
appear upon my Soul? they indeed can drudge on, in the round of duty; never
regarding the frames of their hearts, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. but shall I do so?
when men come into the presence chamber, and the King is not there; they bow to
the empty chair. O never let me be satisfied with empty duties! never let me
take my leave of a duty, until mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.

10. Help. Lastly, 'twill be of special use to keep thine heart with God in
duties, to consider what influence all thy duties have into thine eternity.

These are your seed time, and what you sow in your duties in this world, you
must look to reap the fruit of it in another world, Gal. 6. 7. 8. if you sow to
the flesh, of that you shall reap corruption: but if to the spirit, life
everlasting. O my Soul, answer seriously; would thou be willing to reap the
fruit of vanity, in the world to come? dare thou say, when thy thoughts are
roving to the ends of the earth in duty? when thou scarce mindest what thou
say or hear, now Lord, I am sowing to the Spirit, now I am providing and
laying up for eternity, now I am seeking for glory, honor, and immortaliy, now
I am striving to enter in at the strait gate, now I am taking the kingdom of
Heaven by an holy violence? O such a consideration as this, should mak^ the
multitudes of vain thoughts that pre^s in upon thy heart in duty, to fly seven
ways before it: and thus I have shown you, how to keep your hearts, in the
times of duty.

7. Season. The seventh season calling for more than common diligence to keep
the heart is, when we receive injuries and abuses from men, such is the
depravedness and corruption of man in his collapsed state, that homo homini
lupus, one man is become a wolf, a Tiger to another: they are as the Prophet
complains Hab. 1. 14. as the fishes of the sea, and as the creep^ng things,
that have no ruler over them, and as wicked men are cruel and oppressive one to
another, so they conspire together to abuse and wrong the people of God, as the
same Prophet complains, v. 13. the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous than he. Now when we are thus abused and wro^ged, it is hard to keep
the heart from revengful motions: to make it meekly and quietly to commit the
cause to him that judges righteously: to exercise no other affection but pity
toward them that abuse us. Surely the Spirit that is in us lusts to revenge,
but it must not be so: you have choice helps in the Gospel to keep down your
hearts from such sinful motions against your enemies, and to sweeten your
embittered Spirits: the seventh case therefore shall be this.

7. Case. How a Christian may keep his heart from revengful motions, under the
greatest injuries and abuses from men?

The gospel indeed allows a liberty to vindicate our innocence, and assert our
rights; but not to vent our corruptions, and invade Gods right: when therefore
thou find thy heart begin to be inflamed by revengful motions, presently
apply the following remedies; and the first is this.

1. Remed. Urge upon thy heart the seve^e prohibitions of revenge by the law of
God. Remember that this is f^rbidden fruit, how pleasing and luscious soever it
be to our vitiated appetites, O says nature, revenge is sweet; O but says
God, the effects thereof shall be bitter: how plainly has God interdicted this
flesh pleasing sin, Prove. 20. 22. Say not I will recompense evil. Prove. 24. 29.
Say not I w^ll do so to him as he has done to me. Romans 12. 17. Recompense to
no man evil for evil. and v. 19. Avenge not your selves but rather give place
to wrath: nay that is not all, but Prove. 25. 21. If thine enemy ^unger, feed
him, if he thirst give him drink. The word feed him, as Critics observe,
signifies to feed cheerfully and tenderly, as birds do their young ones: The
Scripture is a great friend to the peace and tranquillity of humane societies,
which can never be preserved, if revenge be not deposed; it was wont to be an
argument urged by the Christians to prove their religion to be supernatural and
pure, that it forbids revenge which is so sweet to nature; and verily it is a
thousand pities such an argument should be lost. Well then awe your hearts with
the authority of God in these Scriptures: and when carnal reason says, mine
enemy deserves to be hated, let Conscience reply, but does God deserve to be
disobeyed? thus, and thus he has done, and so he has wronged me: but what
has God done that I should wrong him? if he dare be so bold to break the
peace, shall I be so wicked to break the precept? i^ he fears not to wrong me,
shall not I fear to wrong God? O let the fear of Gods threatenings repress such
sinsul motions.

2. Remed. Set before your eyes the most eminent patterns of meekness and
forgiveness, that your So^^s may fall in love with it.

This is the way to cut off those common pleas of the flesh for revenge: as
thus, no man would bear such an affront, yes, such and such have born as bad
and worse, I shall be reckoned a coward, a fool, if I pass by this: no matter,
as long as I follow the examples of the wisest and holiest of men: never did
any suffer more and greater abuses from men than (...) did, and never did any
carry it more peaceably and forgivingly, 53. 7. he was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, etc. This pattern the Apostle sets before you for your imitation 1
Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23. For ^ven here^nto are ye called, because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps: Who
when be was* reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteou sly. To be of a meek
forgiving Spirit is Christ like, God like, then shall you be the children of
your Father, which is in Heaven, for he makes his (...) to rise upon the evil
and upon the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust, Matthew. 5.
45. How eminently also did this Spirit of Christ rest upon his Apostles, never
were th^re such men upon earth for true excellency of Spirit. None were ever
abused more, or suffered their abuses better: Being reviled (say they) we
bless, being persecuted we suffer it, being defamed we entreat. 1 Cor. 4. 12,
13. Mr. Calvin though a man of a quick Spirit, yet had attained such a degree
of this Christ like forgiveness that when Luther had used some opprobrious
language of him, the good man said no more but this; al^hough he should call me
a Devil, yet I will acknowledge him to be an eminent servant of Jesus Christ.

I have often heard it reported of holy Mr. Dod that when ^ne enraged at his
closs convincing doc^^ine picked a quarrel with him, sm^te him on the ^ace, and
(...) two of his teeth: this meek servant of Christ spat out the teeth and
blood into his hand and said, see here, you have knocked out two of my teeth,
and that without any just provocation; but on condition I might do your Soul
good, I would give you leave to dash out all the rest: here is the excellency
of a Christians Spirit, above all the seize of Moral Heathens: though
they were excellent at many other things, yet they could never attain this
forgiving spirit: it is the first office of justice (said Tully) to hurt no
body, unless first provoked by an injury, whereupon Lactantius, O quam
simplicem veramque sententiam duorum verborum, adjectione corrupit! What a
dainty sentence spoiled the Orator by adding those two last words! strive then
for this excellency of Spirit, which is the proper excellency of Christians, do
some singular thing that others cannot do, and then you will have a testimony
in their Consciences: When Moses out-did the Magicians, they were forced to
confess the finger of God in that business.

3. Remed. Consider well the quality of the person that has wronged thee,
either he is a good man or a wicked man that has done thee the injury: if he
be a good man, there is light and tenderness in his Conscience, and that will
bring him at last to a sense of the evil he has done; however Christ has
forgiven him greater injuries than these, and why should not thou? will not
Christ upbraid him with any of those wrongs done to him, but frankly forgives
him all, and will thou take him by the throat f^r some petty abuse that he has
done to thee?

Or is he a wicked man? if so, truly you have more need to exercise pity than
revenge toward him, and that upon a double account: for (1) He is beside
himself so indeed is every unconverted sinner Luke 15. 17. should you go into
Bedlan^ and there hear one rail at you, another mock you, and a third threaten
you, would you say I will be revenged upon them? no, you would rather go away
pitying them. Alas, poor creatures they are out of their wits, and know not
what they do. Besides, (2) there is a day coming if they repent not, when they
will have more mi^er^ than you can find in your hearts to wish them: you need
not study revenge, Gods vengeance sleeps not; and will shortly take place
upon them, and is not that enough? have they not an eternity of mis^ry coming?
if they repent not, this must be the portion of their cup, and if ever they do
repent, they will be ready to make you reparation.

4. Rem. Keep down thy heart by this consideration, that by revenge thou can
but satisfy a lust, but by forgiveness thou shall conquer a lust.

Suppose, by revenge thou should destory one enemy, I will show thee how by
forgiving thou shall conquer three: thine own lust, the Devils temptation, and
thine enemies heart: and is not this a more glorious conquest? if by revenge
thou overcome thine enemy, yet (as Bernard says) inselix victoria, ubi
superans virum; succumbit vitio: unhappy victory, when by overcoming another
man; thou art overcome by thine own corruption, but this way you may obtain a
glorious conquest indeed. What an honorable and dry victory did David this way
obtain over Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17. And it came to pass whon David had made an
end of speaking these words, that Saul lift up his voice and wept; and he said
to David, thou art more righteous than I.

It must be a very di^-ingenious nature indeed, upon which meekness and
forgiveness will not work; a stony heart which this fire will not melt: To this
sense is that Prove. 25. 21. If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give
him drink, for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Some
will have it a sin punishing fire, but others, an heart melting fire: to be
sure, twill either melt his heart, or aggravate his misery. Augustine thinks
that Stevens prayer for his enemies was the great means of Paul's conversion.

5. Rem. Seriously propound this question to thy own heart, have I got any good
by the wrong and injuries received, or have I not? It they have done you no
good, turn the reveng upon your selves. O that I should have such a bad heart,
that can get no good out of such troubles. O that my Spirit should be so unlike
to Christ's! the patience and meekness of other Christians have turn^d all the
injuries thrown at them into precious stones: the Spirits of others have been
raised in blessing God when they have been loaded with reproaches by the world:
they have bound them as an ornament to their necks. Superbus fio (said Luther)
quod video nomen pessimum mihi crescere. I could even be proud upon it, that I
have a bad name among wicked men: to the same purpose Jerome sweetly, Gratias
ago Deo meo quod dignus sum quem mundus oderit. I thank my God, that I am
worthy to be hated of the world: thus their hearts were provoked by injuries to
magnify God, and bless him for them: if it work contrary with me I have cause
enough to be filled with self displacency.

If you have got any good by them, if the reproaches and wrongs you have
received, have m^de you search your hearts the more, wa^ch your ways the more
narrowly; if th^^r w^onging you have made you see how you have wronged God,
then let me say for them as Paul did for himself, pray f^rgive them this wrong.

What can you not find an ^eart to forgive one that has (...) instrumental of
so much good to you, tha^ ^s strange what though they meant it for evil, yet if
God have turned it to good: you have no more reason to rage against the
instrument, then he had who received a wound from his enemy which only brake
and let out that impostume, which otherwise had been his death.

6. R^m. It Is of excellent use to keep the heart from revenge, to look up and
eye the first cause by which all our troubles are ordered.

This will calm and meeken our Spirits quickly; never did a wicked tongue try
the patience of a Saint more than David's was tried by that railing Shimei: yet
the Spirit of this good man was not at all poi^oned with revenge, though he
goes along cursing and casting stones at him all the way: yea, though Abishai
offered David, if he pleased, the head of that enemy; but the King said, What
have I to do with you, ye sons of Zerviah? So let him curse* because the Lord
has said unto him, curse David; Who shall then say, wherefore have thou done
so? it may be God uses him as his rod to lash me, because I by my sin made his
enemies to blaspheme him: and shall I be angry with the rod? how irrational
were that? this also was it that quieted Job he does not rail, and vow revenge
upon the Caldeans and Sabeans, but eyes God as the orderer of those troubles,
and is quiet, The Lord has taken away, blessed be his name, Job 1. 21.

Object. But you will say, To turn aside the right of a man, to subvert a man
in his cause, the Lord approves not, Lam. 3. 36.

Ans. True, but though it fall not under his approving? yet it does under his
permitting will, and there is a great argument for quiet submission in that:
nay he has not only the permitting, but the ordering of all those troubles,
did we see more of an holy God, we should show less of a corrupt nature in such
trials.

7. Rem. Consider how you daily wrong God, and you will not be so easily
inflamed with revenge against others that have wronged you.

You are daily grieving and wronging God, and yet he bears, forgives, and will
not take vengeance upon you; and will you be so quick in avenging your selves
upon others? O what a sharp and terrible rebuke is that, Matthew. 18. 32, 33. O
thou wicked, and slothful servant; I forgave thee all that debt because thou
de^iredst me, should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servant,
even as I had pity upon thee? None should be filled with bowels of pity
forbearance, and mercy, to such as wrong them, as those should be that have
experienced the riches of mercy themselves: methinks the mercy of God to us
should melt our very bowels into mercy over others: it is impossible we can be
cruel to others, except we forget how kind Christ has been to us: those that
have ^ound mercy should show mercy: if kindness cannot work, methinks fear
should; If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses, Matthew. 6. 15.

8. Rem. Lastly, let the Consideration of the day of the Lord which draws
nigh, withhold your hearts from anticipating it by acts of revenge

Why are ye so quick? is not the Lord at hand, to aveng all his abused
servants? Be patient therefore my brethren unto the coming of the Lord: Behold
the husbandman waits, etc. Be ye also patient* for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh: grudg not one against another, brethren, least ye be condemned.
Behold the judge stands at the door, Iam. 5. 7, 8, 9. This text affords three
arguments against reveng. (1) The Lords near approach. (2) The example of the
husbandmans patience. (3) The danger we draw upon our selves by anticipating
Gods judgment: vengeance is mine says the Lord, he will distribute justice
more equally and impartially than you can: they that believe they have a God to
right them, will not so much wrong themselves as to avenge their own wrongs.

1. Ob. But flesh and blood is not able to bear such abuses.

Sol. If you resolve to consult flesh and blood in such cases, and do no more
but what that will enable you to do; never pretend to Religion. Christians must
do singular and supernatural things.

2. Ob. But if I pack up such abuses, I shall be reckoned a fool, and every one
will trample upon me.

Sol. (1) You may be reckoned so among fools, but God and good men will account
it your wisdom, and the excellency of your Spirits. (2) It must be a base
Spirit indeed that will trample upon a meek and forgiving Christian: and thus
learn to keep your hearts from revenge under all your provocations.

8. Season. The next season in which we are in danger of losing our hearts is,
when we meet with great crosses and provocations: then sinful passion is apt to
transport the heart, it is the fault of many good men to be of hasty and quick
spirits when provoked; though they dare not concoct anger into malice, for that
would be a note of wickedness, yet are they very incident to sudden anger which
is a sign of weakness. Beza Bez. in Vit.
in the life of Calvin Call. p. 109.
observes, that he was of a keen and hasty spirit: and he that writes the life
of great Cameron, Icon. Cameronis.
says, that his anger was soon stirred toward his near and familiar friends,
but then he would easily depose it, and acknowledge his weakness: alas, when
provocations, and trials of our patience come, we know not what Spirits we are
of. The eighth Case therefore is this.

8. Case. How the heart may be kept meek and patient under great crosses and
provocations?

There are three sorts of anger* natural, holy and sinful anger. (1) Natural
which is nothing else but the motion of the irascible appetite toward an
offensive object: an^ this in it self is no sin, they are propassions rather
than passions; the infelicities, rather than the sins of nature, as Jerome
calls them: reason (says Plutarch) is the driver, the Soul is the Chariot, and
the two horses that draw it on in all its motions, are the concupiscible and
irascible appetites; whilst these are rightly managed by reason, they are not
only lawful, but very useful to the Soul. God would not have us to be stupid
and insensate, though he would have us to be meek and patient: in Ephesians. 4. 26.
He allows the natural motion, but forbids the sinful exorbitancy. (2) Holy
anger which is a pure flame, kindled by an heavenly spark of Love to God, and
in Scripture is called zeal, which is (as one says) the dagger which love
draws in Gods quarrel. Such was Lots against the Sodomites, and that of Moses
against the Idolatrons Israelites: when Servetus condemned Zwinglius for his
harshness, his answer was, in aliis mansuetus ero, in blasphemiis in Christum,
non ita; in other cases I will be mild, but in the cause of Christ, not so.
That which the World calls moderation and mildness here, is in Gods account
stupidity and cowardliness, neither of these are that which I am now persuading
you to keep your hearts against. But (3) There is sinful passion, that is the
thing which endangers you. Now anger becomes sinful when it is either Causeless,
Matthew. 5. 22. or excessive, and that either in measure or time, exceeding the
value of the impulsive cause, be it more transient or abideing, yet it is a sin
and is matter of humiliation before God. Now the means to keep the heart from
it under provocations, are these.

1. Means. Get low and humble thoughts of your selves, and then you will have
meek Spirits, and peaceable deportments toward others.

The humble is ever the patient man, pride is the root of passion, a lofty,
will be a surly spirit: bladders blown up with wind, will not lie close
together: but prick them, and you may pack a thousand in a small room, only by
pride comes contention, Prove. 13. 10. When we over-rate our selves, then we
think we are unworthily treated by others, and that provokes: and here (by the
way) take notice of one great benefit of acquaintance with your own hearts,
even the meekning and calming of our Spirits. Christian, methinks thou should
know so much by thy self, that it is impossible any should lay thee lower, or
have baser thoughts of thee than thou have of thy self. Some render the
original of that text, Hab. 2. 5. Thus the proud man is as he that
transgresses by wine, and drunkards you know are q^arelsome: O get more
humility, and that will bring you more peace.

2. Means. Be often sweetning your spirits in communion with God, and they will
not easily be imbittered with wrath toward men.

A q^iet Conscience never produced an unquiet conversation: the peace of God
does (...) rule in the heart, as an Umpire in appeasing strifes, for so much
that word, Col. 3. 15. imports, wrath and strife are hugely opposite to the
frame and temper of a spiritual heart, because inconsistent with the delight
and contentment of that Dove-like spirit, which loves a sedate and quiet
breast. O says a Soul that feeds upon the sweet Communion of the Spirit, shall
the sp^rkles of provocations now catch in my passions, and raise such a smoke
in my Soul as will offend and drive away the comforter from me? this is so
effectual a remedy against passion, that I durst almost venture in a Christian
of an hasty nature to make long suffering a sign of Communion with God. See
thou such a Christian quiet and calm under provocations, it is very like his
soul feeds upon such sweetness in God as he is loath to leave: and on the other
side, see thou a Christian turbulent and clamorous, doubtless all is not well
within: his Spirit is like a bone out of joint, which cannot move without pain
and trouble.

3. Mea. Get due apprehensions of the evil nature and effects of sinful anger:
Ira furor brevis, anger is a short madness (says one) Ira animae febris (says
another) ang^r is the fever of the Soul: it is the interregnum and eclipse of
reason (says a third.)

The effects of it also are very sad.

(1) It grieves the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. Banishes him from that breast in
which it rages and tumultuates, God is the God of peace; the presence and
comforts of God are only enjoyed in a calm: '^is a golden note one gives upon
the forecited text. God does not usually bless with peace of Conscience, such
as make no conscience of peace. (2) It gives advantage to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.
26, 27. Satan is an angry and discontented Spirit, and finds no rest but in
restless hear^s: he lives like the Salamander in fires of contention, he
bestirs himself when the Spirits are in a commotion, s^metimes he fills the
heart with revengeful thoughts, sometimes he fills the lips, and inflames the
tongue wi^h undecent language; even a meek Moses sometimes spoke unadvisedly
with his lips. (3) It dis-tunes the Spirit for duty, upon this account the
Apostle disswades husbands and wives from jarring carriages and contentions,
that their prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. All acts of worship must be
suitable to the object of worship: but God is the God of peace, the God of love.
(4) To mention no more, it^ disparages the Christian Religion. How would Plato
and Pythagor as shame us if they were now living: Christ was as a lamb for
meekness, and does it become his followers to be like Lions? O keep your
hearts, or you will at once lose, not only your own peace, but the c^edit of
religion.

4. Mea. Consider how sweet a thing it is to a Christian to conquer his
corru^tions, and carry away the spoils of them.

He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty, and he that rules his
spirit, than he that takes a City, Prove. 16. 32. Is there any content
inventing a passion? how much more in mortifying it? when thou come in a calm
mood, or upon a deathbed to review thy life, how comfortable then will it be
to reflect upon the conquests thou have got by the fear of God over the evil
propensions of thine own heart! 'twas a memorable saying of Valentinian the
Emperor, when he came to dye: among all my Conquests (said he) there is but
one that now comforts me; and being asked what that was, he answered, I have
overcome my worst enemy, mine own naughty heart.

5. Mea. Shame your selves by setting before you those eminent patterns that
have been most excellent for meekness.

Abo^^ all, compare your spirits with the spirit of Christ, Learn of me (says
he) for I am meek and lowly, Matthew. 11. 29. Christ was meek and lowly, but I am
proud and passionate, it was the high commendation of Moses, Numb. 12. 3. Now
the man Moses was meek above all the men of the earth: and this was the man
that knew God face to face. It Is said of Calvin and Vrsin that they both were
of choleric natures, but yet had so learned the meekness of Christ, as not to
utter one word under the greatest provocation unbeseeming Religion. When I read
the pretty stories of the very Heathens, that never had the advantages we have,
how the Pythagorians, what ever fewds had been among them in the day, would
hush all, by sending to each other this message, the Sun is almost set; and
that of Plato to his Scholar, I would beat thee if I were not angry.

When I read what lenity and tenderness Lycurgus showed to an insolent fellow
that had struck out one of his eyes; I am ashamed to see how much Christians
are out shot by Heathens, who by mere moral arguments and precepts, had thus
meekned their Spirits and conquered their passions: the dim light of nature
could teach saneca to say, that anger will hurt a man more than the offense;
for there is a certain bound in the offense, but I know not how far mine anger
will carry me. It Is a shame that these men who come so far behind us in means
and advantages, should so far outstrip us in meekness and patience.

Means 6. Lastly, Avoid all irritating occasions.

He that will not hear the Clapper, must not pull the Rope: grievous words stir
up anger (says Solomon) Prove. 15. 1. Do not only pray, and resolve against it,
but get as far as you can out of the way of it: it is true Spiritual Valor to
run as fast, and as far as we can out of sins way: if you can but avoid anger
in its first rise, there is no great fear of it afterward; for it is no^ with
this sin as it is with other sins; other sins grow to their full strength by
degrees, their first motions are the weakest; but this sin is born in its full
strength, it is strongest at first withstand it then, and it falls before you.
Thus learn to keep your hear^s when provocations arise.

Season 9. The ninth Season of exerting our greatest diligence, is the
Crittical hour of temptation, wherein Satan lays close Siege to the Fort-Royal
of a Christians heart, and often surprises it for want of watchfulness: to keep
thy heart now, is no less a Mercy than a Duty; few Christians are so well
skilled in detecting the fallacies, and retorting the arguments by which Satan
uses to draw them to sin, as to come off safe in those encounters: Watch and
Pray (says our Lord) lest ye enter into temptation, Mark 14. 38. Even an
emine^t David, and a wise Solomon have smarted for their carelessness at such a
time as this. The ninth Case therefore shall be this,

Case 9. How a Christian when strongly solicited by the Devil to sin, may keep
his heart from yielding to the temptation?

Now there are six special Arguments by which Satan subtly insinuates and
winds in the temptation; in all which I shall offer thee some help for the
keeping of thy heart, and the first is this,

Arg. 1. The first Argument is drawn from the pleasure of sin: O (says Satan)
here is pleasure to be enjoyed; the temptation comes with a smiling
countenance, and charming Voice: What, art thou so phlegmatic and dull a soul,
as not to feel the powerful charms of pleasure? who can withold himself from
such delights?

Now thine heart may be kept from the danger of this temptation, by retorting
this Argument of pleasure upon the Tempter; which is done two ways.

1. Thou tellest me Satan that sin is pleasant; be it so: but are the gripes of
Conscience, and the flames of Hell so too? Is it pleasant to feel the wounds
and throbs of Conscience? if so, Why did Peter weep so bitterly, Matthew. 26. 75.
Why did David cry out of broken bones, Psalm. 51. I hear what thou say of the
pleasure of sin, and I have read what David has said of the terrible effects
of sin in his Psalm, to bring to remembrance, Psalm. 38. verse 2. Thine Arrows
stick fast in me, and thy Hand presses me sore: ver. 3. There is no soundness
in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones
because of my sin: verse 4. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head as an
heavy burden; they are too heavy for me: verse 5. My wounds stink and are
corrupt, because of my foolishness: verse 6. I am troubled, I am bowed down
greatly, I go mourning all the day long: verse 7. My loins are filled with a
loathsome Disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh: Verse 8. I am feeble
and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart.

Here I see the true face of sin, if I yield to thy temptation, I must either
feel these pangs of Conscience, or the flames of Hell.

2. What talkest thou of the pleasure of sin, when by experience I know there
is more true pleasure in the mortification, than can be in the commission of
sin. O how sweet is it to please God, to obey Conscience, to preserve inward
Peace, to be able to say, in this trial I have disc^vered the sincerity of my
heart; now I know I fear the Lord, now I see that I truly hate sin. Has ^in
any such delight as this? this will choke that temptation.

Arg. 2. The second Argument is drawn from the Secresy of sin: O (says Satan,
this sin will never disgrace thee ab^oad, none shall know it.

This Argument may be retorted, and the heart secured thus: Thou say, none
shall know it; but Satan, can thou find a place void of the Divine Presence
for me to sin in? Thus Job secured his heart from this temptation, Job 31. 4.
Does he not see my ways, and count all my steps? therefore he makes a Covenant
with his eyes, verse 1. After the same manner Solomon ^eaches us to retort this
temptation, Prove. 5. 20. 21. And why my Son will thou be ravished with a
strange Woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the ways of man are
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. What if I hide it
from the eyes o^ all the world for the present, I cannot hide it from God; and
the time is at hand, when all the world shall know it too; for the Word assures
me, Luke 8. 17. That what is done now in secret, shall be proclaimed as upon
the house top. Besides, is not my Conscience as a thousand witnesses? Do I owe
no reverence to my self? could the Heathen man say, turpe quid assurus, te sine
test time, when thou art tempted to commit sin, fear thy self without any
other witness: and shall not I be afraid to sin before mine own Conscience,
which always has a reproof in its mouth, or a pen in its hand, to record my
most secret actions?

Arg. 3. The third Argument by which Satan tempts to sin, is taken from the
gain and profit arising out of it: Why so nice and scrupulous? it is but stretch
Conscience a little, and thou may make thy self; Now is thy opportunity.

The heart may be kept from falling into this dangerous snare, by retorting the
temptation thus: But what profit will it be if a man should gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? Mat. 16. 26. O my soul, my precious soul! shall I hazard thee for all the
good that is in this world? There is an immortal spirit dwelling in this
fleshly Tabernacle, of more v^lue than all earthly things, which must live to
all eternity, when this world shall lie in white ashes: A soul for which Jesus
Christ shed his precious and invaluable blood: I was sent into this world to
provide for this soul; indeed God has also committed to me the care of my
body, but (as one happily expresses it) with this difference; a Master commits
two things to a Servant, Gospel Glass p. 3.
the Child, and the Child's clothes: will the Master thank the Servant, if he
plead, I have kept the clothes, but I have neglected the life of the Chil^.

Arg. 4. The fourth Argument is drawn from the smalness of the sin; It Is but a
little one, a small matter, a trifle; who would stand upon such niceties?

This Argument may be retorted three ways.

1. But is the Majesty of Heaven a little one too? If I commit this sin, I must
offend and wrong a great God, Isa. 40. 15, 16, 17, 22.

2. Is there any little Hell to torment little sinners in? Are not the least
sinners there filled with the fullness of wrath? O there is great wrath
treasured up for such as the world counts little sinners.

3. The less the sin, the less the inducement to commit it: What, shall I break
with God for a trifle? destroy my peace, wound my Conscience, grieve the
Spirit, and all this for nothing? Oh what madness is this?

Arg. 5. A fifth Argument is drawn from the Grace of God, and hopes of pardon:
Come, God will pass by this as an infirmity, he will not be extreme to mark it.

But stay my heart,

1. Where do I find a promise of mercy to presumptuous sinners? indeed for
involuntary surprisals, unavoidable and lamented infirmities, there is a pardon
of course, but where is the promise to a daring sinner, that sins upon a
presumption of pardon? Pause a while my soul upon that Scripture, Numb. 15. 27,
30. And if a Soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a She-Goat, of the
first year for a Sin-offering, etc. But the Soul that does ought
presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off
from among his people.

2. If God be a God of so much mercy, how can I abuse so good a G^d? Shall I
take so glorious an attribute as the mercy of God is, and abuse it unto sin?
shall I wrong him because he is good? or should not rather the goodness of God
lead me to repentance, Romans 2. 4. There is mercy with thee, that thou may be
feared, Psalm. 130. 4.

Arg. 6. Lastly, Sometimes Satan incourages to sin from the examples of good
and holy men, thus, and thus they have ^^nned, and been restored, therefore
this may consist with grace; and thou be saved nevertheless. The danger of this
temptation is avoided, and the heart secured; by retorting the argument these
three ways.

1. Though good men may commit the same sin materially, which I am tempted to,
yet did ever any good man venture to sin, upon such a ground and encouragement
as this?

2. Did God record these examples for my imi^ation, or for my warning? are they
not set up as ^ea marks, that I might avoid the rocks upon which they split? 1
Cor. 10. 6. now these were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after
evil things, as they also lusted.

3. Am I willing to feel what they felt for sin? O I dare not follow them in
the ways of sin! quia me vestigia terrent* Least God plunge me into the deeps
of horror, into which he cast them.

Thus learn to keep your hearts in the hour of temptation to sin.

10. Season. The tenth special season to keep the heart with all diligence, is
the time of spiritual darkness and doubting when it is with the Soul, as it was
with Paul in his dangerous voyage, neither sun, nor moon, nor star appears for
many days: when by reason of the hidings of Gods face, the prevalency of
corruption, and the inevidence of grace; the Soul is even ready to give up all
its hopes and comforts for lost; to draw sad and desperate conclusions upon it
self; to call its former comforts vain delusions; its grace hypocrisy. When
the serene and clear Heavens are overcast with dark clouds, yea filled with
thunders; and horrible tempests; when the poor pensive Soul sits down and weeps
forth this sad lamentation, my hope is perished from the Lord! now to keep the
heart from sinking in such a day as this, to enable it to maintain its own
sincerity, is a matter of great difficulty. The tenth Case then will be this.

Case 10. How the people of God in dark and doubting seasons, may keep their
hearts from entertaining such sad conclusions about their estates, as destroy
their peace, and unfit them for their Duty.

There are two general heads, to which the grounds of doubting our sincerity
may be reduced. (1) Gods carriage toward the Soul, either in the time of some
extraordinary affliction, or of some long and sad desertion. Or, (2) The souls
carriage toward God: And here it usually argues against the truth of its own
graces, either (1) From its relapses into the same sins, from which it has
formerly risen, with shame and sorrow. Or, (2) From the sensible declining of
its affections from God. Or, (3) From the excess of the affections toward
creature comforts and enjoyments. Or, (4) From its enlargements in public, and
often straitnings in private Duties. Or, (5) From some horrid injections of
Satan, with which the soul is greatly perplexed. Or, Lastly, From Gods silence,
and seeming denial of its long depending Suits and Prayers.

These are the common grounds of those sad conclusions: Now in order to the
establishment and support of the heart in this condition it will be necessary.

1. That you be acquainted with some general Truths, which have a tendency to
the settlement of a trembling and doubting Soul.

2. That you be rightly instructed about the forementioned Particulars, which
are the grounds of your doubting.

The general truths requisite for poor doubting souls to be acquainted with,
are these:

1. That every working and appearance of hypocrisy does not presently prove
the person in whom it is to be an hypocrite. You must carefully distinguish
between the presence and predominancy of hypocrisy: there are remains of
deceitfulness in the best hearts. David and Peter had sad experience of it, yet
the standing frame and general bent of the heart being upright; it did not
denominate them hypocrites.

2. That we ought as well to hear what can be said for us, as against us: It is
the sin of upright hearts sometimes to use an over rigid, and merciless
severity against themselves: they do not indifferently consider the case of
their own souls: it is in this case, as Solomon speaks in another, Prove. 13. 7.
There is that makes himself rich, and yet has nothing; and there is that
makes himself poor, and yet has great riches. It Is the damning sin of the
self flattering hypocrite, to make his condition better then it is: and it is
the sin and folly of some upright ones to make their condition worse then
indeed it is. Why should you be such enemies to your own peace? to read over
the evidences of Gods love to your Souls, as a man does a book which he intends
to confute? why do you study to find evasions, to turn off those comforts
which are due to you? it is said of Joseph that he was minded to put away his
espoused Mary, not knowing that that holy thing which was conceived in her, was
by the holy ghost: and this may be your case. A third truth is this.

3. That many a Saint has charged and condemned himself for that, which God
will never charge him with, nor condemn him for. Why have thou hardened our
heart from thy fear (says the Church, Isai. 63. 17. and yet the verse before
manifests, that their hearts were not so hardened: godly Bradford wrote himself
an hypocrite, a painted sepulcher; yet doubtless God acquitted him of that
charge.

4. Every thing which is a ground of grief to the people of God, is not a
sufficient ground of questioning their sincerity. There are many more things to
trouble you then there are to stumble you: if upon every slip and failing
through infirmity, you should question all that ever was wrought upon you your
life must be made up of doubtings and fears: you can never attain a settled
peace, nor live that life of praise and thankfulness, the gospel calls for.

5. The Soul is not at all times fit to pass judgment upon its own condition:
To be sure in the dark day of desertion, when the Soul is benighted; and in the
stormy day of temptation, when the Soul is in a hurry; it is utterly unfit to
judge its estate: examine your hearts upon your beds, and be still, Psalm. 4.
This is rather a season for watching and resisting, then for judging, and
determining.

6. That every breach of peace with God, is not a breach of Covenant with God:
The wife has many weaknesses and failings, often grieves and displeases her
husband; yet in the main is faithful, and truly loves him: these failings may
cause him to alter his carriage, but not to withdraw his love, or deny his
relation. Return O backsliding Israel for I am married unto you.

7. Lastly, what ever our sin, or trouble be, it should rather drive us to God,
then from God. Pardon my sin for it is great, Psalm. 25. 11. Suppose it be true,
that thou have ^o, and so sinned, that thou art thus long and sadly deserted;
yet it is a false inference, that therefore thou should be discouraged, as if
there were no help for thee in thy God. When you have well digested these seven
establishing truths, if still the doubt remain; then consider, what may be
replied to the particular grounds of those doubts. As,

1. You doubt, and are ready to conclude the Lord has no regard or love for
your Souls, because of some extraordinary affliction which is come upon you:
but I would not have thy Soul so to conclude till thou be able satisfactorily
to answer those three questions.

1. Quest. If great troubles and afflictions be marks of Gods hatred, why
should not impunity and constant prosperity be tokens of his love? for
contrariorum contraria est ratio and consequentia: of contrary things, there is
a contrary reason and consequence: but is this so indeed? or says not the
scripture quite otherwise? Prove. 1. 32. The prosperity of fools destroy them.
So Psalm. 73. ^.

2. Quest. Dare I draw the same conclusion upon all others that have been as
much, yea more afflicted then my self? if this argument conclude against thee,
then so it does against every one in thy condition; yea, the greater the
affliction of any Child of God has been, the more strongly the argument still
concludes: and then woe to David, Job, Heman, Paul, and all that have been
afflicted as they were.

3. Quest. Had God exempted you only from those troubles, which all other his
people ^eel, would not that have been a greater ground of doubting to you then
this? especially since the scripture says, Heb. 12. 8. If ye be without
chastnings whereof all are partakers, then* are ye bastards; and not sons.

O how is our Father put to it by froward Children! if he afflicts, then one
cries he loves me not: if he exempt from affliction, others question his love
upon that ground. Surely you have other work to do under the rod then thi^.

2. Or do you rashly infer the Lord has no love for you, because he hides his
face from you, that your condition is miserable because dark and uncomfortable,
before you draw such rash conclusions, see what answer you can give to these 4.
following queries.

1. Quer. If any action of God toward his people will bear a favorable, as
well as an harsh and severe construction, why should not his people interpret
it in the best sense? And is not this such? may he not have a design of love as
well as of hatred in this dispensation? may he not depart for a season, and not
for ever, yea, that he might not depart for ever? you are not the first that
have mistaken Gods ends in desertion, Isai. 49. 14. Sion said the Lord has
forsaken me, my God has forgotten me: was it so indeed? nothing less v. 15.
can a mother forget, etc.

2. Q^er. Do you find the marks of an absolute total and final desertion upon
your own Spirits, that you are so apt to conclude yours to be such? Do you find
your heart inclined to forsake God? have you lost your conscientious tenderness
in point of sin? if so, Sad characters appear upon you indeed: but if in this
dark hour you are as tender of sin as ever, as much resolved to cleave to God
as ever; I cannot, I will not forsake God, let him do what he will with me, oh
no I cannot, If your hearts work thus, it can be but a partial, limited and
temporary desertion; by this he still keeps his interest in your hearts, a sure
sign he will return and visit you again.

3. Quer. Is sense and feeling a competent judge of Gods actions and designs.
Or may a man safely rely upon its testimony after so many discoveries of the
fallibility of it? is this a sound argument? if God had any love for my Soul,
if it were not quite gone, I should feel it now as well as in former times; but
I cannot feel it, therefore its quite gone. Do not you know the Sun still keeps
on his course in the Heavens even in full and closs weather, when you cannot
see it? and may it not be so with the love of God? read Isai. 50. 10. may I not
as well conclude in winter when the flowers have hid their beautiful heads
under ground, they are quite dead and gone, because I cannot find them in
December, where I saw them in May?

4. Quer. Think you the Lord cares not to break his childrens hearts, and his
own promise too? has he no more regard to either? if he return no more, these
must be the consequents, Isai. 57. 16, 17. Heb. 13. 5.

Well then, from Gods carriage toward you either in ^ffliction or desertion,
no such discouraging, heart sinking conclusions can be inferred. Next let us
see whether they may not be inferred from our carriage toward God: and here
the principal grounds of doubting are such as these.

1. I have fallen again into the same sin from which I have formerly risen with
repentance and resolution, therefore my sinning is customary sinning, a spot
that is not the spot of Gods children: hence the upright Soul trembles, upon
this it is ready to affirm that all its former humiliations for, and oppositions
unto sin, were but acts of hypocrisy. But stay poor trembling heart.

1. Quer. If this be so, how comes it to pass that Christ put such a favorable
construction upon the Disciples sleeping the third time, when he had as often
reproved them for it? Ma^^h. 26. 40, 41. And how is it that we find in
Scripture so many promises made not only to the first sins, but also to the
backslidings of Gods people, Ier. 3. 22. Hose. 14. 4.

2. Quer. Is not your repentance and care renewed, as often as your guilt is
renewed? Yea the oftener you sin the more you are troubled? it is not so in
customary sinning, the rise whereof Bernard excellently discovers Lib. de
Cons^. (1) (says he) when a man p. 1109. accustomed to good sins
grieviously, it seems importable, yea he seems to descend alive into hell. (2)
In process of time it seems not importable, but heavy; and betwixt importable
and heavy there is no small descent. (3) Next it becomes light, his conscience
smites but faintly, and he feels not the stripes of it. (4) Then there is not
only a total insensibleness of it, but that which was bitter and displeasing,
is now become sweet and pleasing in some degree. (5) Then it is turned into
custom, and not only pleases, but daily pleases. Lastly custom is turned into
nature, he cannot be pulled away from it; but defends and pleads for it: this
is customary sinning this is the way of the wicked; but the quite contrary is
our condition.

3. Quer. Are you sure from Scripture grounds that a good man may* not relapse
again and again into the same sin? It Is true, as for gross sins, they do not
use to relapse into them. David committed adultery no more, Paul persecuted the
Church no more, Peter denied Christ no more, but I speak of ordinary
infirmities: Jobs friends were good men, yet (says he) Chap. 19. 3. These ten
times have ye reproached me. So then no such conclusions follow from this first
ground of doubting.

2. The second ground is, the declining and withering of our affections to
spiritual things, O says the upright Soul, if ever I had been planted a right
seed, I should have been as a green olive tree in the house of my God: but my
branches wither, therefore my root is naught. But stay,

1. Q^er. May you not be mistaken about the decay of grace, and fading of your
affections? What if they be not so quick and ravishing as at first? may not
that be recompensed in the spirituality and solidity of them ^ow? 1 Phil. 9. I
pray God your love may abound more and more in all judgment: it may be more
solid, though not so ferverous: or do you not mistake by looking forward to
what you would be, rather then backward to what once you were? it is a good note
of Ames: we discern the growth of grace, as the growth of plants, which we
perceive rather crevisse quam crescere, to have grown, then to grow.

(2. Quer.) But grant it be so indeed as you affirm, must it needs follow, that
the root of the matter is not in you? David's last ways are distinguished from
his first, 2 Chr. 17. 3. and yet both first and last, a holy man. The Church of
Ephesus is charged by Christ for leaving her first love; and yet a golden
Candlestick, many precious Saints in that Church, Rev. 2. 2, 3, 4.

3. A third ground of these sad conclusions is, the excess of our affections to
some creature enjoyments. I fear I love the creature more than God, and if so,
my love is but hypocritical. I sometimes feel stronger, and more sensible
motions of my heart to some earthly comforts, then I do to heavenly objects:
therefore my Soul is not upright in me. But stay Soul,

(1. Quer.) May not a man love God more solidly and strongly, then the
Creature, and yet his affections to the creatures be sometimes moved more
violently and sensibly then toward God? as rooted malice argues a stronger
hatred, then a sudden, though more violent passion; so we must measure our
love, not by a violent motion of it, now and then, but by the depth of the
root, and constancy of its actings: because David was so passionately moved for
Absalom, ^oa^ concludes that if he had lived, and all the people dyed; it would
have pleased him well 2 Samuel 19. 7. but that was argued more like a Soldier
then a Logician.

(2. Quer.) If you indeed love the creature for its self, if you make it your
end* and religion but a means, then the conclusion is rightly drawn upon you.
But if you love the creature in reference to God, and see nothing in it
separated from him, though sometimes your affections offend in the excess: this
is consistent with sincere love to God. To love the creature inordinately (i.
e.) to put it in Gods room, and make it a man's end; this is the love of a
carnal heart: to love it immoderately, that is, to let out more affection to it
then we ought, is sometimes the sin of the best hearts.

(3. Quer.) Have not many Souls feared as you do, that when Christ and
creatures should stand as competitors in some eminent trial they should forsake
Christ rather then the creature, and yet when brought to that Dilemma have been
able to cast all the world at their heels for Christ? Many of the Martyrs had
such fears, and thus they were satisfied: the prevalency of love is best seen
at parting: there may be more love to Christ in thy Soul then thou art now
aware of; and if God bring thee to such a pinch thou may see it.

4. A fourth ground of these sad conclusions is from hence, that we find our
hearts sometimes more straightened in private, then in public duties. Oh if my
Soul were sincere, its actings in duty would be uniform. I fear I am but a
Pharisee upon this ground: it is sad indeed we should at any time find our
hearts straightened in private. But,

1. Quer. Do not all thine inlargements in duty whether public, or private
depend upon the Spirit, who is the Lord of influences, and according as he
gives out, or holds back those influences, so art thou enlarged or straightened?
And what if sometimes he please to give that in a public, which he withholds
in a private duty, as long as thy Soul is satisfied in neither without
Communion with God, and the straitness of thy heart is indeed its burden; does
that argue thee to be an hypocrite?

(2. Quer.) Do thou not make conscience of private duties, and set thy self
as before the Lord in them? Indeed, if thou live in the constant neglect, or
careless performance of them, if thou art curious about public, and careless
about private duties, that would be a sad sign: but when you have
conscientiously performed and often met with God in them, it will not follow
you are insincere, because that communion is sometimes interrupted. Besides.

(3. Quer.) May there not be something at sometimes in a public, which is
wanting in a private duty to raise and advantage thine affections. God may
sometimes make use of the melting affections of them with whom thou hear or
prayest, as petty instruments to move thy affections; this advantage is wanting
in private, therefore from hence (the case so standing) no such inferrence can
be drawn.

5. Another ground is from those horrid injections of Satan, with which the
Soul is greatly perplexed; by these I may see what an heart I have: can grace
be where these are?

Yes, grace may be where such thoughts are, though not where they are lodged
and consented to: do thou cry out under the burden, enter thy protest in
Heaven against them, strive to keep up holy and reverend thoughts of God? then
it is a rape, not a voluntary prostitution.

6. The last ground of these sad conclusions is the Lords long silence, and
seeming denial of our long depending suits and prayers. O if God had any regard
to my Soul, he would have heard my cries before now! but I have no answer from
him, therefore no interest in him. But stay doubting Soul,

(1. Quer.) Have not many Saints stumbled upon this stone before thee? Psalm.
31. 22. I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes: nevertheless
thou heardest the voice of my supplication. So the Church Lam. 3. 44. Thou
coverest thy self with a cloud, that our prayers should not pass through. Jonah
2. 4. Then said I, I am cast out of thy sight, and may not you be mistaken in
this mat^er as well as they?

2. Quer. Though Gods abhorring, and final rejecting prayer be an argument of
his abhorring the person that prays; yet dare we conclude so from a mere
suspension of the answer? God may bear long with his own elect, that cry unto
him day and night, Luke 18. 7.

3. Quer. Can you deny but that there are some signs appearing in your Souls,
even whilst God suspends his answer that argue your prayers are not rejected
by him? as (1) Though no answer come, yet you are still resolved to wait: you
dare not say as that profane wretch did, 2 Kings 6. 33. This evil is of the
Lord, why should I wait for him any longer? (2) You can clear and justify God
still, and lay the reason and cause of his silence upon your selves. So did
David, Psalm. 22. 2, 3. O my God, I cry in the day time, and thou hear not;
and in the night, and am not silent, but thou art holy, etc. (3) The suspension
of Gods answer makes you inquisitive into your own hearts, what evils are there
that obstruct your prayers? So the Church, Lam. 3. 8. He shuts out my
prayer: and how does this work? you may see, v. 40. Let us search and try our
ways: well then, neither from hence may you conclude that God has no love for
your Souls.

And thus I have shown you, how to keep your hearts in a dark and doubting
season from those desperate conclusions of unbelief. God forbid any false heart
should encourage it self from these things, Caution.
it is our unhappiness that when we give Saints and sinners their proper
portions, that each of them are so prone to take up the others part.

11. Season. The eleventh special season calling for this diligence to keep our
hearts is, when sufferings for Religion come to an height; then look to your
hearts: Matthew. 24. 8, 9, 10. All these are the beginning of sorrows, and they
shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated
of all nations for my names sake: and THEN shall many be offended. When
sufferings for religion grow hot, then blessed is he that is not offended in
Christ, troubles are then at an height. (1) When a man's nearest friends and
relations forsake and leave him, Micah 7. 5, 6. 2 Timothy 4. 16. When a man is
engaged alone (2) When it comes to resisting to blood, Heb. 12. 4.(3) When
temptations are presented to us in our sufferings, Heb. 11. 37.(4) When eminent
persons for profession turn aside, and desert the cause of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.
19. (5) When God hides his face in a suffering hour, Ier. 17. 17. (6) When
Satan falls upon us with strong temptations to question the grounds of our
sufferings, or the Souls interest in Christ: Now it is heard to keep the heart
from turning back, and the steps from declining Gods ways. The eleventh
question then shall be this.

11. Case. How the heart may be kept from relapsing under the greatest
sufferings for religion? If the bitterness of sufferings at any time cause thy
Soul to distaste the way of God and take up thoughts of forsaking it, stay
thine heart under that temptation by propounding these 8. questions solemnly to
it.

1. Quest. What reproach and dishonor shall I pour upon Christ and religion by
deserting him at such a time as this? This will proclaim to all the world that
how much soever I have boasted of the promises, yet when it comes to the trial,
I dare hazard nothing upon the credit of them: and how will this open the
mouths of Christ's enemies to blaspheme? O better I had never been born then
that worthy name should be blasphemed through me! shall I furnish the triumphs
of the uncircumcised? shall I make mirth in Hell? O if I did but value the name
of Christ as much as many a wicked man values his own name! I would never
endure to see it exposed to such contempt will proud dust and ashes venture
death, yea Hell, rather then a blot upon their name? and shall I venture
nothing to salve the honor and reputation of Christ?

2. Quest. Dare I violate my conscience to save my flesh? who shall comfort me
when conscience wounds me? What comfort is there in life, liberty, or friends,
when peace is taken away from the inner man? when Constantius threatened to cut
off Samosatenus his right hand if he would not subscribe somewhat that was
against his conscience, he held up both his hands to the messenger that was
sent, saying, he shall cut off both rather then I will do it: farewell all
peace, joy and comfort, from that day forward; ^ad Zimri peace that slew his
master? said Iezebel, so say I here, had Judas peace? had Spira peace? and
shall you have peace if you tread in their steps? O consider what you do!

3. Quest. Is not the public interest of Christ and religion infinitely more,
then any private interest of my own? It Is a famous passage that of Terentius
Captain to Adrian the Emperor, he presented a petition to Adrian that the
Christians might have a temple by themselves to worship God apart from the
Arrians: the Emperor tore his petition and threw it away, bidding him to ask
somewhat for himself, and it should be granted: but he modestly gathered up the
pieces of his petition again and told him, if he could not be heard in Gods
ca^se, he would never ask any thing for himself: Yea even Tully, though an
Heathen could say, ne immortalitatem quidem contra rem publicam: he would not
accept even of immortality it self against the Commonwealth. O if we had more
public, we should not have such cowardly spirits.

4. Qu. Did Jesus Christ serve me so? when for my sake he exposed himself to
far greater sufferings than can be before me? His sufferings were great indeed,
he suffered from all hands, in all his offices in every member, not only in his
body, bu^ in his Soul; yea the suff^rings of his Soul, were the very Soul of
his sufferings: witness the bloody sweat in the garden, witness the heart
melting and heaven rending outcry upon the cr^ss, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and yet he flinched not, he endured the cross, despising the
shame. Alas! what are my sufferings compared with Christ's? he has drunk up all
that vinegar and gall that would make my suffe^ings bitter. When one of the
Martyrs was asked, why he was so merry at his death? Oh said he! it is because
the Soul of Christ was so heavy at his death: did Christ bear such a burden for
me, with unbroken patience, and constancy? and shall I shrink back for
momentary and light affictions for him?

5. Qu. Is not eternal life worth the suffering of a moments pain? If I suffer
with him, I shall reign with him. O how will men venture life and limb for a
fading crown swim through seas of blood to a throne? and will I venture
nothing? suffer nothing for the Crown of Glory that fad^th not away? my dog
will follow my horses heels from morning to night, take many a weary step
through m^re and dirt, rather then leave me, though at night all he gets by it
is but bones and blows. If my Soul had any true greatness, any sparks of
generosity in it, how would it despise the sufferings of ^he way, for the glory
of the end! how would it break down all difficulties before it, whil^st by an
eye of faith it sees the forerunner who is already entered standing as it were
upon the walls of Heaven, with the Crown in his hand, saying, he that
overcomes shall inherit all things: come on then, my Soul come on! there is
eternal life laid up for them that by patient continuance in well doing, seek
for glory, honor and immortality. Romans 2. 7.

6. Qu. Can I so easily cast off the socie^y and company of the Saints, and
give the right hand of fellowship to the wicked? How can I part with such
lovely companions as these have been? how often have I been benefited by their
counsels? Ezra ^0. 3. how often refreshed, warmed, and quickened by their
company? Eccles. 4. 10, 11. How often have I fasted and prayed with them? what
sweet counsel have I taken with them? and gone to the house of God in company:
and shall I now shake hands with them and say, farewell all ye Saints for ever,
I shall never be among you more, come drunkards, swearers, ^^asphemers,
persecutors, you shall be my everlasting companions. O rather, let my body and
Soul be rent a sunder, then that ever I should say thus to the excellent of the
earth in whom is all my delight,

Quest. 7. Have I seriously considered the terrible Scripture Comminations
against back-sliders? O my heart! dare thou turn back upon the very points of
such threatenings as these? Ier. 17, 5, 6. Thus says the Lord, cursed be the
man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm; and whose heart departs
from the Lord, for he shall be like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see
when good comes; ( i. e.) the curse of God shall wither him root and branch:
And Heb. 14. 26, 27. If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour the
adversaries: And again, verse 38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him: as if he should say, take him World, take him Devil for your
own, I have no delight in him. O who dare draw back, when God has hedged up
the way with such terrible threats as these!

Quest. 8. Can I look Christ in the face at the Day of Judgment, if I desert
him now?

He that is ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
Generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory
of his Father, with the holy Angels, Mark 8. 38. Yet a little while, and you
shall see the sign of the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with Power
and great Glory: the last Trump shall sound, the dead, both small and great,
even all that sleep in the dust shall awake, and come before that great white
Throne, on which Christ shall sit in that day. And now do but imagine thou
saw the trembling knees, and quivering lips of guilty sinners; imagine thou
heardest the dreadful sentence of the Judge upon them, Go ye cursed, etc. and
then a cry, the weeping, wailing, and wringing of hands, that there shall be:
would thou desert Christ now to protract a poor, miserable life on earth? If
the word of God be true, if the sayings o^ Christ be (...) and ^aithful, this
shall be the portion of the Aposta^e: It Is an easy thing to stop the mouth of
Conscience now, but will it be eas^^ to stop the mouth of the Judge then? Thus
keep thy heart, that it depart not from the living God.

Seas. 12. The twelfth season of looking diligently to our hearts, and keeping
them with greatest care, is the time of sickness: When a Child of God d^aws
^nigh to eternity; when there are but a few sands more in the upper part of his
Glass to run down; Now Satan busily bestit^s himself: of him it may be said, as
of the natural Serpent, nunquaem nisi moriens producitur in longum; he is never
seen at his full length till dying: and now his great design, since he cannot
win the soul from God; is to discourage, and make it unwilling to go to God:
though the gracious soul with Jacob should then rouse up its self upon a dying
bed, and rejoice that the marriage day of the Lamb is now almost come; though
it should then say, with dying Austen: Vivere renuo ut Christovivam, I despise
life to be with Christ. Or as dying Milius, when one asked him whether he were
willing to dye? O said he! I^^ius est nolle mori qui nolit ire ad Christum; let
him be unwilling to dye, who is unwilling to go to Christ. But O! what
shrinking from death? What loathness to depart? may sometimes (indeed too
frequently) be observed in the people of God: How loath are some of them to
take Death by the cold hand? If such a liberty were indulged to us, not to be
dissolved till we dissolve our selves; when should we say with S. Paul, I
desire to be dissolved? Well then, the last Case shall be this:

Case 12. How the people of God in times of sickness may get their hearts loose
from all earthly engagements, and persuade them into a willingness to dye.

And there are seven arguments which I shall urge upon the people of God at
such a time as this to make them cheerfully entertain the messengers of death,
and dye as well as live like Saints; and the first is this.

1. Argu. First the harmlesness of death to the people of God. T^ough it keep
its dart, it has lost its sting: a Saint (to allude to that, Isai. 11. 8.) May
play upon the hole of this aspe, and put his hand into the Cockatrices den.
Death is the Cockatrice, or Aspe; the grave is his hole or den: a Saint need
not fear to put his hand boldly into it: it has left and lost its sting in the
sides of Christ; 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death! where is thy sting? why art thou
afraid? O Saint! that this sickness may be thy death, as long as thou know
that the death of Christ is the death of death? indeed, if thou did dye in
thy sins as Ioh. 8. 21. If death as a King did reign over thee, Romans 5. 14. if
it could ^eed upon thee, as the Lion does upon the prey he has taken, as Psalm.
49. 14. If hell followed the pale horse as it is, Rev. 6. 8. Then thou might
well startle and shrink back from it; but when God has put away thy sins from
thee, as far as the East is from the West, Psalm. 103. 12. As long as there is
no other evil left in death, for thee to encounter with; but bodily pain: as
long as the Scriptures represent it to thee under such harmless and easy
notions, as the putting off thy clothes, 2 Cor. 5. 2. And lying down to sleep
upon thy bed, Isai. 57. 2. Why should thou be afraid? there is as much
difference betwixt death to the people of God, and others; as betwixt the
Unicorns horn when it is upon the head of that fierce beast, and when it is in
the Apothecaries shops; where it is made salubrious and medicinal.

2. Arg. Thy heart may he kept from shrinking back at such a time* as this, by
considering the necessity of death; in order to the full fruition of God.

Whether thou art willing to dye or no I assure thee, there is no other way to
obtain the full satisfaction of thy Soul; and complete its happiness: till the
hand of death do thee the kind offi^e to draw aside the curtain of flesh, thy
Soul cannot see God: this animal life stan^s betwixt him and thee, 2 Cor. 5. 6.
Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. Thy body must
be refined and cast into a new mould, else that new wine of heavenly glory
would break it. Paul in his highest rapture, 2 Cor. 12. 4. when he heard things
unutterable, was then but as a stander by, a looker on; not admitted into the
company, as one of them; but as the Angels are in our assemblies, so was Paul
in that glorious assembly above and no otherwise; and yet even for this he must
as it were be taken out of the body, uncloathed for a little time; to have a
glimpse of that glory, and then put on his clothes again. O then! Who would
not be willing to dye for a full sight and enjoyment of God? Methinks, thy soul
should look and sigh like a Prisoner through the Grates of this Mortality; O
that I had wings like a Dove, then would I fly away, and be at rest: Most men
need patience to dye, but a Saint that understands what death admits him to,
should rather need patience to live; methinks, he should often look out, and
listen on a deathbed for his Lords coming; and when he receives the news of
his approaching change, should say; The voice of my Beloved, behold he comes
leaping over the Mountains, skipping over the Hills, Cant. 2. 8.

Arg. 3. Another Argument persuading to this willingness is, the immediate
succession of a more excellent and glorious life.

It Is but wink, and you shall see God: your happiness shall not be deferred
till the Resurrection; but as soon as the body is dead, the gracious soul is
swallowed up in Life, Romans 8. 10, 11. When once you have loosed from this
shore, in a few moments, your souls will be wafted over upon the wings of
Angels, to the other shore of a glorious eternity. Phil. 1. 23. I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ: Did the Soul and body dye together as Beryllus
taught? or did they sleep till the resurrection as others have groundlessly
fancied? it had been a madness for Paul to desire a dissolution for the
enjoyment of Christ. For if this were so, he enjoyed more of Christ whilst his
Soul dwelt in its fl^shly Tabernacle, then he should out of it.

There are but two ways of the Souls living known in Scripture, viz. the life
of faith, and the life of vision, 1 Cor. 5. 5. those two divide all time both
present and future betwixt them, 1 Cor, 13. 12. If when faith fails, Sight
should not immediately succeed, what should become of the unbodied Soul? but
blessed be God, this great, heart-establishing truth is evidently revealed in
Scripture, Luke 23. 43. ^ou have Christ's promise John 14. 3. I will come and
receive you to my self. O what a change will a few moments make upon your
condition? rouse up dying Saint, when thy Soul is come out a little farther;
when it shall stand like Abraham in its tent door, the Angels of God shall soon
be with it: the Souls of the elect are as it were put out to the Angels to
nurse, and when they dye, these Angels carry them home again to their fathers
house: if an Angel were caused to fly swiftly to bring a Saint the answer of
his prayer, Dan. 9. 21. How much more will the Angels come post from Heaven to
receive and transfer the praying Soul it self?

4. Arg. Farther, It may much conduce to thy willingness to dye, to consider;
that by death God often times hides his people out of the way of all temptations
and troubles upon earth. Rev. 14. 13. Write, from henceforth blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord. It Is Gods usual way, when some extraordinary
calamities are coming upon the world, to set his people out of harms way before
hand, Isai. 57. 1. Merciful men are taken away from the evil to come. So Mich.
7. 1, 2. When such an evil time comes as is there described: That they all lie
in wait for blood, and every man hunts his brother with a net: before that, God
by an act of favor houses his people before hand, do thou know what evil may
be in the earth, which thou art so loath to leave? thy God removes thee for thy
great advantage, thou art disbanded by death, and called off the field; other
poor Saints must stand to it, and endure a great fight of afflictions.

It Is observed that Methusala dyed the very year before the flood, Augustine a
little before the sacking of Hippo. Paereus just before the taking of
Heidelberg: Luther observes that all the Apostles dyed before the destruction
of Jerusalem: and Luther himself before the wars brake out in Germany: it may
be the Lord sees thy tender heart cannot endure to see the misery, or bear the
temptations that are coming, and therefore will now gather thee to thy (...) in
peace: and yet will thou cry, O spare me a little longer?

5. Arg. If yet thy heart hang back, consider the great advantage you will have
by death, above all that ever you enjoyed on earth. And that (1) As to your
communion with God. (2) As to your communion with Saints.

1. For your communion with God, the time of perfecting that is now come; thy
Soul shall shortly stand before the face of God, and have the immediate
emanations and beamings forth of his glory upon it, here thy Soul is remote
from God, the beams of his glory strike it but obliquely and feebly, but
shortly it will be under the line; and there the sun shall stand still as it
did in Gibeon, there shall be no cloudings, nor declineings of it. O how should
this wrap thy Soul with desires of being uncloathed.

2. As for the enjoyment of Saints, here indeed we have fellowship with them of
the lower form; but that fellowship is so dissweetened by remaining
corruptions, that there is no satisfaction in it: as it is the greatest plague
that can befall an hypocrite to live in a pure Church, so it is the greatest
vexation to the Spirit of a Saint to live in a corrupt and disordered Church:
But when death has admitted you into that glorious assembly of the Spirits of
just men made perfect, you shall have the desire of your hearts: here you
cannot fully close one with another, yea, you cannot fully close with your own
Souls. O what discords, jarrings, censurings, are here? what perfect blessed
harmony there? in Heaven each Saint loves another as himself, they are
altogether lovely. O my Soul have thee away from the Lions dens, from the
mountains of Bether; from divided Saints, to those mountains of Myrhe, and hill
of Frankinsense; thou art now going to thine own people as the Apostles phrase
imports 2. Cor. 5* 8.

6. Arg. If all this will not do, Consider what heavy burdens death will ease
thy shoulders of.

In this Tabernacle we groan, being burdened. (1) With bodily distempers, how
true do we find that of Theophrastue, the Soul pays a dear rent for the
tenement it now lives in: but glorified bodies are clogged with no
indispositions, death is the best Physician, it will cure thee of all diseases
at once. (2) With the indwelling of sin, this makes us groan from the very
bowels, Romans 7. 24. But he that is dead is free from sin, Romans 6. 7. Has
justification destroyed its damning power, and sanctification its Reigning
power; so glorification destroys its very being and existence. (3) We groan
under temptations here, but as soon as we are out of the body, we are out of
the reach of temptation: when once thou art got into Heaven, thou may say,
now Satan I am there where thou can not come: for as the damned in Hell are
malo obfirmati; so fixed in sin and misery that their condition cannot be
altered, so glorified Saints are bon^ confirmati, so fixed in holiness and
glory that they cannot be (...). (4) Here we groan under vario^^ tr^ubles and
afflictions, but then the days of our mourning are ended. God shall wipe away
all tears from our eyes: O then! let us have away that we may be at rest.

7. Arg. If still thou linger like Lot in Sodom, then lastly, examine all the
pleas and pretenses for a longer time on earth. Why art thou unwilling to dye?

1. Object. O I have many relations in the World, I know not what will become
of them when I am gone.

Sol. 1. If thou art troubled about their bodies and outward condition, why
should not that word satisfy thee, Ier. 49. 11. Leave thy fatherless children
to me, I will keep them alive, and let thy Widows trust in me. Luther in his
last Will and Testament has this expression, Lord thou have given me wife and
children I have nothing to leave them, but I commit them unto thee. O Father of
the fatherless and judge of widows, nutri, serva, doce, nourish, keep, and
teach them: or art thou troubled for their Souls? thou can not convert them
if thou should live, and God can make thy prayers and counsels to live and
take place upon them when thou art dead.

2. Obj. I would fain live to do God more service in the world.

Sol. Well, but if he have no more service for thee to do here, why should
thou not say with David: if he have no delight to use me any farther, here am
I, let him do what seems him good: in this world thou have no more to do,
but he is calling thee to an higher service and employment in Heaven; and what
thou would do for him here, he can do that by other hands.

3. Obj. I am not yet fully ready, I am not as a bride completely adorned for
the bridegroom.

Sol. 1. Thy justification is complete already, though thy sanctification be
not so; and the way to make it so is to dye, for till then, it will have its
defects and wants.

4. Obj. O but I want assurance, if I had that, I could dye presently!

Sol. 1. Yea, there it sticks indeed; but then consider, that an hearty
willingness to leave all the world to be freed from sin, and be with God, is
the next way to that desired assurance: no carnal person was ever willing to
dye upon this ground.

And thus I have finished those cases which so nearly concern the people of
God, in the several conditions of their life, and taught them how to keep their
hearts in all. I shall next apply the whole.

I. Use of Information.
YOU have heard that the keeping of the heart is the great work of a Christian
in which the very Soul and life of Religion consists, and without which all
other duties are of no value with God: hence then I shall infer to the
consternation of hypocrites, and formal Professors.

1. That the pains and labors which many persons have taken in religion, is
but lost labor, and pains to no purpose, such as will never turn to account.

Many great services have been performed, many glorious works are wrought by
men, which yet are utterly rejected by God, and shall never stand upon record
in order to an eternal acceptance, because they took no heed to keep their
hearts with God in those duties: this is that fatal rock upon which thousands
of vain professors split themselves eternally, they are curious about the
externals of religion, but regardless of their hearts. O how many hours have
some Professors spent in hearing, praying, reading, conferring? and yet as to
the main end of religion, as good they had sat still and done nothing: for all
this signifies nothing, the great work, I mean heart work; being all the while
neglected: tell me thou vain professor, when did thou shed a tear for the
deadness, hardness, unbelief, or earthliness of thy heart? think thou, such
an easy religion can save thee? if so, we may invert Christ's words, and say,
wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to life; and many there be
that go in thereat: hear me thou self deluding hypocrit, thou that have put of
God with hartless duties, thou that have acted in religion as if thou had
been blessing an Idol, that could not search, and discover thy heart: thou that
have offered to God but the skin of the sacrifice, not the marrow, fat and
inwards of it; how will thou abide the coming of the Lord? how will thou hold
up thy head before him when he shall say, O thou dissembling false hearted man?
how could thou profess religion? with what face could thou so often tell
me, thou lovedst me, when thou knew all the while in thine own conscience,
that thine heart was not with me? O tremble to think, what a fearful judgment
it is to be given over to a heedless and careless heart: and then to have
religious duties in stead of a rattle to quiet and still the Conscience!

2. Hence I also infer for the humiliation even of upright hearts, that unless
the people of God spend more time and pains about their hearts then generally
and ordinarily they do, they are never like to do God much service, or be
owners of much comfort in this World.

I may say of that Christian that is remiss and careless in keeping his heart,
as Jacob said of Reuben, Thou shall not excel: It grieves me to see how many
Christians there are that go up and down dejected and complaining, that live at
a poor low rate; both of service and comfort, and how can they expect it should
be otherwise as long as they live at such a careless rate? O how little of
their time is spent in the closet, in searching, humbling, and quickening their
hearts?

You say, your hearts are dead; and do you wonder they are so as long as you
keep them not with the fountain of life? if your bodies had been diated as your
Souls have been, they would have been dead too: never expect better hearts till
you take more pains with them; qui ^ugit molam, fugit farinam: he that will not
have the sweat, must not expect the sweet of Religion.

O Christians! I fear your zeal and strength has run in the wrong cha^nel: I
fear most of us may take up the Churches complaint, Cant. 1. 6. They have made
me the keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept. Two
things have eaten up the time and strength of the Professors of this
Generation, and sadly diverted them from heart work. (1) Fruitless
controversies started by Satan, I doubt not to this very purpose, to take us
off from practical godliness, to make us puzzle our heads, when we should be
searching our hearts. O how little have we minded that of the Apostle, Heb. 13.
9. It Is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace, and not with
meats: (i. e.) with disputes and controversies about meats, which have not
profited them that have been occupied therein.

O how much better is it to see men live exactly, then to hear them dispute
subtly! these unfruitful questions, how have they rendered the Churches?
wasted time and spirits, and called Christians off from their main business,
from looking to their own vineyard? what think you Sirs? had it not been better
if the questions ventilated among the people of God of late days, had been such
as these? how shall a man discern the special, from the common operations of
the Spirit? how may a Soul discern its first declineings from God? how may a
backsliding Christian recover his first love? how may the heart be preserved
from unseasonable thoughts in duty? how may a bosom sin be discovered and
mortified, etc. Would not this have tended more to the credit of religion, and
comfort of your Souls? O it is time to repent, and be ashamed of this folly! when
I read what Suarez a Papist said, who wrote many* Tomes of disputations, that
he prised the time he set apart for the searching and examining of his heart,
in reference to God, above all the time that ever he spent in other studies: I
am ashamed to find the professors of this age yet insensible of their folly:
shall the Conscience of a Suarez feel a relenting pang for strength and time so
ill employed? and shall not yours? this is it your Ministers long since warned
you of: your spiritual nurses were afraid of the rickets when they saw your
heads only to grow, and your hearts to wither. O when will God beat o^r swords
into plowshares! I mean our disputes and contentions, into practical godliness.
(2) Another cause of neglecting our heart has been earthly encumbrances: the
heads and hearts of many have been filled with such a crowd and noise of
worldly business, that they have sadly and sensibly declined and withered in
their zeal, love and delight in God, in their heavenly, serious, and profi^able
way of conversing with man.

O how has this wilderness entangled us! our discourses and conferences, nay
our very prayers and duties have a tang of it: we have had so much work without
doors, that we have been able to do but little within. It was the sad
complaint of an holy one, O says he! Mr. Strong.
it is sad to think, how many precious opportunities I have lost, how many sweet
motions, and admonitions of the Spirit I have posted over unfruitfully, and
made the Lord to speak in vain, in the secret illapses of his Spirit, the Lord
has called upon me, but my worldly thoughts did still lodge within me, and
there was no place in my heart for such calls of God. surely there is a way of
enjoying God, even in our worldly employments* G^d would never have put us upon
them to our loss. Enoch walked with God, and begat sons and daughters, Genesis 5.
19. He walked with God, but did not retire and separate himself from the things
of this life: and the Angels that are employed by Christ in the things of this
world (for the Spirit of the living creatures is in the wheels) they are finite
creatures, and cannot be in a two^old ubi at one time, yet they lose nothing of
the beatifical vision, all the time of their administration, for Mat^h. 18. 10.
their Angels (even whilst they are employed for them) Behold the face of their
father which is in heaven. We need not lose our visions by our employments, if
the fault were not our own: alas! that ever Christians who stand at the door
of eternity, and have more work upon their hands then this poor moment of
interposing time is sufficient for, should yet be filling both our heads and
hearts with trifles.

3. Hence also I infer for the awakening of all, that if the keeping of the
heart be the great work of a Christian, then there are but few real Christians
in the world.

Indeed, if every one that has learned the dialect of Christianity, and can
talk like a Saint, if every one that has gi^ts and parts, and by the common
assisting presence of the Spirit can preach, pray, or discourse like a
Christian: in a word, if such as associate themselves with the people of God,
and delight in ordinances, might pass for Christians, the number then is great.

But alas! to what a small number will they shrink, if you judge them by this
rule! how few are there, that make Conscience of keeping their hearts, watching
their thoughts, judging their ends, etc. O there be but few closet men among
professors! it is far easier for men to be reconciled to any duties in religion
then to these: the profane part of the world will not so much as touch with
the outside of religious duties, much less to this: and for the hypocrit though
he be polite and curious about those externals, yet you can never persuade him
to this inward work, this difficult work: this work to which there is no
inducement by humane applause, this work that would quickly discover what the
hypocrit cares not to know, so that by a general consent, this heart work is
left to the hands of a few secret ones and I tremble to think in how few hands
it is.

II. Use for Exhortation.
IF the keeping of the heart be so important a business, if such choice
advantages ^ccrew to you thereby; if so many dear and precious interests be
wrapped up in it, then let me call upon the people of God every where to fall
close to this work.

O study your hearts, watch your hearts, keep your hearts: away with fruitless
controversies and idle questions, away with empty names and vain shows, away
with unprofitable discourse and bold censures of others, turn in upon your
selves, get into your closets, and now resolve to dwell there: you have been
strangers to this work too long, you have kept others vineyards too long, you
have trifled about the borders of religion too long, this world has detained
you from your great work too long; will you now resolve to look better to your
hearts? will you haste and come out of the crowds of business, and clamours of
the world? and retire your selves more then you have done? O that this day you
would resolve upon it!

Reader, methinks I should prevail with thee; all that I beg for is but this,
that thou would step aside a little oftener to talk with God, and thine own
heart, that thou would not suffer every trifle to divert thee, that thou
would keep a more true and faithful account of thy thoughts and affections:
that thou would but seriously demand of thine own heart, at least every
evening, O my heart where have thou been to day? whether have thou made a rode
to day? if all that has been said by way of induccment be not enough, I have
yet more motives to offer you: and the first is this.

1. Motive. The studying, observing, and diligent keeping of your own hearts
will marvellously help your understanding in the deep mysteries of Religion.

An honest well experienced heart is a singular help to a weak head, such a
heart will serve you in stead of a Commentary upon a great part of the
Scriptures: by this means you shall far better understand the things of God
than the learned Rabbis and profound Doctors (if graceless and unexperienced)
ever did, you shall not only have a more clear, but a more sweet perception and
gust of them: a man may discourse orthodoxly and profoundly of the nature and
effects of faith, the troubles and comforts of Conscience, the sweetness of
Communion with God, that never felt the efficacy and sweet impressions of these
things upon his own spirit: but O how dark and dry are these notions, compared
with his, upon whose heart they have been acted? when such a man reads David's
Psalms, or Paul's Epistles, there he finds his own objections made and answered:
O says he, these holy men speak my very hear^! their doubts were mine, their
troubles mine, and their experiences mine. I remember Chrysostom speaking to
his people of Antioch about some choice experiences, uses this expression.
Sciunt initiati quid dico: those that are initiated know what I say, experience
is the best Schoolmaster. O then! study your hearts, keep your hearts.

2. Mot. The study and observation of your own hearts will antidote you against
the dangerous and infecting errors of the times and places you live in.

For what think you is the reason that so many professors in England have
departed from the faith, giving heed to ^ables: that so many thousands have
been led away by the error of the wicked, that Jesuits and Quakers who have
sown corrupt doctrine, have had such plentiful harvests among us, but because
they have met with a company of empty notional pro^essors that never knew what
belongs to practical godliness, and the study of their own hearts.

If professors did but give diligence to study, search, and watch their own
hearts, they would have that (...) that stedfastness of their own that Peter
speaks of 2 Pet. 3. 17. and this would ballast and settle them, Heb. 13. 9.
Suppose a subtle Papist should talk to such of the dignity, and me^it of good
works, could he ever work the persuasion of it into that heart that is
conscious to it self of so much darkness, deadness, distraction, and unbelief
attending it^ best duties? it is a good rule, non est disputandum de gustu: there
is no disputing against taste: what a man has felt and tasted, one cannot beat
him off from that by argument.

3. Mot. Your care and diligence in keeping your hearts, will prove one of the
best evidences of your sincerity.

I know no external act of religion that differences the sound from the unsound
professor: it is wonderful to consider, how far hypocrites go in all external
duties, how plausibly they can order the outward man, hiding all their
indecencies from the observation of the world.

But then, they take no heed to their hearts, they are not in secret, what they
appear to be in public: and before this trial no hypocrit can stand; it is
confessed, they may in a fit, under a pang upon a deathbed, cry out of the
wickedness of their hearts; but alas! there is no heed to be taken to these
extorted complaints* in our law no credit is to be given to the testimony of
one upon the rack, because it may be supposed, that the extremity of the
torture may make him say any thing to be eased, but if self jealousy, care,
and watchfulness be the daily workings and frames of thy heart, it strongly
argues the sincerity of it: for what but the sense of a divine eye, what but
the real hatred of sin as sin, could put thee upon those secret duties, which
lie out of the observation of all creatures.

If then it be a desirable thing in thine eyes to have a fair testimony of
thine integ^ity, and to know of a truth that thou ^earest God: then study thine
heart, watch thy heart, keep thy heart.

4. Mot. How fruitful sweet and comfortable would all Ordinances and Duties be
to us if our hearts were better kept?

O what precious communion might you have with God, every time you approach
him; if your hearts were but in frame! you might then say with David, Psalm.
104. 34. My meditation of him shall be sweet. That which loses all our comforts
in ordinances and more secret duties, is the indisposedness of the heart: a
Christian whose heart is in a good frame gets the start of all others that come
with him in that duty: they are tugging hard to get up their hearts to God, now
trying this argument upon them and then that, to quicken and affect them, and
sometimes go away as bad as they came. Sometimes the duty is almost ended
before their hearts begin to stir to feel any warmth, quickening, or power from
it: but all this while the prepared heart is at its work; this is he that
ordinarily gets the first sight of Christ in a Sermon: the first seal from
Christ in a Sacrament: the first kiss from Christ in secret prayer. I tell you,
and I tell you but what I have felt, that Prayers and Sermons would appear to
you other manner of things then they do, did you but bring better ordered
hearts unto them, you would not go away dejected and drooping, O this has
been a lost day, a lost duty to me, if you had not lost your hearts it might
not be so: if then the comfort of ordinances be sweet, look to your hearts,
keep your hearts.

5. Mot. Acquaintance with your own hearts would be a Fountain of matter to you
in Prayer.

A man that is diligent in heart work, and knows the state of his own Soul;
will have a fountain fullness of matter to supply him richly in all his
addresses to God: his tongue shall not faulter, and make pauses for want of
matter, Psalm. 45. 1. my heart is enditing a good matter: or as Montanus renders
the original, my heart is boiling up good matter, like a living spring that is
still bubling up fresh water; and then my tongue is as the pen of a ready
writer* others must pump their memories, rack their inventions, and are often
at a loss when they have done all: but if thou have kept and faithfully studied
thine own heart, twill be with thee (as Job speaks in another case) like
bottles full of new wine, that want vent, which are ready to burst: as holy
matter flows plentifully, so more feelingly and sweetly from such a heart: when
a heart experienced Christian is mourning before God over some special heart
corruption, wrestling with God for the supply of some special inward want, he
speaks not as other men do, that have learned to pray by rote, their
confessions and petitions are squeezed out, his drop freely like pure honey
from the comb, it is a happiness then to be with or near such a Christian. I
remember Bernard having given rules to prepare the heart for prayer concludes
them thus, Et cum talis fueris memento mei: and (says he) when thy heart is in
this frame then remember me.

6. Mot. By this the decayed power of religion will be recovered again among
professors, which is the most desirable sight in this world.

O that I might live to see that day! when professors shall not walk in a vain
show, when they shall please themselves no more with a name to live, being
spiritually dead: when they shall be no more (as many of them now are) a
company of frothy, vain, and unserious persons, but the majestic beams of
holiness shining from their heavenly, and serious conversations shall awe the
world, and command reverence from all that are about them: when they shall warm
the hearts of those that come nigh them, so that men shall say, God is in these
men of a truth.

Well, such a time may again be exspected according to that promise, Isai. 60.
21. The people shall be all righteous But till we fall closer to this great
work of keeping our hearts, I am out of hopes to see those blessed days: I
cannot exspect better times, till God give better hearts: does it not grieve
you to see what a scorn religion is made in the world, what objects of contempt
and scorn the professors of it are made in the world.

Professors, would you recover your credit? would you again obtain an
honorable testimony in the Consciences of your very enemies? then, keep your
hearts, watch your hearts: it is the looseness frothiness, and earthliness of your
hearts that ^ath made your lives so; and this has brought you under contempt
of the world, you first lost your sights of God, and communion with him, then
your heavenly and serious deportment among men; and by that, your interest in
their Consciences, O then! for the credit of religion, for the honor of your
profession, keep your hearts.

7. Mot. By diligence in keeping our hearts, we should prevent, and remove the
fatal scandals and stumbling blocks out of the way of the world.

Woe to the world (says Christ) because of offenses, Matthew. 18. 7. does not
shame cover your faces? do not your hearts bleed within you to hear of the
scandalous m^scarriages of many loose professors? could you not like Shem and
Iaphet go backward with a garment to cover the shame of many professors? how
is that worthy name blasphemed? 2 James 7. 2. Sam. 12. 13, 14. the hearts of
the righteous sadned, Psalm. 25. 3. Ezekiel. 36. 20. by this the world is fearfully
prejudiced against Christ and religion, the bonds of death made fast upon their
Souls: those that had a general love and likeing to the ways of God, sta^tled
and quite driven back, and thus Soul blood is shed: woe to the World.

Yea, how are the Consciences of fallen professors plunged and even overwhelmed
in the deeps of trouble? God inwardly excommunicating their Souls from all
comfortable fellowship with himself, and the joys of his salvation: infinite
are the mischiefs that come by the scandalous lives of professors.

And what is the true cause and reason of all this; but the neglecting of their
hearts? were our hearts better kept, all this would be prevented: had David
kept his heart, he had not broken his bones: a neglected careless heart, must
of necessity produce a disorderly scandalous life. I thank God for the
freedom and faithfulness of a reverend brother in showing professors their
manifold miscarriages, Gospel glass.
and from my heart do wish that when their wounds have been thoroughly searched
by that probe, God would be pleased to heal them by this Plaster. O
professors! if ever you will keep religion sweet, if ever you hope to recover
the credit of it in the world, keep your hearts: either keep your hearts, or
lose your credit: keep your hearts or lose your comforts: keep your hearts,
least ye shed Soul blood: what words can express the deep concernments, the
wonderful consequences of this work! every thing puts a necessity, a solemnity,
a beauty upon it.

8. Mot. An heart well kept will fit you for any condition God casts you into,
or any service he has to use you in.

He that has learnt how to keep his heart lowly, is fit for prosperity: and he
that knows how to use and apply to it Scripture promises, and supports, is fit
to pass through any adversity: he that can deny the pride and selfishness of
his heart is fit to be employed in any service for God: such a man was Paul, he
did not only spend his time in preaching to others, in keeping others
vineyards, but he looked to himself, kept his own vineyard, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Least
when I have preached to others, I my self should be a cast away: and what an
eminent instrument was he for God, he could turn his hand to any work, he could
dexterously manage both an adverse and prosperous condition: I know how to
abound, and how to suffer want; let the people deifie him, it moves him not,
unless to indignation: Let them stone him, he can bear it: if a man purge
himself from these (says he 2 Timothy 2. 21.) He shall be a Vessel unto honor,
sanctified and meet for the masters use, and prepared unto every good work.

First the heart must be purged; and then it is prepared for any service of God:
when the heart of Isaiah was purified, which was the thing signified* by the
touching of his lips with a coal from the Altar, Isai. 6. 7. then he was fit
for Gods work: here am I, send me, v. 8. a man that has not learned to keep
his heart, put him upon any service for God, and if it be attended with honor,
it shall swell up and overtop his spirit: if with suffering it will exanimate
and sink him.

Jesus Christ had an instrumental fitness for his fathers work above all the
servants that ever God employed, he was zealous in public work for God, so
zealous, that sometimes he forgot to eat bread, yea, that his friends thought
he had been besides himself: but yet he so carried on his public work, as not
to forget his own private communion with God; and therefore you read in Matthew.
14. 23. that when he had been laboring all day yet after that, he went up to a
mountain apart to pray, and was there alone. O let the keepers of the vineyards
look to their own vineyard! we shall never be so instrumental to the good of
others, as when we are most diligent about our own Souls.

9. Mot. If the people of God would more diligently keep their hearts, how
exceedingly would the communion of Saints be thereby sweetned^

How goodly then would be thy tents O Jacob, and thy tabernacles O Israel! then
as it is prophesied of the Jews, Zech. 8. 23. Men would say, we will go with you,
for we have heard that God is among you. It Is the fellowship your Souls have
with the Father and with the Son, that draws out the desires of others after
fellowship with you. 1 Ioh. 1. 3. I tell you if Saints would be persuaded to
take more pains, and spend more time about their hearts; there would quickly be
such a divine luster upon the face of their coversations that men would account
it no small privilege, to be with or near them.

It Is the pride, passion, and earthliness of our hearts that has spoiled
Christian fellowship: whence is it? that when Christians meet, they are often
jarring and contending, but only their unmortified passions: whence are their
uncharitable censures of their brethren, but only from self ignorance? why are
they so rigid, and unmerciful toward those that are fallen? but because they
consider not themselves, as the Apostle speaks Gal. 6. 1. why is their
discourse so frothy and unprofitable when they meet? is not this from the
earthliness and vanity of their hearts?

My brethren, these be the things that have spoiled Christian fellowship, and
made it become a dry and sapless thing; so that many Christians are even weary
of it, and are ready to say with the prophet Ier. 9. 2. O that I had a Cottage
in the wilderness, etc. That I might leave my people and go from them! and with
David Psalm. 120. 6. My soul has long dwel^ with them that hate peace: This
has made them long for the grave, that they might go from them that are not
their own people, to them that are their own people, as the original of that
text imports, 2 Cor. 5. 8.

But now, if professors would study their own hearts more, watch and keep them
better, all this would be prevented; and the beauty and glory of communion
again restored: they would divide no more, contend no more, censure rashly no
more; when their hearts are in tune their tongues will not jarre, how
charitable, pitiful and tender will they be one of another, when every one is
daily humbled under the evil of his own heart; Lord hasten those much desired
days, and bless these counsels in order to them.

10. Mot. Lastly, By this the comforts of the Spirit, and precious influences
of all Ordinances would be fixed, and much longer preserved in your Souls than
now they are.

Ah! what would I give, that my Soul might be preserved in that frame I
sometimes find it after an Ordinance! aliquando intromittis me domine in
affectium multum inusuatum introrsus ad nescio quam dulcedinem, etc. Sometimes
O Lord, (says one of the fathers sweetly) thou admittest me into the most
inward, unusual and sweet delights, to I know not what sweetness, which were it
perfected in me, I know not what it would be; or rather, what it would not be.
But alas! the heart grows careless ^gain, and quickly returns, like water
removed from the fire to its native coldness: could you but keep those things
for ever in your hearts, what Christians would you be! what lives would you
live! and how is it that these things remain no longer with us? doubtless it is
because we suffer our hearts to take cold again: we should be as careful after
an ordinance or duty to prevent this, as one that comes out of an hot bath, or
great sweat is; of going out into the chill air: we have our hot and cold fits
by turns, and what is the reason but our unskilfulness and carelessness in
keeping the heart.

It Is a thousand pities, that the ordinances of God, as to their quickening and
comforting effects, should be like those humane ordinances the Apostle speaks
of, that perish in the using. O then, let me say to you, as Job. 15. 11. Do
the consolations of God seem small to you? Look over these ten special
benefits, weigh them in a just balance; are they small matters? is it a small
matter to have thy weak understanding assisted? thine endangered Soul
antidoted, thy sincerity cleared, thy communion with God sweetened, thy sails
filled in prayer, is it a small thing to have the decayed power of godliness
again recovered, all fatal scandals removed, an instrumental fitness to serve
Christ obtained, the Communion of Saints restored to its primitive glory, and
the infl^ences of ordinances abiding in the Souls of Saints, if these be no
common blessings, no small benefits, then surely it is a great duty to keep the
heart with all diligence.

The III. Use for Direction.
THE next use shall be for direction to some special means for the keepi^g of
the heart: and here besides what has been hin^ed in the explication of the
duty, page 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. to which I refer the reader and all those
directions throughout the whole, appropriated to particular cases and seasons,
I shall farther add several other general means of excellent use to this end,
and the first is this.

1. Means. Would you thus keep your hearts as has been persuaded, then furnish
your hearts richly with the word of God, which is their best preservative
against sin.

Keep the word, and the word will keep you: as the first receiving of the word
regenerated your hearts, so the keeping of the word within you; will preserve
your hearts. Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, let it
dwell, not tarry with you for a night, and let it dwell richly, or plentifully;
in all that is of it, in its commands, promises, threats, in all that is in
you, in your understandings, memories consciences, affections, and then it will
preserve your hearts, Psalm. 119. 11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart that I
might not sin against thee: It Is the s^^pperiness of our hearts in reference to
the word, that causes so many slips in our lives, Conscience cannot be urged*
or awed, with forgotten truths: but keep it in the heart, and it will keep both
heart and life upright, Psalm. 37. 31. The law of his God is in his heart, none
of his steps shall slide, or if he do, the word will recover the straying
heart again, Ma^th. 26. 57. Then Peter remembered [the words of Iesus] and wept
bitterly: we never lose our hearts till they have first lost the efficacious
and powerful impressions of the word.

2. Mea. Call your hearts frequently to an account, if ever you mean to keep
them with God.

Those that put a stock into the hands of unfaithful or suspicious servants,
will be sure to make short reckonings with them: the heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked, Ier. 17. 9. O it is as necessary, as sweet,
that we and our reins; that is, we and our secret thoughts confer together
every night, Psalm. 16. 7. we should call our hearts to account every evening,
and say, O my heart! where have thou been to day? where have thy thoughts
wandered to day? what account can thou give of them? O naughty heart, vain
heart, could thou not abide by the fountain of delights? is there better
entertainment with the creature than with God? the oftener the heart meets with
rebukes and checks for wandering, the less twill wander; if every vain thought
were retracted with a sigh, every excursion of the heart from God with a severe
check; it would not dare so boldly and frequently to digress and step aside:
those actions which are committed with reluctance are not committed with
frequency.

3. Mea. He that will keep his heart, must take heed of plunging himself into
such a multiplicity of earthly business, as he cannot manage without
neglecting his main business.

It cannot be imagined he should keep his heart with God, that has lost
himself in a wood of earthly business: take heed you do not pinch your Souls
by grati^ying the immoderate desires of your flesh. I wish many Christians
could truly say what a Heathen once did, I do not give, but only lend my self
to my business. It Is said Germanicus reigned in the Romans hearts: Seneca.
Tyberius only in their Provinces: though the world be in your hands, let it
not justle Christ out of your hearts.

Take heed Christian, least thy shop steal away thy heart from thy closet. God
never intended earthly employments for a stop, but rather for a step to
heavenly ones. O let not Aristippus the Heathen arise in judgment against
thee, who said, he would rather neglect his means then his mind, his farm then
his Soul. (...) thy ship be overladen thou must cast some overbord: more
business then thou can well manage, is like more meat then thou can well
digest, which will quickly make a sickly Soul.

4. Mea. He that means to keep his heart must carefully observe its first
declinings from God, and stop it there.

He that will keep his house in good repair, must stop every chinke as soon as
discovered, and he that will keep his heart must not let a vain thought be long
neglected: the serpent of heart Apostas^e is best killed in the egg of a small
remission. O if many poor decayed Christians had looked to their hearts in time,
they had never come to that sad pass they now are: we may say of heart
neglects, as the Apostle does of vain bablings, that they increase to more and
more ungodliness: nemo repent fit turpissimus, little sins neglected will
quickly become great and masterless: the greatest Crocodile once lay in an
egg, the greatest oak was once but an acorn: the firing of a small train of
powder may blow up all by leading to a greater quantity: men little think what
a proud, vain, wanton, or worldly thought may grow to: behold how great a
matter a little fire kindles!

5. Mea. Take heed of loseing the liveliness and sweetness of your communion
with God, least thereby your hearts be loosed off from God.

The heart is an hungry and restless thing, it will have something to feed
upon; if it enjoy nothing from God, it will hunt for something among the
creatures, and there it often loses it self, as well as its end: there is
nothing more engages the heart to a constancy and evenness in walking with God,
then the sweetness which it tastes therein: as the Gauls when once they tasted
the sweet wine of Italy could never be satisfied till they conquered the
country where it grew.

It Is true, Conscience of duty may keep the heart from neglecting it, but when
there is no higher motive, it drives on deadly, and is filled with
distractions, that which we del^ght in, we are never weary of, as is evident in
the motions of the heart to earthly things, where the wheels being oyled with
delight, run nimbly, and have often need of trigging; the motions of the heart
upward would be as free, if its delight in heavenly things were as great.

6. Mea. Habituate thy heart to spiritual meditations, if thou would have it
freed from thos^ burdensome diversions.

By this means you will get a facillity, and dexterity in heart work: it is pity
those smaller portions of our time betwixt solemn duties should lie upon our
hands and be rendered useless to us. O learn to save, and be good husbands upon
your thoughts; to this purpose, a neat Author speaks, Boyles occasional
reflect. page 9. 10.
these Parentheses which happen to come between the more solemn passages
(whether business or recreations) of humane life, are wont to be lost by most
men; for want of a due value for them, and even by good men, for want of skill
to preserve them: for though they do not properly despise them; yet they
neglect, or lose them, for want of knowing how to rescue them; or what to do
with them, but although grains of sand, and ashes be a part, but of a
^e^picable smalness, and liable to be scat^^red and blown away, yet the skilful
artificer by a vehement fire brings numbers of these to afford him that noble
substance glass, by whose help we may both see ourselves, and our blemishes
lively represented, (as in looking glasses) and discern caelestial objects (as
with Tellescopes) and with the sun beams kindle disposed materials (as with
burning glasses) so when these little fragments, or parcels of time, which if
not carefully looked to would be dissipated and lost, come to be managed by a
skilful Contemplator, and to be improved by the caelestial fire of devotion
they may be so ordered as to afford us both looking glasses to dress our Souls
by, and prospectives to discover heavenly wonders, and incentives to inflame
our hearts with zeal, thus far he.

Something of that nature I have under hand, for a public benefit; if God give
life to finish; and opportunity to produce it: certainly this is a great
advantage for the keeping of the heart with God.

IV. Use for Consolation.
I Shall now close the whole with a word or two of consolation to all dilligent
and serious Christians, that faithfully and closely ply heart work; that are
groaning and weeping in secret over the hardness, pride, earthliness and vanity
of their hearts, that are fearing and trembling over the experienced
deceitfulness, and falsness of them, whilst other vain professors eyes are
abroad, their time and strength eaten up by fruitless disputes, and earthly
employments; or at best by a cold and formal performance of some heartless and
empty duties: poor Christian, I have three things to offer thee in order to thy
support and comfort, and doubtless either of them alone mixed with faith is
sufficient to comfort thee over all the trouble thou have with thine own heart.

1. Comfort. This argues thy heart to be upright and honest, what ever thy
other gifts and abillities are.

It Is uprightness of heart will comfort thee upon a deathbed, 2 Kings 20. 2, 3.
Then he turned his face to the wall and prayed to the Lord, saying, remember
now O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
etc.

I am really of his mind who said, si mihi daretur optio eligerim christiani
rustici sordidissimum and maxim agreste opus prae omnibus victoriis and
triumphis Alexandri au^ Caesaris: might I have my wish, I would prefer the most
despicable and sordid work of a rustic Christian, before all the victories and
triumphs of Alexander or Caesar. Yea, let me add, before all the elaborated
duties and excellent gifts of vain professors: before the tongues of men and
Angels: it will signify more to my comfort to spend one solitary hour in
mourning before the Lord over heart corruption, then many hours in* a seeming
zealous, but really dead performance of common duties with the greatest
inlargements and richest embellishments of parts and gifts.

By this very thing Christ distinguishes the formal and serious Christian,
Matthew. 6. 5. The one is for the street and Synagogue, for the observation and
applause of men, but the other is a closet man: he drives on a home trade, a
heart trade: never be troubled then for the want of those things that a man may
have and be eternally damned, but rather bless God for that which none but the
favorites, and darlings of heaven have: many a one is now in hell that had a
better head then thine, and many a one now in Heaven that complained of as bad
an heart as thine.

2. Com. Know farther for thy comfort, that God would never leave thee under so
many heart troubles and burdens, if he intended not thy real benefit thereby.

Thou art often crying out, Lord why is it thus, why go I mourning all the
day, having sorrow in my heart, thus long I have been exercised with hardness
of heart, and to this day have not obtained a broken heart; many years have I
been praying and striving against vain thoughts, yet am still infested and
perplexed with them. O when shall I get a better heart! I have been in travel,
and brought forth but wind, I have obtained no deliverance, neither have the
corruptions of my heart fallen. I have brought this heart many times to
prayers, sermons, Sacraments, expecting and hoping for a cure from them, and
still my sore runs and cease not.

Pensive Soul, let this comfort thee, thy God designs thy benefit, even by
these occasions of thy sad complaints; For (1.) Hereby he would let thee see
what thy heart by Nature is and was, and therein take notice how much thou art
beholding to Free Grace: He leaves thee under these exercises of Spirit, that
thou may lie as with thy face upon the ground, admiring that ever the Lord
of Glory should take such a Toad; so vile a Creature into his bosom: thy base
heart, if it be good for nothing else; yet serves to commend and set off, the
unsearchable riches of Free Grace. (2.) This serves to beat thee off
continually from resting, yea, or but glancing upon thine own righteousness, or
excellency: the corruption of thy heart, working in all thy duties, makes thee
sensible to feel that the bed is too short, and the covering too narrow: Were
it not for those reflections thou have after duties, upon the dullness and
distractions of thine heart in them; how apt would thou be to fall in love
with, and admire thy own Performances, and Inlargements? For if notwithstanding
these, thou have much to do with the pride of thy heart; how much more, if such
humbling and self-abasing considerations were wanting. And lastly this tends to
make thee the more compassionate and tender toward others, Perhaps thou
would have little pity for the distresses, and soul troubles of others, if
thou had less experience of thine own.

Com. 3. To conclude, God will shortly put a blessed end to all these troubles,
cares, and watchings.

The time is coming when thy heart shall be as thou would have it, when thou
shall be discharged of these cares, fears and sorrows, and never cry out: Oh my
hard, my proud, my vain, my earthly heart any more: when all darkness shall be
banished from thine understanding, and thou shall clearly discover all truths
in God, that crystal Ocean of truth: when all vanity shall be purged perfectly
out of thy thoughts, and they be everlastingly, ravishingly, and delightfully
entertained and exercised upon that supreme Goodness, and infinite excellency
of God, from whom they shall never start any more like a broken B^w: And as for
thy pride, passion, earthliness, and all other the matters of thy complaint and
trouble, it shall be said of them, as of the Egyptians to Israel: Stand still,
and see the salvation of God: these corruptions thou see to day, henceforth
thou shall see them no more for ever: when thou shall lay down thy weapons, of
prayers, tears, and groans, and put on the Armor of light, not to fight, but
to triumph in.

Lord, when shall this blessed day come? How long? How long? Holy and True; My
soul waits for thee; Come my Beloved, and be thou like a Roe, or a young Heart
upon the Mountains of Bether. Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader these books following are printed for, and sold by Robert
Boulter, at the Turks head in Bish^psgate Street: near the Great James.
AN exposition with practical notes and observations on the five last Chapters
of the Book of Job; By Joseph Caryl* in quarto. An expo^ition upon the first
eighteen verses of the first Chapter of the Gospel of S. John, by John
Arrowsmith, D. D. in quarto. Schola Wintoni^nsi^ phrases Latinae, the Latin
phrases of Winchester School, corrected and much augmented in this fifth
edition, by H. Robinson, D. D. A Cloud of Witness^s, or the Sufferers Mirror,
made up of the Swan like songs, and other choice passages of several Martyrs
and Confessors, to the end of the sixteenth Cen^u^y, in their Treatises,
Speeches, Letters, Prayers by T. M. M. A. in Octavo, Judicious and select
essays and observations upon ^he first invention of Shipping, Invasive War, the
Navy Royal and sea service, by Sir Walter Rawleigh. Sips of Sweetness or
Consolation for weak believers. A Treatise discoursing of the sweetness of
Christ's carriage toward all his weak members, by John Durant. A Treatise of
death the l^st enemy to be destroyed, showing wherein its enmity consists,
and how it is destroyed, by R^^hard Baxter.

