PLANLOGIA

A SUCCINCT and SEASONABLE DISCOURSE OF THE Occasions, Causes, Nature, Rise,
Growth, and Remedies of MENTAL ERRORS.

Written some Months since; and now made public, both for the healing and
prevention of the Sins and Calamities which have broken in this way upon the
Churches of Christ, to the great scandal of Religion, hardening of the Wicked;
and obstruction of Reformation.

Whereunto are subjoined by way of Appendix:

I. Vindiciarum Vindex: Being a Succinct, but Full Answer to Mr. Philip Cary's
weak and impertinent Exceptions to my Vindiciae Legis and Foederis.

II. A Synopsis of Ancient and Modern Antinomian Errors: with Scriptural
Arguments and Reasons against them.

III A SERMON composed for the preventing and healing of Rents and Divisions in
the Churches of Christ.

By JOHN FLAVELL, Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon.

With an EPISTLE by several Divines, Relating to Dr. CRISP's Works.

LONDON: Printed by R. Roberts, for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three-Leggs in the
Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market, 1691.

THE Reverend Author of the ensuing Treatises, having in them explained and
defended several Gospel Truths, unto which diverse things in the Writings of the
Reverend Dr. Crisp deceased, do seem very opposite; Whereas some of us who
subscribed a Paper, the design whereof was only to testify, That we believed
certain Writings of the Doctor's never before Published, were faithfully
transcribed by his Son, the Publisher of them; which Paper is now, by the
Bookseller, prefixed to the whole Volume, containing a large Preface, which we
never saw till after the publication, together with all the Doctor's former
Works that were published many years before; And are hereupon, by some weak
People, misunderstood, as if by that Certificate, we intended an Approbation of
all that is contained in that Volume. We declare, we had no such intention: As
the Paper we subscribed has no word in it that gives any such intimation: But
are well pleased these later Writings are Published (in reference whereto* We
only certified our belief, which we fixedly retain, of the Publisher's
fidelity) as they contain many passages in them, that may in some measure
remedy the hard and hurtful construction that many expressions were more liable
to in the former; whereof the Doctor seemed apprehensive himself, when in the
beginning of his Discourse, on Tit. 2. 11, 12. he speaks thus: [Beloved, I am
jealous of you with an holy jealousy, 1 Cor. 11. 2, 3. Lest after the sweet
wooing of you in Christ's Name, that you might be espoused unto him; I say, I
am jealous, and fear, lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty,
namely, bewitching her to a presumptuous, licentious adventuring on God's
gentleness, while she tasted the forbidden Fruit; so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in him, namely, by presuming too much
upon him, and adventuring to continue in Sin, in hope that Grace may abound.
For the preventing of which dangerous miscarriage, which has been the
dangerous lot of many Thousands, I thought good to step in with this Text,
which I am persuaded will prove a seasonable warning to some at least. And this
Pio^^ caution of the Author (...), lest he should be misunderstood, gives us
some grounds to believe, that be intended them not in the more exceptionable
(...). It Is best, if any unwary Reader receive hurt, that he receive his
healing also from the same hand; and whereas a Paper was Printed upon this
occasion soon after the Publication of the Doctor's Works, We willingly adopt
so much of it as is requisite to our present purpose, which is to this effect:

Some who Subscribed, this Certificate, saw only the Paper it self, to which
subscription was desired; never having perused the Works of Dr. Crisp. The
Certificate only concerned the Son, not the Father; and certified only
concerning the Son, That they who should subscribe it, believed him in this, to
deal truly; that he was not a Falsarius; that he would not say that was his
Father's, which was not so; a Paper so sober, so modest, was ( taken by it
self) scarce refusable by a Friend.

The Son's Preface, some that subscribed this Certificate, saw not, nor had any
notice, or the least imagination of its Contents; otherwise the part of a
Friend had certainly been done, as well in advising against much of the Preface
as in subseribing the Certificate.

For the Works of this Reverend Person themselves, as it no way concerned the
subscribing this Certificate, to know what they were; so from the opinion that
went of the Author, among many good Men, That he was a Learned, Pious, Good
Man, it was supposed they were likely to have in them many good and useful
things; to which it was only needful to think them his, not to think them
perfect.

We may in some respect judge of Books as of Men, i. e. reckon, that though
diverse very valuable Men, have had remarkable failings; yet that upon the
whole, it is better they have lived and been known in the World, than that they
should not have lived, or have lived obscure.

The truth is (which we have often considered) that though the great Doctrines
of Christian Religion do make a most coherent, comely Scheme, which every one
should labor to comprehend and digest in his mind; yet when the Gospel first
becomes effectual for the changing men's hearts, it is by God's blessing this or
that passage which drops; the most discern not the series and connection of
Truths at first, and too little afterward.

Upon that view of Dr. Crisp's Writings we have had since the Publication, we
find there are many things said in them, with that good savor, quickness, and
spirit, as to be very apt to make good impressions upon men's hearts; and do
judge, that being greatly affected with the Grace of God to Sinners himself,
his Sermons did thereupon run much in that strain. All our minds are little,
and incomprehensive; we cannot receive the weight and impression of all
necessary things at once, but with some inequality; so that when the Seal goes
deeper in some part, it is the shallower in some others.

If some parts of Dr. Crisp's Works be more liable to exception, the danger of
hurt thereby seems in some measure obviated in some other: As when he says, p.
46 vol. 1. Sanctification of Life, is an inseparable Companion with the
Justification of a Person by the Free Grace of Christ. And Vol. 4. p. 93. That
in respect of the Rules of Righteousness, or the Matter of Obedience, we are
under the Law still, or else we are Lawless, to live every Man as seems good in
his own eyes, which I know no true Christian does so much as think.

In like manner whereas, Vol. 2. Sermon. 15. and perhaps elsewhere, the Doctor
seems to be against evidencing our Justification and Union to Christ, by our
Sanctification and new Obedience; we have the truth of God in this matter
plainly delivered by him. Vol. 4. p. 36. when he teaches, that our Obedience
is a comfortable evidence of our being in Christ; and on that, as well as on
many accounts, necessary.

The difference between him and other good men, seems to lie not so much in the
things, which the one or other of them believe, as about their order and
reference to one another; where, it is true, there may be very material
difference: but we reckon, That notwithstanding what is more controversible in
these Writings, there are much more material things, wherein they cannot but
agree, and would have come much nearer each other, even in these things, if
they did take some words or terms which come into use on the one or the other
hand, in the same sense; but when one uses a word in one sense, another uses
the same word (or understands it, being used) in quite another sense, here
seems a vast disagreement, which proves at length to be verbal only, and really
none at all: As let by Condition, be meant a deserving Cause, (in which case
it is well known Civillians are not wont to take it) and the one side would
never use it, concerning any good Act that can be done by us, or good Habit
that is wrought in us, in order to our present acceptance with God, or final
Salvation. Let be meant by it, somewhat, that by the constitution of the
Gospel Covenant, and in the nature of the thing is requisite to our present and
eternal well-being, without the least notion of desert, but utmost abhorrence
of any such notion in this case, and the other side would as little refuse it.
But what need is there for contending at all about a Law-term, about the proper
or present use whereof, there is so little agreement between them it seems best
to serve, and them it offends. Let it go, and they will well enough understand
one another. Again, Let Justification be taken for that which is complete,
entire, and full, as it results at last from all its Causes, and Concurrents,
and on the one hand it would never be denied Christ's righteousness justifies
us at the Bar of God in the Day of Judgment, as the only deserving cause; or
affirmed that our Faith, Repentance, Sincerity, do justify us there, as any
cause at all. Let Justification be meant only of being justified in this or
that particular respect; As for instance, against this particular Accusation,
of never having been a Believer: and the honest mistaken Prefacer would never
have said, O horrid! upon its being said, Christ's Righteousness does not
justify us in this case: For he very well knows Christ's Righteousness will
justify no man that never was a Believer; but that which must immediately
justify him against this particular Accusation, must be proving, that he did
sincerely believe, which shows his interest in Christ's Righteousness, which
then is the only deserving cause of his full entire Justification.

There is an Expression in Vol. 1. p. 46. That Salvation is not the end of any
good work we do, which is like that of another; we are to act from Life, not
for Life. Neither of which are to be rigidly taken, as it is likely they were
never meant in the strict sense. For the former, this Reverent Author gives us
himself the handle, for a gentle interpretation, in what he presently subjoyns,
where he makes the end of our good works to be the manifestation of our
Obedience and Subjection; the setting forth the praise of the glory of the
Grace of God; which seems to imply, that he meant the foregoing negation in a
comparative, not in an absolute sense; understanding the glory of God to be
more principal; and so that by end, he meant the very ultimate end: so for the
other it is likely it was meant, that we should not act or work for life only,
without aiming and endeavoring, that we might come to work from life also.

For it is not with any tolerable charity supposable, that one would
deliberately say the one or the other of these in the rigid sense of the words;
or that he would not, upon consideration, presently unsay it, being calmly
reasoned with. For it were in effect to abandon Humane Nature, and to sin
against a very Fundamental Law of our Creation, not to intend our own felicity;
it were to make our first and most deeply Fundamental Duty, in one great
essential branch of it, our sin, viz. To take the Lord for our God: For to take
him for our God most. essentially includes our taking him for our supreme good;
which we all know, is included in the notion of the last end; it were to make
it unlawful to strive against all sin, and particularly against sinful oversion
from God; wherein lies the very death of the Soul, or the sum of its misery; or
to strive after perfect conformity to God in holiness, and the full fruition of
him, wherein its final blessedness does principally con^ist.

It were to teach us to violate the great Precepts of the Gospel; Repent, that
your sins may be blotted out. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate. -- Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling. To obliterate the Paterns and
Precedents set before us in the Gospel. We have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we might be justified. -- I beat down my body, lest I should be a castaway --
That thou may save thy self, and them that hear thee

It were to suppose one bound to do more for the salvation of others, than our
own salvation. We are required to save others with fear, plucking them out of
the fire. Nay, we were not (by this rule, strictly understood) so much as to
pray for our own salvation; (which is a doing of somewhat) when no doubt, we
are to pray for the success of the Gospel, to this purpose, on behalf of other
me^.

Twere to make all the threatenings of Eternal Death, and promises of Eternal
Life, we find in the Gospel of our Bles^ed Lord, useless, as motives to shun
the one, and obtain the other: For they can be motives no way but as the
escaping of the former, and the attainment of the other have with us the places
and consideration of an end.

It makes what is mentioned in the Scripture, as the Character and commendation
of the most eminent Saints; a fault, as of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, etc. That
they sought the better and Heavenly Country; and declared plainly that they
did so: which necessarily implies their making it their end.

But let none be so harsh as to think of any good man, that he intended any
thing of all this; if every passage that falls from us be stretched and
tortured with utmost severity, we shall find little to do besides accusing
others, and defending our selves as long as we live.

A Spirit of meekness and love, will do more to our Common Peace, than all the
Disputations in the World.

Upon the whole, We are so well assured of the peaceful healing temper of the
present Author of these Treatises, That we are persuaded he designed such a
course of managing the Controversies wherein he has concerned himself, as not
on the one hand to injure the memory of the Dead; and on the other, to prevent
hurt or danger to the Living.

Nor do we say thus much of him, as if he sought, or did need any Letters of
Recommendation from us; but as counting this Testimony to Truth, and this
expression of respect to him, a Debt; to the spontaneous payment whereof,
nothing more was requisite besides such a fair occasion as the Providence of
God has now laid before us, inviting us thereunto.

John How, Vin. Alsop, Nath. Mather, Increase Mather, John Turner, Rich.
Bures, Tho. Powel.


AN EPISTLE TO THE READER
Candid Reader,
CEnsure not this Treatise of ERRORS, as an Error in my Prudentials, in sending
it forth at such an improper time as this. I should never spontaneously have
awakened sleeping Controversies, after God's severe castigation of his people
for them, and in the most proper and hopeful season for their Redintegration.

And beside what I have formerly said, I think fit here to add, That if the
attacque had been general, and not so immediately and particularly upon that
Post or Quarter I was set to defend, I should with Elihu have modestly waited
till some abler and more skilful hand had undertaken the defense of this Cause.

If ever I felt a temptation to envy the happiness of my Brethren, it has been
whilst I saw them quietly feeding their Flocks, and my self forced (...) some
part of my precious (...) time (devoted to the (...) combating with unquiet and
erring Br^thren: But I see I must not be my own chuser. Notwithstanding, I
hope, and am in some measure persuaded, That public benefit will redound to
the Church from this irks^me Labor of mine. And that this strife will spread
no further, but the Malady be cured by an Antidote growing in the very place
where it began: And that the Christian Camp will not take a general Alarm from
such a ^ingle Duel.

The Book now in thy hands consists of Four parts, viz. 1. A general
Discourse of the Causes and Cures of Errors, very necessary at all times
(especially at this time) for the reduction and establishment of seduced and
staggering Christians; and nothing of that nature having occurred to my
observation among the manifold Polemical Tracts that are extant, I thought it
might be of some use to the Churches of Christ in such a vertigenous Age as we
live in; and the blessing of the Lord go forth with it for benefit and
establishment.

2. Next, thou have here the Controversies moved by my Antagonist, first about
the Mosaic Law complexly taken, which he boldly pronounces to be an Adam's
Covenant of works. And secondly, about God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17.
which he also makes the same with that God made with Adam in Paradise; and
affirms Circumcision (expressly called a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith) to
be the Seal of the said Covenant of Works first made with Adam.

3. Finding my Adversary in the pursuit of his design, running into many
Antinomian delirations, to the reproach and damage of the Cause he contends
for; I thought it necessary to take the principal Errors of Antinomianism into
examination, especially at such a time as this, when they seem to spring
afresh, to the hazard of God's Truth, and the Churches Peace; wherein I have
dealt with becoming-modesty and plainness, if happily I might be any way
instrumental in my plain and home way of Argumentation, to detect the falsity
and dangerous nature of those notions which some good men have vented; and
preserve the sounder part of the Church from so dangerous a contagion.

4. In the next place I think it necessary to advertise the Reader, That
whereas in my first Appendix under that head of the Conditionality of the New
Covenant, I have asserted Faith to be the Condition of it, and do acknowledge,
p. 246. that the word Condition is variously used among Iurists; yet I do not
use in any sense, which implies or insinuates, that there is any such condition
in the New Covenant, as that in Adam's Covenant was, consisting in perfect,
personal, and perpetual obedience; or any thing in its own nature meritorious
of the benefits promised, or capable to be performed by us in our own strength;
but plainly, that it be an act of ours (though done in God's strength) which must
be necessarily done before we can be actually justified or saved; and so there
is found in it the true suspending nature of a condition; which is the thing I
contend for, when I affirm, Faith is the condition of the New Covenant.

How many senses soever may be given of this word Condition, this is the
determinate sense in which I use it throughout this Controversy. And whosoever
denies the suspending Nature of Faith, with respect to actual Justification,
pleads (according to my understanding) for the actual Justification of
Infidels. And, thus I find a Condition defined by Navar. Johan. Baptist. Petrus
de Perus. etc. Conditio est Suspensio alicujus dispositionis tantisper dum
aliquid futurum fiat. And again, Conditio est quidam futurus eventus, in quem
dispositio suspenditur.

Once more, My Reader possibly may be stumbled at my calling Faith sometimes
the Instrument, and sometimes the Condition of our Justification, when there is
so great a Controversy depending among Learned Men, with respect to the use of
both those terms. I therefore desire the Reader to take notice, That I dive not
into that Controversy here, much less presume to determine it; but finding both
those Notions equally opposed by our Antinomians, who reject our actual
Justification by Faith either way, and allow to Faith no other use in our
actual Justification, but only to manifest to us what was done from Eternity; I
do therefore use both those terms, viz. the Conditionality, and Instrumentality
of Faith, with respect unto our Justification, and show in what sense those
terms are useful in this Controversy, and are accommodate enough to the design
and purpose for which I use them, how repugnant soever they are in that
particular, wherein the Learned contend about the Use and Application of them.

To be plain, when I say, Faith justifies us as an Organ or Instrument; my only
meaning is, that it receives, or apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, by
which we are justified; and so speaking to the Quomodo, or manner of our
Justification, I say with the general Suffrage of Divines, we are justified
instrumentally by Faith.

But in our Controversy with the Antinomians, where another different Question
is moved about the Quando, or time of our actual Justification; there I affirm,
that we are actually justified at the time of our believing, and not before;
and this being the Act upon which our Justification is suspended, I call Faith
the Condition of our Justification.

This, I desire, may be observed, lest in my use of both those terms, my Reader
should think, either that I am not aware of the Controversy depending about
those terms; or, that I do herein manifest the vacillancy of my Judgment, as if
I leaned sometime to one side, and sometime to another. I speak not here, ad
idem, as they do in that Contest; but when I call it a Condition of
Justification, my meaning is, that no Man is justified until he believe. And
when I call it an Instrument, my meaning is, that it is the Righteousness of
Christ apprehended by Faith, which does justify us when we believe. And so I
find the Generality of our Divines calling Faith sometimes a Condition, and
sometimes an Instrument of our Justification, as here I do.

And if there be any Expression my Reader shall meet with, which is less
accurate, and may be capable of another sense: I crave that Candor from him,
that he interpret it according to this my declared Intention.

5. Lastly, I have added to the former, a short, plain, practical Sermon, to
promote the Peace and Unity of the Churches of Christ, and prevent their
Relapse into past Follies.

In all the Parts of this Discourse, I have sincerely aimed at the Purity and
Peace of the Church of God; and he greatly mistakes, that takes me for a Man of
Contention. It Is true, I am here contending with my Brethren, but pure
necessity brought me in; an unpleasing irksomeness has attended me through it,
and an hearty desire, and serious motion for Peace amongst all the professed
Members of Christ, shall close and finish it. Let all Litigations of this
nature (at least, in this Critical Juncture) be suspended by common Consent,
since they waste our time, hinder our Communion, imbitter our Spirits,
impoverish practical Godliness, grieve the Spirit of God, and good Men, make
sport for our Common Enemies, who warm their own Fingers at the Fire of our
Contentions; and place more Trust in our dividing Lusts, than they do in their
own feeble Arguments, or castrated Penal Laws, to effect our Ruin.

It is my grief (the Lord knows) to see the delightful Communion the Saints
once enjoyed, whilst they walked together under the same Ordinances of God, now
dissolved in such a sad and scandalous Degree, by the Impressions of erroneous
Opinions, made both upon their Heads and Hearts. I do therefore heartily join
with Budaeus in his pious Wish, Utinam tam consertis manibus compertam
comprehensamque veritatem semel reti^ere poss^mus qu^m protinus agnitam
festivis oculis hilares exosculamur.
That God would give his People as much Constancy in retaining the Truths they
once received, as they had Joy and Comfort at their first Reception of them. I
must in this occasion declare my just Jealousy, that the Non-improvement of our
Baptismal Covenant unto the great and solemn Ends thereof in our Mortification,
Vivification, and regular Communion with the Church of Christ, into which
Society we were matriculated by it; is at this day punished upon Professors in
those fiery Heats, and fierce Oppositions, unto which God seems to have
penally delivered us at this day.

For my own part, it is my fixed Resolution to provoke no good man if I can
help it. But if their own intemperate Zeal shall provoke them, in pursuit of
their Errors, to destroy the very nature of God's Covenant of Grace with
Abraham and his Seed, and I have a plain call (as here I had) at once to defend
God's Truths and my Peoples Souls against them, I will earnestly contend in the
Cause of Truth, whilst I can move my Tongue, or make use of the Pen of the
Scribe.

Reader, I shall appeal to thee, if thou be wise and impartial, Whether any man
that understands the Covenant of God renewed with Abraham (which is the grand
Charter, by which we and our Children hold and enjoy the most invaluable
Privileges) can endure to see it dissolved and utterly destroyed, by making it
an abolished Adam's Covenant of Works; and stand by as an unconcerned
Spectator, when challenged and provoked to speak in defense thereof?

Is there any thing found in God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. to make it
an abolished Covenant of Works, which does not as injuriously bear upon, and
strike at the very life of the Covenant of Grace in the last and best Edition
of it, under which the whole Church of God now stands? What is that thing (I
would fain know) in God's Covenant with Abraham? Is it the Promissory part of
it, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, Genesis 17. 7? God
forbid: for the essential and sweetest part of the New Covenant is contained in
that Promise, Ier. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 10. Yet thou will find my Antagonist here
forced to assert, God may become a Peoples God in a special manner by virtue of
the abolished Covenant of Works; and such he makes this Covenant to be.

Or does the Restipulation Abraham and his were here required to make unto God,
even to walk before him, and be perfect; does this make it an Adam's Covenant
of Works? Surely no. For as God there requires perfection of Abraham, so Christ
requires the same perfection of all New Covenant Foederates now, Matthew. 5. 48.
Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; which is
altogether as much as ever God required of Abraham and his, in Genesis 17. 1. Take
Perfection in what sense you will, either for a positive Perfection, consisting
in truth and sincerity; or a comparative Perfection, consisting in the growth
and more eminent degrees of Grace; or a superlative Perfection, which all
New Covenant Foederates strive after here, Phil. 3. 12, 13- and shall certainly
attain in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23. In this also the Covenant with Abraham, and with
us, are truly and substantially one and the same.

Or does my mistaken Friend imagine, that God required this Perfection of
Abraham, and his, as in the First Covenant he required it from Adam, and all
his? viz. to be performed and maintained in his own strength, under penalty of
the Curse; but now though Christ command perfection, yet what duty lies in any
command, answerable strength for it lies in the Promise? Very well, and was it
not so then? compare the Command, Deuter. 10. 16. Circumcise therefore the
fore-skins of your hearts, with the answerable gracious Promise to enable them
so to do, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the
heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God.

Or lastly, Did Circumcision, the Sign and Seal added to Abraham's Covenant,
make it an Adam's Covenant of Works? That Is equally impossible with the former:
for no man, but such a daring Man as I am concerned with, will dare to say,
that a Seal of the righteousness of Faith (as Circumcision was, Romans 4. 11.)
can make the Covenant, to which it is affixed (and which I have shown in all
the other substantial parts, the very same with that we are now under) to
become an Adam's Covenant of Works.

These things I have here superadded, to leave as little as is possible behind
me to be an occasion of further trouble and contention. Let all strife
therefore in so plain a case be ended: Contentious Spirits are not the most
excellent Spirits among Christians. Fire (and so Contention) is more apt to
catch in low-built thatcht Cottages, than in high-built Castles, and Princely
Palaces: the higher we go, still the more peace. The highest Region is most
sedate and calm. Stars have the strongest influence, when in conjunction.
Angels (tho legions) have no wars among them; and as willingly go down, as up
the Ladder, without justling each other. And the Most High God is the God of
Peace; let us also be the Children of Peace. And I do assure the Persons with
whom I contend, That whilst they hold the head, and are tender of the Churches
Peace, I can live in charity with them here, and hope to live in glory with
them hereafter.

I remain, Reader, thine and the Truth's Friend, John Flavell.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Causes and Cures, etc.
THE Etymology and definition of the word Error, Introd. p. 2, 3. The
difference between Heresy and Error, Introd. p. 4. Twenty general Observations,
Disc. p. 7. Obs. 1. Truth is the object and natural food of the Understanding,
p. 7. Explained and confirmed, P. 8. Obs. 2. Several sorts of Knowledge,
amongst which the supernatural knowledge of saving Truths revealed in the
Scriptures, is the best, 9. Obs. 3. Unto the attainment of Divine Knowledge out
of the Scripture, some things are naturally, yet less principally requisite in
the subject; and something absolutely and principally necessary, 11. As the
irradiation of the mind by the Spirit of God; the benefits of which, 12. Obs.
4. Among the manifold impediments to the obtaining of true Knowledge, and
settling the mind in the truth and faith of the Gospel, these three are of
special consideration; viz. Ignorance, Curiosity and Error, p. 13. Obs. 5.
Error is binding upon the Conscience as well as Truth; and altogether as much,
and sometimes more influential upon the Affections and Passions than Truth is,
14. Obs. 6. It Is exceeding difficult to get out Error when once it is imbib' d,
and has rooted it self by an open profession, 15. Obs. 7. Men are not so
circumspect and jealous of the Corruptions of their Minds by Errors, as they
are of their Bodies in times of Contagion; or of their Lives with respect to
gross Immoralities, 17. Obs. 8. It Is a great Judgment of God to be given up to
an Erroneous Mind, 19. Obs. 9. It Is a pernicious Evil to advance a mere Opinion
into the place or seat of an Article of Faith; and to lay as great stress upon
it, as they ought to do upon the most clear and fundamental Point, 21. Obs. 10.
Error being conscious to it self of its own weakness, and the strong assaults
that will be made upon it, evermore labors to defend and secure it self under
the wings of Antiquity, Reason, Scripture, and high pretensions to Reformation
and Piety, 23. Obs. 11. God in all Ages in his tender care for his Churches and
Truths, has still qualified and excited his Servants for the defense of his
precious Truths, against the Errors and Heresies that have successively
assaulted them, p. 25. Obs. 12. The want of a modest suspicion and just
reflection, gives both confidence and growth to Erroneous Opinions, 27. Obs.
13. There is a remarkable involution or concatenation of Errors, one linking
in, and drawing another after it, 29. Obs. 14. Errors abound most, and spring
fastest in the times of the Churches Peace, Liberty, and outward Prosperity
under Indulgent Governors, 31. Obs. 15. Errors in the tender bud, and first
spring of them, are comparatively shy and modest, to what they prove
afterward; when they have spread and rooted themselves into the minds of
multitudes, and think it time to set up and justle for themselves in the World,
33. Obs. 16. Nothing gives more countenance and increase to Errors, than a weak
and feeble defense of the Truth against it, 35. Obs. 17 Errors of Judgment are
not cured by compulsion and external force, but by rational conviction, and
proper spiritual remedies, 36. Obs. 18. Erroneous Doctrines producing Divisions
and fierce Contentions amongst Christians, prove a fatal Stumbling Block to the
World; fix their Prejudices, and obstruct their conversion to Christ, p. 38.
Obs. 19. How specious and taking soever the pretenses of Error be, and how long
soever they maintain themselves in esteem among men, they are sure to end in
the loss and shame of their Authors and Abettors at last, 40. Obs. 20. If ever
Errors be cured, and the Peace and Unity of the Church established men must be
convinced of, and acquainted with the occassions and causes both within and
without themselves, from whence their Errors do proceed; and must both know and
apply the proper rules and remedies for the prevention or cure of them, 42.
Divine Permission an occasion of Error, 44. Which must be prevented by
avoiding, 1. A want of love to the Truth, 45. 2. Pride and wantonness of the
mind, 46. 3. The neglect of Prayer, ibid. Culpable Causes of Errors in men are,
1. A wrangling humor at the pretended obscurity of the Scriptures, p. 47. Cod's
wisdom manifested in leaving some difficulties in the Scriptures, 49. For the
prevention of this, cause these Rules following to be heeded and practiced,
viz. R. 1. To expound all obscure Texts of Scripture according to the analogy
and proportion of Faith, p. 50. R. 2. Not to wrest Scripture from its general
and common sense in favor of our preconceived Opinions, 51. R. 3. When we meet
with a difficult place of Scripture, to search the Context thoroughly, 52. R. 4.
Let one Testament freely cast its light upon the other, the Old on the New, and
the New on the Old, ibid. R. 5. Observe the sense which the current of
Expositors do agree in, and which naturally agrees with the scope of the place,
53* Cause 2. The abuse of the Liberty given by Christ to all his People to read
the Scriptures, and to judge of the sense of them by a private judgment of
Discretion, ibid. Remedy of it, is to observe the limits which Christ has set
to this Liberty; which Limitations are, 1. A liberty to read and study, but not
publicly to expound and preach the Word, 57. 2. Christians of different
Abilities ought to study some parts of Scripture rather than others, 59. Cause
3. Slothfulness in a due and serious search of the Scripture, 61. How to find
the institution of the Sabbath in the Scripture, 64. How to find the
institution of the Baptism of Infants there, 65. Several Considerations to cure
this slothfulness, 67. Viz. A serious search of the Scriptures is our duty,
ibid. No action of ours that is not agreeable to God's will, is acceptable to
him, 68. This is the path in which the wisest and best of men have gone before
us, 69. Every discovery of the Will of God obtained in this method, is highly
pleasant, 70. Confirms our Faith, 71. An impartial search into the Will of God
will be a testimony of our Integrity and* Sincerity, ibid. Cause 4. Instability
of judgment, and unsetledness of mind about the truth of the Gospel, 72. This
is the effect sometimes of Hypocrisy, sometimes of weakness, 74. To prevent
which, some Rules, 76. viz. R. 1. To get a real inward implantation into
Christ, ibid. R. 2. To labor for an experimental Taste of the Truths
professed, p. 77. R. 3. To study hard, and pray earnestly, p. 77. R. 4. To be
sensible of the benefit of a good establishment, and the evil and danger of a
wavering mind, p. 78. Cause 5. Eagerness to snatch at any Doctrine or Opinion
that promises ease to an Anxious Conscience, 79. For the cure of which some
Queries propounded, viz. Qu. 1. Whether a good trouble be not better than a
false Peace? 82. Qu. 2. Whether Troubles so laid asleep, will not revive again
with a double force? 83. Q. 3. Whether the Saints in Scripture, that have been
under terrors, have not found peace by those very methods which the Principles
that quiet you, exclude? 84. Cause 6. An easy Credulity. 85. The Remedies
against this. 1. The consideration, that it is beneath a man, 88. 2. That the
privilege of trying all things, is of too great a value to be thus slighted,
89. 3. Observe the Practices and Lives of those men whose Opinions you are so
ready to embrace, 90. Cause 7. A vain Curiosity, 90. Remedies. 1. A due
consideration of the mischiefs that have entered into the World by this, 92. 2.
God has not left his people to seek their Salvation among curious, but solid
and plainly revealed Truths, 94. 3. It Is a dangerous snare of Satan, ibid.
Cause 8. Pride and Arrogance of Humane Reason, 95. Remedies. 1. It Is the Will
of God, that Ratiocination should submit to Revelation, and Reason to Faith,
98. 2. A sense of the weakness and corruption of Natural Reason, 99. 3.
Consider the manifold mischiefs flowing from the pride of Reason. Cause 9.
Ignorant Zeal, 101. Defensatives. 1. A Reflection upon the mischiefs occasioned
by it in all Places and Ages, 104. 2. A consideration how hurtful it may prove
to your own Soul, 106. 3. How prejudicial is has been to Human Society, 107.
4. That Opinion is to be suspected which comes in by the Affections, 108. Cause
10. Impulsive of spreading Errors, Satan, 110. Rules for Cure. 1. Pray for a
sound Conversion, 113. 2. Acqu^int your selves with the Devices of Satan, ibid.
3. Resign your Souls to the conduct of Christ and his Spirit, 114. 4. Live in
the practice of the truths and duties God has revealed already, 115. Cause 11.
Instrumental, the false Teacher, ibid. Remedies. 1. Pray for strength of Grace,
and solidity of Judgment, and use all means to obtain it, 119. 2. Acquaint your
selves with the Artifices of such as these, 121. Such as are, their endeavors
to blast the reputation of faithful Teachers, ibid. the mixing their Errors
among solid Truths, 122. Cause 12. The methods used by False Teachers to draw
men from the truth; among which the first is, their representing the Abuses of
the Ordinances of God in such a manner as to scare tender Consciences from the
use of them, 124. Remedies. 1. Nothing so great and sacred in Religion, but
what has been vilely corrupted and abused, 127. 2. It Is the temper of a
gracious Soul to love those Ordinances which are most abused and disgraced,
129. 3. Before you forsake any Ordinance, consider whether you have found no
advantage by it, 130. Cause 13. Another method which they use, is, a granting
to their Followers a Liberty of Prophesying, 131. Remedies. 1. Let all that
encourage or undertake such a work as this, consider the danger they cast on
their own, and other men's Souls, 134. 2. How daring a presumption it is to
intrude themselves into such an Office, without a Call from Christ, 136. 3. To
vent our unsound Liberty, is said in Scripture to be our greatest dishonor,
137. 4. It Is much more safe and advantageous for every one to fill their own
places with their proper work, ibid. Cause 14. Another method of theirs, is a
Spirit of Enthusiasm, or a pretense to Revelations, 138. Remed. 1. Whatever
Doctrine seeks credit to it self this way, ought to be suspected of wanting a
Scripture-foundation, 141. 2. Consider, how often the Devil has abused the
World by such ways as these, 142. 3. H^w impossible it is to know, whether such
a Revelation be from God, or the Devil, 144. Cause 15. Another method they use,
is Timing their Assaults, 145. Remed. 1. Respects Ministers, that they should
look carefully after the Souls of young Converts, 149. Remed. 2. Young Converts
should consider, That they must not expect to find Christ in one way, and not
another; that they are exposed to the Snares of Satan; and that it is a sad
thing to grieve the hearts of those Ministers who have traveled in pain for
them, 150, 151. Cause 16. Another Artifice of False Teachers, is, to press
their Proselytes to declare speedily for them and their Opinions. 152.
Remedies. Consider, 1. That hasty engagements in disputable matters, have cost
many Souls dear, 155. 2. Weighty Actions require answerable deliberations,
ibid. 3. The only season wherein men have to consider, is, before their
Affections are too far engaged, 156. 4. Consult with pious Ministers, and trust
not to your own Judgment, 157. 5. Suspect that Opinion that will not allow you
a due time for consideration, 158. Consectaries from the whole, ibid. 1. The
usefulness and necessity of ^ standing Ministry, ibid. 2. How little peace the
Church must expect, till a greater light be poured out upon it, 159. 3. What a
mercy it is to be kept sound in Judgment, and steadfast in the ways of Christ,
161. 4. We may discover one cause of the great decay of serious P^ety in this
Age, 162. 5. One Reason of the frequent. Persecutions God exercised his Church
with, 163. 6. We may learn the duty and necessity of mutual Charity and
forbearance, 164.
The Contents of Vindiciarum Vindex, or the First Appendix.
THE whole of the Answer reduced under three heads, p. 175. Two things
premised, 176. Head 1. Mr. Carry has not been able to free his Thesis from the
horrid absurdity charged upon it, viz. That Moses, and the whole People of God,
were under a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace at the same time, 179.
From whence follows, Absurd. 1. That all their lives they were in the midway
between life and death, and after death in the midway betwixt Heaven and Hell,
180. Mr. Cary's First Reply, 184. Answered, 185. Mr. Cary's Second Reply, 187.
Answered, ibid. The Ten Commandments complexly taken, including the Ceremonial
Law, were added as an Appendix to the promise, 192. Mr. Cary's Answer to it
considered, 194. A Promise of pardon in the Sinai Dispensation, to penitent
Sinners, 198, 199. The several Arguments that are left standing in their full
force against Mr. Carry, 200, 201, 202, 203. The Law given at Sinai, wrote of
the chief Privileges which the Jews had, 203. His Argument, that the Law is not
of faith, considered and answered, 206. Dr. Edw. Reynolds's Opinion about the
Law, 207, 213. The Position about Abraham's Covenant, being a Covenant of
Grace, defended, 213. The first Argument for the proof of it, 214. Mr. C's
Reply answered, 215. His distinction of A Covenant of Works, and The Covenant
of Works, overthrown, 217, 218. The second Argument for the proof of it, 220.
Mr. C's Reply answered, 221. Third Argument, 222. Mr. C's Reply answered, 223.
The Covenants not made with Abraham in Genesis 17. 225, 228. Circumcision did not
oblige all men, on whom it passed, to keep the whole Law of Moses for
Righteousness, 230. Fourth Argument, 231. Circumcision in its direct end,
taught them the corruption of Nature by sin, and the mortification of sin by
the Spirit, 231. Mr. C's Reply answered, 232. His Arguments to prove the Sinai
Covenant a Covenant of Works, likewise answered, 233. Cutting off, in Genesis 17.
14. not the same with the death threatened to Adam, ibid. How faith reckoned to
Abraham for Righteousness while he was in Uncircumcision, 234. How the Sinai
Covenant is a Bondage Covenant, 236. Dr. Crisp's Judgment, 237. Of the
Conditionality of the New Covenant, 242. The Question stated, 243. What the
word Condition signifies, 245. Antecedent and consequent Conditions, 246. No
condition of the Covenant with respect to its first sanction with Christ, 247.
but has an antecedent Condition with respect to the application of its
benefits unto men, 248. Which is Faith, as organically considered, 249. The
Opinions of Orthodox Divines in this Question cited, 250. That the Covenant is
Conditional, proved from M. C's own Concessions, 256. Christ has not performed
the Condition for us, 262. Tho he works Faith in us by his Spirit, 263. A
Condition does not imply merit, 264. Arguments to prove the conditionality of
the Covenant; 266. First Argument, 267. Second Argument, 268. Third Argument,
ibid. Fourth Argument, 270. Fifth Argument, 272. Mr. Cary's Reply to it, 273.
The answer, 274. The Reasons of my Faith and Practice in the Baptism of
Infants, 278. in several Theses. These. 1. God has dealt with his Church and
People in the way of a Covenant, and will do so to the end of the World, 281.
These. 2. After the Cessation of the first Covenant, as a Covenant of Life, God
has published a Second Covenant of Grace by Jesus Christ, 283. When the
Covenant of Grace took place, 284. These. 3. Tho the primordial Light of this
Covenant of Grace was comparatively weak and obscure; yet God from the first
publication of it, has been heightning its Privileges, and amplifying its
Glory in the after Editions; and will more and more illustrate it to the end of
the World, 287. These. 4. It is past all doubt, that the Infant Seed of Abraham,
under the second Edition of the Covenant of Grace, were taken into God's
gracious Covenant, had the Seal of that Covenant applied to them, and were
thereby added to the visible Church, 289. These. 5. That Romans 11. 17. is a clear
proof, that believing Parents, and their Seed, are ingrafted into the room of
the Jews, who were broken off, 290, 291. These. 6. Suitably hereunto, when a
Christian Church was constituted, the Children of such believing Parents were
declared foederally holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. That the Promise which was sealed to
them by Circumcision, is now sealed by Baptism, Act. 2. 39. 292. These. 7. The
change of the Token and Seal of the Covenant, from Circumcision to Baptism,
will by no means infer the change of the Covenants, especially when the latter
comes into the place of, and serves to the same use and end with the former,
Col. 2. 11. p. 295. A Postscript to Mr. Carry, 297. Some absurdities chargeable
upon him, 300.
The Contents of the Second Appendix: Or, The Rise and Growth of Antinomianism.
THe rise of Antinomianism, Ap. 2. 308. The Abuse of Free Grace chargable upon
good, as well as wicked Men, 311. By what means some good Men may be drawn to
such dangerous Opinions, 313, 314, 315, 316. A Catalogue of Ten Antinomian
errors, 318. which are all contrary to the current of the Scriptures, 323. and
to the experience of Saints, 325. Error 1. That Justification is an eternal Act
of God, and so perfectly abolishes Sin in our Persons, that we are as clear
from Sin as Christ himself, 328. Sense of the Orthodox about it, 328, 329. This
proved to be irrational, 332. Unscriptural, 335. Injurious to Jesus Christ,
338. and injurious to the Souls of Men, 340. Error 2. That Justification by
Faith, is only the manifestation to us of what was really and actually done
before. Reasons against it, 341, ad 350. Error 3. That Men ought not to doubt
of their Faith, or question, whether they believe or no. Reasons against it,
351 ad 354. Error 4. That Believers are not bound to confess their Sins, or
pray for the Pardon of them. From whence will follow either, 1. That there is
no Sin in Believers, 355. Or 2. That Sin in them is inconsiderable, 357. Or 3.
That it is not the Will of God they should confess and mourn over them; which
is refuted, 358 Error 5. That God sees no Sin in Believers, 360. This proved to
be injurious to God's Omniscience, 361. To be inconsistent with his
providential Dispensations, 362. To have no foundation in Scripture, 363. To
clash with their other Principles, 365. Error 6. That God is not angry with the
Elect for their Sins, 365. How the Antinomians led into this Error, 366. Three
Concessions about God's Corrections of his People, 368. God lays his
Corrections on his People, 369. And for their Sins, 371. These Corrections
consistent with his satisfied Justice, 373 Error 7. That by God's laying our
Iniquities upon Christ, he became as sinful as we, and we as completely
righteous as he. That not only the Punishment of Sin, but the Sin it self was
laid upon Christ, 375, 376. Four Concessions, 377, 378. Sin simply considered,
did not become the Sin of Christ, 379. We are not as completely Righteous as
Christ, 384. Error 8. Neither Believers own Sins, nor the Sins of others, can
do them hurt. Nor must they do any Duty for their own Good, Salvation, or
eternal Reward, 389. That Believers sins do them no hurt, refuted, ibid. Sin
considered formally, 392. Effectively, 392. Reductively, 393. That Believers
ought to do no Duty for their own good, or with an Eye to their reward,
refuted, 395. Self Ends, either Corrupt or Spiritual, 397. This Error injurious
to the Souls of Men, ibid. Error 9. The new Covenant is not made with us, but
Christ for us; The Covenant is wholly a promise without any Condition on our
parts; That Faith, Repentance, Obedience, are Conditions on Christ's part, and
that he performs them for us, 398. Refuted, 399. The Covenant of Redemption,
and of Grace, distinguished, ibid. Christ did not believe and repent for us,
401. Error 10. They deny Sanctification to be the evidence of Justification,
404. Refuted, ibid.
The Contents of the Sermon about Gospel-Unity.
THe Text, 1 Cor. 1. 10. opened, p. 410. A Duty, and the Arguments enforcing
it, 410, 11. Doctrine, Unity among Believers is a necessary Mercy, and
indispensible Duty, 414. What Unity among Believers is, explained, 415.
Consists in a Mystical Union with the Head, and a Moral Union among themselves,
ad. 419. This Unity desirable as it conduces, (1.) To the Glory of God, 419.
(2.) To the Comfort and Benefit ^f Souls, 421. (3.) With respect to the World,
422. Use. By way of Exhortation to Unity, 424. Motive 1. 425. Mot. 2. 427. Mot.
3. 428 Mot. 4. 432. Mot. 5. 433. Mot. 6. 436. Use 2. Direction, 436. Direction
1. 437. Direction 2. 440. Ministers to mind their proper work, ibid. The People
to mind theirs, 441. Direction 3. 442. Direct. 5. 444. Direct. 6. 445. Direct.
7. 446. Direct. 8. 447.
A Table of the Scriptures Vindicated and Explained.
C C. stands for the Causes and Cures of Mental Errors; Ap. 1. for the 1st
Appendix* Ap. 2. for the 2d Appendix; Sermon. for the Sermon of Gospel-Vnity.

GEnesis, cap. 17. v. 7, 8. Ap. 1. p. 233. -- v. 9, 10. C. C. p. 65. Ap. 1.
225. Leviticus, cap. 26. v. 40, 41. C. C. p. 70. Ap. 1. p. 198. Numbers, cap.
23. v. 21. Ap. 2. p. 363. Job 12. 11. C. C. p. 7. Psalm 58. 3. C. C. p. 3. 89.
v. 30, 31. Ap. 2. p. 374. Canticles 2. 6, 7. Sermon. p. 423. Isaiah 9. 16. C. C
p. 136. Jer. 15. 16. C. C. p. 70. 50. v. 20. Ap. 2. p. 364. Mal. 3*16. C. C. p.
107. Matt. 15. 14. C. C. p. 88. Joh. 17. 23. Sermon. p. 422. Acts 2. 38. C. C. p.
65. -- v. 46, 47. Sermon. p. 421. cap. 7. 38. Ap. 1. p. 199. cap. 15. 10. Ap. 1.
p. 236. cap. 16. 2, 3. Ap. 1. p. 226, 229. Rom 1. 26. C. C. p. 19. cap. 4. 9,
10. Ap. 1. p. 234. -- v. 11. Ap. 1. p. 220. -- v. 13. Ap. 1. p. 234. cap. 5.
17, 20. Ap. 1. p. 189. cap. 6. 1, 2. Ap. 2. p. 309. cap. 8. 28. Ap. 2. p. 389.
-- v. 33. Ap. 2. p. 336. cap. 9. 4. Ap. 1. p. 203. cap. 10. 2. C. C. p. 102.
cap. 11. 16. C. C. p. 65. -- v. 17. Ap. 1. p. 290. cap. 12. 2. C. C. p. 67. --
v. 6. C. C. p. 50. cap. 15. 5. Sermon. p. 419. 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13. C. C. p. 41.
cap. 7. 14. C. C. p. 51. 65. 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7. Ap. 1. p. 197. Galatians 1. 6. C.
C. p. 154. cap. 3. 1. C. C. p. 118. -- v. 12. Ap. 1. p. 205. -- v. 17. Ap. 1.
p. 176, 229. cap. 4. 17. C. C. p. 102. cap. 5. 1. Ap. 1. p. 236. -- v. 23. Ap.
1. p. 230. -- v. 4. Ap. 1. p. 284. Ephesians 4. 14. C. C. p. 118, 72, 74.
Philippians 2. 12. Sermon. p. 424. Colossians 2. 6, 7. C. C. p. 76. -- v. 10, 11.
C C. p. 66. cap. 3. 10. C. C. p. 8. 1 Thessalonians 4. 11. Sermon. p. 440. 2
Timothy 4. 3. C. C. p. 90. Hebrews 5. 13, 14. C. C. p. 59. James 4. 8. C. C. p.
74. 2 Peter 1. 12. C. C. p. 77. cap. 2. 1. C. C. p. 18, 34. -- v. 3. C. C. p.
118. cap. 3. 16. C. C. p. 47, 48. p. 51. p. 135. 1 John 2. 13. C. C. p. 59.
cap. 3. 7. Ap. 2. p. 385. Jude v. 4. Ap. 2. p. 3 10. v. 13. C. C. p. 3. 73. v.
16. C. C. p. 46.
CORRIGENDA.
PAge 10. l. 23. for you, r. your; p. 18. l. 23. for their, r. there; and l. 2
4. for as r. a; p. 23. in the Margent, r. tenetur; p. 37. l. 23. r dissent in
judgment; p 51. l. 19. r. (...); p. 54. l. 22. ^or full liberty, r. fullness;
p. 62. l. 19. r. spars^m; p. 72. l. penult, r. wait; p. 80. in the Marg. for
assailed, r. absolved; p. 89. l. 7. for carry, r. carry; p. 120. l. 4. add wait;
p. 155. l 4 r. preventives; p. 167. l. 19. r. temerity; p. 249. dele as it is,
and add in its place, in this sense.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Printed a Book, Entitled, A Demonstration of the first
Principles of the Protestant Applications of the Apocalypse; together with the
Consent of the Ancients, concerning the fourth Beast in the 7th of Daniel, and
the Beast in the Revelations: By Drue Cressener, D. D. Printed for Tho.
Cockerill.

A Blow at the Root: OR, THE CAUSES and CURES OF Mental Errors.
The INTRODUCTION.
FINDING by sad Experience what I before justly feared, that Errors would be
apt to spring up with Liberty (though the restraint of just Liberty, being a
practical Error in Rulers, can never be the cure of Mental Errors in the
Subjects;) I judged it necessary at this Season to give a Succinct account of
the Rise, Causes, and Remedies of several Mistakes and Errors, under which even
the Reformed Churches among us, as well as others, do groan at this Day.

I will not stay my Reader long upon the Etymology and Derivations of the Word.
We all know that Etymologies are no Definitions* Yet because they cast some
light upon the Nature of the thing we enquire after, it will not be lost labor
to observe that this word ERROR derives it self from three Roots in the Hebrew
Language.

(1.) The Frst word Primitively signifies to deviate or decline from the true
Scope or path, (...) Chatta, a Scopo aberravit.
as Unskilful Marks-men, or Ignorant and Inadvertent Travelers use to do. The
least variation or turning aside from the true Rule and Line, tho it be but an
hairs breadth, presently becomes an Error. We read, Judge. 20. 16. of 700.
Benjamites, who could every one sling stones at an hairs breadth, and not miss,
(...) Heb. and not err. This by a Metaphor is applied to the Mind or Judgment
of man; and denotes the warpings thereof from the Straight, Perfect, Divine Law
or Rule, and is usually Translated by the word Sin.

(2.) It is derived from another word also, which signifies to wander in
variable and uncertain motions: You find it in the Title of the 7th. Psalm,
Shiggaion of David, a wandering Song, (...) Shaga.
or a Song of variable Notes and Tunes, higher and lower, sharper and flatter.
In both the former Derivations it seems to note simple Error through mere
Weakness and Ignorance. But then

(3.) In its Derivation from a third Root, it signifies not only to Err, but to
cause others to Err also; and so signifies a Seducer, or one that is active in
leading others into a wrong way; and is applied in that sense to the Prophets
in Israel, (...) Tagna. in Hiph.
who seduced the People, Ezekiel. 13. 10. The Greek Verb (...) takes in both these
senses, both to go astray, and when put Transitively, to lead or cause others
to go astray with us. Hence is the word (...), Planets or wandering Stars; the
title given by the Apostle Jude ver. 13. to the false Teachers and Seducers of
his time.

An Error then is any departure or deviation in our Opinions or Judgments from
the perfect Rule of the Divine Law: And to this all men by nature are not only
liable, but inclinable. Indeed man by Nature can do nothing else but Err, Psalm.
58. 3. he goes astray as soon as born; makes not one true step till renewed by
Grace, and many false ones after his Renovation. The Life of the Holiest man is
a Book with many Errata's; but the whole Edition of a wicked man's Life is but
one continued Error; he that thinks he cannot Err, manifestly Errs in so
thinking. The Pope's supposed and pretended Infallibility has made him the
great deceiver of the World. A good man may Err, but is willing to know his
Error, and will not obstinately maintain it, when he once plainly discerns it.

Error and Heresy among other things differ in this; Heresy is accompanied
with pertinacy; and therefore the Heretic is (...), sels-condemned; his own
Conscience condemns him, whilst men labor in vain to convince him. He does not
formally and in terms Condemn himself, but he does so equivalently, whilst he
continues to own and maintain Doctrines and Opinions which he finds himself
unable to defend against the evidence of Truth. Humane frailty may lead a man
into the first, but Devilish Pride fixes him in the last.

The word of God which is our rule, must therefore be the only Test and
Touchstone to try and discover Errors; for Regula est index sui and obliqui.
It Is not enough to convince a man of Error, that his Judgment differs from
other men's; you must bring it to the Word, and try how it agrees or disagrees
therewith; else he that charges another with Error, may be found in as great or
greater an Error himself. None are more disposed easily to receive and
tenaciously to defend Errors, than those who are the Antesignani, Heads or
Leaders of Erroneous Sects, especially after they have fought in defense of bad
Causes, and deeply engaged their Reputation.

The following Discourse justly entitles it self, A BLOW AT THE ROOT: And
though you will here find the Roots of many Errors laid bare and open; which
comparatively are of far different degrees of Danger and Malignity; which I
here mention together, many of them springing from the same Root: Yet I am far
from censuring them alike; nor would I have any that are concerned in lesser
Errors be exasperated, because their lesser Mistakes are mentioned with greater
and more pernicious ones; this Candor I not only entreat, but justly challenge
from my Reader.

And because there are many general and very useful Observations about Errors,
which will not so conveniently come under the Laws of that Method which governs
the main part of this Discourse, viz. the CAUSES and CVRES of Error: I have
therefore sorted them by themselves, and premised them to the following Part in
Twenty Observations next ensuing.

Twenty general Observations, about the rise and increase of the Errors of the
times.
First Observation.
TRuth is the proper Object, the natural and pleasant food of the
Understanding, Job 12. 11. Does not the ear (that is, the understanding by the
ear) try words, as the mouth tastes meat? Knowledge is the assimilation of the
Understanding to the truths received by it. Nothing is more natural to man,
than a desire to know: Knowledge never cloys the Mind, as food does the natural
Appetite; but as the one increases, the other is proportionably sharpened and
provoked. The Minds of all (that are not wholly immersed in Sensuality) spend
their Strength in the laborious search and pursuit of Truth. Sometimes climbing
up from the Effects to the Causes, and then descending again from the Causes to
the Effects; and all to discover Truth. Fervent Prayer, sedulous Study, fixed
Meditations, are the labors of inquisitive Souls after Truth. All the
Objections and Counter-arguments the mind meets in its way, are but the pauses
and hesitations of a bivious Soul, not able to determine whether Truth lies
upon this side, or upon that.

Answerable to the sharpness of the Minds appetite, is the fine edg of Pleasure
and Delight it feels in the discovery and acquisition of Truth. When it has
Racked and Tortured it self upon knotty Problems, and at last discovered the
Truth it sought for; with what joy does the Soul dilate it self, and run (as it
were with open arms) to clasp and welcome it?

The Understanding of man at first was perspicacious and clear, all Truths lay
obvious in their comely order and ravishing beauty before it: God made man
upright, Eccl. 7. 29. this rectitude of his mind consisted in Light and
Knowledge, as appears by the prescribed method of his Recovery, Col. 3. 10.
Renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him. Truth in the
Mind, or the Minds union with Truth, being part of the Divine Image in man,
discovers to us the Sin and Mischief of Error, which is a defacing (so far as
it prevails) of the Image of God.

No sooner was man created, but by the exercise of knowledge he soon discovered
God's Image in him; and by his Ambition after more, lost what he had. So that
now there is an haziness or cloud spread over Truth by Ignorance and Error, the
sad effects of the Fall.

Second Observation.
Of Knowledge there are diverse sorts and kinds; some is Humane, and some Divine;
some Speculative, and some Practical; some Ingrafted, as the Notions of
Morality, and some Acquired by painful search and Study: But of all knowledge
none like that Divine and Supernatural knowledge of saving truths revealed by
Christ in the Scriptures; from whence arises the different degrees both of the
Sinfulness and danger of Errors; those Errors being always the worst, which are
committed against the most important Truths revealed in the Gospel.

These Truths lie infolded either in the plain words, or evident and necessary
consequences from the words of the Holy Scriptures; Scripture-Consequences are
of great use for the refutation of Errors; it was by a Scripture-consequence,
that Christ successfully proved the Resurrection against the Sadduces, Matthew.
22. The Arrians and other Heretics rejected consequential proofs, and required
the express words of Scripture only, hoping that way to defend and secure their
Errors, against the arguments and assaults of the Orthodox.

Some think that reason and natural light is abundantly sufficient for the
direction of life; but certainly nothing is more necessary to us for that end,
than the written Word; for though the remains of natural light have their place
and use, in directing us about natural and earthly things; yet they are utterly
insufficient to guide us in spiritual and heavenly things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The
natural man receives not the things of God, etc. Ephesians. 5. 8. Once were ye
darkness, (...), now are ye light in the Lord, i. e. by a beam of heavenly
light shining from the Spirit of Christ, through the written Word, into you
minds or understandings.

It Is the written Word which shines upon the path of our Duty, Psalm. 119. 105.
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament do jointly make the Solid
Foundation of a Christian's Faith. Hence Ephesians. 2. 20. we are said to be built
upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. We are bound therefore to
honor Old Testament Scriptures as well as New, they being part of the Divine
Canon; and must not scruple to admit them as sufficient and authentic proofs,
for the confirmation of Truths, and refutation of Errors. Christ referred the
people to them, Ioh. 5. 39. and Paul Preached and Disputed from them, Acts 26.
22.

Third Observation.
Unto the Attainment of Divine Knowledge out of the Scriptures, some things are
naturally, yet less principally requisite in the Subject; and something
absolutely and principally necessary.

The natural qualifications desirable in the Subject, are clearness of
Apprehension, solidity of Judgment, and fidelity of Retention. These are
desirable requisites to make the Understanding susceptible of knowledge; but the
irradiation of the mind by the Spirit of God, is principally necessary, Joh.
16. 13. He shall guide you into all truth: The clearest and most comfortable
light he gives to men, is in the way of Sanctification, called the teachings
of the Anointing, 1 John 2. 27.

When this spiritual sanctifying light shines upon a mind, naturally enriched
and qualified with the three forementioned requisites, that Mind excels others
in the riches of knowledge. And yet the teachings of the Spirit in the way of
Sanctification, do very much supply and recompense the defects and weaknesses
of the forementioned qualifications. Whence two things are highly remarkable:

1. That men of great abilities of natute, clear apprehensions in natural
things, strong Judgments, and tenacious memories, do not only frequently fall
into gross Errors and damnable Heresies themselves; but become Heresiarchs, or
Heads of erroneous Factions, drawing multitudes into the same sin and misery
with themselves; as Arrius, Socinus, Pelagius, Bellarmin, and multitudes of
others have done.

And secondly, It is no less remarkable, that men of weaker parts, but Babes in
comparison, through the Sanctification and direction of the Spirit, for which
they have humbly waited at his feet in Prayer, have not only been directed and
guided by him into the Truth, but so confirmed and fixed therein, that they
have been kept sound in their Judgments in times of abounding Errors, and firm
in their adherence to it in days of fiercest Persecution. How men of excellent
natural parts have been blinded, and men of weak natural parts illuminated; see
1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. Matthew. 11. 25.

Fourth Observation.
Among the manifold impediments to the obtaining of true Knowledge, and settling
the mind in the truth and faith of the Gospel, these Three are of special
remark and consideration, viz. Ignorance, Curiosity, and Error.

Ignorance slights it, or despairs of attaining it. Truth falls into contempt
among the ignorant, from sluggishness and apprehension of the difficulties that
lie in the way to it, Prove. 24. 7. Wisdom is too high for a fool. Curiosity
runs beside or beyond it. This Pride and Wantonness of the mind puffs it up
with a vain conceit, that it is not only able to penetrate the deepest
Mysteries revealed in the Scripture, but even unrevealed secrets also, Col. 2.
18. intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind. But Error militates directly against it, contradicts and opposes
Truth, especially when an Error is maintained by pride against inward
convictions, or means of better information. It Is bad to maintain an Error for
want of light; but abundantly worse to maintain it against light. This is such
an affront to the Spirit of God, as he usually punishes with Penal Ignorance,
and gives them up to a spirit of Error.

Fifth Observation.
Error is binding upon the Conscience, as well as Truth; and altogether as much
and sometimes more influential upon the Affections and Passions, as Truth is.

For it presents not it self to the Soul in its own name and nature, as Error;
but in the name and dress of Truth; and under that notion binds the Conscience,
and vigorously influences the passions and affections; and then being more
indulgent to lust than Truth is, it is for that so much the more embraced and
hugged by the deceived soul, Acts 22. 4, 5. The heat that Error puts the soul
into, differs from Religious Zeal, as a Feverish does from a Natural heat,
which is not indeed so benign and agreeable, but much more fervent and
scorching. A mind under the power of Error, is restless and impatient to
propagate its Errors to others, and these heats prey upon, and eat up the vital
Spirits and Powers of Religion.

Sixth Observation.
It Is exceeding difficult to get out Error, when once it is imbibed, and has
rooted it self by an open profession.

Errors, like some sorts of Weeds, having once seeded in a Field or Garden,
it is scarce possible to subdue and destroy them, especially if they be
hereditary Errors, or have grown up with us from our youth; a teneris
assuescere multum est, faith Seneca; it is a great advantage to Truth or Error,
to have an early and long possession of the mind. The Pharisees held many
erroneous opinions about the Law, as appears by their corruptive Commentaries
upon it, refuted by Christ, Matthew. 5. but did he root them out of their heads
and hearts thereby? No, no; they sooner rid him out of the world. The Sadduces
held a most dangerous Error about the Resurrection; Christ disputed with them
to the admiration of others; and proved it clearly against them; and yet we
find the Error remaining long after Christ's Death, 2 Timothy 2. 18. The Apostles
themselves had their minds tinctured with this Error, That Christ should be
outwardly great and magnificent in the world, and raise his Followers to great
Honors and Preferments amongst men: Christ plainly told them it was their
Mistake and Error; for the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister; yet this did not rid their minds of the Error; it stuck fast in them,
even till his Ascension to Heaven. Oh how hard is it to clear the heart of a
good man once leavened with Error! and much more hard to separate it from a
wicked man I am persuaded (says Mr. Gurnal) some men take more pains to
furnish themselves with Arguments to defend some Error they have taken up, than
they do for the most saving Truths in the Bible. Austin said, when he was a
Manichean, Non Tu eras, sed Error meus erat Deus meus; Thou O Lord, were not,
but my Error was my God. Gurnal's Christian Armor, part 2. page 36.


Some have chose rather to die, than to part with their darling Errors, and
Souldamning Heresies. I have read (says Mr. Bridges) of a great Atheist, that
was burnt at Paris for blaspheming Christ, held fast his Atheistical Opinions
till he came to the very stake; boasted to the Priests and Friars that followed
him, how much more confidently he went to sacrifice his life in the strength of
reason, under which he suffered, than Christ himself did; but when he began to
feel Torments indeed, then he roared and raged to the purpose. Vidi ego
hominem. says the Author; in hs Life, he was Loose; in his Imprisonments,
Sullen; and at his Death, Mad with the Horrors of Conscience.

Some inded have recovered the soundness of their Judgments, after deep
corruptions by dangerous Errors. Austin was a Manichee, and fully recovered
from it. So have many more; and yet multitudes hold them fast even to death,
and nothing but the Fire can reveal their work, and discover what is Gold, and
what is Straw and Stubble.

Seventh Observation.
It deserves a Remark, That men are not so circumspect and jealous of the
corruption of their minds by Errors, as they are of their bodies in times of
Contagion; or of their lives with respect to gross immoralities.

Spiritual dangers affect us less than corporeal; and intellectual evils less
than moral. Whether this be the effect of Hypocrisy, the Errors of the mind
being more secret and invisible than those of the Conversation, God only knows,
man cannot positively determine.

Or whether it be the effect of Ignorance, that men think there is less sin and
danger in the one than in the other; not considering that an Apoplexy seizing
the Head, is every way as mortal, as a Sword piercing the Body: And that a
Vertigo will as much unfit a man for service, as an Ague or Fever: The Apostle
in 2 Pet. 2. 1. calls them (...), damnable Heresies, or Heresies of
Destruction. An Error in the mind may be as damning and destructive to the
Soul, as an Error of Immorality or Profaneness in the Life.

Or whether it may come to pass from some remains of fear and tenderness in the
Conscience, which forbids men to reduce their erroneous Principles into
Practice; the relying under many confident Errors in the mind* a^ secret
Jealousy, which we call formido oppositi, which will not suffer them to act to
the full height of their professed opinions. Austin gives this Character even
of Pelagius himself, Retract. lib. 2. cap. 33. Nomen Pelagii non sine laud
aliqua posui, quia vita ejus a multis praedicabatur: I have not mentioned (
says he) the name of that man, without some praise, because his life was famed
by many. And of Swinkfeldius it is said, Caput regulatum illi defuit, corbonum
non defuit: His Heart was much more regular than his Head. Yet this falls out
but rarely in the world; for loose Principles naturally run into loose
Practices; and the Errors of the Head into the Immoralities of Life.

Eighth Observation.
It is a great Judgment of God, to be given over to an erroneous mind.

For the Understanding being the leading Faculty, as that guides, the other
Powers and Affections of the Soul follow, as Horses in a Teem follow the
Fore-horse. Now how sad and dangerous a thing is this, for Satan to ride the
Fore-horse, and guide that, that is to guide the life of man? That Is a
dreadful, spiritual, judicial stroke of God, which we read of Romans 1. 26.
(...); God by a penal Tradition suffered them to run into the dregs of
Immorality, and Pollutions of life; and that because they abused their light,
and became came vain in their imaginations, ver. 21.

Wild whimsies and fancies in the head, usually mislead men into the puddle and
mire of Profaneness, and then it is commonly observed God sets some visible
mark of his Displeasure upon them; especially the Heresiarchs, or Ringleaders
in Error. Nestorius his Tongue was consumed by Worms. Cerinthus his Brains
Knocked out by the Fall of an House. Montanus hang^d himself: It were easy to
instance in multitudes of others, whom the visible Hand of God has marked for
a warning to others; but usually the spiritual Errors of the Mind are followed
with a Consumption and Decay of Religion in the Soul. If Grace be in the Heart,
where Error sways its Scepter in the Head, yet usually there it languishes and
withers. They may mistake their Dropsy, for growth and flourishing, and think
themselves to be more spiritual, because more airy and notional; but if men
would judge themselves impartially, they will certainly find that the Seeds of
Grace thrive not in the Heart, when shaded and over-dropt by an erroneous Head.

Ninth Observation.
It Is a pernicious Evil, to advance a mere Opinion into the place and seat of
an Article of Faith; and to lay as great a stress upon it, as they ought to do
upon the most clear and fundamental Point. To be as much concerned for a Tile
upon the Roof, as for the Cornerstone, which unites the Walls, and sustains
the Building.

Opinion (as one truly says) is but Reason's Projector, and the Spy of Truth:
It makes in its fullest discovery no more than the dawning and twilight of
Knowledge; and yet I know not how it comes to pass, but so it is, that this Idol
of the Mind holds such a sway and Empire over all we hold, as if it were all
the Day we had. Matters of mere opinion, are every where cried up by some
Errorists, for Mathematical Demonstration, and Articles of Faith, written with
a Sunbeam; worshipping the Fancies and Creatures of their own minds, more than
God; and putting more trust in their ill-founded Opinions, than in the surer
word of Prophecy. Much like that Humorist that would not trust daylight, but
kept his Candle still burning by him; because (said he) this is not as subject
to Eclipses, as the Sun is.

And what more frequent, when Controversies grow fervent, than for those that
maintain the Error, to boast every silly Argument to be a Demonstration; to
upbraid and pity the blindness and dullness of their Opposers, as men that shut
their eyes against Sunbeams; yea, sometimes to draw their presumptuous
Censures through the very hearts of their Opposers, and to insinuate that they
must needs hold the Truths of God in unrighteousness, sin against their
knowledge, and that nothing keeps them from coming over to them, but Pride,
Shame, or some Worldly Interest? What a complicated evil is here! Here Is a
proud exalting of our own opinions, and an immodest imposing on the minds of
others more clear and sound than our own, and a dangerous Usurpation of God's
Prerogative in judging the hearts and ends of our Brethren.

Tenth Observation.
Error being conscious to it self of its own weakness, and the strong assaults
that will be made upon it, evermore labors to defend and seeure it self under
the wings of Antiquity, Reason, Scripture, and high pretensions to Reformation
and Piety.

Antiquity is a venerable word, but ill used, when made a cloak for Error.
Truth must needs be elder than Error, as the Rule must necessarily be, before
the ab^rration from it. The gray hairs of Opinions are then only Beauty, and a
Crown, when found in the way of Righteousness. Copper (says Learned Dumoulin)
will never become Gold by Age. A Lie will be a Lie, let it be never so ancient.
We dispute not by Years, but by Reasons drawn from Scripture. That which is now
called an Ancient Opinion, if it be not a true Opinion, was once but a new
Error. When you can tell us how many years are required to turn an Error into
Truth, then we will give more heed to Antiquity, when pressed in the service of
Error, than we now think due to it.

If Antiquity will not do, Reason shall be pressed to serve Error's turn at a
dead lift; and indeed the Pencil of Reason can lay curions Colors upon rotten
Timber, and varnish over erroneous Principles with fair and plausible
pretenses. What expert Artists have the Socinians proved themselves in this
matter? But because men are bound to submit human Authority and Reason to
Divine Revelation, both must give way and strike sail to the Written Word.

Hence it comes to pass, that the great Patrons and Factors for Error, do above
all things labor to gain countenance to their Errors from the Written Word;
and to this end they manifestly wrest and rack the Scriptures to make them
subservient to their Opinions; not impartially studying the Scriptures first,
and forming their notions and opinions according to them; but they bring their
Erroneous Opinions to the Scriptures, and then with all imaginable art and
sophistry wiredraw and force the Scriptures to countenance and legitimate their
Opinions Cum unaquaeque Haeresis sui commenti parentem habeat Diabolum, ac
pudore tam exosi nominis teneatur; pulcherrimum, and quod super omnia est,
nomen Salvatoris profitetur, Scripturarumque dictionibus amicitur, Athanas.
contra Arian


But because pretenses of Piety and Take heed (says one) that when Zeal for
Reformation knocks at the door, some new Errors step nor in with it, which will
as much need an after Reformation.
Reformation are the strokes that give life to the face of this Idol, and give
it the nearest resemblance unto Truth, these therefore never fail to be made
use of, and zealously professed in the favor of Error, though there be little
of either many times to be found in their Persons, and nothing at all in the
Doctrines that lay claim to it.

Eleventh Observation.
God in all ages in his tender care for his Churches and Truths, has still
qualified and excited his Servants for the defense of his precious Truths,
against the Errors and Heresies that have successively assaulted them.

As Providence is observed in every Climate and Island of the World to have
provided Antidotes against the poisonous Plants and Animals of the Country;
and the one is never far from the other: So is the care of his Providence much
more conspicuous in the case now before us. When, or wheresoever venomous
Errors and deadly Heresies do arise, he has his servants at hand with
Antidotes against them.

When Arrius, that cunning and deadly Enemy to the Deity of Christ, struck at
the very heart of our Religion, Faith and Comfort; a man of subtle Parts, and
Blameless Life, which made his Heresy much the more spreading and taking; the
Lord had his well-furnished Athanasius in a readiness to resist and confound
him. And as he had his Athanasius to defend the Deity of Christ; so he wanted
not his Basil to defend the Doctrine of the Holy Spirit against Macedonius.

so when Pelagius was busily advancing Free Will into the Throne of Free Grace,
Providence wanted not its Mallet in Learned and Ingenious Augustine, to break
him and his Idol to pieces: And it is highly remarkable (as the Learned Dr.
Hill observes) that Augustine was born in Africa the same day that Pelagius was
born in Britain.

When Gotteschalcus published his dangerous Doctrine about Predestination, the
Lord drew forth Hincmarus to detect and confute that Error, by evincing
clearly, that God's Predestination forces no man to Sin.

So from the beginning and first rise of Popery, that center and sink of
Errors, we have a large Catalogue of the Learned and Famous Witnesses, which in
all Ages have faithfully resisted and opposed it; and when notwithstanding all,
it had even overrun Europe like a rapid Torrent, or rather Inundation of the
Ocean: And Germany was brought to that pass, that if the Pope had but Commanded
it, they would have eaten Grass or Hay more pecudum. Then did the Lord bring
forth Invincible Luther, and with him a troop of Learned Champions, into the
field against him; since which time the Cause of Popery is become desperate.

Thus the care of Providence in all ages has been as much displayed in
protecting the Church against the dangers that arose from false Brethren within
it, as from avowed persecuting Enemies without it; and had it not been so, the
rank Weeds of Heresies and Errors had long since overtopt and choked the Corn,
and made the Church a barren^Field.

Twelfth Observation.
The want of a modest Suspicion, and just reflection, gives both confidence and
growth to Erroneous Opinions.

If matters of mere Opinion were kept in their proper place, under the careful
guard of Suspicion; they would not make that bustle and confusion in the
Churches, they have done, and do at this day.

It Is confessed, that all Truths are not matters of mere Opinion; neither are
all Opinions of equal weight and value; and therefore not to be left hanging in
an equipendious Scepticisme: And yet it is as true, that matrers of Opinion
o^ght carefully to be sorted from matters of Faith, and to be kept in their own
rank and class, as things doubtful, quibus potest subesse falsum; whilst
matters of Faith clearly revealed, are to stand upon their own sure and firm
Basis. The former, viz. matters of mere Opinion, we are so to hold, as upon
clearer light to be ready to part with them, and give them up into the hands of
Truth. The other, viz. matters of Faith, we are to hold with resolutions to
Live and Dye by them.

What is Opinion, but the wavering of the understanding betwixt probable
Arguments, for and against a point of Doctrine? So that it is rather an
inclination, than an assertion, as being accompanied with Fear, Floating. and
Inconstancy. In such cases there should be a due concession and allowance of
other men's Opinions to them, and why not, whilst they offer as fair for the
Truth as we? And happily their Parts, Helps, and Industries, arenot inferior to
ours, it may be beyond them, and we may discern in them as much tenderness of
Conscience, and fear of Sin as in our selves. In this case a little more modest
Suspicion in our Opinions, would do the Church a great deal of right; and that
which should prevail with all modest persons to exercise it, is the just
reflection they may make upon their own former confident mistakes.

Thirteenth Observation.
There is a remarkable involution or concatenation of Errors, one linking in,
and drawing another after it.

Amongst all Erroneous Sects, there is still some (...), some Helena, for whose
sake the war against Truth is commenced; and the other lesser Errors are
pressed for the sake and service of this leading darling Error. As we see the
whole (...) R. Ecclesiae subjicienda esse omnia summo judicio and tribunali
Ecclesiae, cui praeest Papa, etc. inde conficitur immotas habendas esse
traditiones omnes R. Ecclesiae, dogmata omnia, decreta seu Pontificum seu
Conciliorum. Fred. Spanhem. Elench. Controv. p. 51.
Troop of Indulgences, Bulls, Masses, Pilgrimages, Purgatory, with multitudes
more, flow from, and are pressed into the Service of the Pope's Supremacy and
Infallibility. So in other Sects, men are forc^d to entertain many other
Errors, which in themselves considered, they have no great kindness for; but
they are necessitated to entertain them in defense of that great, leading
darling Opinion they first espoused.

Those that cry up and trumpet abroad the Sovereign power of Free Will, even
without the preventing Grace of God, enabling men to supernatural works, as if
the Will alone had escaped all damage by the Fall, and Adam had not sinned in
that noble Virgin-faculty. To defend this Idol, which is the (...), they are
forced to oppugn and deny several other great and weighty Truths, as particular
eternal Election, the certainty of the Saints Perseverance, the necessity of
preventing Grace in Conversion; which Errors are but the outworks raised in
defense of that Idol.

So in the Baptismal Controversy, men would never have adventured to deny
God's Covenant with Abraham, to be a Covenant of Grace; or to assert the
Ceremonial Law, so full of Christ, to be an Adam's Covenant of works; and
Circumcision, expressly called the seal of the Righteousness of Faith, to be the
condition of Adam's Covenant. Much less would they place all the elect of God
in Israel, at one and the same time, under the severest Curse and Rigor of the
Law, and under the pure Convenant of Grace, were they not forced into these
Errors and Absurdities by dint of Argument, in defense of their darling Opinion.

Fourteenth Observation.
Errors abound most, and spring fastest in the times of the Churches Peace,
Liberty, and outward Prosperity under Indulgent Rulers. Arrius Alexandrinus
Haeresin insanam incipit Alexandriae sub annum Domini 324, ut Eusebius Anno
Imperii Constantini 15.
Arrianism sprang up under Constantine's mild Government.

Christian benevolent Rulers are choice Mercies and Blessings to the Church.
Such as rule over men in the fear of God, are to the Church, as well as Civil
State, like the light of the morning, when the Sun arises, even a morning
without Clouds, as the tender Grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain, 2 Samuel 23. 4.

But this as well as other mercies, is liable to abuse; and under the
influences of indulgent Governors, Error as well as Truth, springs up,
flowers, and seeds. Persecution gives check to the wantonness of men's Opinions,
and finds them other and better work to do. Caterpillars and Locusts are swept
away by the bitter East-winds, but swarm in Halcyon days, and fall upon every
green thing. So that the Church rides in this respect more safely in the stormy
Sea, than in the calm Harbor. Peace and Prosperity is apt to cast its Watchmen
into a sleep, and whilst they sleep, the envious one sows Tares, Matthew. 13.
25.

'Twas under Constantine's benign Government that Poison was poured out into
the Churches. The abuse of such an excellent mercy provokes the Lord to cut it
short, and cause the Clouds to gather again after the Rain. We have found it so
once and again (alas! that I must say again), in this wanton and foolish
Nation. Professors could live quietly together, Converse, Fast, and pray in a
Christian manner together under common Calamities and Dangers; differences in
Opinion were suspended by consent. But no sooner do we feel a warm Sun-blast of
Liberty and Peace, but it revives and heats our dividing Lusts and Corruptions,
instead of our Graces. The Sheep of Christ fight with each other, though their
furious pushing one at another is known to presage a change of Weather.

Fifteenth Observation.
Errors in the tender bud and first spring of them, are comparatively shy and
modest, to what they prove afterward, when they have spread and rooted
themselves into the minds of multitudes, and think it time to set up and justle
for themselves in the World Eunomius haeresin suam (communicato Consilio cum
Eudoxio) aliquamdiu occulte and intricate ac perplexe sparsit; tandem animo
sumpto, quae haeretice sentiret, in coetibus publicis palam ostendit.
Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 29.


They usually begin in modest Scruples, conscientious Doubts and Queries. But
having once gotten many Abetters, and amongst them some that have subtilty and
ability to plead and dispute their Cause, they ruffle it out at another rate;
glory in their numbers, piety and ability of their Party; boast and glory in
the conceited Victories they have achieved over their Opposers. The Masque
drops off its face, and it appears with a brow of Brass, becomes insolent and
turbulent both in Church and State. Of which it is easy to give many pregnant
instances, in the Arians of old, and more recent Errors, which I shall not at
present be concerned with, lest I exasperate, whilst I seek to heal the Wound.

The Donatists in Augustin's time madestly moved, that men might ^ot be
compel^'d to live holy. Coacta and in vita pietas, they mentioned it with
deslike; but when grown in power, facti insolentes vim Orthodoxis inferebant,
insomuch that Dulcitius the Tribune was feign to defend the orthodox against
them with an Army.
Should a man hear the Sermons, or private Discourses of Errorists, whilst the
Design is but forming and projecting, he should meet with little to raise his
jealousy. They speak in Generals, and guard their Discourses with politic
Reserves. You shall not see, tho you see to see, the tendency of their
Discourses. Hence the Apostle says, 2 per. 2. 1. (...), They shall privily (or
covertly) bring in damnable Heresies: As the Boy in Plutarch, being asked by a
Stranger, what is that you carry so closely under your Cloak? wittily answered,
You may well know that I intend you shall not know it, by my so carrying it.

Sixteenth Observation.
Nothing gives more countenance and increase to Error, than a weak and feeble
defense of the Truth against it. Quidam vero non satis coelestibus literis
eruditi, cum veritatis accusatoribus respondere non possent, objicientibus, vel
impossible, vel incongruens esse, ut Deus in uterum se mulieris includeret,
etc. quae omnia cum neque ingenio, neque doctrina defendere ac refutare possent
(nec enim vim rationemque penitus pervidebant) depravati sunt ab itinere recto,
and coelestes literas corruperunt, ut novam sibi doctrinam sine ulla radice ac
stabilitate componerent. Lactan. lib. 4. cap. 30. De Haeresibus.


The strength of Error lies much in the weakness of the Advocates and
Defendants of Truth. Every Friend of Truth is not fit to make a Champion for
it. Many love it, and pray for it, that cannot defend and dispute for it. I can
dye for the Truth (said the Martyr) but I cannot dispute for it. Zuinglius
blamed Carolostadius for undertaking the Controversy of that Age, because
(said he) non habuit satis humerorum, his shoulders were too weak for the
burden.

It can be said of few, as Cicero speaks of one, Nullam unquam in
disputationibus rem defendit, quam non probarit; nullum oppugnavit, quem non
everterit; He undertook no Cause in disputation, which he could not defend; he
opposed no Adversary, but could overthrow him. He is a rare and happy
Disputant, who can clear and carry every point of Truth, of which he undertakes
the defense. 'Twere happy for the Church, if the abilities and prudence of all
her Friends were commensurate and equal to their love and Zeal. Every little
foyl, every weak or impertinent Answer of a Friend to Truth, is quickly turned
into a weapon to wound in the deeper.

Seventeenth Observation.
Errors of Judgment are not cured by compulsion and external force, but by
rational conviction, and proper spiritual Remedies.

Bodily sufferings rather spread than cure intellectual Errors. I deny not but
fundamental Heresies breaking forth into open Blasphemies against God, and
Seditions in the Civil State, ought to be restrained. It Is no way fit men
should be permitted to go up and down the World with Plague-sores running upon
them. Nor do I understand why men should be more cautious to preserve their
Bodies than their Souls. But I speak here of such Errors as may consist with
the foundations of the Christian Faith, and are not destructive to Civil
Government. They take the ready way to spread and perpetuate them, that think
to root them out of the World by such improper and unwarrantable means as
external force and violence. The Wind never causes and Earthquake, till it be
pent in, and restrained from motion.

We neither find, nor can imagine, That those Church or State Exorcists should
ever be able to effect their end, who think to confine all the Spirits of Error
within the Circle of a severe Uniformity. Fires, Prisons, Pillories,
Stigmatizings, etc. are the Popish Topics to confute Errors. It Is highly
remarkable, that the World long ago consented for the avoiding of dissenting
judgment, to enslave themselves and their Posterity to the most fatal and
destructive Heresy that ever it groaned under.

It Is a rational and proper Observation long since made by Lactantius, Quis
mihi imponat necessitatem credendi, quod nolim, vel non credendi, quod velim?
Who can force me to believe what I will not, or not to believe what I will? The
rational and gentle Spirit of the Gospel is the only proper and effectual
method to cure the Diseases of the Mind.

Eighteenth Observation.
Erroneous Doctrines producing Divisions and fierce Contentions amongst
Christians, prove a fatal Stumbling Block to the World; fix their Prejudices,
and obstruct their conversion to Christ. Many Enemies to Christianity flockt to
the Nicene Synod, odio Christianorum, propter abolitam Gentilium
superstitionem, ut haberent in quos illuderent. Say the Centurists.


They dissolve the lovely union of the Saints, and thereby scare off the World
from coming into the Church. This is evidently implied in that Prayer of
Christ, John 17. That all his People might be one, that the World might believe
the Father had sent him. There is indeed no just cause for any to take offense
at the Christian Reformed Religion, because so many Errors and Heresies spring
up among the Professors of it, and divide them into so many Sects and Parties:
for in all this we find no more than what was predicted from the beginning, 1
Cor. 11. 18, 19. I hear there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it:
for there must be also Heresies among you, etc. And again, Acts 20. 30. Also of
your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples
after them. Ante omnia, scire nos convenit, and ipsum, and legatos ejus
praedixisse, quod plurimae Sectae, and Haereses deberent existere, quae
concordiam sancti corporis rumperent: ac mo^^isse, ut summa prudentia
caveremus, ne quando in laqueos and frauds illius adversarii nostri cum quo
nos Deus Iuctari voluit, incideremus. Lactan. lib. 4. cap. 30.


The very same things strongly confirm the Christian Religion, which wicked men
improve to the reproach and prejudice of it. When Celsus objected to the
Christians the variety and contrariety of their Opinions; saying, Were we
willing to turn Christians, we know not of what Party to be, seeing you all
pretend to Christ, and yet differ so much from one another. Tertullian, the
Christian Apologist, made him this wise and pertinent Reply, Haereses non
dolemus venisse, quia novimus esse praedictas. We are not troubled that
Heresies are come, seeing it was predicted that they must come. These things
destroy not the credibility of the Christian Religion, but increase and confirm
it, by evidencing to the World the truth and certainty of Christ's Predictions
(which were quite beyond all human foresight) that as soon as his Doctrine
should be propagated, and a Church raised by it, Errors and Heresies should
spring up among them for the trial of their Faith and Constancy.

Nevertheless, this no way excuses the sinfulness of Errors and Divisions in
the Church. Christ's Prediction neither infuses, nor excuses the Evil predicted
by him: for what he elsewhere speaks of Scandals, is as true in this case of
Errors. These things must come to pass, but woe be to that man by whom they come.

Ninteenth Observation.
How specious and taking soever the pretenses of Error be, and how long soever
they maintain themselves in esteem among men, they are sure to end in the loss
and shame of their Authors and Abetters at last. Post foedum Arii obirum,
quamplurimos ex iis, qui ab Ario prius decepti fuerant, ad sanitatem rediisse,
scribit Athanasius, ad Serapion^m*


Truth is a Rock, the waves of Error that dash against, evermore return in
froth and foam: yea, they foam out their own shame, says the Apostle, Iud. 13.
What Tacitus spoke of crafty Counsels, I may as truly apply to crafty Errors,
Consilia callida prima specie laeta, tractatu dura, eventu tristia: They are
pleasant in their beginnings, difficult in their management, and sad in their
event and issue.

Suppose a man have union with Christ, yet his Errors are but so much Hay,
Wood, Straw, Stubble built, or rather endeavored to be built upon a foundation
of Gold: this the fiery trial burns up; the Author of them suffers loss; and
though himself may be saved, yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. the
meaning is, he makes a narrow escape. As a man that leaps out of an House on
fire, from a Window or Battlement, with great difficulty saves his life; just
so Errorists shall be glad to quit their Erroneous Opinions, which they have
taken so much pains to build, and draw others into: and then, oh what a shame
must it be for a good man to think, how many days and nights have I worse than
wasted, to defend and propagate an Error, which might have been employed in a
closer study of Christ and mine own heart! Keckerman relates a Story of a vocal
Statue, which was thirty years a making by a cunning Artist, ^eck. Phys. p. 16.
Albertus magnus.
which by the motion of its Tongue with little Wheels, Wires, etc. could
articulate the sound, and pronounce an entire Sentence. This Statue saluting
Aquinas, surprised him, and at one stroke he utterly destroyed the curious
Machin, which exceedingly troubled the fond Owner of it, and made him say with
much concernment, Vno ict^ opus trigint a annorum destruxisti, thou have at one
stroke destroyed the study and labor of thirty years.

Beside, What shame and trouble must it be to the zealous Promoters of Errors,
not only to cast away so vainly and unprofitably their own time and strength,
which is bad enough: but also to ensnare and allure the Souls of others into
the same, or worse mischief? for though God may save and recover you, those
that have been misled by you may perish.

Twentieth Observation.
If ever Errors be cured, and the Peace and Unity of the Church established,
men must be convinced of, and acquainted with the Occasions and Causes both
within and without themselves, from whence their Errors do proceed; and must
both know and apply the proper Rules and Remedies for the prevention or cure of
them.

There is much difference betwixt an Occasion, and a proper Cause; these two
are heedfully to be distinguished. Critical and exact Historians, as Polybius
and Tacitus, distinguish betwixt the (...), and the (...), the beginning
Occasions, and the real Causes of a War; and so we ought in this case of Errors
carefully to distinguish them. The most excellent and innocent things in the
World, such as the Scriptures of Truth, the Liberty of Christians, the
Tranquillity and Peace of the Church (as you will hear anon) may, by the
Subtilty of Satan working in conjunction with the Corruptions of men's hearts,
become the Occasions, but can never be the proper culpable Causes of Errors.

Accordingly having made the twenty Remarks upon the Nature and Growth of
Errors (which cannot so well be brought within the following Rules of method) I
shall in the next place proceed in the discovery both of the mere Occasion, as
also of the proper culpable Causes of Errors, together with the proper
Preventives and most effectual Remedies placed together in the following order.

The Occasion.
The holy God, who is a God of Truth, DIVINE PERMISSION.
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. and hates Errors, Rev. 2. 6. the God of Order, and hates
Confusions and Schisms in his Church, 1 Cor. 14. 33. is yet pleased to permit
Errors and Heresies to arise, without whose permission they could never spring.
And this he does for the trial of his Peoples Faith and Constancy, and for a
spiritual punishment upon some men for the abuse of his known Truths; and by
the permission of these Evils he advances his own Glory, and the good of his
Church and People. Augustine answers that Question, Why does not God, since he
hates Errors, sweep them out of the World? Because (says he) it is an act of
greater power to bring good out of evil, than not to suffer Evils to be at all.

Satan's Design in Errors is to cloud and darken God's Name and precious
Truths; to destroy the Beauty, Strength, and Order of the Church. But God's
ends in permitting and sending Errors, are (1.) to plague and punish men for
their abuse of Light, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. For this cause God shall send them strong
Delusions, etc. (2.) To prove and try the Sincerity and Constancy of our
hearts, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 3. I Cor. 11. 19. And lastly, By these things the Saints
are awakened to a more diligent search of the Scriptures, which are the more
critically read and examined upon the trial of Spirits and Doctrines by them, 1
Ioh. 4. 1. Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits; And Rev. 2. 2. Thou
have tried them, that say they are Apostles, etc.

The Prevention.
Though Heresies and Errors must (for the Reasons assigned) break forth into
the World, and God will turn them eventually into his own glory, and the
benefit of his Church: yet it is a dreadful judgment to be delivered over to a
spirit Error, to eb the Authors and Abetters of them; this is a judicial stroke
of God: and as ever we hope to escape, and stand clear out of the way of it,
let us carefully shun these three following Causes and Provocations thereof.

(1.) Want of love to the Truth, which God has made to shine about us in the
means, or into us by actual illumination under the means of knowledge. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 10, 11. Because they received not the love of Truth, God gave them up to
strong Delusions. They are justly plagued with Error that slight Truth. False
Doctrines are fit Plagues for false Hearts.

(2.) Beware of Pride and Wantonness of Mind. It Is not so much the Weakness as
the Wantonness of the Mind, which provokes God to inflict this Judgment. None
likelier to make Seducers than Boasters, Jude 16. Arrius gloried that God had
revealed some things to him, which were hidden from the Apostles themselves.
Simon Magus boasted himself to be the mighty Power of God. The erroneous
Pharisees loved the praises of Men. When the Papist reproached Luther that he
affected to have his Disciples called Lutherans, he replied, Non sic, o fatue,
non sic; oro ut nomen meum taceatur: he disdained that the Children of Christ
should be called by so vile a name as his.

(3.) Beware you neglect not Prayer, to be kept sound in your Judgments, and
guided by the Spirit into all Truth, Psalm. 119. 10. With my whole heart have I
sought thee: O let me not wander, or err, from thy Commandments. This do, and
you are safe from such a judicial Tradition.

The First Cause.
We shall next speak of the Causes of Error found in the evil Dispositions of
the Subjects, which prepare and incline them to receive Erroneous Doctrine and
Opinions, and even catch at the Occasions and least Sparkles of Temptation, as
dry Tinder: and amongst these is found,

(1.) A perverse wrangling Humor at the pretended OBSCURITY of the Scriptures.
The Romish Party snatch at this Occasion, and make it the proper Cause, when
indeed it is but a picked Occasion, of the Errors and Mistakes among men. They
tell us the Scriptures are so difficult, obscure, and perplexed, that if private
men will trust to them as their only Guide, they will inevitably run into
Errors, and their only relief is to give up their Souls to the conduct of their
Church; whereas indeed the true Cause of Error is not so much in the Obscurity
of the Word, as in the corruption of the mind, 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 8.

We do acknowledge there are in the Scriptures, (...), some things hard to be
understood* 2 Pet. 3. 16. the sublime and mysterious nature of the matter
rendering it so: and some things hard to be interpreted from the manner of
expression; as indeed all mystical parts of Scripture and Prophetical
predictions are, and ought to be delivered. The Spirit of God this way
designedly casts a veil over them, till the proper season of their revelation
and accomplishment be come. Besides (as the Learned Glassius observes) in
Paul's style there are found some peculiar words and forms of speech, which
ordinary Rules of Grammar take no notice, nor give any parallel Examples of: as
to be buried with Christ; to be baptized into his death; to which I may add, to
be circumcised in him, etc. There are also multitude of words found in
Scripture of various and vastly different Significations: and accordingly there
is a diversity, and sometimes a contrariety of senses given of them by
Expositors; which to an Humourist or quarrelsome Wit gives an occasion to vent
his Errors with a plausible appearance of Scripture-consent. And indeed
Tertullian says, Non periclitor dicere ipsas Scripturas ita dispositas esse,
ut materiam subministrarent Haereticis. The Scriptures are so disposed, that
Heretics may pick Occasions; and those that will not be satisfied, may be
hardened. See Mark 4. 11, 12.

But all this notwithstanding, the great and necessary things to our Salvation
are so perspicuously and plainly revealed in the Scriptures, that even Babes in
Christ do apprehend and understand them, Matthew. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29.
And though there be difficulties in other points more remote from the
foundation; yet the Spirit of God is not to be accused, but rather his Wisdom
to be admired herein. For (1.) this serves to excite our most intense study and
diligence, which by this difficulty is made necessary, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. the
very Prophets, yea the very Angels search into these things, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12.
(2.) Hereby a standing Ministry in the Church is made necessary, Nehem. 8. 8.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. So that to pretend Obscurity of Scripture to be the
culpable cause of Error, when indeed the fault is in our selves; this is too
much like our Father Adam, which would implicitly accuse God, to exc^se
himself; he laid it upon the Woman which God gave him, and we upon the
Scriptures which God has given us.

The Remedies.
The proper Remedies and Preventives in this case are an heedful attendance to,
and practice of these Rules.

Rule I.
Let all obscure and difficult Texts of Scripture be constantly examined and
expounded according to the Analogy or proportion of Faith, which is St. Paul's
own Rule, Romans 12. 6. Let him that prophesies, (i. e. expounds the Scripture
in the Church) do it according to the proportion of faith. The Analogy or
proportion of Faith is what is taught plainly and uniformly in the whole
Scriptures of Old and New Testament, as the rule of our Faith and Obedience.
Whilst we carefully and sincerely attend hereunto, we are secured from sinful
corrupting the word of God. Admit of no sense which interfereth with this
proportion of Faith. If men have no regard to this, but take liberty to rend
off a single Text from the body of Truth to which it belongs, and put a
peculiar interpretation upon it which is absonous and discordant to other
Scriptures, what woeful work will they quickly make?

Give but a Papist liberty to take that Scripture, Iam. 2. 24. out of the frame
of Scripture, A man is justified by works, and not by faith only; and expo^^d
it without regard to the Tenor of the Gospel-doctrine of Justification in
Paul's Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, and a gross Error starts up
immediately. Give but a Socinian the like liberty to practice upon John 14. 28.
and a gross H^resie shall presently look with an Orthodox face.

Rule II.
Never put a new sense upon words of Scripture in favor of your preconceived
Notions and Opinions, nor wrest it from its general and common use and sense.
This is not to interpret, but to rack the Scriptures, as that word (...)
signifies, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Interpretis officium est, non quid ipse velit, sed
quid censeat ille, quem interpretatur, exponere, as Hieron. against Ruff.
speaks. We are not to make the Scriptures speak what we think, but what the
Prophet or Apostle thought, whom we interpret. In 1 Cor. 7. 14. we meet with
the word [ holy] applied to the Children of Believers; that word is above 500
times used for a state of separation to God: Therefore to make it signify in
that place nothing but Legitimacy, is a bold and daring practicing upon the
Scripture.

Rule III.
Whenever you meet with an obscure place of Scripture, let the Context of that
Scripture be diligently and thoroughly searched; for it is usual with God to set
up some light there to guide us through the obscurity of a particular Text. And
there is much truth in the Observation of the Rabbines, Nulla est objectio in
Lege, quae non habet solutionem in l^tere. There Is no scruple or objection in
the Law, but it has a solution at the side of it.

Rule IV.
Let one Testament freely cast its light upon the other; and let not men
undervalue or reject an Old Testament Text, as no way useful to clear and
establish a New Testament Point of Faith or Duty. Each Testament reflects light
upon the other. The Jews reject the New Testament, and many among us sinfully
slight the Old: But without the help of both, we can never understand the mind
of God^ in either. It Is a good Rule in the Civil-Law, Turpe est de Lege
judicare, tota lege nondum inspecta. We must inspect the whole Law, to know the
sense of any particular Law.

Rule V.
Have a due regard to that sense given of obscure places of Scripture, which
has not only the current sense of Learned Expositors, but also naturally
agrees with the scope of the place. A careless neglect and disregard to this,
is justly blamed by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 7.

Cause II.
A Second evil temper in the Subject, disposing and inclining men to receive
and suck in erroneous Doctrines and Opinions, Controversiae Anabaptisticae
exortae sunt superiore saeculo variis in Europae locis, puta a Muntzero Saxone
cum Sociis Anno MDXXI. occasion scripti Lutheri de liberate Christiana, Fred.
Spanh. Elench. Contr. p. 95.
is the ABUSE of that just and due CHRISTIAN LIBERTY allowed by Christ to all
his people to read, examine, and judge the sense of Scriptures with a private
judgment of discretion.

This is a glorious acquisition, and blessed fruit of Reformation, to vindicate
and recover that just Right, and gracious Grant made to us by Christ and the
Apostles, out of the injurious hands of our Popish Enemies, who had usurped and
invaded it. The exercise of this Liberty, is at once a Duty commanded by
Christ, and commended in Scripture. It Is commanded by Christ, John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, says Christ to the people. 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to
wise men; judge you what I say. And the exercise of this private judgment of
discretion by the people, is highly commended by St. Paul in the Bereans, Acts
17. 11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received
the Word with all readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily whether
those things were so. This Liberty is not allowed in that latitude in any
Religion, as it is in the Christian Religion, nor enjoyed in its full liberty,
as it is in the Reformed Religion, whose glory it is that it allows its
Principles and Doctrines to be critically examined and tried of all Men by the
Rule of the Word, as well knowing, the more it is sifted and searched by its
Professors, the more they will be still confirmed and satisfied in the truth of
it.

But yet this gracious and just liberty of Christians, suffers a double abuse:
One from the Popish Enemies, who injuriously restrain and deny it to the
people. Another, by Protestants themselves, who sinfully stretch and extend it
beyond the just degree and measure in which Christ allows it to them.

The Pope injuriously restrains it, discerning the danger that must necessarily
follow the concession of such a liberty to the people, to compare his
superstitious and erroneous Doctrines with the Rule of the Word.

St. Peter, in 2 Pet. 1. 19. tells the people they have a more sure Word of
Prophecy, whereunto they do well that they take heed. Certainly the Pope forgot
either that he was Peter's Successor; or that ever St. Peter told the people
they did well to make use of that liberty, which he denies them. Mr. Pool tells
us of a Spaniard that used this expression to an English Merchant, You people
of England (said he) are happy, you have liberty to see with your own eyes, and
to examine the Doctrines delivered to you, upon which your everlasting Life
depends; but we dare not say our souls are our own, but are commanded to
believe whatever our Teachers tell us, be it never so unreasonable or
ridiculous. This is a most injurious and sinful restraint upon it on the one
side.

And then Secondly, It Is too frequently abused, by stretching it beyond
Christ's allowance and intendment upon the other side; when every ignorant and
confident person shall, under pretense of liberty granted by Christ, rudely
break in upon the Sacred Text, distort, violate and abuse the Scriptures at
pleasure, by putting such strange and ^oreign senses upon them, as the Spirit
of God never meant or intended Prove. 8. 22. Quod dictum scribit Epiphanius,
primam Ario praebuisse occasionem, haeresin contra filium dei fingendi.


How often have I heard that Scripture, Micha 4. 10. They shall be brought even
to Babylon; confidently interpreted, for almost, but not full h^me to Babylon,
against the very Grammar of the Text, and the Truth of the History? And so
again, that place, Isa. 58. 8. The glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward,
through ignorance of the word, read re-reward, that is, a double reward to his
people? But these are small matters compared with those grosser abuses of
Scripture by the ignorant and unlearned, which prejudice Truth, and too much
countenance Popish Reproaches.

The Remedies.
The proper way to prevent and remedy this mischief, is not by depriving any
Man of his just Liberty, either to read, or judge for himself what God speaks
in his Word, and think that way to cure Errors; that were the same thing as to
cut off the Head to cure an Headache. Leave that sinful policy with the false
Religion. Let those only that know they do evil, be afraid of coming to the
light. But the proper course of preventing the mischiefs that come this way, is
by laboring to bound and contain Christians within those limits Christ himself
has set unto this liberty which he has granted them. And these are such as
follow:

Limitation I.
Though Christ have indulged to the meanest and weakest Christian a liberty to
read and judge of the Scriptures for himself; yet he has neither thereby, nor
therewith granted him a liberty publicly to Expound and Preach the Word to
others: That Is quite another thing.

Every Man that can read the Scriptures, and judge of their sense, is not
thereby presently made Christ's Commission-Officer, publicly and
authoritatively to Preach and Inculcate the same to others: Two things are
requisite to such an employment, viz. Proper Qualifications, 1 Timothy 3. And a
solemn Call or designation, Romans 10. 14, 15. The Ministry is a distinct Office,
Acts 20. 17, 28. 1 These. 5. 12. and none but qualified and ordained persons can
Authoritatively Preach the Word, 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22.

Christians may privately edify one another by reading the Scriptures,
communicating their sense one to another of them, admonishing, counselling,
reproving one another in a private fraternal way, at seasons wherein they
interfere not with more public Duties: But for every one that has confidence
enough (and the ignorant usually are best stocked with it) to assume a liberty
without due Qualification or Call, to Expound and give the Sense of Scriptures,
and pour forth his crude and unstudied Notions, as the pure sense and meaning
of God's Spirit in the Scriptures; this is what Christ never allowed, and
through this Flood-gate Errors have broken in, and overflowed the Church of
God, to the great scandal of Religion, and confirmation of Popish Enemies.

Limitation II.
Though there be no part of Scripture shut up or restrained from the knowledge
or use of any Christian; yet Jesus Christ has recommended to Christians of
different abilities, the study of some parts of Scripture rather than others,
as more proper and agreeable to their Age and Stature in Religion.

Christians are by the Apostle ranked into three Classes, Fathers, Young Men,
and Little Children, 1 John 2. 13. and accordingly the Wisdom of Christ has
directed to that sort of food which is proper to either: For there is in the
Word all sorts of Food suitable to all Ages in Christ; there is both Milk for
Babes, and strong Meat for grown Christians, Heb. 5. 13, 14. Those that are
unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, should feed upon Milk, that is, the
easy, plain, but most nutritive and pleasant practical Doctrines of the
Gospel. But strong Meat (says he) that is, the more abstruse, deep, and
mysterious truths, belongs to them that are of full Age, even those who, by
reason of use, have their Senses exercised to discern both good and evil; that
is, Truth and Error. To the same purpose he speaks, 1 Cor. 3. 2. I have fed you
with milk, and not with meat; for hitherto ye were not able to bear it.

Art thou a weak unstudied Christian? a Babe in Christ? Then the easier, and
more nutritive Milk of plain Gospel-Doctrine is fitter for thee, and will do
thee more good, than the stronger Meat of profound and more mysterious Points;
or the Bones of Controversy, which are too hard for thee to deal with.

God has blessed this Age with great variety of sound and allowed Expositors
in our own Language, by the diligent study of which, and prayer for the
illumination and guidance of the Spirit, you may not only attain unto the true
sense and meaning of the more plain and obvious; but also unto gre^ter
knowledge, and clearer insight into the more obscure and controverted parts of
Scripture.

Cause III.
There is also another evil disposition in the Subject, rendering it easily
receptive of Errors, and that is spiritual SLOTHFVLNESS and carelessness in a
due and serious search of the whole Scripture, with a sedate and rational
consideration of every part and particle therein, which may give us any, though
the least light to understand the mind of God in those obscure and difficult
points we search after the knowledge of.

Truth lies deep, as the rich Veins of Gold do, Prove. 2. If we will get the
treasure, we must not only beg, as he directs, verse. 3. but dig also verse. 4.
else as he speaks, Prove. 14. 23. The talk of the lips tends only to poverty. We
are not to take up with that which lies uppermost, and next at hand upon the
surface of the Text; but to search with the most sedate and considerative mind
into all parts of the written Word, examining every Text which has any respect
to the truth we are searching for, heedfully to observe the Scope, Antecedents,
and Consequents, and to value every Apex, Tittle, and Iota; for each of these
are of Divine Authority, Matt. 5. 18. and sometimes greater weight is laid upon
a small word, yea, upon the addition or change of a Letter in a word, as
appears in the names of Abram and Sarai.

It will require some strength of mind, and great sedulity, to lay all parts of
Scripture before us, and to compare words with words, and things with things,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 13. comparing spiritual things with spiritual.
And though it be true that some important Doctrines, as that of Justification
by Faith, are methodically disposed, and thoroughly cleared and settled in one
and the same Context; yet it is as true, that very many other points of Faith
and Duty are not so digested, but are delivered sparsini, here a little, and
there a little, as he speaks, Isa. 28. 10. You must not think to find all that
belongs to one Head or Point of Faith, or Duty, laid together in a System, or
common place in Scripture; but scattered abroad in several pieces, some in the
Old Testament, and some in the New, at a great distance one from another.

Now in our searches and inquiries after the full and satisfying knowledge of
the Will of God in such Points, it is necessary that the whole Word of God be
thoroughly searched, and all those parcels brought together to an interview. Ex.
Gr.

If a Man would see the entire discovery that was made of Christ, to the
Fathers, under the Old Testament, he shall not find it laid together in any one
Prophet; but shall find that one speaks to one part of it, and another to
another.

Moses gives the first general hint of it, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman
shall break the serpents head. But then if you would know more particularly of
whose Seed according to the flesh, he should come, you must turn to Genesis 22.
18. In thy seed (says God to Abraham) shall all nations of the earth be
blessed. And if you yet doubt what Seed God means there, you must go to the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 16. To thy seed, which is Christ. If you would further know
the place of his Nativity, the Prophet Micha must inform you of that, Mic. 5.
2. it should be Bethlehem-Ephrata. If you inquire of the quality of his Parent,
another Prophet gives you that, Isa. 7. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive,
and bear a Son, and call his name Immanuel. If the time of his Birth be
inquired after, Moses and Daniel must inform you of that, Genesis 49. 10. Dan. 9.
24.

So under the New Testament, If a Man inquire about the change of the Sabbath,
he must not expect to find a formal repeal of the Seventh day, and an express
institution of the first day in its room; but he is to consider,

First, What the Evangelist speaks, Mark 2. 28. That Christ is Lord of the
Sabbath, and so had power, not only to dispense with it, but to change it.

Secondly, That on the first day of the Week Christ rose from the dead, Matt.
28. 1, 2. And that this is that great day, foretold to be the day to be
solemnized upon that account, Psalm. 118. 24.

Thirdly, That accordingly the first day of the Week is emphatically styled the
Lord's day, Rev. 1. 10. where you find his own name written upon it.

Fourthly, You shall find this was the day on which the Apostles and Primitive
Christians assembled together for the stated and solemn performance of Public
Worship, John 20. 19. and other public Church-Acts and Duties, 1 Cor. 16. 1,
2. And so by putting together, and considering all these Particulars, we draw a
just Conclusion, That it is the Will of God, that since the Resurrection of
Christ, the first day of the week should be observed as the Christian-Sabbath.

In like manner as for the Baptizing of Believers Infants; We are not to expect
it in the express words of a New-Testament-Institution or Command, that Infants
under the Gospel should be Baptized; but God has left us to gather
satisfaction about his Will and our Duty in that point, by comparing and
considering the several Scriptures of the Old and New Testament which relate to
that matter; which if we be impartial and considerative, we may do,

First, By considering, that by God's express Command, Genesis 17. 9, 10. the
Infant Seed of his People were taken into Covenant with their Parents, and the
then Sign of that Covenant commanded to be applied to them.

Secondly, That though the Sign be altered, the Promise and Covenant is still
the same, and runs as it did before, to Believers and their Children, Acts 2.
38, 39.

Thirdly, That the foederal holiness of our Children is plainly asserted under
the New Testament, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Romans 11. 16.

Fourthly, We shall further find, that Baptism succeeds in the room of
Circumcision, and that by an Argument drawn from the compleatness of our
Privileges under the New Testament, no way inferior, but rather more extensive
than those of the Jews, Col. 2. 10, 11, 12.

Fifthly, We shall find that upon the Conversion of any Master or Parent, the
whole Household were Bapized. By putting all these things, with some others,
together, we may arrive to the desired satisfaction about the Will of God in
this matter.

But some Men want abilities, and others are too sluggish and lazy to gather
together, compare and weigh all these and many more hints and discoveries of
the Mind of God, which would give much light unto this point; but they take an
easier and cheaper way to satisfy themselves with what lies uppermost upon the
surface of Scripture, and so, as it were by consent, let go, and lose their
own, and their Childrens blessed and invaluable Privileges, for want of a
little labor and patience to search the Scriptures; a folly which few would be
guilty of, if but a small earthly inheritance were concerned therein.

The Remedies.
To cure this Spiritual sluggishness, and awaken us to the most serious and
diligent search after the Will of God in such controversal and doubtful points,
that we may not neglect the smallest hint given us about it, the following
Considerations will be found of great use and weight.

Consideration I.
The most sedate, impartial, and diligent inquiries after the Will of God
revealed in his Word, is a Duty expressly enjoined by his Sovereign Command,
which immediately and indispensibly binds the Conscience of every Christian to
the practice of it.

Remarkable is that Text to this purpose, Romans 12. 2. And be not conformed to
this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Here you find
this Duty, not only associated with, but made the very end of our
Nonconformity to the World, and renovation of our minds, the very things which
constitute a Christian.

And to sweeten our pains in this work, that Will of God, for the discovery
whereof we search, is presented to us under three illustrious and alluring
properties, viz. Good, Acceptable, and Perfect. Good it must needs be, because
the Will and Essence of God, the chief Good, are not two things, but one and
the same. And Perfect it must needs be, because it is the Beam and Standard, by
which the Actions of all reasonable Creatures ought to be weighed and tried, as
to the moral good or evil of them. And being both good and perfect, How can it
choose but, upon both accounts, be highly Acceptable and grateful to an upright
Soul, as that Epithete (...) there imports. Search the Scriptures, says
Christ, Ioh. 5. 39. To the Law and to the Testimony, faith the Prophet, Isa. 8.
20. This is not matter of mere Christian Liberty, but Commanded Duty; and at
our peril^ be it if we neglect it.

Consideration II.
No act of ours can be good and acceptable to the Lord, further than it is
agreeable to his Will revealed in the Word.

No Man can be a Rule to himself. He can be no more his own Rule than his own
End. One Man cannot be a Rule to another. The best of Men, and their Actions,
and Examples, are only so far a rule of imitation to us, as they themselves are
ruled by the Divine revealed Will, 1 Cor. 11. 1. uncommanded acts of Worship
are abominable to God, and highly dangerous to our selves; they kindle the fire
of his jealousy to the ruin and destruction of the presumptuous Sinner, L^vit.
10. 1, 2. So that if the beauty and excellency of the Will of God be not enough
to allure us, the danger of acting without the knowledge of it may justly
terrify us.

Consideration III.
In this Duty we tread in the Footsteps of the wisest and holiest Men that ever
went to Heaven before us.

It is not only the Characteristical note of a good Man, Psalm. 1. 2. but it has
been the constant practice of the most eminent believers in all Ages. The
greatest Prophets, that had this advantage of us, that they were the Organs or
inspired instruments of discovering the Will of God to others, yet were not
excused from, neither did they neglect to search it diligently themselves, 1
Pet. 1. 10, 11. Daniel, that great favorite of Heaven, who had the Visions and
Revelations of God; yet he himself diligently searched the written Word, in
order to the discovery of the Mind of God, Dan. 9. 2.

Consideration IV.
Every discovery of the Will of God by fervent Prayer, diligent and impartial
search of the Scriptures, and all other allowed helps, gives the highest
pleasure the mind of Man is capable of in this World.

If Archimedes* upon the discovery of a Mathematical Truth, was so transported
and ravished, that he cried out, (...), I have found it, I have found it; what
pleasure then must the investigation and discovery of a Divine Truth give to a
sanctified Soul! Thy words were found of me (says Jeremiah) and I did eat
them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart, Jer. 15. 16.
as pleasant food to a Famished Man; for now Conscience is quieted, comforted,
and cheered in the way of Duty. A Man walks not at adventure with God, as that
word signifies, Levit. 26. 40, 41.

but has the pleasant directive light of the Word and Will of God, shining
sweetly upon the path of his Duty.

Consideration V.
By this means you shall find your Faith greatly confirmed in the truth of the
Scriptures.

The sweet consent, and beautiful harmony of all the parts of the written Word,
is a great Argument of its Divinity; and this you will clearly discern, when by
a due search you shall find things that lie at the remotest distance, to
conspire and consent in one, and one part casting light, as well as adding
strengh, to another. Thus you shall find Vetus Testamentum in novo revelatum,
and novum in vetere velatum. The New Testament veiled in the Old, and the Old
revealed in the New: And that such a consent of things, so distant in time and
place, can never be the project and invention of Man.

Consideration VI.
The diligent and impartial search and inquiry after the Will of God, out of no
other design than to please him in the whole course of our Duties, will turn to
us for a testimony of the integrity and sincerity of our hearts.

Thy word (said David) have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee: And God will not hide his Will from those that thus seek to know it. If
Men would apply themselves to search the Word by fervent Prayer, and fixed
Meditations, upon so pure a design, not bringing their prejudiced or
prepossessed minds unto it; the Spirit of the Lord would guide them into all
Truth, and keep them out of dangerous and destructive Errors.

Fourth Cause.
Besides the slothfulness of the mind, there is found in many Persons another
evil Disposition preparing them easily to receive Erroneous Impressions;
namely, the INSTABILITY and Fickleness of the Judgment, and Unsetledness of
mind about the Truth of the Gospel.

Of this the Apostle warns us, Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more
Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by
the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in weight to
deceive. None are so constant and steady in the profession of the Truth, as
those that are fully convinced of, and well satisfied with the grounds of it.
Every Professor, like every Ship at Sea, should have an (...), a ballast and
steddiness of his own, 2 Pet. 3. 17. ready and prepared to render a reason of
the hope that is in him, 1 Pet. 3. 15. able upon all occasions to give an
account of those inward motives which constrained his assent to the Truth.

He that professes a Truth ignorantly, cannot be rationally supposed to adhere
to it constantly. He that is but half convinced of a truth, when he engages in
the profession of it, must needs be (...), a double-minded Man, as the Apostle
calls him, Iam. 1. 8. half the mind hangs one way, and half another, and so it
is easily moveable this way or that, with the least breath of temptation. And
hence it comes to pass they are so often at a loss about their Duty and their
Practice; for Animi volutatio pendentem reddit vitam. A doubtful Mind must
needs make a staggering and uncertain Practice.

Erroneous Teachers are called wandering Stars, Jude 13. which keep no certain
course as the fixed Stars do, but are sometimes nearer and sometimes remoter
one from another. Thus Errorists first imbibe unsetling Opinions, and then
discover them in their inconstant Practices. Ber^ius wrote a Book de Apostatia
Sanctorum, and soon after turned Papist. The Socinians and Libertines teach,
That a Man of any Persuasion in Religion may be saved, so that he walk not
contrary to his own Light: such Doctrine directly tends to Sceptecism in
Religion.

And this Instability of the Judgment proceeds either from Hypocrisy, or
weakne^^ Sometimes from Hypocris^e All Hypocrites are (...), double-minded Men:
Iam. 4. 8. The double-minded man (that is the Hypocrite) is unstable in all his
ways. One of that number was not ashamed to say, Se duas habere animas in eodem
corpore, unam Deo dicatam, alteram unicuique illam vellet: That he had two
Souls in one Body, one for God, and another for whosoever would have it.

Sometimes Instability of the mind is the effect only of Weakness in the
Judgment, proceeding merely from want of age and growth in Christ, not having
as yet attained Senses exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5. 14.
they are but Children in Christ, and Children are easy and credulous
Creatures, Ephesians. 4. 14. presently taken with a new Toy* and as soon weary of it;
such a wavering and instable temper invites temptation, and falls an easy prey
into its hands.

I confess some Cases may happen, where the Pretenses on both sides may be so
fair, as to put a judicious Christian to a stand what to choose; but then their
deliberation will be answerable, and then they will not change their Opinions
every month, as Scepticks do. Wherever Error finds such a mutable disposition,
its work is half done before it make one assault. How many wavering Professors
at this day lie in Temptation's way? and how great a harvest have Errorists and
Heretics had among them? There Is not a Mountebank comes upon the Stage, but he
shall find ten times more Customers for his Druggs, than the most Learned and
Experienced Physician. The giddy-headed Multitude have more regard to Novelty,
than Truth.

The Remedies.
How necessary and desirable are some effectual Rules and Remedies in this
Case! O what a mercy would it be to the Professors of these days, to have their
Minds fixed, and their Judgments settled in the Truths of Christ! Happy is that
man whose Judgment is so guarded, that no dangerous Error or Heresy can commit
a Rape upon it. To this end I shall here commend the four following Rules to
prevent this vertigenous malady in the heads of Christians.

Rule I.
Look warily to it that you get a real inward implantation into Christ, and lay
the foundation deep and firm in a due and serious deliberation of Religion
whenever you engage in the public profession of it.

To this sense sound the Apostle's words, Col. 2. 6, 7. As you have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in him,
and stablished in the faith, as you have been taught. Fertility and stability
in Christ, a pair of inestimable Blessings, depend upon a good rooting of the
Soul in him at first. He that thrusts a dead stick into the ground, may easily
pull it up again, but so he cannot do by a well-rooted Tree. A color raised by
violent action, or a great fire, soon dies away; but that which is natural or
constitutional will hold. Every thing is as its foundation is. 'Twas want of a
good root and due depth of earth which soon turned the green Corn into dry
stubble, Matt. 13. 21.

Rule II.
Labor after an inward experimental taste of all those Truths which you
profess.

This will preserve your minds from wavering and hesitation about the certainty
and reality of them. We will not easily part with those Truths, which have
sensibly shed down their sweet influences upon our hearts, Heb. 10. 34. No
Sophister can easily persuade a man that has ta^ted the sweetness of Honey,
that it is a bitter and unpleasant thing: Non est disputandum de gustu: you
cannot easily persuade a man out of his Senses.

Rule III.
Study hard and pray earnestly for satisfaction in the present Truths; 2 Pet.
1. 12. That you may be established (...), in the truth that now is under
opposition and controversy. Be not ignorant of the Truths that lie in present
hazard.

Antiquated Opinions that are more abstracted from our present Interest, are no
trials of the soundness of our Judgments, and integrity of our Hearts, as the
controversies and conflicts of the present Times are. Every Truth has its time
to come upon the stage, and enter the lists; some in one Age, and some in
another; but Providence seems to have cast the lot of your Nativity for the
honor and defense of those Truths, with which Error is struggling and
conflicting in your time.

Rule IV.
Lastly, Be thoroughly sensible of the benefit and good of establishment, and of
the evil and danger of a wavering Mind and Judgment.

Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines (says the Apostle) for
it is a good thing that the heart be established, etc. Heb. 13. 9. Established
Souls are the honor of Truth. It was the honor of Religion in the primitive
days, that when the Heathens would proverbially express an Impossibility, they
used to say, You may as soon turn a Christian from Christ, as do it.

The Fickleness of Professors is a stumbling block to the World. They Will say as
Cato of the Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey, quem fugiam, video, quem
sequar, non video: they know whom to avoid, but not whom to follow. And as the
honor of Truth, so the flourishing of your own Souls depends on it. A Tree
often removed from one Soil to another, can never be expected to be fruitful,
it is well if it make a shift to live.

Fifth Cause.
Another inward Cause disposing men to receive Erroneous Impressions, is an
unreasonable EAGERNESS to snatch at any Doctrine or Opinion that promisesh ease
to an anxious Conscience.

Men that are under the frights and terrors of Conscience, are willing to
listen to any thing that offers present relief. Of all the Troubles in the
World, those of the Mind and Conscience are most intolerable. And those that
are in pain are glad of ease, and readily catch at any thing that seems to
offer it.

This seems to be the thing which led those poor distressed Wretches, intimated
Micah 6. 6. into their gross Mistakes and Errors about the method of the
remission of their Sins. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and ^ow my
self before the high God? shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with
Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousand of Rams* or with
ten thousand of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression,
the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? They were ready to purchase inward
peace, and buy out their pardon at any rate. Nothing but the twinges of
Conscience could have extorted these things from them. Great is the efficacy
and torment of a guilty Conscience.

Satan, who feels more of this in himself than any other Creature in the World,
and knows how ready poor ignorant, but distressed Sinners, are to catch at any
thing that looks like ease or comfort, and being jealous what these troubles of
Conscience may issue into, prepares for them such Erroneous Doctrines and
Opinions under the names of Anodines and quieting Recipe's, by swallowing of
which they feel some present ease; but their Disease is thereby made so much
the more incurable.

Mr. Gataker, in his Book against Saltmarsh, p. 27. tells us of one that had
taken ill Courses, and being under much trouble of mind, could not be quiet
till he turned Papist, and had been shrieved and assailed by a Priest.
It Is upon this account he has found such vent in the World for his Penanees,
Pilgrimages and Indulgences among the Papists. But seeing this Ware will not go
off among the Reformed and more enlightened Professors of Christianity, he
changes his hand, and fitteth other Doses under other names to quiet sick and
distressed Souls, before ever their frights of Conscience come to settle into
true Repentance and Faith in the Blood of Christ, by dressing up, and
presenting to them such Opinions as these, viz.

That they may boldly apply to themselves all the Promises of pardon and peace,
without any respect at all to Repentance or Faith in themselves; that it is not
at all needful, nay, that it is illegal and sinful to have any respect to these
things, forasmuch as their Sins were pardoned, and they justified from
Eternity; and that the Covenant of Grace is in all respects absolute, and is
made to Sinners as Sinners, without any regard to their Faith or Repentance;
and whatever Sins there be in them, God sees them not. Saltmarsh, in the
Title Page of his Book called Free Grace, shows you the Sovereign virtue of
Antinomian Principles, to quiet Troubles of Conscience of 12 years growth.


To such a Charm of Troubles as this, how earnestly does the Ear of a
distressed Conscience listen? how greedily does it suck in such pleasing words?
Are all Sins that are pardoned, pardoned before they are committed? and does
the Covenant of Grace require neither Repentance nor Faith antecedently to the
application of the Promises? how groundless then are all my Fears and Troubles?
This, like a Dose of Opium, quiets, or rather stupifies the raging Conscience:
for even an Error in Judgment, till it be detected and discovered to be so,
quiets and comforts the heart, as well as principles of Truth; but whenever the
fallacy shall be detected, whether here or hereafter, the anguish of Conscience
must be increased, or (which is worse) left desperate.

The Remedies.
To prevent and cure this mistake and error in the Soul, by which it is fitted
and prepared to catch any Erroneous Principle (which is but plausible) for its
present relief and ease, I shall desire my Reader seriously to ponder and
consider the following Queries upon this Case.

Query I.
Whether by the vote of the whole Rational World, a good Trouble be not better
than a false Peace? Present ease is desirable, but eternal safety is much more
so: and if these two cannot consist under the present Circumstances of the
Soul, Whether it be not better to endure for a time these painful pangs, than
feel more acute and eternal ones, by quieting Conscience with false Remedies
before the time?

It Is bad to lie tossing a few days under a laborious Fever; but far worse to
have that Fever turned into a Lethargy or fatal Apoplexy. Erroneous Principles
may rid the Soul of its present pain, and eternal hopes and safety together.
Acute pains are better than a senseless stupidity. Though the present rage of
Conscience be not a right and kindly conviction, yet it may lead to it, and
terminate in faith and union with Christ at last, if Satan do not this way
practice upon it, and quench it before its time.

Query II.
Bethink your selves seriously, Whether Troubles so quieted and laid asleep,
will not revive and turn again upon thee with a double force, as soon as the
virtue of the Drug (I mean the Erroneous Principle) has spent it self?

The efficacy of Truth is eternal, and will maintain the peace it gives, for
ever; but all delusions must vanish, and the Troubles which they damm'd up for
a time, break out with a greater force. Satan employs two sorts of Witches.
Some to torment the Bodies of Men with grievous pain and anguish: but then he
has his White-Witches at hand to relieve and ease them. And have these poor
Wretches any great cause (think you) to boast of the cure, who are eased of
their pains at the price of their Souls?

Much like unto this, are the cures of inward Troubles by Erroneous Principles.
I lament the Case of blinded Papists, who by Pilgrimages, and Offerings to the
Shrines of Titular Saints, attempt the cure of a lesser Sin by committing a
greater. Is it because there is not a God in Israel, who is able in due season
to pacify Conscience with proper and durable Gospel-Remedies, that we suffer
our Troubles thus to precipitate us into the Snares of Satan for the sake of
present ease?

Query III.
Read the Scriptures, and inquire whether God's People, who have lain long
under sharp inward Terrors, have not at last found settlement and inward peace
by those very Methods, which the Principles that quiet you, do utterly exclude?

If you will fetch your Peace from a groundless Notion, that your Sins were
pardoned, and your Persons justified from all eternity, and therefore you may
apply boldly and confidently to your selves the choicest Promises and
Privileges in the Gospel, without any regard to Faith or Repentance wrought by
the Spirit in your Souls: I am sure holy David took another Course for the
settlement of his Conscience, Psalm. 51. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And it has been the
constant practice of the Saints in all Ages, to clear their Title to the
Righteousness of Christ wrought without them, by the Works of his Spirit
wrought within them.

Sixth Cause.
The next Evil Temper in the Subject, preparing and disposing it for Error, is
an easy CREDVLITY, or sequacious humor in men, rendering them apt to receive
things upon trust from others, without due and thorough examination of the
grounds and Reasons of them, themselves.

This is a disposition fitted to receive any impression Seducers please to make
upon them: they are said to deceive the hearts of the simple, (...), i. e.
credulous, but well-meaning People that suspect no harm. It Is said, Prove. 14.
15. the simple believes every word. Through this Sluice or Floodgate, what a
multitude of Errors in Popery have overflowed the People! They are told, they
are not able to judge for themselves, but must take the matters of their
Salvation upon trust from their Spiritual Guides; and so the silly People are
easily seduced, and made easily receptive of the grossest Absurdities their
ignorant Leaders please to impose upon them.

And it were to be wished, That those two Points, viz. Ministrorum mut a
officia, and populi caeca o^sequia, the dumb Services of their Ministers, and
the blind Obedience of the People had stayed within the Popish Confines. But
alas, alas! how many simple Protestants be there, who may be said to carry
their Brains in other men's Heads? and like silly Sheep follow the next in the
tract before them; especially if their Leaders have but wit and art enough to
hide their Errors under specious and plausible Pretenses. How many poisonous
Drugs has Satan put off under the gilded Titles of Antiquity, Zeal for God,
higher seize in godliness, new Lights? etc. How natural is it for men to
follow in the Tract, and be tenacious of the Principles and Practices of their
Progenitors? Multitudes seem to hold their Opinions Iure Haereditario, by an
Hereditary Right, as if their Faith descended to them the same way their
Estates do.

The Emperor of Morocco told King John's Ambassador, That he had lately read
St. Paul's Epistles; And truly (said he) were I now to choose my Religion, I
would embrace Christianity before any Religion in the World: but every man
ought to dye in that Religion he received from his Ancestors.

Many honest, well-meaning, but weak Christians, are also easily beguiled by
specious pretenses of new Light, and higher seize in Reformation. This
makes the weaker sorts of Christians pliable to many dangerous Errors cunningly
insinuated under such taking Titles. What are most of the Erroneous Opinions
now vogued in the World, but old Errors under new Names and Titles?

The Remedies.
The Remedies and Preventions in this Case are such as follow.

Remedy I.
It Is beneath a man to profess any Opinion to be his own, whilst the grounds
and reasons of it are in other men's keeping, and wholly unknown to himself.

If a man may tell Gold after his Father, then sure he may and ought to try and
examine Doctrines and Points of Faith after him. We are commanded to be ready
to give an account of the hope that is in us, and not to say, this or that is
my Judgment or Opinion, but let others give an account of the ground and reason
of it.

I confess, if he that leads me into an Error were alone exposed to the hazard,
and I quit and free, whatever become of him; it were quite another thing. But
when our Savior tells us, Matthew. 15. 14. that both (that is, the Follower as
well as the Leader) fall into the ditch; at my peril be it if I follow without
eyes of my own. That Is but a weak building that is shored up by a prop from a
Neighbor's Wall. How many men have ruined their Estates by Suretiship for
others? but of all Suretiship none so dangerous as spiritual Suretiship. We
neither ought (as a late Worthy speaks) to defy the Judgment of the weakest,
nor yet on the other side to deify the Judgment of the strongest Christian. He
that pins his Faith upon another man's Sleeve, knows not whither he will carry
it.

Remedy II.
As you ought not to abuse your Christian Privilege and Liberty to try all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. so neither on the other side to undervalue, or part
with it. See the things that so much concern your eternal peace with your own
eyes.

I showed you before, this Liberty is abused by extending it too far; and under
the notion of proving all things, many embolden themselves to innovate and
entertain any thing: yet beware of bartering such a precious Privilege for the
fairest Promises others can make in lieu of it. I would not slight nor
undervalue the Piety and Learning of others, nor yet put out my own eyes to see
by theirs.

Remedy III.
Before you adventure to espouse the Opinions of others, diligently observe and
mark the fruits and consequences of those Opinions in the Lives of the zealous
Abettors and Propagators of them: By their fruits (says Christ) ye shall know
them.

When the Opinion or Doctrine naturally tends to looseness, or when it sucks
and draws away all a man's zeal to maintain and diffuse it, and practical
Religion thereby visibly languishes in their Conversations, it is time for you
to make a pause, before you advance one step farther toward it.

Seventh Cause.
The next Evil Disposition that I shall note in the Subject, is a vain
CVRIOSITY of mind, or an itching desire to pry into things unrevealed, at least
above our ability to search out and discover.

It Is an Observation as true as ancient, Pruritus aurium scabies Ecclesiae,
itching Ears come to a Scab upon the face of the Church. The itch of Novelty
produces the Scab of Error. Of this Disease the Apostle warns us, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
For the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine; but after
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears.
Nothing will please them but new Notions, and new modes of Language and Method,
Tone and Gesture.

Sound Doctrine is the only substantial and solid food that nourishes and
strengthens the heart of the new Creature: but vain Scepticks nauseate and
despise this as trite, vulgar, cheap and low. Nothing humors them but
Novelties and Rarities: their unsettled Brains must be wheeled about, (...),
with diverse and strange Doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. Novelty and Variety are the only
properties that commend Doctrines to wanton Palates. Hence it is they so boldly
intrude into things they have not seen, Col. 2. 18. These Cyril fitly calls
(...), the domineerings, or darings of bold Spirits.

The Schoolmen have filled the World with a thousand ungrounded Fancies, as the
distinct Offices and Orders of Angels; and higher flights of fancy than these,
which seem to be invented for no other end or use, but to please the itching
Ears of the Curious.

There is not only a vesana temerit as Genethliacorum, a wild and daring
rashness of Astrologers, presuming to foretell Futurities, and the Fates of
Kingdoms, as well as particular Persons, from the conjunctions and influences
of the Stars; but there is also found as high a presumption and boldness among
men in matters of Religion.

Satan is well aware of this humor in men, and how exceeding serviceable it is
to his Design; and therefore having the very knack of clawing and pleasing
itching Ears with taking-Novelties, he is never wanting to feed their minds
with a pleasing variety, and fresh succession of them: new Opinions are still
invented and minted, in which the dangerous Hooks of Error are hid. If men were
once cured of this spiritual itch, and their minds reduced to that temper and
sobriety, as to be pleased with, and bless God for the plain revealed Truths of
the Gospel; Satan would drive but a poor Trade, and find but few Customers for
his Erroneous Novelties.

The Remedies.
The proper Remedies to cure this itch after Novelty, or dangerous Curiosity of
the mind, are

Remedy I.
Due Reflection upon the manifold mischiefs that have entered into the World
this way.

It was this Curiosity and desire to know, that overthrew our first Parents,
Genesis 3. 6. When the Woman saw that the Tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of
the fruit thereof. The very same way by which he let in the first Error, he
has let thousands into the World since that day. Nothing is more common in the
World, than for an old Error to obtain afresh under the name of new Light.
Satan has the very art of turkening stale Errors after the mode of the present
times, and make them current and passable, as new Discoveries and rare
Novelties.

Thus he puts off Libertinism, the old Sin of the World, under the Title of
Christian Liberty. What a Troop of Pagan Idolatrous Rites were by this means
introduced among the Papists? A great part of Popery is but Ethnicismus
redivivus, Heathenism revived. The Pagans Pontifex Maximus was revived under
the new Title of Pope. The Gentiles Lustrations, in the Popish Holy Water.
Their Novendiale sacrum, or Sacrifice nine days after the burial of the Party,
in the Popish Masses for the dead. Their Alvarium Fratrum, in Cloisters of
Monks and Friars*

Their Enchanters, in Popish Exorcists. Their Asyla, in Popish Sanctuaries.
With multitudes more of Pagan Rites quite out of date in Christendom,
introduced again under new names in Popery; as was intimated R^v. 11. 2. and
Rev. 13. 15.

Remedy II.
Be satisfied that God has not left his People to seek their Salvation, Quod
nesciatur sine crimine, ne discutiatur cum discrimine.
or spiritual subsistence, among curious, abstruse and doubtful Notions; but in
the great, solid, and plainly revealed Truths of the Gospel. John 17. 3. This
is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. In facili and absoluto stat aeternit as: the great
Concerns of our Salvation are plain and easy to be understood.

Remedy III.
Vain Curiosity is a dangerous Snare of Satan. By such trifles as these, he
devours our time, eats up our strength, and diverts our minds from the
necessary and most important business of Religion. Whilst we immerse our
thoughts in these pleasing, but barren Contemplations, Heart-work, Closet-work,
Family-work, lie by neglected. Whilst we are employed in garnishing the Dish
with Flowers, and curious Figures, the cunning Cheat takes away the meat our
Souls should subsist by.

Eighth Cause.
Pride and Arrogance of HVMANE REASON, is another Evil Disposition, molding and
preparing the mind for Errors. When men are once conceited of the strength and
perspicacity of their own carnal Reasons and Apprehensions, nothing is more
usual than for such men to run mad with Reason into a thousand Mistakes and
Errors. To this cause Ecclesiastical Historians ascribe the Errors that infest
the Church. Deinde, and humanae rationis sapientia quae religioni plurimum
semper nocuit, seu Philosophia, non paucas ex sese produxit haereses. Namque eo
tempore Philosophica studia maxim vigebant; and suis argutiis, seu (ut ipsi
putabant) demonstrationibus, in sua sententia ita confirmati erant: ut nihil
verum existimarent, quod ab eorum conceptis jamdudum opinionibus discreparet.
Magdeb. in Cent. 2. cap. 5. page 56.


Reason indeed is the highest natural excellency of man: it exalts him above
all Earthly Creatures, and in its primitive perfection almost equalized him
with Angels, Heb. 2. 7. The Pleasures which result from its exercises and
experiments, transcend all the delights and pleasures of sense. How common is
it for men to dote upon their own intellectual beauty, and glory in their
victories over weaker Understandings? And tho the reason of fallen Man is
greatly wounded and weakened by Sin; yet it conceits it self to be as strong
and clear as ever; and with Sampson, when his Locks were shorn, goes forth as
before time, being neither sensible of its own weakness, or of the mysterious
and unsearchable depths of Scripture.

Reason is our Arbiter and Guide by the institution and Law of Nature, in civil
and natural Affairs: it is the beam and standard at which we weigh them. It is
an home-born Judge and King in the Soul: Faith comes in as a stranger to
Nature, and so it is dealt with, even as an Intruder into Reason's Province,
just as the Sodomites dealt with Lot. It refuses to be an Underling to Faith.
Out of this Arrogance of carnal Reason, as from Pandor^^'s Box, swarms of
Errors are flown abroad into the World.

By this means Socinianism first started, and has since propagated it self.
They look upon it as a ridiculous and unaccountable thing to reason, that the
Son should be coequal and coeternal with the Father: that God should forgive
sins freely, and yet forgive none but upon full satisfaction. That Christ
should make that satisfaction by his Sufferings, and yet be pars laesa, the
Party offended, and so make satisfaction to himself: with many more of the like
stamp.

Yea, Atheism, as well as Socinianism, are births from this Womb. It Is proud
and carnal Reason which quarrels at the Creation of the World, and seems to
triumph in its uncontrolable M^xim, Ex nihilo nihil fit, out of nothing comes
nothing. It looks upon the Doctrine of the Resurrection with a deriding smile,
as a thing incredible. It thinks it hard and harsh that God should command men
to turn themselves to him, and threaten them with damnation in case of refusal;
and yet at the same time man should not have in himself a sufficient power, and
a free will to do this, without the supernatural and preventing Grace of God.
It thinks it a ridiculous thing for such a great and solemn Ordinance of God as
Baptism is, to pass upon such a Subject as an Infant of a week old, which is
not capable to understand the Ends and Uses of it. Hence it is some overheated
Zealots lots have not stuck to say, Mr. Samuel Clark's Golden Apples. p. 149.
That we have as good warrant and reason to baptize Cats, Dogs and Horses, as
we have to babtize Infants. Oh the madness of Carnal Reason!

The Remedies.
To take down the Arrogance, and prevent the mischief of Carnal Reasonings, let
us be convinced,

Remedy I.
That it is the will of God, that Reason in all Believers should resign to
Faith, and all Ratiocination submit to Revelation.

Reason is no better than an Usurper, when it presumes to arbitrate matters
belonging to Faith and Revelation. Man having sinned by pride, the wisdom of
God humbles him at the very root of the Tree of Knowledge, and makes him deny
his own Understanding, and submit to Faith; or else for ever to lose his
desired Felicity. Laud against Fisher, p. 5.
Reason's proper place is to sit at the feet of Faith, and instead of searching
the secret grounds and reasons, to adore and admire the great and unsearchable
Mysteries of the Gospel. None of God's works are unreasonable, but many of them
are above Reason. It was as truly, as ingenuously said by one; Never does
Reason show it self more reasonable, than when it cease to reason about
things that are above Reason. Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? where is
the Disputer of this World? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this World?
For after that, in the wisdom of God, the World by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1 Cor.
1. 20, 21. It Is not Reason, but Faith that must save us.

The Wisdom of God in the Gospel, is wisdom in a Mystery, even hidden wisdom,
which God ordained before the World unto our glory, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Such wisdom as
the most Eagle-eyed Rationalists and famed Philosophers of the World understood
not. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. But God has
revealed them to us by his spirit, ibid. verse. 9, 10.

Remedy II.
Be convinced of the weakness and deep corruption of natural Reason, and this
will restrain its Arrogance, and make it modest and wary.

A convinced and renewed Soul is conscious to it self of its own weakness and
blindness, and therefore dares not pry audaciously into the Arcana Coeli, nor
summon the great God to its bar. It finds it self posed by the Mysteries of
Nature, and therefore concludes it self an incompetent Judge of the Mysteries
of Faith.

The Arrogance of Reason is the reigning Sin of the Unregenerate, though it be
a Disease with which the Regenerate themselves are infected. When Conviction
shall do its work upon the Soul, the Plumes of spiritual pride quickly fall;
and it says with Job: Once have I spoken, but I will speak no more; yea,
twice, but I will proceed no further. q. d. I have done, Father, I have done; I
have uttered things that I understood not, Job 42. 3. Spiritual Illumination
cures this Ambition.

Remedy III.
Consider the manifold Mischiefs and Evils flowing from the pride of Reason.

It does not only fill the World with Errors and Distractions; but it also
invades the Rights of Heaven, and casts a vile reflection upon the Wisdom,
Sovereignty and Veracity of God. It lifts up it self against his Wisdom, not
considering that the foolishness of God is wiser than men, 1 Cor. 1. 25. It
spurns at his glorious Sovereignty, not considering that he gives no account
of his matters, Job 33. 13. It questions his Veracity, in saying with
Nicodemus, How can these things be? Joh. 3. 9.

Cause IX.
The last Evil Disposition I shall here take notice of in the Subject, is rash
and ignorant ZEAL; a temper preparing the mind both to propagate furiously, and
receive easily Erroneous Doctrines and Opinions.

When there is in the Soul more heat than light; when a fervent Spirit is
governed by a weak Head, such a temper of Spirit Satan desires, and singles out
as fittest for his purpose, especially when the Heart is graceless, as well as
the Understanding weak. A blind Horse of an high mettle will carry the Rider
into any Pit, and venture over the most dangerous Precipices.

Such were the Superstitious Jewish Zealots: they had a zeal for God, but not
according to knowledge. This (...) blind zeal, St. Paul charges justly upon the
Jewish Bigots, Romans 10. 2. as the proper cause of their dangerous Errors about
the great point of Justification: and surely no man understood the evil of it
more than he, who in his unregenerate state was transported by it to the most
furious persecution of the Saints, Acts 26. 11. and even to dotage, and extreme
fondness upon the Erroneous Traditions of his Fathers, Gal. 1. 14.

Blind Zeal is a Sword in a Mad-man's hand. No Persecutor to a Conscientious
one, whose Erroneous Conscience offers up the blood of the Saints to the glory
of God, Job. 16. 2. The blind, but zealous Pharisees would compass Sea and Land
to make one Proselyte, Matthew. 23. 15. as our Modern Pharisees, the Jesuits,
have since done, who have mingled themselves with the remotest and most
barbarous Nations, to draw them to the Romish Error. Of the same temper were
the false Teachers taxed by the Apostle, Gal. 4. 17. they zealously affect you,
but not well: yea, they would exclude you ( viz. from our Society and
Ordinances) that you might affect them.

And as it is the great Instrument by which Satan propagates Errors, so it
makes a fit temper in the Souls of the People to receive them. For by this
means Error gains the possession of the Affections, without passing a previous
and due test by the Understanding, and so gains the Soul by the advantage of a
Surprise. Every thing, by how much the more weak and ignoble it is, by so much
the more it watches upon Surprisals and Advantages. Error cares not to endure
the due examination and test of Reason; and therefore seeks to gain by
surprisal, what it despairs of ever gaining by a plain and fair trial.

There be few Errorists in the World of Alexander's mind, who would rather lose
the day, than steal the Victory. Hence it comes to pass, that the greatest
number of those they lead Captives, are silly Women, as the Apostle speaks, who
are the most affectionate, but least judicious Sex.

From this blind Zeal it is, that they cunningly wind their Erroneous Opinions
into all their Discourses, where they have any hope to prevail. A rational and
modest Contradiction puts them into a flame, it breaks the nearest bonds of
Friendship and Society.

Rabshekah in 2 King. 18. would not treat with Hezekiah's Counselors of State,
but with the common People upon the Wall: and Error cares not to treat with
sound Reason, able to sift it through the Scripture-search, but with the
Affections; as well knowing, it is in vain to make war in Reason's Territories,
without first gaining a party among the Affections.

The Remedies.
The best Defensatives against Erroneous Contagions in this case, are to be
found in the following Particulars.

Defensative I.
Reflect seriously and sadly upon the manifold Mischiefs occasioned everywhere,
and in all Ages of the World, by rash Zeal.

Revolve Church-histories, and you shall find, that scarce any cruel
Persecution has flamed in the World, which has not been kindled by blind
Zeal. Turn over all the Records, both of Pagan and Popish Persecutions, and you
shall still find these two Observations confirmed and verified.

First, That ignorant Zeal has kindled the fires of Persecution; and secondly,
That the more zealous any have been for the ways of Error and Falsehood, still
the more implacably fierce and cruel they have been to the sincere Servants of
God. None like a Superstitious Devoto to manage the Devil's work of Persecution
thoroughly, and to purpose. They Will rush violently and headlong into the blood
of their dearest Relations, or most eminent Saints, to whose sides the Devil
sets this sharp Spur. Superstitious Zeal draws all the strength and power of
the Soul into that one Design; and woe to him that stands in the way of such a
man, if God interpose not betwixt him and the stroke. It was a rational wish of
him that said, Liberet me Deus ab homine unius tantum negotii, God deliver me
from a man of one only Design.

Now consider, Reader, if thy judgment be weak, and thy affections warm, how
much thou lie exposed, not only to Errors which may ruin thy self, but also
to Tongue and Hand-persecution, wherein Satan may manage thy zeal for the
injury or ruin of those that are better than thy self: And withal consider,
how many dreadful threatenings are found in Scripture against the instruments of
Persecution, so employed and managed by Satan.

Certainly, Reader, it were better for thee to stand with thy naked breast
before the mouth of a discharging Cannon, than that thy Soul should stand under
this guilt, before such a Scripture-threatning as that, Psalm. 7. 13. He has
also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordains his Arrows against
the persecutors. And none more likely to become such, than those of thine own
temper and complexion; especially if grace be wanting in the heart, whilst Zeal
for erroneous Principles eats up the Affections.

Second Defensative.
Consider what mischief zeal for an Error will do thine own Soul, as well as
others.

It will wholly ingross thy time, thoughts and strength; so that if there be
any gracious principle in thee, it shall not be able to thrive and prosper: For
look, as a Fever takes off the natural appetite from Food, so will erroneous
Zeal take off thy Spiritual Appetite from Meditation, Prayer,
Heart-examination, and all other the most necessary and nourishing Duties of
Religion, by reason whereof thy grace must languish.

When thy Soul, with David's, should be filled and feasted, as with marrow and
fatness, by delightful meditations of God upon thy Bed, thou will be rolling in
thy mind thy barren and insipid notions, which yield no food or spiritual
strength to thy Soul; thou will lie musing how to dissolve the Arguments and
Objections against thine Errors, when thou should rather be employed in
solving the just and weighty Objections that lie against thy sincerity and
interest in Christ, which were time far better improved.

Third Defensative.
Consider how baneful this inordinate zeal has been to Christian Society,
lamentably defacing, and almost dissolving it every where, to the unspeakable
detriment of the Churches.

We read, Mal. 3. 16. of a blessed time, when they that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his Name. Oh happy time! Halcion days! I, my self, remember the time, when
the Zeal of the Saints spent it self in provoking one another to Love and Good
Works, in joint and fervent Prayer, in inward, experimental, and edifying
Communion; my Soul has them still in remembrance, and is cast down within me:
For alas! alas! how do I see every where Christian Communion turned into vain
janglings? Churches and Families into mere Cock-pits? Men's Discoursings falling
as naturally into contentions about trifles, as they were wont to do into
Heavenly and Experimental Subjects, to the unspeakable disgrace and damage of
Religion?

Fourth Defensative.
That Opinion is justly to be suspected for erroneous, which comes in at the
Postern-door of the Affections; and not openly and fairly ar the right Gate of
an enlightened and well-satisfied judgment. It Is a Thief that comes in at the
backdoor, at least strongly to be suspected for one. Truth Courts the Mistress,
makes its first and fair Addresses to the Understanding. Error bribes the
Handmaid, and labors first to win the Affections, that by their influence it
may corrupt the Judgment.

And thus you see, besides the innocent Occasion, viz. God's Permission of
Errors in the World, for the trial of his people, Nine proper Causes of Errors
found in the evil dispositions of the minds of Men, which prepare them to
receive erroneous Doctrines and Impressions, viz.

1. A wrangling humor at the pretended Obscurity of Scripture. 2. The Abuse of
that Christian Liberty purchased by Christ. 3. Slothfulness in searching the
whole Word of God. 4. Fickleness and Instability of Judgment. 5. Eagerness
after Anodines to ease a distressed Conscience. 6. An easy Credulity in
following the Judgments and Examples of others. 7. Vain Curiosity, and prying
into unrevealed Secrets. 8. The Pride and Arrogance of Human Reason. 9. Blind
Zeal, which spurs on the Soul, and runs it upon dangerous precipices.
We next come to consider the principal Impulsive Cause, by which Errors are
propagated and disseminated in the World.

Cause X.
Come we next in the proper order, to consider the Principal Impulsive Cause of
Errors; which is SATAN working upon the predisposed matter he finds in the
corrupt Nature of Man. Quae quidem res abunde docet diram esse Diaboli
malitiam: qui victus, atque prostratus a Christo, nihilominus ausus est ejus
verbum ac totam religionis formam, tetris opinionibus ac blasphemiis
conspurcare, lacerare, and propemodum evertere. Ut autem portenta hujus maligni
spiritus in conspectu sint and quasi primae scaturigines plurimarum haeresium,
quae postea, veluti aliis in se receptis rivis mirum in modum excreverunt, etc.
Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. p. 368.
The Centurists speaking of the strange and sudden growth of Errors and
Heresies, immediately after the planting of the Gospel by Christ, and the
Apostles, ascribe it to Satan.

Satan is a Liar from the beginning, When Swinkfeld sent his Books to Luther,
he told the Messenger, the Devil was the Author of them; and the Lord rebuke
thee Satan, was the Answer he returned to them.
and abode not in the Truth: He hates it with a deadly hatred, and all the
Children and Friends of Truth. And this hatred he manifests sometimes by
raising furious storms of persecution against the sincere Professors of it,
Rev. 3. 10. and sometimes by Clouds of Heresies and Errors, with design to
darken it. In the former he acts as a roaring Lion; in the latter as a subtle
Serpent, 2 Cor. 11. ^. I fear lest as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty; so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

He is exceeding skilful and dexterous in citing and wresting the Scriptures to
serve his vile designs and purposes; and as impudently daring, as he is crafty
and cunning; as appears in the History of Christ's temptation in the desert,
Matt. 4. 6. where he cites one part of that promise, Psalm. 91. 11. and
suppresseth the rest; shows the encouragement, viz. He shall give his Angels
charge over thee; but clips off the limitation of it, viz. to keep thee in all
thy ways: In viis, non in praecipitiis, In our lawful ways, not in rash and
dangerous precipices; as Bernard well glosseth.

And it is worth observation, that he introduces multitudes of Errors into the
World, under the unsuspected notions of admirable Prophylacticks, and approved
Preservatives from all mischiefs and dangers from himself. Under this notion,
he has neatly and covertly slided into the World, Holy Water, Crossings,
Relics of Saints, and almost innumerable other superstitious Rites.

Erroneous Teachers are the Ministers of Satan, however they transform
themselves into Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 15. and the subtle
dangerous Errors they broach, are fitly styled by the Spirit of God, (...), the
depths of Satan, Rev. 2. 24. The corrupt Teachers, the Gnostics, etc. called
them Depths, i. e. great mysteries, high and mavelous seize in
knowledge; but the Spirit of God fits a very proper Epithete to them, They are
Satanical depths, and Mysteries of Iniquity. Now the level and design of Satan
herein is double:

First, He aims at the ruin and damnation of those that vent and propagate
them; upon which account the Apostle calls them (...), 2 Pet. 2. 1.
destructive, or (as we render it) damnable Heresies. And because God will
preserve the Souls of his own from this mortal Contagion, therefore,

Secondly, He endeavors by lesser Errors to busy the minds, and check the
growth of Grace in the Souls of the Saints, by employing them about things so
foreign to true godliness, and the power thereof, Heb. 13. 9.

The Remedies.
The Rules for prevention and recovery, are these that follow:

Rule I.
Pray earnestly for a through change of the state and temper of thy Soul, by
sound Conversion and Regeneration.

Conversion turns us from darkness to light; and from the power of Satan to
God, Acts 26. 18. They are his own slaves and vassals that are taken captive by
him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 16. A Sanctified heart is a Sovereign defensative
against Erroneous Doctrines; it furnishes the Soul with spiritual eyes,
judicious ears, and a distinguishing taste, by which it may discern both good
and evil, truth and error, Heb. 5. 14. yea, it puts the Soul at once under the
conduct of the Spirit, and protection of the Promise, Ioh. 16. 13. and though
this does not secure a Man from all lesser mistakes, yet it effectually secures
him from greater ones, which are inconsistent with Christ and Salvation.

Rule II.
Acquaint your selves with the wiles and methods of Satan, and be not ignorant
of his devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11.

When once you understand the wash and paint with which he sets off the ugly
face of Error, you will not easily be enamoured with it. Pretenses of Devotion
upon one side, and of Purity, Zeal, and Reformation upon the other* though they
be pleasant sounds to both ears, yet the wary Soul will examine, before it
receive and admit Doctrinal Points under these gilded Titles. Those that have
made their Observations upon the stratagems of Satan, will heedfully observe
both the tendency of Doctrines, and the Lives of their Teachers; and if they
find looseness, pride, wantonness in them, it is not a glorious title, or
magnificent name that shall charm them. They know Satan can transform himself
into an Angel of Light; and no wonder if his Ministers also be transformed into
Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15.

Rule III.
Resign your Minds and Judgments in fervent Prayer to the Government of Christ,
and Conduct of the Spirit; and in all your addresses to God, pray that he would
keep them chaste and pure, and not suffer Satan to commit a rape upon them.
Plead with God that part of Christ's Prayer, John 17. 17. Sanctify them through
thy truth: thy word is truth.

Rule IV.
Live in the conscientious and constant practice of all those Truths and Duties
God has already manifested to you.

This will bring you under that blessed Promise of Christ, John 7. 17. If any
man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God.
Satan's greatest successes are amongst idle, notional, and vain Professors; not
humble, serious, and practical Christians.

Caus^ XI.
Having considered and dispatched the several internal Causes of Error, found
in the evil dispositions of the seduced, as also the Impulsive Cause, viz.
Satan, who fits suitable baits to all these sinful humors and evil tempers of
the heart; we come next to consider the Instrumental Cause employed by Satan in
this work, viz. the FALSE TEACHER, whom Satan makes use of as his Seedsman, to
disseminate and scatter erroneous Doctrines and Principles into the minds of
Men, Ploughed up and prepared by those evil tempers forementioned, as a fit
Soil to receive them.

The choice of Instruments is a principal part of Satan's policy. Every one is
not fit to be employed in such a Service as this. All are not fit to be of the
Council of War, who yet take their places of Service in the Field. A Rustic
carried out of the Field, on Board a Ship at Sea, though he never learned his
Compass, nor saw a Ship before, can by another's direction tug lustily at a
Rope; but he had need be an expert Artist, that sits at the Helm, and steers
the course. The worst Causes need the smoothest Orators; and bad Ware a cunning
Merchant to put it off Subtiles and astutas fuisse Montani frauds, and quae
blanda specie quibusvis imponere facile potuerint; inde liquet quod totam
propemodum Scripturam suscepit; ac de Deo Patre, Filio, and Spiritu sancto, (ut
Epiphanius scribit) eadem docuit quae Ecclesia Christi. Magdeb. Cent. 2. Cap.
5. p. 77. De Haeresibus sub Commodo.


Deep-parted Men are coveted by Satan to manage this design. None like an
eloquent Tertullus to confront a Paul, Acts 24. 1. A subtle Eccius to enter the
List in defense of the Popish Cause, against the Learned and Zealous Reformers.
When the Duke of Buckingham undertook to Plead the bad Cause of Richard the
third, the Londoners said, They never thought it had been possible for any Man
to deliver so much bad Matter, in such good Words, and quaint Phrases.

The first Instrument chosen by Satan to deceive Man, was the Serpent; because
that Creature was more subtle than any Beast of the Field. There is not a Man
of eminent parts, but Satan courts and sollicites him for this service. St.
Austin told an ingenious, but unsanctified Scholar, Cupit abs te ornari
Diabolus, The Devil covets thy Parts to adorn his Cause. He surveys the World,
and wherever he finds more than ordinary strength of Reason, pregnancy of
Wit, depth of Learning, and elegancy of Language, that is the Man he looks for.

These are the Men that can almost indiscernably sprinkle their Errors among
many precious Truths, and wrap up their poisonous Drugs in Leaf-gold or Sugar.
Maresius notes of Crellius and his Accomplices, That by the power of their
Eloquence, and sophistry of their Arguments, they were able artificially to
cloth horrible Blasphemies to allure the simple. Tectorio fucatae eloquentiae,
argutiisque Sophisticis e Scriptura perniciose detorta, ac fallaci fallenteque
ratione horrendae blasphemiae artificiose circumvestiuntur ad inescandos
simpliciores. Praefatio ad Hydr. Socin.
.

And like the Hyaena, they can counterfeit the voices of the Shepherds, to
deceive and destroy the Sheep. There is (says a late Mr. W. Gurnal, Christi^n
Armor, Part 2. p. 33.
Worthy) an erudita nequitia, a Learned kind of wickedness, a subtle art of
deceiving the minds of others. Upon which account the Spirit of God sometimes
compares them, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Sunt quidam vaniloqui, and mentis seductores, non
Christiani, sed Christum mercantes and cauponantes verbum Evangelii, qui
venenum Erroris commiscentes dulci blandimento sicut oenomeli ut qui biberit
illius potus gustabilem sensum, dulcedine captus, inobservanter morti
addic^tur. Ignatius Epist. ad Trallianos, p. 68
to cunning and cheating Tradesmen, who have the very art to set a gloss upon
their bad Wares with fine words, (...), they buy and sell the people with their
ensnaring and feigned words. And sometimes he compares them to cunning
Gamesters, that have the art and sleight of hand to Cog the Die, to deceive the
unskilful, and win their Game, Ephesians. 4. 14. (...), etc.

And sometimes the Spirit of God compares them to Witches themselves, Gal. 3.
1. (...); foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? How many strange feats
have been done upon the bodies of Men and Women by Witchcraft? But far more and
stranger upon the Souls of Men by the Magic of Error. Iannes and Iambres
performed wonderful things in the sight of Pharaoh, by which they deceived and
hardened him; and unto these, false Teachers are compared.

Such a Man was Elymas the Sorcerer, who labored to seduce the Deputy, Sergius
Paulus, though a prudent Man, Acts 13. 7, 8, 9, 10. Oh full of all subtilty and
all mischief, thou Child of the Devil! says Paul unto him. The Art of
seduduction from the ways of truth and holiness, discovers a Man to be both the
Child and Scholar of the Devil.

But as the wise and painful Ministers of Christ, who turn many to
Righteousness, shall have double Glory in Heaven; so these subtle and most
active Agents for the Devil, who turn many from the ways of Righteousness, will
have a double portion of misery in Hell.

The Remedies.
The proper Remedies in this Case are principally two.

Remedy I.
Pray fervently, and labor diligently in the use of all God's appointed means,
to get more solidity of Judgment, and strength of Grace to establish you in the
Truth, and secure your Souls against the cunning craftiness of Men that lie in
to deceive.

It Is the ignorance and weakness of the people, which makes the Factors for
Error so successful as they are. Consult the Scriptures, and you shall find
these cunning Merchants drive the quickest and gainfullest trade among the weak
and injudicious. So speaks the Apostle, With good words and fair speeches, they
deceive the hearts of the simple; (...), harmless, weak, easy Souls, who have
a desire to do well, but want wisdom to discern the subtilties of them that
mean ill; who are void both of fraud in themselves, and suspicion of others.
Oh! what success have the Deceivers, (...), their fair words and sugared
speeches, sweet and taking expressions, among such innocent ones!

And who are they among whom Satan's cunning Gamesters commonly win the Game,
and sweep the Stakes, but weak Christians, credulous Souls, whom for that
reason the Apostle calls (...), Children. The word properly signifies an an
Infant, when it is referred to the Age; but unskilful and unlearned, when
referred (as it is here) to the Mind. So again, 2 Pet. 2. 14. They (that is,
the False Teachers there spoken of) beguile (...), unstable Souls, Souls that
are not confirmed and grounded in the Principles of Religion. Whence by the
way, take notice of the unspeakable advantage and necessity of being well
Catechized in our youth: the more judicious, the more secure.

Remedy II.
Labor to acquaint your selves with the sleights and artifices Satan's Factors
and Instruments generally make use of, to seduce and draw Men from the Truth.
The knowledge of them is a good defensative against them. Now there are two
common Artifices of Seducers, which it is not safe for Christians to be
ignorant of

First, They usually seek to disgrace and blast the reputations of those Truths
and Ministers set for their defense, which they design afterward to overthrow
and ruin; and to beget credit and reputation to those Errors which they have a
mind to introduce. How many precious truths of God are this day, and with this
design defamed as legal and carnal Doctrines; and those that defend them, as
Men of an Old Testament spirit?

Humiliation for Sin, Contrition of Spirit, etc fall under disgrace with many,
and indeed all qualifications and pre-requisites unto coming to Christ, as
things not only needless, but pernicious unto the Souls of Men, although they
have not the least dependence upon them: Yea, Faith it self, as a pre-requisite
unto Justification, as no better than a Condition pertaining to Adam's Covenant.

And so for the persons of Orthodox Ministers; you see into what contempt the
false Teachers would have brought both the Person and Preaching of Paul
himself, 2 Cor. 10. 10. His bodily presence (say they) is weak, and his speech
contemptible.

Secondly, Their other common Artifice is, to insinuate their false Doctrines
among many acknowledged and precious Truths, which only serve for a convenient
vehicle to them; and besides that, to make their Errors as palatable and
gustful as they can to the vitiated Appetite of corrupt Nature. Mr. W. G.
The forementioned Worthy has judiciously observed how artificially Satan has
blended his baneful Doses, to please the Palate of Carnal Reason, Spiritual
Pride, and the desire of Fleshly Liberty.

Carnal Reason is that great Idol, which the more intelligent part of the
carnal World worships. And are not the Socinian Heresies as pleasant to it, as
a wellmixt Iulep to a feverish Stomach.

Spiritual Pride is another Diana, which obtains greatly in the World; and no
Doctrine like the Pelagian and Semipelagian Errors, gratify it. A Doctrine that
sets fallen Nature upon its Legs again, and persuades it, it can go alone to
Christ; at least, with a little external help of Moral suasion, without any
preventing or creating work in the Soul. This goes down glib and grateful.

And then for Fleshly Liberty, How do those that are fond of it rejoice in that
Doctrine or Opinion, which looses Nature from the yoke of restraint? How does
the poor deluded Papist hug himself, to think he has liberty by his Religion,
to let loose the reins of his Lust to all sensualities, and quit himself from
all that guilt, by Auricular Confession to the Priest once a year? How does the
Familist smile upon that Principle of his, which tells him, the Gospel allows
more Liberty than severe Legal Teachers think fit to tell them of: They press
Repentance and Faith; but Christ has done all this to thy hands.

Cause XII.
Having considered the several Causes of Errors, found in the evil dispositions
of the seduced, as also the impulsive and instrumental Causes, namely Satan and
false Teachers employed by him; I shall next proceed to discover some special,
and most successful Methods frequently used by them, to draw the minds of Men
from the Truth. Amongst which, that which comes first to consideration, is the
great skill they have in representing the ABUSES of the Ordinances of God, and
Duties of Religion, by wicked Men, to scare tender and weak Consciences from
the due use of them, and all further attendance upon them.

The abuse of Christ's holy Appointments are so cunningly improved to serve
this design, that the minds of many wellmeaning persons receive such deep
disgust at them, that they are scarce ever to be reconciled to them again. A
strong prejudice is apt to drive Men from one extreme upon another, as thinking
they can never get far enough off from that which has been so scaringly
represented to them. Thus making good the old Observation, Dum vitant stulti
vitia, in contraria currunt; they run from the troublesome smoke of
Superstition, into the Fire of an irreligious contempt of God's Ordinances,
split themselves upon Charybdis to avoid Scylla. Ex. gra.

The Papists having deeply abused the Ordinance of Baptism, by their corruptive
mixtures and additions of the superstitious Cross, Chrism, etc. part whereof is
not sufficiently purged to this day by the Reformation; and finding also
multitudes of carnal Protestants dangerously resting upon their supposed
baptismal Regeneration, to the great hazard of their Salvation; which mistake
is but too much countenanced by some of its Administrators: They take from
hence such deep offense at the administration of it to any Infants at all
(though the Seed of God's Covenanted People) that they think they can never be
sharp enough in their invectives against it; nor have they patience to hear the
most rational defenses of that Practice.

So, for that Scriptural Heavenly Duty of Singing: What more commonly alleged
against it, than the abuse and ill effects of that precious Ordinance? How
often is the Nonsense and Error of the common Translation, the rudeness and
dullness of the Meter of some Psalms, as Psalm. 7. 13. as also the cold
formality, with which that Ordinance is performed by many who do but Parrotize?
I say, How often are these things buz'd into the ears of the people, to
alienate their hearts from so sweet and beneficial a Duty?

And very often we find it urged to the same end, how unwarrantable and
dangerous a thing it is for carnal and unregenerated persons to appropriate to
themselves in Singing, those Praises and Experiences which are peculiar to the
Saints; not understanding, or considering that the singing of Psalms is an
Ordinance of Christ, appointed for teaching and admonition, as well as
praising, Col. 3. 16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns,
etc. The Divinity of former ages (says Mr. Saltmarsh) put but a Grain, or
Dram of Gospel, to a Pound of Law, in their Receipts for distempered Souls.
Vide Saltmarsh of Free Grace, p. 40.
Thus Antinomianism took, if not its rise, yet its encouragement from the too
rigorous pressing of the Law upon convinced sinners.

If Satan can prevail first with wicked Men, to corrupt and abuse God's
Ordinances by the superstitious mixtures and additions; and then with good Men,
to renounce and slight them for the sake of those abuses; he fully obtains his
design, and gives Christ a double wound at once; one by the hand of his avowed
Enemies, the other by the hands of his Friends, no less grievous than the
first. First, wicked Men corrupt Christ's Ordinances; and then good Men
nauseate them.

The Remedies.
The proper Remedies against Errors, insinuated by the abuses of Duties and
Ordinances, are such as follow:

Remedy I.
Let Men consider, that there is nothing in Religion so great, so sacred and
excellent, but some or other have greatly corrupted or vilely abused them.

What is there in the whole World more precious and excellent than the
Free Grace of God? and yet you read, Jude 4. of some that turned the Grace of
our Lord into Lasciviousness. What more desirable to Christians, than the
glorious Liberty Christ has purchased for them by his Blood, and settled upon
them in the Gospel-Charter? A Liberty from Satan, Sin, and the rigor and Curse
of the Law; and yet you read, 1 Pet. 2. 16. of them that used this Liberty for
a cloak of maliciousness. It Is true, Christ came to be a Sacrifice for Sin, but
not a Cloak for Sin; to set us at Liberty from the Bondage of our Lusts, not
from the Ties and Duties of our Obedience. Under the pretense of this Liberty
it was, that the Gnostics, Carpocratians, and the Menandrians of old, did not
only connive at; but openly taught and practiced all manner of leudness and
uncleanness.

St. Augustine, Menandriani omnem turpitudinem libenter amplexi sunt, tanquam
gratiae Dei erga homines fructum. August. Lib. de Haeres.
in his Book of Heresy, makes this sad complaint, The Menandrians (says he) do
willingly embrace all uncleanness as the fruit of the Grace of God toward Men.
And not only the Liberty purchased by Christ, but the very Person and Gospel of
Christ are liable to abuses; and oftentimes through the corruptions of Men's
hearts, become Stones of stumbling, and Rocks of offense. What then? Shall we
renounce the Grace of God, our Christian Liberty, the very Gospel, yea, and
Person of Christ himself, because each of them have been thus vilely abused by
wicked wretches? At the peril of our eternal damnation be it, if we do so.
Blessed is he (says our Lord) that is not offended in me. Beware, lest by this
means Satan at once wound the Lord Jesus Christ by scandal, and thy Soul by
prejudice.

Remedy II.
Consider also, that it is the nature and temper of a gracious Soul, to raise
his esteem, and heighten his love to those Ordinances which are most abused and
disgraced by Men.

The more they are abused and opposed by others, the higher they should be
valued and honored by us; Psalm. 119. 126, 127. It is time for thee, Lord, to
work; for they have made void thy Law; therefore I love thy Commandments above
gold, yea, above fine gold. q. d. The more they are disgraced and abused by
wicked men, the more do I honor and prize them. A like spirit, with David's,
was found in Elijah, 1 King. 19. 14. I have been very jealous for the Lord God
of Hosts; because the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown
down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the Sword.

A good Man will strive to honor and secure those Truths and Duties most,
which he finds under most disgrace or danger. He loves the Truth sincerely, who
cleaves to it, and stands by it under all opposition. This is a good trial of
the soundness of thy heart, and purity of thine ends in Religion: Such a proof,
as the honor and reputation of Religion in the World can never give thee.

In Solomon's time the Jews were very cautious how they admitted and received
Proselytes, suspecting that by-ends and worldly respects may draw men to it;
but they were not so cautelous in times of disgrace and persecution.

Remedy III.
Before you part with any Ordinance or practice in Religion, bethink your
selves whether you never found any spiritual blessings or advantages in that
path which you are now tempted to forsake.

Had you never any spiritual meltings of your hearts and affections in that
Heavenly Ordinance of Singing? And may there not be now Thousands of Mercies in
your possession in consequence to, and as the fruit of your solemn dedication
to God in Baptism by your Covenanted Parents? For my own part, I do heartily
and solemnly bless God for it upon this account; and so I hope Thousands
besides my self have cause to do. However, such a Practice may by no means be
deserted by you, because abused by others.

Cause XIII.
Another Method and Artifice, by which false Teachers draw multitudes of
Disciples after them, is, by granting to their Ignorant and Ambitious Followers
the LIBERTY of PROPHESYING; flattering them into a conceit of their excellent
Gifts and Seize, when God knows they had more need to be Catechized and
taught the Principles of Christianity, than undertake to expound and apply
those profound Mysteries unto others.

Satan has filled the Church and World with Errors and Troubles this way.
Stultissimiatque impiissimi homines, non intelligentes nihil contrarium in
rebus iisdem ab eodem dictum fuisse, verbis tantum inhaerentes. causas ipsas
dictorum reliquerunt. Et diversa quidem Scripturae dicta videntes, ad
impietatem reciderunt, divinorum dictorum incapaces. Hilarious, Lib. 1. de
Trinit.
When ignorant and unexperienced Persons begin to think it a low and a dull
thing to sit from year to year under other men's teachings, and to fancy that
they are wiser than their Teachers; their Pride will quickly tempt them to show
their Ignorance, and that mischievous Ignorance will prove dangerous to the
Truth, and troublesome to the Church. The Apostle forbids the Ordination of a
Novice, lest he be puffed up, and fall into the condemnation of the Devil: and
in 1 Timothy 1. 7. he shows us the reason why some swerved and turned aside unto
vain jangling; and it was this, That they desired to be Teachers of the Law,
neither understanding what they said, nor whereof they affirmed. That is, They
affected to be Preachers, though not able to speak congrucusly, with tolerable
sense and reason.

I do not here censure and condemn the use and exercise of the Gifts of all
private Christians. There are to be found amongst them some Persons of raised
parts, and answerable modesty and humility, who may be very useful, when called
to service, in extraordinary Cases, by the Voice of Providence; or exercise
their Gifts in a probationary way, or in due subordination unto Christ's
public Officers and Ordinances, by, and with the consent of the Pastor, and
Congregation.

But when unqualified and uncalled Persons undertake such a work out of the
conceit and pride of their own hearts, or are allured to it by the crafty
Designs of Erroneous Teachers, partly to overthrow a public, regular and
standing Ministry in the Church, to which end the Scriptures are manifestly
abused, such as Ier. 31. 34. Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Pet. 4. 10. with many
others; This is the practice I here censure, which like a Trojan Horse, has
sent forth multitudes of Erroneous Persons into the City of God to infest and
defile it.

I cannot doubt but many a sincere Christian may be drawn into such employment
whichputs him into a capacity of honoring God in a more eminent way, which is
a thing desirable to an honest and zealous heart: and that the temptation may
be greatly strengthened upon them by the plausible suggestions of cunning
Seducers, who tell them, That those Ministers who oppose and condemn this
practice, do it as men concerned for their own Interest, as desirous to
monopolize the work to themselves, and as envying the Lord's People: and that
Christ has given them a greater liberty in this case, than those men will
allow them. By this means they daw many after them, and fix them in their
Erroneous ways.

I have no mind at all here to expose the Follies and Mischiefs introduced this
way, as neither being willing to grieve the hearts of the Sincere on one side,
nor gratify scoffing Atheists, and profane Enemies to Religion, upon the other
side: only this I will, and must say, That by this means the Sacred Scriptures
are most injuriously wrested, the Peace and Order of the Church disturbed, and
a great many Mistakes and Errors introduced.

The Remedies.
The prevention and cure of Errors this way introduced, or likely to be
introduced into the Church, is by pondering and applying the following
Considerations.

Consideration I.
Let all that encourage others, or undertake by others encouragement such a
Work as this, for which they are not competently qualified, and unto which they
are not regularly called, consider seriously with themselves what danger they
cast their own, and other men's Souls upon.

The Apostle tells us, 2 Pet. 3. 16. That the unlearned and unstable do wrest
the Scriptures to their own destruction. Danger enough, one would think, to
scare them from it, did not the same sin of Ignorace, which makes them wrest
the Scriptures, cause them also to slight and overlook the danger of so doing.
Athanas^^s indicat Scripturas malitiose intellectas and detortas, errores
parere. Athanasius contra Apollinar.


Certainly, my Friends, it is a great deal safer, and more excusable, to put an
ignorant Rustic into an Apothecary's Shop to compound a Medicine of Drugs and
Spirits, which he understands not, and considently administer the same to the
Bodies of men; than for such Persons as are led by ignorance and confidence, to
intermeddle with the Ministerial Employment: the one, perhaps, by mistake, may
poison men's Bodies; but the other their Souls. An ignorant Master, or Pilot,
that never learned the Compass, are rather to be trusted among Rocks and
Quicksands, than a proud ignorant Person with the conduct of Souls.

Consideration II.
What daring Presumption is it to intrude our selves into so great and weighty
an Employment without any Call or Warrant of Christ! Romans 10. 14. How shall
they call upon him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without
a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent?

These Mysteries must be committed to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach
others. Those Abilities must be examined, 1 Timothy 3. 10. and the Exercise of
them warranted by a due and orderly appointment thereunto, 1 Timothy 4. 14. else
(as one well observes) In tam praepostera disciplinae ruina tot essent sensus,
quot capita; tot dissensus, quot sensus; We shall have as many senses of
Scripture, as we have Preachers, etc.

If every Phaeton, that thinks himself able, shall undertake to drive the
Chariot of the Sun, no wonder if the World be set on fire. Gifts and Abilities
of Mind are not of themselves sufficient to make a Preacher. Some Lawyers at
the Bar may be as skilful as the Judge upon the Bench, but without a Commission
they dare not sit there.

Consideration III.
The honor you affect, to vent your unsound Notions with liberty, is in
Scripture-account your greatest dishonor.

The Scripture reckons false Teachers among the basest of the People: The
Prophet that teaches lies, he is the Tail, i. e. the basest part of the whole
body of the People, Isa. 9. 15. And so far is due Gospel-Liberty from
countenancing such dangerous Irregularities, that we find in a clear Prophecy
of Gospel Times, what shame God will pour upon them, Zech. 13. 4, 5. They shall
be brought with shame enough to confess, I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman;
for man taught me to keep Cattle from my youth.

Consideration IV.
How much more safe, regular and advantageous were it for such as you, to fill
your own proper Places under able and faithful Gospel Ministers, and to suck
the Breasts of fruitful Ordinances, than to consume and pine away by sucking
your own Breasts? I mean, living upon your own weak and insufficient Gifts, in
the sinful neglect of Christ's Appointments?

Cause XIV.
False Teachers also propagate their Errors by a Spirit of ENTHVSIASM, the
usual concomitant of Erroneous Doctrine; and draw away multitudes after them,
by pretending to extraordinary Revelations, Visions, and Voices from Heaven,
which seem to give great credit to their Way and Party. Nonnulli autem falsorum
Prophetarum vaticinio illecti de quibus and very Prophetae, and ipse
praedixerat, exciderunt a doctrina Dei, and traditionem veram reliquerunt. Sed
illi omnes daemoniacis fraudibus irretiti, quas prospicere and cavere
debuerant, divinum nomen and cultum per imprudentiam perdiderunt. Lact. lib. 4.
cap. 30. de Haeresibus.


This was an old trick and practice of Deceivers, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. to give Signs
and Wonders in confirmation of their Way, which Signs the Lord may permit to
fall out to prove his People, verse. 2. 3. tho, for the most part, they are
confuted by their unanswerable Events.

In the beginning of our Reformation by Luther, Calvin, etc. there sprung up a
Generation of Men, called Swenkfeldians, great Pretenders to Revelations and
Visions, who were always speaking of Deifications; and an higher strain of
Language they commonly used among themselves, than other serious Christians
understood, and therefore scornfully entitled Orthodox and humble Christians,
who stuck to the Scripture Phrase, and wholesome form of sound words,
Grammatists, Vocabulists, Literalists, etc. These Men (as Irretiti suis
quibusdam Enthusiasticis laqueis, unde se extricari summam putant impietatem:
dementabant multos magnificis istis verbis, Illuminatio, Revelatio, Deificatio,
etc.
Scultetus in his Annals, ad annum 1525. Observes of them) were so entangled in
certain Enthusiastic Snares, that they thought it the highest impiety to
renounce them: and they had befooled multitudes with their magnificent words of
Illumination, Revelation, Deification.

Much of the same Spirit was Thomas Muntzer, John of Leyden, David George,
Jacob Behmen, etc. whose cloudy Nonsense, aenigmatical Expressions, and wilful
Obscurity, drew many into a strange admiration of them: They all pretend to an
higher knowledge of Mysteries than what the Gospel is acquainted with; and and
yet give us (as Mr. Baxter well observes) neither Reasons with Aristotle, nor
Miracles with Christ, and his Apostles, to cause us to believe any of their new
Revelations. Vid. Baxter of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, p. 148.

Of the same Bran were our late Familists in England, of whom Henry Nichols was
the chief Leader, who decried the written Word as a dead Letter; and set up
their own fond Conceits and Fancies under the notion of the Spirit; against
whom that heavenly and Learned Man, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, seasonably and
succesfully appeared. Hacket, Coppinger and Arthington, were of the same Tribe;
who lived awhile wrapped up in Antinomian Fancies, which at last brake forth
into the highest and most horrid Blasphemies.

Another Art they make use of to seduce the Credulous, is a pretense unto the
Spirit of Prophecy; and great sucsess they promise themselves this way among
the weak, but curious Vulgar. And to this end Satan has inspired and employed
some Cunninger Heads to invent very pleasing Predictions and Prophecies, in
favor of that Party whom he designs to deceive. And how catching and
bewitching these things are, gaining more respect among these vain Spirits,
than the divine unquestionable Prophecies of Scripture, this Age has had full
and sad experience.

Now the Design of Satan in these things, is to gain credit to those Sects, as
People peculiarly favored and beloved of God above others; as if they were the
particular Favorites of Heaven, as Daniel was; and so to draw the Multitude to
admire their Persons, and espouse their Errors.

The Remedies.
Now the Remedies in this Case are such as follow.

Remedy I.
Whatever Doctrine or Practice seeks credit to it self this way, falls justly
thereby under suspicion, that it wants a solid Scripture-foundation.

God has not left his People to seek satisfaction in such uncertain ways as
these; but has given them a surer word of Prophecy, to which they do well to
take heed, 2 Pet. 1. 19. He has tied us to the standing Rule of the Word,
forbidding us to give heed to any other Voice, or Spirit, leading us another
way, Isa. 8. 19. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. Gal. 1. 8. Scripture Light is a safe and
sure Light, a pleasant and sufficient Light.

The Scripture (says Luther) is so full, that as for Visions and Revelations,
nec curo, nec desidero, I neither regard, nor desire them. And when he himself
had a Vision of Christ after a day of fasting and prayer, he cried out, Avoid
Satan, I know no Image of Christ, but the Scripture. An hankering mind after
these things, speaks a sickly and distempered state of Soul, as longing after
Trash in young distempered Persons, does a distempered state, or ill habit of
Body.

Mr. William Bridges somewhere tells us of a Religious Lady of the Empresses
Bedchamber, whose name was Gregoria, who being greatly troubled about her
Salvation, wrote to Gregory, That she would never cease importuning him, 'till
he had sent her word, that he had obtained a Revelation from Heaven that she
should be saved: to whom he returned this Answer; Rem difficilem postulas and
inutilem, Thou requirest of me that which is difficult to me, and unprofitable
for thee.

Remedy II.
Consider how often the World has been abused by the Tricks and Cheats of that
officious Spirit, the Devil, in such ways as these.

What has propagated Idolatry among Heathens and Christians more than this?
Hinc fluxerunt multae peregrinationnes, Monasteria, delubra, dies festi and
alia, says Lavater, in Job 33. Pilgrimages, Monasteries, Shrines of Saints,
Holydays, etc. have been introduced by this Trick. 'Twere endless to give
Instances of it in the Histories of former Ages. Of the Prophesies, Visions and
pretended Inspirations of Storke, Pfeiffer, Becold, Warendorp, etc. with the
efficacy of them on the deluded People, and fatal consequences of them both to
the Deceived, and Deceivers: See Mr. Samuel Rutherford' s survey of the
Spiritual Antichrist, p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.


We have a notable late Account of it among our selves, in a Book, entitled, [
A Discovery of the notorious Falsehood and Dissimulation contained in a Book,
styled, The Gospel-way confirmed by Miracles] Licensed and published 1649.
wherein is laid open to the World, the free Confession of Ann Wells, Matthe^
Hall, etc. deluding the People of Whatfield in Suffolk with such pretended
Voices, Visions, Prophecies and Revelations, the like have scarcely been heard
of in England since the Reformation. Multitudes of People were deluded by them.

At length the Lord extorted from this Woman a full Confession of the notorious
falseness of these things, by a terrible Vision of Hell: her Partisans labored
four days to suppress and stifle it, but to no purpose: for the Horrors of
Conscience prevailed with her to confess the notorious Dissimulations contained
in that Book, before the People of Whatfield, and a Justice of the Peace. And
thus the Lord out-shot Satan in his own Bow.

Remedy III.
Consider how difficult, yea, and impossible it is for a man to determine that
such a Voice, Vision, or Revelation is of God; and that Satan cannot feign or
counterfeit it; seeing he has left no certain marks by which we may
distinguish one Spirit from another: an albus? an ater?

Sure we are, Satan can transform himself into an Angel of Light; and therefore
abandoning all those unsafe and uncertain ways, whereby Swarms of Errors have
been conveyed into the World, let us cleave inseparably to the sure Word of
Prophecy, the Rule and Standard of our Faith and Duty.

Cause XV.
Another way in which False Teachers discover their Subtilty with great
success, is, in TIMING their Assaults, and nicking the proper Season, when the
minds of men are most apt and easy to be drawn away by their fair and specious
Pretenses.

Such a Season as this, they find about the time of men's first Conversion, or
soon after their Implantation into Christ. Now it is that their Affections are
most lively and vigorous, though their Judgments be but weak. They have now
such strong and deep apprehensions of the Grace and Love of Christ, and such
transcendent zeal for him, that they easily embrace any thing whereby they
conceive he may be honored and exalted. They have also such deep Apprehensions
and powerful Aversations as to Sin, that they are in danger to fly even from
Truth and Duty it felf, when it shall be artificially represented to them as
Sin. For not only that which is malum per se, Sin indeed; but that which is
male coloratum, painted with Sin's Colors, is apt to scare and fright them.

Besides, These young Converts or Novices have not had time to confirm and root
themselves in the Truth; and Trees newly planted are much more easily drawn up,
than those that have spread and fastened their Roots in the Earth. It Is
observable what a swarm of false Teachers troubled the Churches of Corinth,
Galatia and Philippi, at, and newly after their first planting: and what danger
those young Christians were in, abundantly appears in the Apostle's frequent
Cautions and holy Jealousy over them: he bids them beware of Dogs, beware of
Evil Workers, beware of the Concision, Phil. 3. 2. I fear lest by any means as
the Serpent beguiled Eve through his s^btilty, so your minds be corrupted from
the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. he was afraid of the Galatians,
lest he had bestowed upon them labor in vain, Gal. 4. 11. he would not give
place to false Brethren, no not for an hour, Gal. 2. 5. charges the Romans to
receive them that were weak in the faith, but not to doubtful Disputations,
Romans 14. 1. All which, and many more Expressions, discover his grounded
jealousy, and their extraordinary danger of seduction at their first
plantation. A Novice in Christianity is the Person Satan seeks for: strong
Believers are not in such apparent danger as little ones in Christ, 1 John 5.
21. Little Children, keep your selves from Idols.

And the reason is, because keen Affections, matched with weak Judgments, give
a mighty advantage to Seducers. Children are apt to be taken with beautiful
Appearances, and fine shows; and Erroneous Teachers have the very knack to set
a glo^s of extraordinary sanctity upon their dangerous Opinions. Hence those
Persons that promoted the Sect of the Nicolaitans, made use of a cunning Woman,
who for her skill in painting Errors with the Colors of Truth, got the name of
Iezebel, Rev. 2. 20. That Queen was famous for the art of Painting, 1 King. 16.
and so was this false Prophetess: indeed there was scarce any eminent Sect of
Errorists or Heretics mentioned in Church History, but some curious feminine
Artist has been employed to lay the beautiful Colors upon it. So we find
Simon Magus had his Helena. Carpocrates his Marcellina. Montanus his Priscilla
and Maximilla. And the curious Colors of Holiness, Zeal and Freegrace,
artificially laid upon the face of Error, how wrinkled and ugly soever in it
self, sets it off temptingly and takingly to weak and injudicious Minds.

Moreover, Erroneous Teachers are great Boasters: they usually give out to the
World what extraordinary Comforts they meet with in their way, which proves a
strong temptation to young Converts, who have been so lately in the depths of
spiritual Trouble, to try at least, if not to embrace it, for the expected
Comforts sake.

Ah, how many pious Ministers in England, upon such Grounds and Pretenses as
these, have had their spiritual Children rent from them as soon as born! they
have travailed as in birth for them; and no sooner did they begin to take
comfort in the success of their Labors, but to the great grief and
discouragement of their hearts, they have been this way bereaved of them. those
that have owned them as their spiritual Fathers one month, would scarce
vouchsafe to own them, when they have met them in the Streets another month.
Many sad Instances I could give of this, and some as remarkable as they are
fresh and recent: but I silence particulars. Oh see the advantage Satan and his
Instruments gain by nicking such a critical Season as this is.

The Cure, or Remedy.
The Remedies in this case are twofold: the first respects the spiritual
Fathers; and the second the spiritual Children: both are concerned in the
danger, and the Lord help both to attend to their duty.

Remedy I.
Let all those whose Ministry God blesses with the desirable fruits of
Conversion, look carefully after the Souls of young Converts.

No Nurse should be more tender and careful of her Charge, than a Minister
should be: and unto the care of a tender Nurse, Paul compares his care over
the young Converts in Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. for alas, they lie exposed
to all dangers: they are credulous, and Seducers cunning: they want judgment to
discern Truth from Error; have not yet attained unto Senses exercised, and Age
in Christ to discern Good from Evil: when Errors are made palatable, Children
will be hankering after them, and Seducers have the very art to make them so.
-- Veluti pueris absynthia tetra medentes
Cum dare conantur, prius or as pocula circum
Contingunt dulci Mellis, flavoque liquore.


Shepherds look to your Flocks; imitate the great Shepherd of the Sheep, who
gathers the Lambs with his Arms, and carries them in his Bosom; visit them
frequently, exhort and warn them diligently, and use all means to establish
them in the present Truths.

Remedy II.
Let young Converts and weak Christians look carefully to themselves by an
heedful attendance unto the following Truths.

First, It is not safe to try, nor upon trial likely that you should find
Christ in one way, and comfort in another. God does not usually bless those
ways to men's comfort and edification, into which they turn aside from that good
way wherein they first met with Christ and Conversion. The same Ministry and
Ordinances which are appointed and blessed for the one, are likewise appointed,
and commonly blessed for the other, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Secondly, It Is a manifest Snare of the Devil (and you may easily discern it)
to take you off from the great Work you are newly engaged in, by entangling
your minds in Notions that are for^ign to it. Your hearts are now warm with
God, Satan labors this way to cool and quench them: the cunning Cheat labors
to steal away the sweet and nutritive Food which is before you, and lay the
hard and dry Bones of barren Controversies and insipid Notions in their room.
Your business is not to frame Syllogisms, or study Solutions to cunning
Arguments about lower and lesser matters, so much as it is by Prayer and
Self-examination, to clear your Interest in Christ, and to solve those doubts
that lie with weight upon your Spirits, with reference to that great Concern.

Thirdly, It Is a sad thing to grieve the hearts of those faithful Ministers
that have traveled in pain for us, and rejoiced in our Conversion as the Seal
of their Ministry. Oh, serve not your godly Ministers, as the Hen is sometimes
served that has long brooded, brought forth, and with much care and selfdenial
nourished up young Partridges, which as soon as fledged, take the wing, and
return no more to her.

Cause XVI.
There is yet another Artifice of false Teachers to draw Men into Errors, and
that is, by pressing the Consciences of those they have made some impressions
upon, unto all HASTE and SPEED, openly to declare their new Opinions, and avow
and own them before the World; as knowing that this will rivet and fix them to
all intents and purposes.

When they find Men under half Convictions, and strong inclinations to their
way, they are sure then to ply them with a thick succession of Motives and
Arguments, to join themselves by a free and open profession, to that erroneous
Party which are headed by themselves.

And the Arguments usually pressed to this purpose are, 1. The danger of delay.
2. The comfort of declaring themselves.


First, They press them with the danger of the least delay, by telling them,
That now they must live every day and hour in known sin, and hold the truth of
God in unrighteousness, the evil whereof they skilfully aggravate; and the more
tender and sensible the Conscience is, the deeper impressions such discourses
make, although the Case, indeed, will not bear the weight they lay upon it, as
having not that due allowance God gives of time and means of full information
in matters of this nature; yea, possibly driving them into as great a snare by
precipitation, and too hasty engagements under a Doubting Conscience.

Secondly, They press them to a quick resolution, with the expectations of
abundance of comfort, inward peace and joy, which will result from a full
engagement of themselves, and open declaration of their Judgment; proseliting
to a Party, being the main design they drive at.

This was the very Art and Method by which Satan prevailed with Eve to swallow
the bait, Genesis 3. 5. For God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then
your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. q.
d. The sooner thou tastest, the better; for the first taste will give thee a
God-like knowledge, and mavelous advancement of thy understanding; Did thou
but know the benefit that would accrue to thee thereby, thou would not delay
one moment. And thus by setting before her the speedy and immediate benefits of
eating, he prevailed, and drew her into the fatal snare.

In this the Ministers of Satan imitate the Ministers of Christ: As these press
Men to make haste to Christ, lest by consulting with flesh and blood, and
listening to the temptations of Satan, hopeful inclinations should be blasted
in the bud; so the others push Men on to hasty resolutions, lest by hearkening
to the voice of God's Spirit and their own Consciences, the design they have so
far advanced should be lost and disappointed. The Ministers of Christ urge Men
to a speedy change of their Company, and to associate themselves with spiritual
and profitable Christians, as well knowing of what great use this will be to
confirm and strengthen them in the ways of God. So Errorists in like manner
vehemently urge them to associate with their Party, as knowing how one wedges
in and fixes another in the ways of Error; for such Causes Satan pushes on
half-convictions into hasty resolutions, quick dispatch being his great
advantage. This the Apostle intimates, Gal. 1. 6. I marvel (says he) that ye
are so soon removed, etc. (...), what so soon! yes, if it had not been so soon,
it might never have been at all; for Errors (as one ingeniously observes) like
Fish, must be eaten fresh and new, or they'I quickly stink.

The Cure, or Remedy.
The Remedies and Preventatives in this Case, are such as follow:

Remedy I.
Consider, that hasty engagements in weighty and disputable matters, have cost
many Souls dear.

As hasty Marriages have produced long and late repentance; so has the
clapping up of an hasty Match betwixt the Mind and Error. By entertaining
strange persons, Men sometimes entertain Angels unaware; but by entertaining of
strange Doctrines, many have entertained Devils unawares. It Is not safe to open
the door of the Soul to let in strangers in the night; let them wait till a
clear daylight of information show you what they are.

Remedy II.
Weighty Actions require answerable Deliberations. It was the worthy saying of
Augustus Caesar Satis coleriter fieri, quicquid commode geritur.
, That Is soon enough, that is well enough. There be many things to be
considered, and thoroughly weighed, before a Man change his judgment, and
embrace a new Doctrine or Opinion. Luther, in his Epistle to the Ministers of
Norimberg, cites an excellent passage out of Basil Multa anxie considerare eum
oportet, and multas noctes absumere insomnes, and cum multis lachrymis petere a
Deo veritatis demonstrationem, qui se a fratribus separari vul^.
, He that is about to separate himself from the society of his Brethren, had
need to consider many things even unto anxiety; to beg of God the demonstration
of Truth with many tears, and to pass many solitary nights with waking eyes,
before he attempt, or put such a matter in execution. By the vote of the whole
rational World, Time and Consideration ought to be proportionate to the weight
of an Undertakement.

Remedy III.
The only season Men have to weigh things judiciously and impartially, is
before their affections be too far engaged, and their credit and reputation too
much concerned.

Men are better able to weigh Doctrines and Opinions, whilst they are other
men's, than when they have espoused them and made them their own. Before an
Opinion be espoused, Perit omne judicium, cum res transit in affectum.
the Affections do not blind and pervert the Judgment, as they do afterward.
Selflove Love pulls down the balance at that end which is next us. If therefore
by hasty resolution, you lose this only proper and advantageous season of
deliberation, you are not like to find such another.

Remedy IV.
Trust not to the clearness of your own unassisted eyes, nor to the strength of
your single reason; but consult in such cases, with others that are pious and
judicious, especially your godly and faithful Ministers; and hearken to the
Counsels they give you. Paul justly wondered that the Galatians were so soon
removed; and well he might: For had they not a Paul to consult with, before
they gave their consent to false Teachers? Or if he was at a distance from them
about the work of the Lord in remote places, had they no godly and judicious
Friends near them, whose Prayers and assistances they might call in, as Daniel
did? Dan. 2. 17. Woe unto him that is alone in a time of temptation, except the
Lord be with him by extraordinary assistance and direction.

Remedy V.
Lastly, Suspect that Opinion (as justly you may) for erroneous, that is too
importunate and pressing upon you, and will not allow you due time of
consideration, and means of information. That which is a truth to day, will be
a truth to morrow: But that which looks like a truth to day, may be detected,
and look like it self, an odious Error to morrow. And this is the reason of
that post-haste that Satan and his Factors make to gain our present consent,
lest a speedy detection frustrate the suit, and spoil the design. The Uses
follow in Six Consectaries.

Consectary I.
From all that has been said about Errors, we see in the first place, the
great usefulness and plain necessity of an able, faithful, standing Ministry in
the Church.

One special end of the Ministry, is the establishment of the peoples Souls
against the Errors of the times, Ephesians. 4. 11, 14. He gave some Apostles, etc.
that we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, etc. Ministers are
Shepherds, and without a Shepherd, how soon will the flock go astray? Moses was
absent but a few days from the Israelites, and at his return found them all run
into the snares of Idolatry. A Sheep is animal sequax, a creature that follows
a Leader. One stragler may mislead a whole flock. A Minister's work is not only
to feed, but to defend the flock. I am set (says Paul) for the defense of the
Gospel, Phil. 1. 17. An Orthodox and Faithful Minister, is a double blessing to
the people; but woe to that people, whose Ministers, instead of securing them
against Errors, do cause them to err, Isa. 9. 16. they are the Dogs of the
Flock. Some in Scripture are called dumb dogs, who, instead of barking at the
Thief, bite the Children: But faithful Ministers give warning of spiritual
dangers. So did the worthy Ministers of London, Worcestershire, Devon, etc. in
their Testimonies against Errors.

Consectary II.
This discourse shows us also how little quietness and peace the Church may
expect, till a greater degree of light and unity be poured out upon it; what by
persecutions from without it, and troubles from within, little tranquillity is
to be expected. It Is a Note of St. Bernards, that the Church has sometimes had
pacem a Paganis, sed raro aut nunquam a filiis, peace sometimes from Pagan
Persecutors, but seldom or never any peace from her own Children.

We read, Zech. 14. 7. the whole state of the Christian Church, from the
primitive days, to the end of the World, set forth under the notion of one day,
and that a strange day too, the light of it shall neither be clear nor dark,
nor day nor night, but at evening time it shall be light; i. e. a day full of
interchangeable and alternate providence. Sometimes persecutions, heresies and
errors prevail, and these make that part of the day dark and gloomy; and then
Truth and Peace break forth again, and clear up the day. Thus it has been, and
thus it will be until the evening of it, and at even-time it shall be light;
then light and love shall get the ascendant of error and divisions. Most of our
scuffles and contentions are for want of greater measures of both these.

Consectary III.
From the manifold Causes and Mischiefs of Errors before mentioned, we may also
see what a choice mercy it is to be kept sound in judgment, steadfast and
unmovable in the Truths and Ways of Christ. A sound and steadfast Christian is a
blessing in his Generation, and a glory to his Profession. 'Twas an high
Encomium of Athanasius, Sedem maluit mutare, quam syllabam: He would rather
lose his Seat, than a syllable of God's Truth. Soundness of Judgment must needs
be a choice Blessing; because the understanding is the (...), that
leading-faculty which directs the Will and Conscience of Man, and they his
whole Life and Practice. How often and how earnestly does Christ pray for his
people, that they may be kept in the Truth? It Is true, Orthodoxy in its self is
not sufficient to any man's Salvation; but the conjunction of an Orthodox head,
with an honest sincere heart, does always constitute an excellent Christian,
Phil. 1. 10. Happy is the man that has an head so hearted, and an heart so
headed.

Consectary IV.
By this discourse we may further discover one great and special cause and
reason of the lamentable decay of the spirit and power of Religion, amongst the
Professors of the present Age.

It Is a complaint more just than common, That we do all fade as a leaf. And
what may be the Cause? Nothing more probable than the wasting of our time and
spirits in vain janglings and fruitless controversies, which the Apostle tells
us, Heb. 13. 9. have not profited, i. e. they have greatly damnified and
injured them that have been occupied therein. Many Controversies of these times
grow up about Religion, as Suckers from the Root and Limbs of a Fruit-tree,
which spend the vital Sap that should make it fruitful.

Anglia 4. annis facta est colluvies, and lerna omnium errorum, and sectarum.
Nulla a condito orb provincia tam parvo spatio tot monstrosas haereses
protulit atque haec. Honor. Reg. de Statu Eccles. Brittan. p. 1.
It Is a great and sad Observation made upon the state of England by some
judicious persons, That after the greatest increase of Religion, both
intensively in the power of it, and extensively in the number of Converts, what
a remarkable decay it suffered both ways, when about the year Forty-four,
Controversies and Disputations grew fervent among Professors. Since that time
our strength and glory have very much abated.

Consectary V.
From this Discourse we may also gather, the true Grounds and Reasons of those
frequent Persecutions which God lets in upon his Churches and People: These
rank Weeds call for Snowy and Frosty Weather to subdue and kill them.

I know the enemies of God's People aim at something else: They strike at
Profession, yea, at Religion it self; and according to their wicked intention,
without timely Repentance, will their reward be. But whatever the intention of
the Agents be, the issues of Persecution are upon this account greatly
beneficial to the Church; the Wisdom of God makes them excellently useful, both
to prevent and cure the mischiefs and dangers of Errors. If Enemies were not,
Friends and Brethren would be injurious to each other. Persecution, if it kills
not, yet at least it gives check to the rise and growth of Errors: And if it do
not perfectly redintigrate and unite the hearts of Christians, yet to be sure
it cools and allays their sinful heats; and that two ways: (1.) By cutting out
for them far better and more necessary work. Now, instead of racking their
Brains about unnecessary Controversies, they find it high time to be searching
their hearts, and examining the foundations of their Faith and Hope, with
respect to the other World. (2.) Moreover, such times and straights, discover
the Sincerity, Zeal and Constancy of them we were jealous of, or prejudiced
against before, because they followed not us.

Consectary VI.
Lastly, Let us learn hence, both the Duty and Necessity of Charity and mutual
Forbearance; We have all our mistakes and errors one way or other, and
therefore must maintain mutual Charity under dissents in judgment.

I do not say, but an erring Brother must be reduced if possible, and that by
sharp rebukes too, if gentler essays be ineffectual, Tit. 1. 13. and the wounds
of a Friend have more faithful love in them, than the kisses of an Enemy: And
if God make us instrumental by that or any other method, to recover a Brother
from the error of his way, he will have great cause, both to bless God, and
thank the Instrument, who thereby saves a Soul from death, and hides a
multitude of sins, Iam. 5. 20. It Is our Duty, if we meet an Enemy's Ox or Ass
going astray, to bring him back again; Exodus 23. 4. much more the Soul of a
Friend. Indeed, we must not make those Errors that are none, nor stretch every
innocent expression to that purpose; nor yet be too hasty in meddling with
contention, till we cannot be both silent and innocent; and then whatever the
expense be, Truth will repay it.

AN APPENDIX: Containing a Full and Modest Reply to Mr. Philip Cary's Rejoinder
to my Vindiciae Legis and Foederis.
Manifesting the badness of his Cause, in the feebleness and impertinency of
his Defense. And adding farther light and strength to the Arguments formerly
produced in defense of God's gracious Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. and the
right of Believers Infants to Baptism, grounded thereupon.

SIR,
NEXT to the not deserving a Reproof, is the due reception and improvement of
it. You deserve a sharper reprehension for your timerity and obstinacy, than I
am willing to give you from the Press. Yet in love to the Truth, and your own
Soul, reprove you I must, and I hope God will enable me to be both mild in the
manner, and convincingly clear in the matter and cause thereof. It Is better to
lose the Smiles, than the Souls of men. I dare not neglect the duty of a
Friend, for fear of incurring the suspicion of an Enemy. Several Learned and
Eminent Divines who have seen what has publicly passed betwixt you and me,
have returned me their thanks, and think you ought to thank me too for the
pains I have taken to set you right, hoping you will evidence your self-denial
and repentance by an ingenuous retractation of your Errors.

But how will you deceive their Expectations, and unbecome the Character given
you by your Friends, when they shall find the true measure both of your ability
and humility drawn by your own Pen in the following Rejoinder?

I have thoroughly considered your Reply in the Manuscript you sent me, which I
hear is now in the Press; and in the following Sheets have given a full, and (I
think) a final Answer to whatsoever is material therein. And it so falling out,
that my Discourse of Errors was just going under the Press, whilst your
Rejoinder was there also, I thought it not convenient to delay my Reply any
longer, but to have my Antidote in as great readiness as might be to meet it.

One Inconvenience I easily foresee, that the Pages of your Manuscript, which I
follow, may not throughout exactly answer to the Print: But every intelligent
Reader will easily discern and rectify That, if my Bookseller save him not that
trouble, as I have desired him to do.

As to the Controversy about the Right of Believers Infant Seed to Baptism, you
have altogether adventured it the second time with the consent of your
Partisans, upon the three Hypotheses, which (if I mistake not) I have fully
confuted and baffled in my first Answer. But if my brevity occasioned any
obscurity in that, I hope you shall find it sufficiently done here. Mean time
you have given, and I accordingly take it for granted, that our Arguments for
Infants Baptism stand in their full strength against you, 'till you can better
discharge and free your dangerous Assertions from the Errors and Absurdities in
which they are now more involved and intricated than before.

The weaker any thing is, the more querulous it is. If Scripture-Argument, and
clear Reason, will not support the Cause I undertake, I am resolved never to
call in passionate Invectives and weak Evasions for my Auxiliaries, as you have
here done. The Lord give us all clearer Light, tenderer Consciences, exemplary
Humility and Ingenuity.

Vindiciarum Vindex: OR, A REFUTATION OF THE Weak and Impertinent Rejoinder OF
Mr. PHILIP CARRY:
Wherein he vainly attempts the defense of his Absurd Thesis, to the great
abuse and injury of the Laws and Covenants of God.

AND must I be dipped once more in the Water-Controversy? it is time for me to
think of undressing my self, and making ready for my approaching Rest, and
employ those few moments I have to spend, in more Practical and Beneficial
Studies, for my own, and the Churches greater advantage. And it is time for Mr.
C. to reflect upon his past Follies, which have consumed too much of his own,
and others time, without any advantage; yea, to the apparent loss and injury of
the Cause he undertakes to defend.

When I received these Sheets from him, in vindication of his Solemn Call, I
was at a stand in my own Resolutions, whether to let it pass (without any
Animadversions upon it) as a passionate Clamor for a desperate Cause; or give a
short and full Answer to his confused and impertinent Rejoinder. But
considering that I had under hand at the same time the foregoing Treatise of
the Causes and Cures of Mental Errors; and that though my honest Neighbor
discovers much weakness in his way of Argumentation, yet it was like to meet
with some interested Readers, to whom, for that reason, it would be the more
suitable; and how apt such Persons are to glory in the last word; but
especially considering that a little time and pains would suffice (as the Case
stands) to end the unseasonable Controversy betwixt^ us, and both clear and
confirm many great and weighty Points of Religion: I was upon these
Considerations prevailed with, against my own Inclination, to cast in these few
Sheets as a Mantissa to the former seasonable and necessary Discourse of
Errors, resolving to fill them with what should be worth the Reader's time and
pains.

As for the rude Insults, uncomely Reflections, and passionate Expressions of
my discontented Friend, I shall not throw back the dirt upon him, when I wipe
it off from my self: I can easily forgive and forget them too. The best men
have their Passions, Iam. 5. 17. even Sweet-briers and Holy-Thistles have their
offensive Prickles. I consider my honest Neighbor under the strength of a
Temptation. It disquiets him to see the Labors of many years, and the raised
Expectations of so great a conquest and triumph over men of Renown, all
frustrated by his Friend and Neighbor, who had done his utmost to prevent it;
and often foretold him of the folly and vanity of his Attempt. Every thing will
live as long as it can, and natura vexat a prodit seipsam. But certainly it had
been more for Truth's honor, and Mr. C's comfort, to have confessed his
Follies humbly to God, and have laid his hand upon his mouth.

The things in controversy betwixt us, are great and weighty, viz. The true
nature of the Sinai Laws, in their complex body; the quality of God's Covenant
with Abraham; and the dispensation of the New Covenant we are now under. These
are things of great weight in themselves; and their due Resolutions are at this
time somewhat the more weighty, because my Antagonist has adventured the whole
Controversy of Infants Baptism upon them.

I have in my Vindiciae Legis, etc. stated the several Questions clearly and
distinctly. Shown Mr. C. what is no part of the Controversy, and what is the
very hinge upon which it turns; desired him, if he made any Reply, to keep
close to the just and necessary Rules of Disputation, by distinguishing,
limiting, or denying any of my Propositions; that the matters in Controversy
might be put to a fair and speedy issue. But instead of that, I meet with a
flood of words rolling sometimes to this part, and then to another part of my
Answer, and so back again, without the steady direction of Art or Reason. There
may, for ought I know, be some things of weight in Mr. Cary's Reply, if a man
could fee them for words: but without scoff or vanity I must say of the
rational part of it, as the Poet said of the overdressed Woman, -- Pars minima
est ipsa Puella sui, it is the least part of it. To follow him in his irregular
and extravagant way of writing, were to make my self guilty of the same folly I
blame him for. I am therefore necessitated to perstringe them, and reduce all I
have to say, under three general Heads.

I. I shall clearly evince to the World, That Mr. Carry has not been able to
discharge and free his own Theses from the horrid Consequents, and gross
Absurdities which I laid to their charge in my first Reply; but instead
thereof, in this feeble and unsuccessful attempt to free the former, he has
entangled himself in more and greater ones. II. That he has left my Arguments
standing in their full strength against him. III. And then I shall confirm and
strengthen my three Positions, which destroy the Cause he manages, by some
further Additions of Scripture, Reason and Authorities, which I hope will fully
end this matter betwixt us.
But before I touch the Particulars, two things must be premised for the
Reader's due information.

1. That the Controversy about the true nature of the Sinai Laws, both Moral
and Ceremonial, complexly considered, is not that very Hinge upon which the
Right of Believers Infants to Baptism depends: that stands as it did before, be
the Sinai Laws what they will. We do not derive the Right of Infants from any
other Law or Covenant, but that gracious Covenant which God made with Abraham,
which was in being 430 years before Moses his Law; Gal. 3. 17.
and was no way injured, much less disannulled, by the addition of it. If
Abraham's Covenant be the same Covenant of Grace we are now under, the Right of
Believers Infants to Baptism, is secured, whatever the Sinai Convenant prove to
be. Which I speak not out of the least jealousy that Mr. Carry has, or ever
shall be able to prove it to be a pure Adam's Covenant of Works; but to prevent
Mistakes in the Reader.

2. It must be heedfully observed also, that how free, gracious and absolute
soever the New Covenant be, (for God forbid that I should go about to eclipse
the glory of Free Grace on which my Soul depends for Salvation) yet that will
never prove Abraham's Covenant to be an abolished Adam's Covenant of Works,
unless two things more be proved, which I never expect to see, viz.

First, That Abraham, and his believing Posterity, were bound by the very
nature and act of Circumcision to keep the whole Law in their own persons in
order to their Justification and Salvation, as perfectly and perpetually, and
under the same penalty for the least failure, as Adam was to keep the Law in
Paradise.

Secondly, It must be further proved, That Abraham, and all his believing
Offspring, who stood with him under that Covenant, whereof Circumcision was the
initiating Sign, were all saved in a different way from that in which Believers
are now saved under the Gospel: for so it must be, if the addition of
Circumcision made it unto them an Adam's Covenant of Works. But this would be a
direct contradiction to the words of the Apostle, speaking of them who were
under the Covenant of Circumcision, Acts 15. 11. But we believe, that through
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they. If he say,
they stood indeed under that Covenant, as a pure Covenant of Works, but were
saved by another Covenant; and so for many Ages the Church of God stood
absolutely under the Covenant of Works, and at the same time under the pure
Covenant of Grace; the one altogether absolute and free, the other wholly
conditional: and though these two be in their own natures inconsistent and
destructive of each other, yet so it was, that all the Saints for many Ages
were absolutely under the one, and yet purely under the other: shall I be then
censured for saying he speaks pure contradiction?

Possibly my Reader will be tempted to think I abuse him, and that no man of
common sense can be guilty of such an horrid Absurdity. I must, whatever
respect I have for Mr. C. once more tell him before the World, that this is not
only his own Doctrine, but that very Doctrine upon which he has adventured the
whole Cause and Controversy of Infants Baptism, which I therefore say is
hereby become a desperate Cause.

And this brings me to my first general Head, viz.

I. First, That Mr. Carry has not been able to free his Thesis from this borrid
absurdity; but by struggling to do it, has (according to the nature of Errors)
entangled himself in more and greater ones.

Mr. Carry, in p. 174, 175. of his Solemn Call, was by me reduced to this
Absurdity, which he there owns in express words, That Moses, and the whole body
of the People of Israel, were absolutely under (without the exception of any)
the severest penalties of a dreadful Curse; and that the Sinai Covenant could
be no other than a Covenant of Works, a ministration of death and condemnation;
and yet at the same time, both Moses, and all the Elect, were under a pure
Covenant of Gospel Grace: And if these were two contrary Covenants in
themselves, and just opposite the one to the other, as indeed they were, we
have nothing to say, but with the Apostle, O the depth, etc.

This, Reader, is the Position which must be made good by Mr. Carry, or his
Cause is lost. Deformed Issues do not look as if they had beautiful Truth for
their Mother. No false or absurd Conclusion can regularly follow from true
Premises: But hence naturally and necessarily follows this

Absurdity I.
That Abraham, Moses, and all the Believers under the Old Testament, by
standing absolutely under Adam's Covenant of Works, as a ministration of death
and condemnation; and at the same time purely under the Covenant of Grace (as
Mr. C. affirms they did) must necessarily, during their lives, hang midway
betwixt Life and Death, Justification and Condemnation; and after death, midway
betwixt Heaven and Hell. During life, they could neither be justified nor
condemned. Justified they could not be, for Justification is the Soul's passing
from death to life, 1 John 3. 14. John 5. 24. Upon a man's justification his
Covenant and State are changed; but the Covenant and State of no man can be so
changed as long as he remains absolutely under the severest Penalties and
condemnation of the Law, as Mr. C. affirms they did.

Again, Condemned they could not be, seeing all that are under the pure
Covenant of Grace (as he says they were at the same time) are certainly in
Christ; and to such there is no condemnation, Romans 8. 1. nor ever shall be:
Ioh. 5. 24. He that believes, shall not come into condemnation, but is passed
from death unto life. What remains then, but that during life, they could
neither be perfectly justified, nor perfectly condemned; and yet being
absolutely under the severest Penalties of Adam's Covenant, they were perfectly
condemned; and again, being under the pure Covenant of Grace, they must be
perfectly justified?

And then after death, they must neither go to Heaven, nor Hell; but either be
annihilated, or stick midway in Limbo Patrum (as the Papists fancy) betwixt
both. No condemned Person goes to Heaven, nor any justified Person to Hell. His
Position therefore, which necessarily infers this gross Absurdity, is justly
renounced and detested by Learned and Orthodox Divines.

The Learned and Acute Turrettine, Turret. pars 2da, page 290.
the late famous Professor of Divinity at Geneva, proving that the Sinai Law
could not be a pure Covenant of Works, brings this very Medium to prove it, as
a known truth, allowed by all men. The Israelites (says he) with whom God
covenanted, were already under Abraham's Covenant, which was a Covenant of
Grace; and were saved in Christ by it; therefore they could not be under the
Legal Covenant. Nemo enim simul potest duo^us foederibus tota specie distinctis
subesse; because no man can be under two Covenants specifically different at
the same time, as these two are.

That Great and Renowned Divine Mr. William Strong, Mr. Strong on the Covenant,
p. 66, 67.
gives four irrefragable Arguments to prove, that no man can stand under both
these Covenants at the same time, which in co-ordination actually destroy and
make void each other. If the First Covenant stand, there is no place for the
Second; and if the Second stand, the first is made void. And this (says he)
will fully appear, if we consider the direct contrariety in the terms of those
two Covenants. For (1.) the Righteousness of the first Covenant is in our
selves; but the Righteousness of the Second is the Righteousness of another, 1
Ioh. 5. 11. 12. (2.) In the Covenant of Works, acceptance is first of the
Works, and afterward of the Person; Genesis 4. 7. but in the Covenant of Grace,
the acceptance is first of the Person, and then of the Work, Genesis 4. 4. (3.)
The First Covenant was a Covenant without a Priest, but the Second is a
Covenant with a Priest. (4.) In the First Covenant there is matter of glorying,
but in the Second there is none, Romans 3. 27. So that these two can never
consist, except you can compound, or reconcile these four Opposites in the
justification of the same Person.

To the same purpose, says that Excellent Mr. Samuel Bolton. Bolton' s Bounds,
p. 133.
If the Law were a Covenant of Works, then were the Jews under a different
Covenant from us, and so none of them were saved, which the Apostle gainsays,
Acts 15. 11. or else they were both under a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant
of Grace. But that they could not be; they are utterly inconsistent* Ergo. And
thus all sound Divines speak. I may therefore say of Mr. Cary's Position, as
Ruveus before me did, omnem absurditatem excedere videtur, it seems to exceed
all Absurdities. A man may more rationally suppose two Natures and essential
Forms in one Body, and place the same thing under diverse Species in the
predicament of substance: yea, 'twere more tolerable to affirm, That ex duobus
entibus per se fit unum ens per se, than to place any (as Mr. C. places all) of
God's People under two opposite Covenants. If Mr. C. were absolutely under the
condemnation of the Law, would he not be purely justified, think you? Yet he
places Abraham, Moses, and all Believers with them, absolutely under the
severest condemnation of the Law, and the pure Gospel^Covenant, at once.

But to cover the shame and nakedness of his Assertion, which places Believers
absolutely under Adams Covenant, he is fain to make use of two Fig Leaves, as
Adam did.

(1.) And the first attempt he now makes, p. 4, 5, 6, 7. of his Reply, is by
way of retortion, by telling us, That the same pretended Absurdities do fall as
heavily, and a great deal more, on our Doctrine, who affirm the Sinai Law
(complexly taken) to be a Covenant of Faith, or Grace, than upon his who makes
them two essentially different Covenants: because we are forced to comprize
perfect doing, with the curse for nonperformance, under the same Covenant with
believing: and that it cannot be denied but that all the People of God were
absolutely under the Sinai Covenant, Gal. 3. 23. and Gal. 4. 4, 5. and
consequently under the curse, Gal. 3. 10. This is the sum and substance of his
first Answer.

I will not be tempted to expose my Neighbor to derision for this his strange
Answer; Reply.
but rather propound two sober Queries to him, and the Reader, viz. (1.) What
Orthodox Divines he ever met with, and what are their names, who are forced to
comprize perfect doing, with the curse for nonperformance, under the same
Covenant with believing: and so make the two opposite Covenants to be
specifically one and the same? Name your Men, with their Books and Pages; or
retract with shame and sorrow what you have here abusively affirmed of them.
Cameron indeed makes it a subservient Covenant; the most a true, though obscure
Covenant of Grace; but none comprize Adam's Covenant with its Curse, in the New
Covenant. (2.) Whether it be imaginable, That the same Absurdity can follow
from their Doctrine, that make the whole complex body of the Sinai Law a
Covenant of Grace, though more obscure, and so place all the People of God in
those Ages under it* as does necessarily follow his Doctrine, who makes it a
pure Adam's Covenant of Works, and places the Church of God absolutely under
the curse of it, and also under the pure Covenant of Grace at the same time? If
Grace and Grace (how diffeferent soever in degrees of manifestation) be as
opposite and repugnant, as Grace and Works, as Justification and Condemnation
are, it is time for me to lay down my Pen; for I have certainly lost my
Understanding to guide it any further.

But Mr. Carry will say, If you do not, yet Mr. Roberts does comprize both in
one Covenant. I say, you abuse Mr. Roberts in so affirming: for he says in
that very place you refer to Roberts on the Covenant, page 775, 776, 777.
, That believing in Christ was ultimately and chiefly intended in the Sinai
Covenant; and perfect doing was only urged upon Israel in subordination and
tendency to that believing. And upon that ground it is he affirms that Covenant
to be a Covenant of Faith, and so denominates it from the chief scope and
intent of it. He sets not doing and believing in co-ordination, or places the
Church under two opposite Covenants, as you do; but places the Law, where it
ought to be placed, in subordination to Faith and Christ. And therefore you
have abused that good Man, as well as me, and your self most of all in this
your first impertinent and silly Answer.

(2.) But you have one Evasion more, p. 7. where you say, That how harsh and
dreadful soever the Terms or Conditions of the Legal Covenant were to those
that were under it, as Moses, and the whole body of the Israelites, then were;
yet the grace of the Gospel Covenant far superseded, and was by far more
victorious, powerful, and efficacious, Romans 5. 17, 20.

Worse and worse. Reply.
Your Discourse mends like sower Ale in Summer. Here you fancy the two
Covenants (under which you place the whole Church of God) to be in a conflict
one with the other; Condemnation and Justification struggling one with another,
as I told you before they would: but however, the Grace of the New Covenant
prevails at last, and gets the victory over the Covenant of Works. Very good;
but then pray, Sir, if you please, answer me a plain Question or two at your
leisure.

First, How far did the Covenant of Grace prevail against the Covenant of
Works? Was it so far prevalent and victorious as utterly to vanquish and
disannul it, as a Covenant of Works to them? or was it not? Was the Victory you
speak of, a complete, or a partial one? If you say it was incomplete and
partial, then you leave them (as I told you before you must) partly under the
Promise, and partly under the Curse; justified in part, and condemned in part.
But if you say, it was a complete and perfect Victory, then it utterly
dissolved its obligation as a Covenant of Works; then they did not remain under
two opposite Covenants, as you affirmed they did; but on their believing,
changed their state with their Covenant, as we affirm they did.

Secondly, If you say, it did not totally free them from the Curse of the
Covenant of Works, but however prevailed so far that they were not actually
damned by virtue of the Curse; then be pleased to answer me one Question more,
How it was possi^le for them to be absolutely under the Curse of the Law (as
you affirmed they were) and yet that Curse to be so superseded by the Covenant
of Grace, as here you speak?

To supersede the Curse (though it be a Phrase I never met with before) if it
signify any thing, it must signify this; That the Covenant of Grace caused the
Law to omit, forbear, or give over to curse that People any more. But did, or
can the Law forbear or cease to curse those that are absolutely under it as a
ministration of death and condemnation? Pray consult, Romans 3. 19. and Gal. 3.
10. Are you aware what you say, when you place Believers absolutely under the
Curse of the Law, and then talk of the New Covenant's victory over it; and
after all this, leave them as you do, absolutely under the cursing power of the
one; and still under the victorious grace of the other? For shame, my Friend,
give up your absurd notion, and repent of this folly. I would not willingly
shame you before the World; I did all that lay in me to prevent it. But
however, Pudor est medicina pudoris, the only way you have left me to prevent
your glorying in your shame, is this way, to make you ashamed of your
vainglory. As for that Scripture you allege to countenance your fancy, Romans
5. 17, 20. you might to as good purpose have opened your Bible, and have taken
the first Scripture that came to hand, and it would have done your Position
less harm. For the Apostle's scope there, is to demonstrate the perfection of
the abounding Righteousness of Christ, for the full discharge of Believers from
the guilt of sin, and curse of Adam's Covenant; and cuts the throat of your
Position, which it is alleged to prove.

I have stood the longer upon the clearing of this first Point; because this
being fully cleared, it runs through and clears the whole Controversy betwixt
us. For now it will be evident to all, That neither Abraham's, nor Moses his
Covenant (complexly taken, as Mr. Carry takes it) could possibly be for this
reason, an Adam's Covenant of Works; and if not a Covenant of Works, then how
dark or legal soever the Dispensations of them were, they must needs be the
same Covenant of Grace, for substance, under which we are, and so the main
Controversy betwixt us is hereby at an end.

I know not how many Covenants of Works, or how many of Grace, Mr. C. fancies
there are; But Orthodox Divines constantly affirm Vid. Bolton 's Bounds, p. 148.
, That as there never were but two ways of Life to mankind, the one before the
Fall, by perfect doing* the other after the Fall, by sincere believing: So
answerably there can be but two Covenants betwixt God and Mankind, viz. the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace. The last of which has, indeed,
been more obscurely Administered, and in that respect is called the Old
Covenant; yet that and the New are essentially but one Covenant: And the Church
of God, which for many Ages stood under that Old Covenant, did not stand under
it as an Adam's Covenant, or the First Covenant of works, for the undeniable
Reasons above given. And therefore Abraham's Covenant, from whence we derive our
Childrens Title to Baptism, must of necessity be the very same Covenant for
substance with this New Covenant, which all Abraham's believing offspring, and
their Infant Seed are now under. And in proving this one point, I have
sufficiently confuted both Mr. C's Solemn Call, and this his feeble vindication
of it, together.

But lest he should take this for the only Absurdity proved upon him, though it
be tiresome to me, and must be ungrateful to him; give me leave to touch one
more among many; and that the rather, because I make great use of it in this
Controversy, and Mr. Carry both yields and denies it. If his own words be the
Messengers of his meaning, either he, or I, must mistake their errand.

I had in my Prolegomena, distinguished of the Law, as strictly taken for the
Ten Commandments; and more largely and complexly taken, as including the
Ceremonial Law. The former I considered according to God's intention and design
in the prom^lgation of it, which was to add it as an Appendix to the Promise,
Gal. 3. 19. And the carnal Jews mistaking and perverting the end of the Law,
and making it to themselves a Covenant of Works, by making it the very Rule and
Reason of their justification before God, Romans 9. 32, 33. Romans 10. 3. I told
him, That the Controversy depended upon this double sense of the Law, for that
it ought not to be denominated from the abused and mistaken End of it; but from
God's chief scope and design in the promulgation of it, which was to add it as
an Appendix to the Promise, as the word (...) there imports; and so must be
published with Evangelical purposes. Let us now hear Mr. C's sense of this
matter. In his Call, p. 131. he yields the distinction in these words. In his
Reply, p. 43. proving the Law to be a Covenant of Works, from Romans 10. 5. he
says, The Jews were right enough in reference to the true nature of the Law,
That it was a Covenant of Works, etc. though they were out in respect of its
proper use and intention, which was not, that any should attain unto Life and
Righteousness thereby; but to show them the nature of Sin, and the Holiness and
Righteousness of God; to convince them of their sin and misery without Christ,
and their necessity of a Savior; which they being ignorant of, and still going
about to establish the^r own Righteousness which was of the Law, and refusing
to submit themselves unto the righteousness of God, etc. they stumbled at that
stumbling stone, and were accordingly broken, snared, and taken, Romans 9. 31,
32, 33. Romans 10. 3. And this ( says he) was the true ground of the dispute
between the Apostle and them. This was Orthodoxly spoken, and would end the
Controversy, would he stand to it. But This was the nature of it in the first
sanction of it, as the fruit of God's special designation and appointment; and
that it is the greatest violation and perverting of Scripture that can lightly
be met with, to affirm, that this is uttered and declared by Paul, etc. only
because the Jews had perverted it, and reduced it (as they thought) to its
primitive intention. And again, p. 44. he says, he has proved that it was the
same with Adam's Covenant in both respects, that is, intentionally, as well as
materially considered. And once more, p. 20. he expressly denies that the Law
was added as an Appendix to the Promise; calls that a crude assertion of mine;
and asks me, Why it might not be added as an Appendix rather to the first
Covenant of Works, to reinforce that? And after all, gushes out many slighting
and opprobrious terms upon me, which I will not throw back again, but rather
leave him to reconcile himself with himself.

I shall only ask Mr. Carry a sober Question or two, instead of Recriminations,
and rendering reviling for reviling.

First, How the Jews were right enough in reference to the true nature of the
Law, as it was a Covenant of Works, and yet out in respect of its proper use
and intention, which was not, that any should attain unto Life and
Righteousness by it, but to convince them of Sin, and of the necessity of a
Savior; and yet the Law be a Covenant of Works, intentionally, as well as
materially considered; and that in respect of God's special designation and
appointment? If God designed and appointed it in his Sinai dispensation, to be
to them an Adam's Covenant of Works, then certainly they were not out (as you
say they were) when they sought Righteousness by the works of it; nor could
that mistake of theirs be the ground of the Controversy betwixt the Apostle and
them: For it seems it was no mistake, being by God's intention, as well as its
own primitive nature, promulged at Sinai, as a true Adam's Covenant.

Secondly, You deny the Law was added to the Promise, (...) posita, pro
apposita, hoc est, Promissioni adjecta. Beza.
and ask me why it might not be added to the first Covenant to reinforce that?
I answer, Because the scope of the place will not bear it, nor any good
Expositor countenance such a fancy. You make the Sinai Law to be the same with
that first Covenant, and by so expounding the Apostle, you make him say, either
that the same thing was added to it self, (which must in your own Phrase, be by
a Correspondency of Identity) or else that there are two distinct Covenants of
Works (when indeed there is but one) and that the latter was added to the
former. This is your way of Expounding Scripture, when driven to a straight by
dint of Argument. Nothing beside such a pure necessity, could drive you upon
such an Absurdity.

It was added to the promise (says Dr. Reynolds) by way of subserviency and
attendance, Vid. Dr. Reynolds, Use of the Law, p. 378. full up to my sense, and
p. 371.
the better to advance and make effectual the Covenant it self. Mr. Strong upon
the two Covenants, says, the Apostle's meaning is, that the Law was added as
an Appendix to the Promise. But it may be you had rather hear Dr. Crisp's
Exposition Dr. Crisp, Lib. 4. Sermon. 9.
than his; for you say, had it been added to the Promise, it would have given
life. The Doctor will at once give you the true sense of the Text, and with it
a full answer to your Objection. Though Life (says he) be not the end of the
Law, yet there are other sufficient uses of it requiring the promulgation
thereof: It was published to be an Appendix to the Gospel* Gal. 3. 19. And this
supposes, (1.) The priority of the Gospel to the Law. (2.) The principality of
the Promise of Life by Christ, above the Law. (3.) The Consistence of the Law
and Gospel. They may well stand one by another, as an House, and the addition
to it may. That it was with such an intention added to the Promise, I have met
with no Man that had front enough to deny or scruple it before you. And that
the Jews did mistake its chief scope and use, from whence we denominate it a
Covenant of Grace, the generality of Godly and Learned Divines constantly
affirm. See Mr. Anth. Burgess de Lege, p. 227. Bolton's Bounds, p. 160, 161.
Mr. Samuel Mather on the Types, p. 11. with multitudes more, whose citations
would even weary the Reader. And what you urge from Mr. Poole's Annotations, on
2 Cor. 3. 6, 7. it makes nothing at all to your purpose: For it is manifest the
Annotator there, takes the Moral Law in it self, strictly taken, and as set in
opposition to the Gospel, which it never was since the Fall, but by the
ignorance and infidelity of unregenerate Men.

You also labor to shelter your erroneous fancy under the authority of Dr.
Owen; but you manifestly abuse him in your Citation; for in that very place you
refer to, he speaks strictly of the Covenant of Works made with Adam in
Paradise; and plainly distinguishes it from the Sinai Covenant, which
sufficiently shows his judgment in this point. For these are his own words,
which you suppressed in the Citation, Dr. Owen of Justification, p. 396, 397.
Vindicated from Mr. C's gross Misrepresentations
As to the Sinai Covenant and the New Testament, with their privileges thence
emerging, they belong not to our present Argument. This Paragraph you wilfully
omit, that you might include that which his words plainly exclude. In the same
place he tells you, that David and Abraham's Covenant, was for essence the
Covenant of Grace, notwithstanding the variations made in it: But you take and
leave, as best suits your design ^ut if you will see the Doctor's judgment, in
concurrence with all his Brethren, you have it in these very words: Although
this Covenant has been variously administered in respect of Ordinances and
Institutions in the time of the Law, and since the coming of Christ in the
flesh; yet for the substance and efficacy of it, to all its spiritual and
saving ends, it is one and the same; upon the account of which various
dispensations it is called the Old and New Testament. Vide Declaration of the
Faith and Order of the Congregational Churches in England, p. 15. at the Savoy,
October. 12. 1658.
.

Once more in p. 16, 17, etc. of my Vindiciae Legis, you find your self pinched
with another Dilemma, from Lev. 26. 40, 41, 46. whence I plainly proved, That
there is a Promise of Pardon found in the Sinai dispensation, to penitent
sinners. That this Promise was given at Mount Sinai by the hand of Moses, is
undeniable from verse. 46. That it contained the Relief of a gracious remission
to penitent sinners, is as undeniable from verse. 40, 41. If you say, this
Promise belongs to Moses his dispensation (as verse 46. tells you it did) then
there is remission of Sins found in the Sinai Laws. If you say, it only refers
to Abraham's Covenant of Grace; then that Covenant of Grace appears to be
conditional, which you utterly deny.

Now what is your Reply to this? (1.) You object my own words in the Method of
Grace, p. 326. as if you had never read the just and fair Vindication I had
before given you of them, p. 134, 135. of my first Reply to you. At this rate
Men may continue Controversies to the Worlds end. Sir, there are many
Witnesses, that you are very well acquainted with my Method of Grace. (2.) You
say, p. 31. of your Reply, That that Covenant could not be conditional, because
a Condition implies merit either of congruity or condignity. This is a further
discovery of your ignorance of the nature of Conditions, as well* as Covenants:
But that Point belonging to the last Head of Controversy between us, I shall
refer it thither.

It were easy for me to instance in many more Absurdities which Mr. C. cannot
eluctate, and to prove them upon him as easily as to name them. But I will not
press him too far; what has been named and proved already, is more than enough
to convince the Reader, that my first Argument is left standing in its full
force and strength against him, viz.

Argument I.
That Proposition can never be true, which necessarily draws many and horrid
gross absurdities after it by just consequence. But so does this: Ergo.

Argument II.
My next Argument, Vindiciae, etc. p. 27. is as secure as the first. It was
this. If Adam's Covenant had one end, namely, the Happiness and Justification
of Men by their own Obedience, and the Law at Sinai had quite another end,
namely to bring Sinners to Christ by Faith for their Righteousness; the one to
keep him within himself, the other to take him quite out of himself; then the
Sinai Law cannot possibly be the same with Adam's Covenant of Works in Paradise.

But so stands the Case, Romans 10. 4. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

Therefore they cannot be the same, but two different Covenants.

All that touches this Argument, is but three Lines in the 49th page of your
Reply; where you say you have sufficiently answered and cleared this in p. 169,
172. of your former Discourse, from the corrupt interpretation by me fastened
thereon.

Now, if the Reader will give himself the trouble to examine those Pages, he
shall find that Mr. C. there allows that very interpretation which he here
calls corrupt; and says it comes all to one reckoning with his own. If this
will overthrow my second Argument, it is gone.

Argument III.
My third Argument was drawn from Acts 7. 38. in this Form:

If Christ himself were the Angel by whom the Laws were delivered to Moses,
which are there called the lively Oracles of God; then the Law cannot be a pure
Adam^s Covenant of Works: For it is never to be imagined, that ever Jesus
Christ himself should deliver to Moses such a Covenant directly opposite to all
the ends of his future Incarnation.

But it is more than probable from that Text, that it was Christ which
delivered the Law to Moses on the Mount. Ergo.

To this Argument he says not one word in p. 49. of his Reply, where he cites
a part of it, nibling a little at that expression [ The lively Oracles of God],
thinking it unimaginable the Sinai Law should be such; when as the Apostle
Paul, Romans 7. 10. found the Commandment to be unto death; and the Apostle 2
Cor. 3. 6, 7. calls it a Ministration of death. I must therefore leave Mr. C.
to reconcile those two Scriptures. And withal, Fr. Spanhem. Elench. Controvers.
p. 552.
I must tell him, that Spanhemius gives the same sense I do of Acts 7. 38. as
the current judgment of Christians against the Jews, That it was not a created
Angel, but Christ himself.

Argument IV.
The last Argument I urged, was from Romans 9. 4. and thus it may run.

No such Covenant as by the Fall had utterly lost all its Promises, Privileges,
and Blessings, and could retain nothing but Curses and Punishments, could
possibly be numbered among the chief Privileges in which God's Israel gloried.

But the Law given at Sinai was numbered among their chief privileges, Romans 9.
4. Ergo.

To this he only says, p. 57. of his Reply, That the Law, even as it was a
Covenant of Works, was a privilege inestimable, beyond what all others enjoyed;
because the very Curses and Punishments annexed thereunto, in case of the least
faileur, were of excellent use to convince them of their sin and misery without
Christ, and their necessity therefore of a Savior; which was the proper work
of the Law, as a Covenant of works; which advantage all other Nations wanting,
it might well be numbered among the chief Privileges they were invested with.

But (1.) If the Law were intended by God, to be an Adam's Covenant to them (as
Mr. C. says it was) where then is the Privilege of God's Israel above other
Nations? (2.) If their Privilege consisted in the subserviency of that Law to
Christ (as he here intimates it did) then he yields the thing I contend for.
For this being its chief scope and end, we do hence justly denominate it a
Covenant of Grace, though more obscure and legally administered. And in this
judgment most of our solid Divines concur. Mr. Charnock on the Attributes, p.
390. is clear and judicious in the point. Bolton 's Bounds, p. 130, etc.
Mr. Samuel Bolton, in that excellent Book called, The Bounds of Christian
Liberty, gives nine solid Arguments to prove the Law was not set up at Sinai as
a Covenant of Works. Burgess, de Lege, p. 225. Greenhill, in Loc.
Mr. Anth. Burgess gives us six Arguments to prove the same Conclusion. Mr.
Greenhill on Ezekiel. 16. gives us demonstration from that Context, That since it
was a Marriage-Covenant, as it appears to be v. 8. it cannot possibly be a
distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace. The incomparable Turrettine
Learnedly and Judiciously states this Controversy; Turrettine, part 2. p. 288,
289.
and both positively asserts, and by many Arguments fully proves, That the
Sinai Law cannot be a pure Covenant of Works, or a Covenant specifically
distinct from the Covenant of Grace. It were easy to fill Pages with
Allegations of this kind; but I hope what has been said, may suffice for this
Point.

But still Mr. Carry complains, that I have all this while but threatened his
Arguments to prove them fallacious, or to have four Terms in them; and
therefore he has drawn out some select Arguments, as he calls them, p. 37. to
try my skill upon. I will neither tire my Reader in a foolish chase of such
weak and impertinent Arguments as he there produces, nor yet wholly neglect
them, lest he glory in them as unanswerable. And therefore to show him the fate
of the rest, I will only touch his first Argument, which being his Argumentum
Palmarium, deservedly leads the Van to all the rest. And thus it runs upon all
four.

That Covenant that is not of Faith, must needs be a Covenant of Works, yea,
the very same for substance with that made with Adam.

But the Scripture is express, That the Law is not of Faith, Gal. 3. 12. Ergo.

The Law is considered two ways in Scripture. Reply.
(1.) Largely, for the whole Mosaical Economy, comprehensive of the Ceremonial
as well as Moral Precepts; and that Law is of Faith, as the Learned Turrettine
has proved by four Scripture Arguments, Pars secunda, p. 292, 293. Lex dicitur
non esse ex fide, Gal. 3. 12. non ut late sumitur prout notat Oeconomiam
Mosaicam; sed stricte, quum sumitur pro Lege Morali abstracte, and seorsim a
promissionibus gratiae, quomodo illam intelligebant Justiciarii, qui vitam ex
ea quaerebant. Nam fidem etiam in foedere Sinaitico praeceptam fuisse
evincitur, etc.
Because it contained Christ the Object of Faith, etc. Because it impelled men
to seek Christ by Faith. Because it required that God be worshipped, which he
cannot rightly be without Faith. And because Paul describes the Righteousness
of Faith in those very words whereby Moses had declared the Precepts of the
Law, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13. Again, the Law in Scripture is taken strictly for
the Moral Law only, considered abstractly from the promises of Grace, as the
Legal Iusticiaries understood it. These are two far different senses and
acceptations of the Law. Your Major Proposition takes the Law in its large
complex body, as appears by your 3d page. Your Minor Proposition, which you
would confirm by Gal. 3. 12. takes the Law strictly and abstractly, as it is
set disjunctly from, yea in opposition to Faith and the Promises, and so there
are two sorts of Law in your Argument, and consequently your Argument is
fallacious, as all its fellows be, and runs (as I told you before) upon all
four.

I hope this may suffice with respect to the Sinai Covenant controverted
betwixt me and my Neighbor, to evince that it cannot be what he asserts it to
be, even an Adam's Covenant of Works: and that I have discharged what I
undertook to prove with respect to this Covenant, namely, That Mr. C. cannot
free his Position from the gross Absurdities with which I loaded it, but
endeavoring to do that, has incurred many more: that his Reply has left my
Arguments standing in their full strength against him: and that the Position I
have set up against him, is well founded in Scripture; and has the general
concurrence and consent of Learned, Holy and Orthodox Divines.

To conclude, Let the grave and learned Dr. Edw. Reynolds, in his excellent
Treatise of the Use of the Law, determine this Controversy betwixt us, p. 371,
etc. where designedly handling this Doctrine from Romans 7. 13. That the Law was
revived and promulgated anew on Mount Sinai by the Ministry of Moses, with no
other than Evangelical and merciful purposes, he abundantly confirms my Sense
and Arguments, and saves me the labor of refuting the principal, and most of
yours: where carrying before him the whole Context of Gal. 3. from the 15th to
the 23d, he clearly carries his Doctrine with it, proving from v. 15. That
God's Covenant with Abraham was perpetual and immutable, and therefore all
other subsequent Acts of God (such as the giving of the Law was) do some way or
other refer unto it. (2.) From v. 16. P. 376.
he further proves, That as God's Covenant with Abraham is most constant in
regard of the wisdom and unvariableness of him that made it; so it can never
expire for want of a Seed to whom it is made. P. 377.
(3.) From v. 17. he proves, that if another Law be made after the Promise,
which prima specie, and in strict construction, does imply a contradiction to
the terms and nature of the former Law; then it is certain, that this latter
Law must be understood in some other sense, and admit of some other subordinate
use, which may well consist with the being and force of the former Covenant.
(4.) From v. 18. he proves, that the coming of the Law has not voided the
Promise, and that the Law is not of force (as you vainly dream) toward the
Seed to whom the Promise is made; and therefore if it be not to stand in a
contradiction, it follows that it must stand in subordination to the Gospel;
and so to tend to Evangelical Purposes. (5.) He further proves his Conclusion
from v. 19. which shows for what end the Law was added, (...). It was not
(says he) set up alone, as a thing in gross by it self; as an adequate,
complete, solid Rule of Righteousness, as it was given to Adam in Paradise:
much less was it published to void and disannul any precedent Covenant; but so
far was it from abrogating, that it was added to the Promise by way of
subserviency, and attendance; the better to advance and make effectual the
Covenant it self; and that until the Seed should come, which whether it respect
Christ personal, or mystical; in either sense (says he) it confirms the point
we are upon, viz. That the Law has Evangelical purposes. If the Seed be
understood of the Person of Christ, then this shows that the Law was put to the
Promise, the better to raise and stir up in men the expectations of Christ, the
promised Seed. But if we understand by Seed, the Faithful (which I rather
approve); P. 379.
then the Apostle's meaning is this; That as long as any are either to come
into the unity of Christ's Body, and have the Covenant of Grace applied to
them, etc. so long there will be use of the Law, both to the Unregenerate, to
make them ^ly to Christ, and those that are already called, that they may learn
to cast all their faith, hope, and expectation of Righteousness upon him still.
This then manifestly shows, P. 380.
that there was no other intention in publishing the Law, but with reference to
the Seed: that is, with Evangelical purposes to show mercy: not with reference
to those that perish, who would have had condemnation enough without the Law.
And further strengthens his Conclusion from the last words of verse. 19. That it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. This (says he) evidently
declares, That the Law was published in mercy and pacification, not in fury or
revenge; (for the work of a Mediator is to negotiate peace, and treat of
reconcilement between Parties offended) whereas, if the Lord had intended death
in the publishing of the Law, he would not have proclaimed it in the hand of a
Mediator, but of an Executioner. (6.) From verse. 20. P. 381*
Those words (says he) show why the Law was published in the hand of a
Mediator, viz. that they should not despair and sink under the fear of his
Wrath. For as he made a Covenant of Promise to Abraham, and his Seed; so he is
the same God still, one in his grace and mercy toward Sinners. God is one, i.
e. in sending this Mediator, he does declare to Mankind, that he is at peace
and unity with them again. Moses was the Representative, and Christ the
substantial and real Mediator. God is one, i. e. P. 382.
he carries the same purpose and intention both in the Law and in the Gospel;
P. 384.
namely, benevolence, and desire of reconcilement with men. (7.) To sum up all
that has been spoken touching the use of the Law in a plain similitude;
Suppose we a Prince should proclaim a Pardon to all Traitors, if they would
come in and plead it; and after this, should send forth his Officers to attach,
imprison, examine, convince, arraign, threaten and condemn them: is he now
contrary to himself? has he repented of his Mercy? No, but he is unwilling to
lose his Mercy, desirous to have the honor of his Mercy acknowledged unto him.
The same is the Case between God and us. To Abraham he made a promise of Mercy
and Blessedness to all that would plead interest in it, for the remission of
their Sins; but men were secure and heedless of their Estate, P. 385.
etc. Hereupon the Lord published by Moses a severe and terrible Law; yet in
all this, God does but pursue his first purpose of mercy, and take a course to
make his Gospel accounted worthy of all acceptance; which clears the general
point, That God in the publication of the Law by Moses on Mount Sinai, had none
but Merciful and Evangelical Intentions. And once more; The Law was not
published by Moses on Mount Sinai, as it was given to Adam in Paradise, P. 386.
to justify, or to save men. And p. 385. it is not given, ex primari^
intention, to condemn men. In consequence to all which he says, p. 388, 389.
that to preach the Law alone by it self, is to pervert the use of it; neither
have we any power or commission so to do. It was published as an Appendant to
the Gospel, and so must it be preached. It was published in the hand of a
Mediator, and must be preached in the hand of a Mediator. It was published
Evangelically, and it must be so preached.

See how this agrees now with p. 173. of your Call, and how the several parts
of the discourse of this sound and eminent Doctor (which I have been forced to
sum up and contract) do abundantly confute your vain Notions of the Law, and
cut the very nerves of your best Arguments, if they had any nerves in them: for
indeed it is moles absque nervis:

It were easy for me to represent the Sense of many other eminent Divines in
perfect harmony with the Doctrine of this great and excellent Divine, who has
substantially proved the Point I defend against you: but it is enough.

II. Let us next examine what execution his Reply has done upon my second
Position, set up in direct opposition to him; namely, That God's Covenant with
Abraham, Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. the Covenant of Grace.
Genesis 17. unto which Circumcision was annexed, is, for its substance, the
self-same Covenant of Grace with that which Gentile-believers and their
Infant Seed are now under.

Here I have abundant cause again to complain, that Mr. C. has so formed his
Answers, as if he had never read the Book he undertakes a Reply to. And I do
verily believe, the greatest part of his Reply was made at random, before ever
my printed Book was in his hands. For he has not at all considered the state
of the Question as I there gave it him; nor kept himself to the just and
necessary Rules of Disputation, as I earnestly desired he would. However, it is
not Complaints, but confirmation and vindication of my Arguments, which is my
proper work. I shall therefore recite them briefly, and vindicate and confirm
them strongly; contracting all into as few words as can express the sense and
Argument of the Point before me.

Argument I.
If Circumcision be a part of the Ceremonial Law, and the Ceremonial Law was
dedicated by Blood; and whatsoever is so dedicated, is by you confessed to be
no part of the Covenant of Works: Vindiciae Legis, etc. p. 42.
then Circumcision can be no part of the Covenant of Works, even by your own
confession. But it is so. Ergo.

To this Mr. Reply. P. 68.
Carry returns a Tragical Complaint instead of a Rational Answer. Insinuates my
falsehood and gross abuse of him. Appeals to his Reader. Tells him I have taken
a liberty to say what I please, as if there were no future Judgment to be
regarded. And that I can expect no comfort another day without repentance now.
For those things that have thus passed betwixt him and me, shall again be
revised, and set in order before me. That he is weary of noting my Miscarriages
of this kind. That there is hardly a Page or Paragraph in my whole Reply, but
abounds with Transgressions of this nature. He begs the Lord to forgive me; and
wishes he could say, Father, forgive him, for he knows not what he does; as if
my Sin were greater than the Sin of those that stoned Stephen, or crucified
Christ.

Either I am guilty or innocent in the matters here charged upon me by Mr. C.
If guilty, Reply.
I promise him an ingenuous acknowledgment. If innocent, (as both my
Conscience, and his own Book will prove me to be) then I shall only say, he
knows not what spirit he is of. The Case must be tried by his own Book, and
it will quickly be decided. These are the very words in his Solemn Call, p.
148. He (that is, Mr. Sedgwick) makes no distinction betwixt the Ceremonial
Covenant that was dedicated with blood, and the Law written in stones that was
not so dedicated. How strangely does he confound and obscure the word and truth
of God, which ought to have been cleared and distinctly declared to those he
had preached or written to? With much more, p. 149, 150, 151. where he says,
It Is plain, that the Law written in Stones, and the Book wherein the Statutes
and Judgments were contained, were two distinct Covenants, and delivered at
distinct seasons, and in a distinct method; the one with, the other without a
Mediator; the one dedicated with blood and sprinkling, the other (that we read
of) not so dedicated.

Now let the Reader judge whether I have deserved such Tragical Complaints and
dreadful Charges for inferring from these words, That the Ceremonial Law being
by him pronounced a distinct Covenant from the Moral Law, which he makes all
one with Adam's Covenant; delivered at a distinct season, and in a distinct
method; the Ceremonial Law with a Mediator, the Moral Law without a Mediator;
the Ceremonial Law dedicated with blood and sprinkling, the Moral Law not so
dedicated: let him judge (I say) whether I have wronged him in saying, that by
his own confession, Circumcision being a part of this Ceremonial Law, it can
therefore be no part of the Covenant of Works?

But Mr. Carry has two things to say for himself. Exception.
(1.) That in the same place he makes the Ceremonial Law no other than a
Covenant of Works: And the wrong I have done him, is by not distinguishing (as
he did) betwixt A Covenant of Works, and The Covenant of Works. Here it seems
lies my guilt upon which this dreadful outcry against me is made.

But if I should chance to prove, Reply.
that there never was, is, or can be any more than one Covenant of Works; and
that any other Covenant which is distinguished from it (as he confesses the
Ceremonial Law was) by a Mediator, and the blood of sprinkling, can be no part
of that Covenant of Works: what then will become of Mr. C's distinction of A
Covenant of Works, and The Covenant of Works? Now the matter is plain and
evident, That as there never were, are, or can be more than two common Heads
appointed by God, namely Adam, and Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 45, 46, 47, 48. Romans 5.
15, 17, 18, 19. so it is impossible there should be more than two Covenants,
under which Mankind stands, under these two common Heads. And the First
Covenant once broken, it is utterly impossible that fallen Man should ever
attain life that way, or that ever God should set it up again with such an
intention and scope, Charnock on the Attributes, p. 390.
unless (as Mr. Charnock speaks) he had reduced man's Body to the dust, and his
Soul to nothing, and framed another man to have governed him by a Covenant of
Works; but that had not been the same man that had revolted, and upon his
revolt was stained and disabled. If Mr. C. therefore be not able to prove more
Covenants of Works with Mankind than one, let him rather blush at his silly
distinction betwixt a^ Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Works. For indeed
he makes at least four distinct Covenants of Works, one with Adam, two with
Moses; one Moral, the other Ceremonial; and a fourth with Abraham at the
institution of Circumcision, Genesis 17.

(2.) If it appear (as it clearly does) that as there never was, is, or can be
any more than one Covenant of Works, so whatsoever Covenant is distinguished
from it by a Mediator, and dedication by the sprinkling of blood (as he says
the Ceremonial Law was) cannot possibly, for the Reasons he gives, be any part
or member of Adam's Covenant of Works; then, I hope, I have done M. C. no wrong
in my assumption from his own words, for which he so reviles and abuses me. But
this will appear as plain as the Noon-day-light: for a Covenant with a
Mediator, and dedicated by sprinkling of blood, does, and necessarily must
essentially difference such a Covenant from that Covenant that had no Mediator,
nor dedication by blood. To deny this, were to confound Law and Gospel, Adam's
and Christ's Covenant; but the distinction betwixt them is his own, therefore
my assumption was just. That this blood was typically the blood of Christ, and
that the Holy Ghost signified the one by the other, is plain from Heb. 9. 7, 8.
And I never met with that man that scrupled it before Mr. Carry. So then my
first Argument to prove Abraham's Covenant of Circumcision to be the Covenant
of Grace, and not an Adam's Covenant, or any part thereof, stands firm after
Mr. C's passionate Reply, which I hope the Lord will pardon to him, though he
had scarce Charity enough left to desire a pardon for his Friend, who had
neither wronged the Truth, nor him.

Argument II.
My second Argument was this. If Circumcision was the seal of the Righteousness
of Faith, it did not pertain to the Covenant of Works; for the Righteousness of
Faith and Works are opposite.

But Circumcision was the Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. Ergo.

The sum of what he answers to this, p. 72, 73, etc. (as far as I can pick his
true sense out of a multitude of needless words) is this. He confesses this
Argument seems very plausible; but however, Abraham was a Believer before
Circumcision; and tho indeed it sealed the Righteousness of Faith to him, yet
it sealed it to him only as the Father of Believers: and denies that ever
Jacob, or Isaac, or any other enrolled in that Covenant, were sealed by it; but
to all the rest beside Abraham, it was rather a token of servitude and bondage.
This is the sum and substance of his Reply.

But, Reply.
Sir, let me ask you two or three plain Questions. (1.) What is the reason you
silently slide over the Question I asked you, p. 41. of my Vindiciae, etc? Did
you find it an hot Iron, which you durst not touch? It Is like you did. My
Question was this. Had Adam 's Covenant a seal of the righteousness of faith
annexed to it, as this had, Romans 4. 11? The righteousness of faith is
evangelical righteousness, and this Circumcision sealed. Say not it was to
Abraham only that it sealed it, for it is an injurious restriction put upon the
Seal of a Covenant which extended to the Fathers, as well as to Abraham:
however, you admit that it sealed evangelical righteousness to Abraham: but I
hope you will not say, that a Seal of the Covenant of Works (for so you make
Circumcision to be) ever did, or could seal evangelical righteousness to any
individual person in the World.

I find you a man of great confidence, but certainly here it failed you: not
one word in Reply to this. (2.) I told you your distinction was invented by
Bellarmine, and showed you where it was confuted by Dr. Ames: but not a word to
that. (3.) I showed, That the extending of that Seal to all Believers as well
as Abraham, is most agreeable to the drift and scope of the Apostle's Argument,
which is to prove, that both Jews and Gentiles are justified by Faith, as
Abraham was: and that the ground of ^ustification is common to both: and that
how great soever Abraham was, yet in this case he has found nothing whereof to
glory. And is not your Exposition a notable one, to prove the community of the
privilege of Justification, because the Seal of it was peculiar to Abraham
alone? p. 47, 48.

Sir, You have spent words enough upon this Head to tire your Reader. But why
can I not meet with one word among them, that fairly advances to grapple with
my Argument? or answer the important Questions before you, upon which the
matter depends? If this be all you have to say, I must tell you, You are a weak
manager of a bad Cause; which is the less hazard to Truth.

Argument III.
In the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 17. God makes over himself to Abraham,
and his Seed, to be their God, or gives them a special interest in himself.

But in the Covenant of Works, God does not since the Fall, make over himself
to any to be their God by way of special interest.

Therefore the Covenant of Circumcision cannot be the Covenant of Works.

The sum of your Reply in p. 76. is under two Heads.

(1.) You boldly tell me, That God does in the Covenant of Works make over
himself to Sinners to be their God by way of special interest: but it being
upon such hard terms, that it is utterly impossible for Sinners that way to
attain unto life, he has therefore been pleased to abolish that, and make a
new Covenant: and bring Exodus 20. 2. to prove it.

This is new and strange Divinity with me. Reply.
(1.) That God should become a People's God by way of special interest, by
virtue of the broken Covenant of Works. This wholly alters the nature of that
Covenant; for then it was a Law that could give life, contrary to Gal. 3. 21.
unless you can suppose a Soul that is totally dead in Sin, to have a special
interest in God, as his God. (2.) This Answer of yours yields the Controversy
about the nature of the Sinai Law: for this very Concession of yours, is the
Medium by which our Divines prove it to be a Covenant of Grace. (3.) This
Concession of yours confounds the two Covenants, by communicating the essential
property and prime privilege of the Covenant of Grace; to Adam's Covenant of
Works. Either therefore expunge Ier. 31. 33. as a Covenant of Grace, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people; or allow that in Genesis 17. 7. to be
specifically the same; and that Exodus 20. though more obscurely delivered. (4.)
You assert, That God may actually become a Peoples God by way of special
interest, and yet the salvation of that People be suspended upon impossible
terms. You sent them before to Purgatory, but by this you must send them
directly to Hell: for if the salvation of God's peculiar People be upon
impossible terms, it is certain they cannot be saved. And lastly, It is an
horrid reflection upon the Wisdom and Goodness of God, who never did, or will
make any Covenant, wherein he takes fallen Men to be his peculiar People, and
make over himself to be their God; and yet not make provision for their
Salvation in the same Covenant, but leave their Salvation for many Ages upon
hard and impossible terms, ( i. e.) leave them under damnation.

(2.) I told you in my Vindiciae, etc. p. 49. that you were fain to cut
Abraham's Covenant, Genesis 17. into two parts; and make the first to be the pure
Covenant of Grace, which is the promisory part to the 9th verse; and the
Restipulation (as you call it, p. 205.) to be as pure a Covenant of Works.
Which I truly said was a bold Action; and in so calling it, I gave it a softer
name than the nature of it deserved.

The sum of what you reply to this, Mr. C 's Defense, p. 79.
is, (1.) By denying the matter of fact, and charging me with
misrepresentation; and in the next page confessing the whole Charge, saying,
Though the Promise and the Restipulation, mentioned verse. 7, 8, 9. make but one
and the same Covenant of Circumcision; yet there are two Covenants mentioned in
that Context, the first between God and Abraham himself, verse. 2, 4. the other
between God and Abraham, and his natural Posterity also, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. The
former you call a Covenant of Grace, the latter a Covenant of Works. And p. 81.
you affirm, That after God had entered the Covenant of Grace with Abraham, v. 2,
4. that Abraham himself was required to be circumcised by the Command of God,
as a Token of the Covenant of Works. And then P. 81.
(after some unbecoming Scoffs for misplacing verse. 7, 8. where verse. 9, 10.
should be; as also of Genesis 12. for Genesis 17. (whether by the Scribe, my Self, or
Press, I cannot say; but in each place sufficient light is given to set you
right in the scope and Argument of my Discourse) you tell us, That how harsh
and unlikely soever it may seem to man's carnal reason, that the latter, to
wit, the Covenant of Works made with Abraham, verse. 9, 10. must needs make void
the Covenant of Grace made with him, verse. 2, 4. yet the Apostle gives a quite
contrary resolution of it, Gal. 3. 17. And after all, p. 79. in return to my
Argument, That the Circumcision of Abraham, and his Seed, verse. 9, 10. could
not possibly be a condition of Adam's Covenant of Works from the nature of the
act:
because Paul himself circumcised Timothy, Act. 16. 1, 2, 3. and asserts it to
be a part of his Liberty, Gal. 2. 3. 4. which could never be, if in the very
nature of the act it had bound Timothy to keep the Law for justification; and
had been contrary to the whole scope of the Apostle's Doctrine: but it became
an obligation only from the intention of the Agent. All that you say to this,
p. 95. is, That as for Paul's compliance with the Jews, however the case stood
in that respect, this is certain, That the blessed Apostle would never have
expressed himself with that vehemence he does, Gal. 5. 2, 3. if this had been
only the sense of the Jewish Teachers, or that Circumcision in its own nature
did not oblige to the keeping of the whole Law; and that this is only my
corrupt gloss upon the Text.

If there be but one Covenant made betwixt God and Abraham in that 17th of
Genesis, Reply.
and you make two, not only numerically, but specifically distinct, yea,
opposite Covenants of it; then you boldly cut God's Covenant with Abraham in
two, and are guilty of an insufferable abuse of the Covenant of God. But the
former is true: therefore so is the latter. You say, p. 223, 224. of your Call,
That at the second and fourth Verses God made a Covenant with Abraham himself
alone; but at verse 7. he makes the Covenant of Circumcision betwixt himself
and Abraham, and his natural Seed also; and says, verse. 7. And, or (according
to the old Translation) Moreover; as proceeding to speak of another Covenant
than what he had been before insisting on.

Now I would soberly ask, (1.) What Vouchers you have amongst Expositors for
this your rash and daring Assertion? I find not a man that has trod this path
before you, and I hope none will be hardy enough to follow. You certainly stand
alone, and it is pity but you should. (2.) Where do you find the just parts of
the New Covenant in the 2d and 4th verse? Is it not altogether promisory on
God's part, without any restipulation on Abraham's? for you have excluded v. 1,
9, 10. from that which you call God's Covenant of Grace with him. And then for
your Covenant of Works, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. you make this to be the Promisory
part of that Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee; and
again verse. 8. I will be their God. Was ever such a Promise as this, found in a
Covenant of Works? Tell me whatever God said more in the New Covenant, than he
says here? Oh blessed Covenant of Works, if this be such! (3.) Tell me whether
you can satisfy your own Conscience with the Answers you have given to my first
Argument against your paradoxical, yea heterodoxical Exposition? I told you,
That if verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. contain another Covenant, viz. of Works, entered by
God with Abraham and his Seed, it must needs make void the former Covenant,
verse. 2, 4. for wherever the Covenant of Works takes place, the Co-Covenant
of Grace gives place; they cannot consist, as I have abundantly proved before.
Do you verily think those words of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 17. which you bring as
a foundation to support your singular and sinful Exposition, viz. And this I
say, That the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law,
which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul that it should
make the Promise of none effect; do you think (I say) that in that, or any
other Text, the Apostle opposes the two Covenants made (as you fancy) with
Abraham, Genesis 17? or does he not there speak of God's Covenant with Abraham, as
distinguished from the Law made 430. years afterward? (4.) Have you satisfied
your own Judgment and Conscience in the Reply you make to that unanswerable
Objection from Paul's circumcising of Timothy, Acts 16. 2, 3. where you have
the plain matter of fact before you, that he was circumcised by Paul; and this
Fact of his, justified as a part of the Liberty he had in Christ, Gal. 2. 3, 4.
from whence it evidently appears, Teneter non simpli^iter and absolute ex
genere operis, sed ex intention operantis, and supposita tali opinione, etc.
Poole in loc.
That Circumcision in its own nature did not simply and absolutely oblige men
to the keeping of Moses his Law for Righteousness, but only from the intention
or opinion of the Person. And though you call this my corrupt gloss upon the
Text, therein you grossly abuse me. The gloss is neither corrupt, nor my own;
but the unanimous Judgment of all sound Expositors of the Text, as you might
see, were you capable of seeing it, in a Collection of their Judgments upon
that Text, Gal. 5. 2, 3. in Mr. Poole's Synopsis. And tho Estius thinks the Act
of Circumcision might be obligatory to the Gentiles, to whom the Law was not
given; yet it was not so to the Jews that believed, and such was Timothy. But
why do I refer you to the Judgment of Commentators? the very reason of it may
convince you: For,

If the very Act of Circumcision did in its own nature oblige all on whom it
passed, to keep the whole Law for their Righteousness, then Paul so obliged
Timothy, and all others on whom he passed it, to keep the Law for their
Righteousness.

But Paul did not oblige Timothy, or any other on whom he passed it, by the
very Act of Circumcision so to keep the Law.

Therefore the very Act of Circumcision in its own nature did not oblige all on
whom it passed, to keep the whole Law for Righteousness.

You may ponder this Argument at your leisure, and not think to refute it at so
cheap a rate, as by calling it a corrupt gloss of my own. And thus I hope I
have sufficiently fortified and confirmed my Third Argument, to prove Abraham's
Covenant to be a Covenant of Grace. My Fourth was this.

Argument IV.
That which in its direct and primary end teaches Man the corruption of his
Nature by sin, and the mortification of sin by the Spirit of Christ, cannot be
a condition of the Covenant of Works.

But so did Circumcision in the very direct and primary end of it. Therefore,
etc.

Your Reply to this is, That when I have substantially proved that the Sinai
Covenant, as it contained the Passover, Sacrifices, Types and Appendages,
under which were veiled many spiritual Mysteries relating to Christ, and
mortification of sin by his Grace and Spirit, to be no Covenant of Works, but a
Gospel Covenant; you will then grant with me, that the present Argument is
convincing; p. 96, 97. of your Reply.

Sir, Reply.
I take you for an honest man: and every honest man will be as good as his
word. Either I have fully proved against you, that the Sinai Law (taken in that
latitude you here express it) is not an Adam's Covenant of Works, or I have
not. If I have not, doubtless you have reserved your more pertinent and strong
Replies in your own breast, and trust not to those weak and silly ones which
you see here baffled, and have only served to involve you in greater
Absurdities than before. But if you have brought forth all your strength (as in
such a desperate strait no man can imagine but you would) then I have fully
proved the point against you. And if I have, I expect you to be ingenuous and
candid in making good your word, That you will then grant with me, that this
Argument is convincing to the end for which it was designed. And so I hope we
have fully issued the Controversy between us, relating to God's Covenant with
Abraham. You have indeed four Arguments, p. 59, 60, 61, 62. of your Reply, to
prove Abraham's Covenant a Covenant of Works of the same nature with Adam's
Covenant.

(1.) Because as life was implicitly promised to Adam upon his obedience, and
death explicitly threatened in case of his disobedience, which made that
properly a Covenant of Works; so it was in the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis
17. 7, 8. compared with verse. 10, 14.

This Argument or Reason can never conclude: Reply.
because as God never required of Abraham, and his Children, personal, perfect,
and perpetual obedience to the whole Law for life, as he did of Adam; so the
death, or cutting off, spoken of here, seems to be another thing from that
threatened to Adam. Circumcision (as I told you before) was appointed to be the
discriminating Sign betwixt Abraham's Seed, and the Heathen World: and the
wilful neglect thereof is here threatened with cutting off by Civil or
Ecclesiastical Excommunication from the Commonwealth, and Church of Israel, as
Luther, Calvin, Paraeus, Musculus, etc. expounds; not by death of Body and
Soul, as was threatened to Adam, without place for repentance, or hope of mercy.

(2.) You say Abraham's Covenant could not be a Covenant of Faith, because
Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision, Romans 4. 9, 10.

This is weak reasoning. Reply.
Circumcision could not belong to a Gospel Covenant, because Abraham was a
Believer before he was circumcised. You may as well deny the Lord's Supper to
be the Seal of a Gospel Covenant, because the Partakers of it are Believers
before they partake of it. Beside, you cannot deny but it sealed the
Righteousness of ^aith to Abraham: and I desired you before, to prove that a
Seal of the Covenant of Works i^ capable of being applied to such an use and
service, which you have not done, nor ever will be able to do; but politickly
slided by it.

(3.) You say it cannot be a Covenant of Grace, because it is
contra-distinguished to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 13.

The Law in that place is put strictly for the pure Law of Nature, Reply.
and Metaleptically signifies the Works of the Law, which is a far different
thing from the Law taken in that latitude wherein you take it. And is not this
a pretty Argument, that because the promise to Abraham, and his Seed, was not
through the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith; therefore the Covenant
of God made with Abraham, and his Seed, Genesis 17. cannot be a gracious, but a
legal Covenant? This Promise mentioned Romans 4. 13. was made to Abraham long
before the Law was given by Moses: and Free Grace, not Abraham's legal
Righteousness, was the impulsive cause moving God to make that Promise to
Abraham, and to his Seed: and their enjoyment of the Mercies promised, was not
to be through the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith. By what rule of
art this Scripture is alleged to prove God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17.
to be a Covenant of Works, I am utterly to seek. If it be only because
Circumcision was added to it, that is answered over and over before; and you
neither have, nor can reply to it.

(4.) Lastly, It cannot (say you) be a Covenant of Grace, because it is
represented to us in Scripture as a Bondage-covenant, Acts 15. 10, etc. Gal. 5.
1.

It Is time, Reply.
I see, to make an end. Your discourse runs low, and dreggy. Do you think it is
one and the same thing to say, That the Ceremonial Law was a yoke of bondage to
them that were under it, and to say it was an Adam's Covenant? Are these two
parallel distinctions in your Logic? Alas! Sir, there is a wide difference.
The difficulty, variety, and chargeableness of those Ceremonies, made them
indeed burdensome and tiresome to that People; but they did not make the
Covenant, to which they were annexed, to become an Adam's Covenant of Works:
for in the very next breath, verse. 11. the Apostle will tell you, they were
saved; yea, and tells us, that we shall be saved even as they. So that either
they that were under this yoke, were saved by Faith in the way of Freegrace, as
we now are; or we must be saved in the way of legal Obedience, as they were.
Take which you please, for one of them you must take. We shall be saved, even
as they, Acts 15. 10, 11.

If you can make no stronger opposition to my Arguments, than such as you have
here made, your Cause is lost; though your confidence and obstinancy remain. It
were easy for me to fill more Paper than I have written on this Subject, with
Names of principal note in the Church of God, who with one voice decry your
groundless Position, and constantly affirm, that the Law in the complex sense
you take it, as it comprehends the Ceremonial Rites and Ordinances whereunto
Circumcision pertains, is, and can be no other than the Covenant of Grace,
though more obscurely administered. But because Latin Authors are of little use
to you, and among English ones, the Judgment of Dr. Vol. 2. Sermon. 2. page 247,
248, 250.
Crisp, I suppose, will be instar omnium with you: I will recite it faithfully
out of his Sermon upon the two Covenants, where he makes the Old and New
Covenants to be indeed two distinct Covenants of Grace, (for which I see no
reason at all) but proves the former to be so in these words.

It is granted of all men, That in the Covenant of Works there is no remission
of Sin, there is no notice of Christ; but the whole business or employment of
the Priests of the old Law, was altogether about remission of Sins, and the
exhibiting and holding forth of Christ in their fashion unto the People. In the
15th of Numbers, verse. 28. (I will give you but one Instance) there you shall
plainly see, That the administration of that Priestly Office had remission of
Sins as the main end of that Administration. If a Soul sin through ignorance,
he shall bring a She-goat unto the Priest, and he shall make an atonement for
the Soul that sins ignorantly, and it shall be forgiven him: See, the main
end is administering forgiveness of Sins.

And that Christ was the main Subject of that their Ministry, is plain, because
the Apostle says in the Verse before my Text, That all that Administration was
but a Shadow of Christ, and a Figure for the present to represent him, as he
does express in the 9th Chapter of this Epistle. And the truth is, the usual
general Gospel that all the Jews had, was in their Sacrifices and Priestly
Observations. --

So that it is plain, the administration of their Covenant was an administration
of Grace, and absolutely distinct from the administration of the Covenant of
Works. And what can be said more absolutely and directly contradictory to your
Position, than this is? And yet again, p. 250. speaking to that Scripture, Heb.
8. 8. where the Apostle distinguishes of a better and a faulty, of First and
Second; he says, Finding fault with them, The days come, when I will make a
new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah, not
according to the Covenant I made with their Fathers, when I took them by the
hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt; and (as Jeremiah adds it, for the
Apostle takes all this out of Ier. 31. 31.) although I was an Husband to them;
and in the close of all, Your Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. --
Here are two Covenants, a new Covenant, and the Covenant he made with their
Fathers. Some may think it was the Covenant of works at the promulgation of the
Moral Law; but mark well that Expression of Jeremiah, and you shall see it was
the Covenant of Grace. For (says he) not according to the Covenant I made with
their Fathers, although I was an Husband unto them. How can God be considered
as Husband to a People under the Covenant of Works, which was broken by man in
innocence, and so became disannulled or impossible by the breach of it? The
Covenant of Works runs thus: Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things that are written in the Book of the Law; and, In the day thou sinnest,
thou shall die the death. Man had sinned before God took him by the hand to
lead him out of the Land of Egypt, and Sin had separated Man from God: how then
can God be called an Husband in the Covenant of Works? The Covenant therefore
was not a Covenant of Works, but such a Covenant as the Lord became an Husband
in, and that must be a Covenant of Grace, etc.

How the Doctor makes good his two distinct Covenants of Grace, I see not, nor
expect ever to see proved, and is not my present concernment to enquire; but
once it is evident by what he has here said, That the Ceremonial Law, whereof
Circumcision is a branch, can be no other than the Covenant of Grace. And
nothing is more common among our Divines, than to prove not only the Sinai Law,
but God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. to be the Covenant of Grace by this
Medium, That God having entered into a Covenant of Grace with Abraham before,
would never bring him under a Covenant of Works afterward, which must nullify
and void the former. And beside, such a Covenant of Works as you make this, was
never heard of in the World, wherein God promises to be a God to Abraham, and
his Seed, in their Generations, upon the rigorous and impossible Terms of
Adam's Covenant.

By this time, I presume, you must feel the force of those Arguments produced
against your vain and groundless notion; and how little you are able to do to
deliver your Thesis from them, but the more you struggle, the more still you
are entangled. Go which way you will, your Absurdities follow you as your
Shadow. -- haeret lateri lethalis arundo. Leaving therefore all your
Absurdities upon you, till God shall give you more illumination and ingenuity
to discern and acknowledge them; I shall pass on to the examination of your
third Position, which led you into these other gross Mistakes; and if God shall
convince you of your Error in this point, I hope it may prove a means of
recovering you out of the rest: which in love to your Soul, I heartily desire.

III. Your third Position is, That God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. can be
no other than the Covenant of Works, because Circumcision was the Condition of
it: For (say you) the new Covenant is altogether absolute, and unconditional.

Of the Conditionality of the New Covenant.
This Question, Whether the Covenant of Grace be conditionate or absolute, was
moved (as a learned Man observes) in the former Age, by occasion of the
Controversy about Justification, betwixt the Protestants and Papists. Among the
Protestants, some denied, and others affirmed the Conditionality of the
Gospel Covenant. Those that denied it, did so for fear of mingling Law and
Gospel, Christ's Righteousness and Man's, as the Papists had wickedly done
before. Those that affirmed it, did so out of fear also; lest the necessity of
Faith and Holiness being relaxed, Libertinism should be that way introduced.
But if the Question were duly stated, and the sense of its Terms agreed upon,
the Gospel Covenant may be affirmed to be conditional, to secure the People of
God from Libertinism, without the least diminution of the Righteousness of
Christ, or clouding the Freegrace of God.

I did in my first Answer to your Call, endeavor to prevent the needless
trouble you have here given your self, by a succinct state of the Question:
telling you the Controversy betwixt us, is not, (1.) Whether the
Gospel Covenant requires no duties at all of them that are under it? nor (2.)
Whether it requires any such Conditions as were in Adam's Covenant, namely,
perfect, personal, and perpetual Obedience under the penalty of the Curse, and
admitting no place of Repentance? nor (3.) Whether any Condition required by it
on our part, have any thing in its own nature meritorious of the Benefits
promised? nor (4.) Whether we be able in our own strength, and by the power of
our Free Will, without the preventing, as well as the assisting Grace of God,
to perform any such work or duty as we call a Condition? These things I told
you were to be excluded out of this Controversy. But the only Question betwixt
us, is, Whether in the New Covenant, Quest.
some act of ours (though it have no merit in it, nor can be done in our own
single strength) be not required to be performed by us antecedently to a
blessing or privilege consequent by virtue of a promise? And whether such an
act or duty, being of a suspending nature to the blessing promised, it have not
the true and proper nature of a Gospel-condition?

In your Reply (contrary to all rule and reason) you include and chiefly argue
against the very Particulars by me there excluded; and scarcely (if at all)
touch the true Question, as it was stated, and by you ought accordingly to have
been considered. I might therefore justly think my self discharged from any
further concernment with you about it: for if you will include what I plainly
excluded, you argue not against mine, but another man's Position, which I am
not concerned to defend. You here dispute against meritorious Conditions, which
I explode and abhor as much as your self. You say, p. 34. of your Reply, that a
Condition plainly implies something of merit, by way of condignity or
congruity; which is false, and turns the Question from me to the Papists. And
were it not more for the clearing up of so great a Point for the instruction
and satisfaction of others, than any hope you give me of convincing you, I
should not have touched this Question again, unless I had found your Replies
more distinct and pertinent. But finding the Point in controversy of great
weight, I will once more tell you, 1. What the word [ Condition] signifies. 2.
In what sense it is by us used in this Controversy. 3. Establish my Arguments
for the conditionality of the New Covenant.


(1.) And first we grant, That neither our word [ Condition] nor your term [
Absolute] are either of them found in Scripture, with respect to God's
covenanting with Man; so that we contend not about the signification of a
Scripture term. But though the word Conditional be not there, yet the thing
being found there, That brings the word Conditional into use in this
Controversy. For we know not how to express those ^ sacred Particles, (...)
etc. If, If not, Unless, But if, Except, Only, and the like, which are
frequently used to limit and restrain the Grants and Privileges of the New
Covenant, Romans 10. 9. Matt. 18. 3. Mark 5. 36. Mark 11. 26. Romans 4. 24. I say,
we know not how to express the true sense and force of these Particles in this
Controversy, by any other word so fit and full as the word Conditional is. Now
this word Condition being a Law-term, is variously used among Iurists; and the
various use of the word, occasions that confusion which is found in this
Controversy. He therefore that shall clearly distinguish the various senses and
uses of the word, is most likely to labor with success in this Controversy. I
shall therefore briefly note the principal senses and uses of the term, and
show in what sense we here take it. Of Conditions there be two sorts.

Conditions.
1. Antecedent 2. Consequent
As to the latter, namely, consequent Conditions, you your self acknowledge, p.
100. That in the outward dispensation of the Covenant, many things are required
of us in order unto the participation or enjoyment of the full end of the
Covenant in glory.

So then the Covenant is acknowledged to be consequently conditional, Si
promissiones foederisintelliganturde fine, nemo negare potest esse
conditionale^; quia fiunt semper sub condition fidei. and poenitentiae.
Turrettine.
which is no more than to say with the Apostle, Without holiness no man shall
see God; or, that if any man draw^ back, his soul shall have no pleasure in
him, etc. Our Controversy therefore is not about consequent Conditions, laid by
God upon Believers, after they are in Christ and the Covenant; the Covenant so
considered, a posteriori, will not be denied to be Condi^tional. The only
Question is about Antecedent Conditions; and of these we are here to consider,
1. Such as respect the first Sanction of the Covenant in Christ. 2. Such as
respect the application of the benefits of the Covenant unto Men Si foedus
specterur ratione sanctionis primae in Christo, nullam habet conditionem
praeviam; sed sola gratia Dei, and Christi merito nititur. Sed si attendatur
ratione acceptationis and applicationis in fideli, conditionem habet Fidem,
quae hominem unit Christo, and sic in communionem foederis mittit. Turret. vol.
2. p. 203.
.


As to the first Sanction of the Covenant in Christ, we freely acknowledge ^t
has no previous Condition on Man^s part; but depends purely and only upon the
Grace of God, and Merit of Christ. So that our Question proceeds about such
antecedent Conditions only as respect the Application of the Benefits of the
Covenant unto Men. And of these Antecedent Conditions there are likewise two
sorts, which must be carefully distinguished.

1. Such Antecedent Conditions which have the force of a meritorious and
impulsive Cause, which being performed by the proper strength of Nature, or at
most by the help of common assisting Grace, do give a Man a right to the reward
or blessings of the Covenant. And in this sense we utterly disclaim antecedent
Conditions, as I plainly told you, p. 61. of my Vindiciae, etc. Or, 2. An
Antecedent Condition signifying no more than an Act of ours, which though it be
neither perfect in every degree, nor in the least meritorious of the benefit
conferred; nor performed in our own natural strength; yet according to the
constitution of the Covenant, is required of us in order to the blessings
consequent thereupon by virtue of the Promise: and consequently the benefits
and mercies granted in the Promise in this order are, and must be suspended by
the Donor or Disposer of them, until it be performed. Such a Condition we
affirm Faith to be. But here again, Faith (...) the Condition of the New
Covenant, is considered, 1. Essentially. Or, 2. Organically and Instrumentally.

In the first consideration of Faith, according to its Essence* it is contained
under Obedience, and in that respect we exclude it from justifying our persons,
or entitling us to the saving-mercies of the New Covenant, as it is a work of
ours; and so I excluded it, p. 133. of my Method of Grace, which you ignorantly
or wilfully mistake, when in your Reply, p. 88, 89. you object it against me.
Faith considered in this sense, is not the Condition of the Covenant, nor can
pretend to be so, more than any other Grace. But

We consider it Organically, Relatively, and (as most speak) Instrumentally, as
it receives Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. and so gives us power to become the Sons of
God; it being impossible for any Man to partake of the saving benefits of the
Covenant, but as he is united to Christ. For all the Promises of God in him are
yea; and in him, Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And united to Christ no Man can be, before
he be a believer; for Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. Upon
which Scriptural Grounds and Reasons it is, that we affirm Faith to be an
Antecedent Condition, or, Causa sine qua non, to the saving benefits of the new
Covenant; and that it must go before them, at least in order of nature, which
is that we mean, when we say Faith is the antecedent Condition of the New
Covenant. And those that deny it to be so, as the Antinomians do, who talk of
actual and personal Justification from Eternity, or at least from the death of
Christ, must consequently assert the actual Justification of Infidels; and not
only disturb, but destroy the whole order of the Gospel, and open the Sluices
and Floodgates to all manner of licentiousness.

And thus our Pious and Learned Divines generally affirm Faith to be the
condition of the Covenant. Moses's Self-denial. p. 188.
So Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, Faith (says he) has the great honor above all
other Graces, to be the Condition of the second Covenant; therefore certainly
it is some great matter that Faith enables us to do. Whatsoever keeps Covenant
with God, brings strength, though it self be never so weak; as Sampson^s Hair.
What is weaker than a little Hair? Yet because the keeping that, was keeping
Covenant with God; therefore even a little Hair was so great strength to
Sampson. Faith then, that is the Condition of the Covenant, in which all Grace
and Mercy is contained, if it be kept, it will cause strength indeed to do
great things.

And as this excellent Man, Mr. Buroughs, is in this sense for the
Conditionality of the New Covenant; so are the most Learned and Eminent of our
own Divines. Dr. Edward Reynold's assigning the differences betwixt the two
Covenants, gives this for one: Dr. Reynold's his Life of Christ. p. 512.
They differ in the Condition (says he); there Legal Obedience, here only
Faith; and the certain consequent thereof, Repentance. There is difference
likewise in he manner of performing these Conditions: For now God himself
begins first to work upon us, and in us, before we move or stir toward him. He
does not only command us, and leave us to our created strength to obey the
Command; but he furnishes us with his own Grace and Spirit to obey the Command.

Of the same judgment is Dr. Owen. Dr. Owen Treatise of Redemption. Book 3.
chap. 1. p. 103, 104. And in his Tract of Justification, p. 299, etc.
Are we able (says he) of our selves to fulfill the Condition of the New
Covenant? Is it not as easy for a Man by his own strength to fulfill the whole
Law, as to repent, and believe the Promise of the Gospel? This then is one main
difference of these two Covenants, That the Lord did in the Old only require
the Condition; now in the New, he also effects it in all the foederates to whom
the Covenant is extended. This is the Man you pretend to be against Conditions.

Mr. William Pemble opening the nature of the two Covenants, Pemble, of Iustif.
Sect. 4. Chap. 1. p. 214, 215, 216, 217.
says, The Law offers Life unto Man upon condition of perfect Obedience; the
Gospel offers Life unto Man upon another condition, to wit, of Repentance, and
Faith in Christ. And after his proofs for it, says, From whence we conclude
firmly, That the difference between the Law and the Gospel, assigned by our
Divines, is most certain and agreeable to the Scriptures, viz. That the Law
gives Life unto the just, upon condition of perfect obedience in all things;
the Gospel gives Life unto sinners, upon condition they repent and believe in
Christ Jesus.

Learned and judicious Mr. William Perkins thus; Perkins, Order of Causes,
Chap. 31. p. 17.
The Covenant of Grace is that whereby God freely promising Christ and his
Benefits, exacts again of Man, that he would by Faith receive Christ. And
again, in the Covenant of Grace two things must be considered, the Substance
thereof, and the Condition. Reformed Catholic, of Iustif. p. 570.
The Substance of the Covenant is, That Righteousness and Life Everlasting, is
given to God's Church and People by Christ. The Condition is, That we for our
parts are by Faith to receive the foresaid Benefits; and this Condition is by
Grace, as well as the Substance.

That Learned, Humble, and Painful Minister of Christ Mr. John Ball, Mr. J.
Ball of the Covenant of Grace, Chap. 1. Of the Ne^ Covenant, p. 198.
stating the difference betwixt the two Covenants, shows, that in the Covenant
at Sinai, in the Covenant with Abraham, and that with David, that in all these
Covenant expressures, there are for substance the same Evangelical conditions
of Faith and Sincerity.

Dr. Davenant thus: Davenant De Justif. Act. cap. 30.
In the Covenant of the Gospel it is otherwise; for in this Covenant, to the
obtainment of Reconciliation, Justification, and Li^e Eternal, there is no
other condition required than of true and lively Faith, John 3. 16. Therefore
Justification, and the right to Eternal Life, does depend on the Condition of
Faith alone.

Dr. Downame harmonizeth with the rest in these words: That which is the only
Condition of the Covenant of Grace, Tract. 1. Of Iustif. Lib. 6. cap. 8. Sect.
10. and Lib. 7. cap. 2. Sect. 6.
by that alone we are justified: But Faith is the Condition of the Covenant of
Grace, which is therefore called Lex Fidei. Our Writers (says he)
distinguishing the two Covenants of God, that is, the Law and the Gospel,
whereof one is the Covenant of Works, the other the Covenant of Grace, do
teach, That the Law of Works is that which to Justification requires works as
the Condition thereof: The Law of Faith that, which to Justification requires
Faith as the Condition thereof. The former says, Do this, and thou shall live;
the latter, Believe in Christ, and thou shall be saved.

But what stand I upon particular, though renowned names? You may see a whole
Constellation of our sound and famous Divines in the Assembly, thus expressing
themselves about this Point. The Grace of God (say they) is manifested in the
second Covenant, in that he freely provideth, and offers to sinners a
Mediator, Larger Catech. 4to. London 1648. p. 8.
and Life and Salvation by him, and requiring Faith as the Condition to
interest them in him, promises and gives his Holy Spirit to all his Elect, to
work in them that Faith, with all other saving Graces, and to enable them to
all holy Obedience, as the evidence of the truth of their Faith, etc.

I could even tire the Reader with the Testimonies of eminent foreign Divines,
as Cameron de triplici foedere, These. 82. Vrsinus and Paraeus explicatio
Catech. Quest 18. de foedere. Wendeline, Christian Theology, Lib. 1. cap. 19.
These. 9. Poliander, Rivet, Wallaeus, and Thysius, the four learned Professors
at Leyden, Synops. Disp. 23. Sect. 27, etc. And as for those Ancient and Modern
Divines, whom the Antinomians have corrupted and misrepresented, the Reader may
see them all vindicated, and their concurrence with those I have named,
evidenced by that Learned and Pious Mr. John Graile, in his Modest Vindication
of the Doctrine of Conditions in the Covenant of Grace, from p. 58. onward; a
Man whose name and memory is precious with me, not only upon the account of
that excellent Sermon he Preached, and those fervent Prayers he poured out many
years since at my Ordination; but for that Learned and Judicious Treatise of
his against Mr. Air, wherein he has cast great light upon this Controversy,
as excellent Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Woodbridge have also done. But alas, what
evidence is sufficient to satisfy ignorant and obstinate Men!

Sir, it pities me to see the lamentable confusion you are in. You are forced
by the evidence of truth to yield and own the substance of what I contend for.
You have yielded the Covenant to be consequently Conditional in p. 84. of your
Reply. You have also as plainly yielded, that the Application of Pardoning
Mercy unto our Souls, is in order of nature consequent unto believing; p. 31.
of your Reply. From both which concessions in your own words recited, this
Conclusion is evident and unavoidable, viz.

That no adult person, notwithstanding God's Eternal Election, and Christ's
meritorious death and satisfaction, according to the Constitution and Order of
the New Covenant, can either be justified in this World, or saved in the World
to come, unless he first believe.

For if the Application of Pardoning Mercy unto our Souls, is in order of
Nature consequent unto believing (as you truly affirm it to be) then according
to the Constitution and Order of the New Covenant, no application of pardoning
Mercy can be made to our Souls before we believe. And if it be evident (as you
say it is, p. 84.) that unto a full and complete enjoyment of all the Promises
of the Covenant, Faith on our part is required; then as no Man can be actually
justified in this World, so neither can he be saved before, or without Faith in
the World to come. And if you did but see the true suspending nature of Faith,
which you plainly yield in these two concessions; you would quickly grant the
conditional nature of it: For what is the proper nature and true notion of a
Condition, but to suspend the benefits and grants of that Covenant in which it
is so inserted? And thus the Controversy betwixt us is fairly issued. But I
doubt you understand not what you have here written, or are troubled with a
very bad memory: Because I find you in a far different note from this in p.
103. of your Reply, where you say, That if Jesus Christ fulfilled the Law, and
purchased Heaven and Happiness for Men (as all true Protestants hitherto have
taught) then nothing can remain, but to declare this to them, to incline them
to believe and accept it; and to prescribe in what way, and by what means they
shall finally come to inherit Eternal Life. To affirm therefore, that Faith and
Repentance are the Conditions of the New Covenant required of us in point of
Duty, antecedent to the benefit of the Promise, does necessarily suppose, that
Christ has not done all for us, nor purchased a right to Life for any; but
only made way that they may have it upon certain terms, or (as some say) he
has merited that we might merit: But the Conditions of the Covenant are not to
be performed by the Head and Members both, Gal. 4. 4. Christ therefore having
in our stead performed the Conditions of Life, there remains nothing but a
Promise, and the Obedience of Children, as the fruit and effect thereof to them
that believe in him, together with means of obtaining the full possession,
which here we want.

Either these passages I have here cited and compared, Reply:
were fetched at a great distance of time, out of Authors differing as much in
judgment as you and I do; and so the dissonancy of them is the mere effect of
oblivion, and incogitancy: Or else your Intellectuals are more confused and
weak than I am willing to suspect them to be. For if the application of
Pardoning Mercy to our Souls* is in order of Nature consequent to Believing (as
you truly say it was); then certainly, notwithstanding Christ's fulfilling the
Law, and purchasing Heaven and Happiness for Men, something else must remain to
be done, besides declaring this to them, to incline them to believe and accept
it, or prescribing to them in what way they shall finally come to inherit
Eternal Life. For besides those declarations and prescriptions you talk of,
Faith it self must be wrought in the Souls of Men, or else Pardoning Mercy is
not in order of Nature consequent unto believing, as you said it was: For all
the external Declarations and Prescriptions in the World are not Faith it self,
but only the means to beget it; which may, or may not, become effectual to that
end.

Secondly, Whereas you say, that this (senseless notion) is consequent upon the
Doctrine of all true Protestants, you therein grossly abuse them, and make all
the true Protestants in the World guilty of worse than Arminian or Antinomian
dotage. The Antinomian, indeed, makes our actual justification to be nothing
else but the manifestation or declaration of our Justification from Eternity,
or the time of Christ's death. And the Arminian tells us, That the Declaration
of the Gospel to Men, is sufficient to bring them to Faith by the assisting
Grace of the Spirit.* But your notion is worse than the very dregs of both, and
yet you tack it as a just consequent to the Doctrine of all true Protestants.

Thirdly, You say, Reply. P. 104.
That to affirm Faith and Repentance to be the Conditions of the New Covenant
required of us in point of Duty, antecedent to the benefit of the Promise, does
necessarily suppose that Christ has not done all for us, nor purchased a right
to Life for any; but only made way that they may have it upon certain terms, or
merited that we might merit. Here, Sir, you vilely abuse all those worthy
Divines before mentioned, who have made Faith the Condition of the New
Covenant, pinning upon them both Popery and Judaism. Popery, yea, the dregs of
Popery, in supposing their Doctrine necessarily implies that Christ has
merited that we might merit. And Judaism to the height, in saying, their
Doctrine necessarily supposes that Christ has not purchased a right of Life to
any. What can a Jew say more? Ah, Mr. C. can you read the words I have recited
out of blessed Buroughs, Owen, Pemble, Perkins, Davenant, Downame, yea, the
whole Assembly of Reverend and Holy Divines, with multitudes more (who have all
with one mouth asserted Faith to be the Condition of the New Covenant required
on Man's part, in point of Duty; and that Men must believe before they can be
justified; which is the very same thing with what I say, That it is antecedent
to the benefit of the Promise) and not tremble to think of the direful charges
you here draw against them? The Lord forgive your rash presumption.

Fourthly, Whereas you say, Christ has in our stead performed the Conditions
of life, and that there remains nothing but a Promise, Sal^marsh, of Freegrace.
p. 126, 127.
etc. you therein speak at the highest dialect of Antinomianism; Has not
Christ by his Life and Death performed the Conditions of Life in our stead? yet
you your self confess, that pardoning Mercy is in order of nature consequent to
our believing; certainly then there is something more to be done beside the
mere making, or being of a Promise: there must be the effect of the Promise in
our hearts; yea, the effects of those absolute Promises of the first Grace,
Ezekiel. 36. Ier. 32. Or else notwithstanding Christ's performance of Redemption
on his part, we can neither be justified nor saved. For I don't think you
intend to lay the Conditions of Repentance or believing upon Christ, who in the
New Covenant has laid them upon us, tho in the same Covenant he graciously
undertakes to work them in us: and yet your words sound in that wild Antinomian
Note.

But, Objection.
I suppose, you take my Notion to be as self-repugnant as your own, when I say
Faith is an antecedent Condition to Justification: because I also say, this
Grace is also supernaturally wrought in us, and is not of our selves. This
staggers you, and is the very stone you stumble at all along this Controversy:
for in your sense, p. 34. every Condition is meritorious by condignity or
congruity.

First, What do I say more in all this, Reply.
than what those Worthies beforementioned do expressly affirm? Does not Dr.
Owen (the man whom you deservedly value) make Conditions both in Adam's
Covenant and the New, with this difference, that Adam's Covenant required them,
but the New Covenant effects them in all the Foederates? Sir, We take it for no
contradiction to assert, That the planting of the Principle, and the assisting
and exciting of the Acts of Faith, are the proper Works of the Spirit of God,
and are also contained in the absolute Promises of the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.
26, 27. Ier. 32. 39, 40. And yet Faith, notwithstanding this, is truly and
properly our work and duty; and that upon our believing, or not believing, we
have, or have not, an actual interest in Christ, Righteousness, and Life. For
though the Author of Faith be the Spirit of God, yet believing is properly our
Act, and an Act required of us by a plain Command, 1 John 3. 23. This is the
Command of God, That ye believe. And if its being wrought in God's strength
makes it cease to be our Work, I would fain know what Exposition you would give
of that place, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation, etc. for it is God
that works in you both to will and to do. And as this Faith is truly and
properly our work, though wrought in God's strength (for it is not God, but we,
that do believe) so it is wrought in us by him (by your own confession) before
the application of pardoning Mercy, which is consequent in order of nature
thereunto: and therefore has the true nature of an antecedent Condition, which
is that I contend for; and did you but understand your own words, you would not
contend against.

Oh, Object. 2.
but say you, p. 34. every Condition is meritorious, either by way of congruity
or condignity.

This is your ignorance of the nature of a Condition, Reply.
with which I find you as unacquainted as with the nature of a Covenant. A
Condition, whilst unperformed, only suspends the act of the Law or Testament:
it being the will of the Testator, Legislator, or Donor, that his Law or
Testament should act or effect, when the Condition is performed, and not
before: but it is not essential to a Condition, to be a meritorious or
impulsive cause moving him to bestow the benefit for the sake thereof. A man
freely gives another out of his love and bounty such an Estate or Sum of Money,
which he shall enjoy if he live to such a year, or day; and not before: is this
quando dies veniet, this appointed time the meritorious or impulsive cause of
the gift? surely no man will say it: but that it is a causa sine qua non, or a
Condition suspending the enjoyment of the gift, no man will deny that knows
what the nature of a Condition is. An act meritorious by way of Congruity, is
that to which a reward is not due out of strict justice, but out of decency, or
some kind of meetness. Merit of condignity is a voluntary action, for which a
reward is due to a man out of justice, and cannot be denied him without
injustice. Our Faith is truly the Condition of the New Covenant, and yet we
detest the meritoriousness of it in either sense.

But you object my words to me in my Method of Grace, Object. 3.
where I assert the impossibility of believing without the efficacy of
supernatural Grace, p. 102, 103.

Sir, I own the words you quote, Reply.
and am bold to challenge the most envious Eye that shall read those lines, to
show me the least repugnancy betwixt what I said there, and what I have said in
my Vindiciae Legis, etc. p. 9. of the Prolegomena, and p. 61. of that Book. You
show your good will to make an advantageous thrust; but your Weapon is too
short, and can draw no blood. But leaving these weak and impertinent Cavils,
let us come to your Solution of my Arguments, p. 98. by which I proved the
Conditionality of the New Covenant. My first Argument was this.

If we cannot be justified or saved till we believe, Argument 1
and are justified when we believe; Then Faith is the Condition on which those
consequent Benefits are suspended, etc.

The sum of your Answer (without denying, Answer.
distinguishing, or limiting one Proposition) is this, That, here Faith is
properly put into the room of perfect Obedience, and is to do what perfect
Obedience was to do under the Law: whereas (say you) Faith is only appointed as
an Instrument to receive and apply the Righteousness of Christ, which is the
alone matter of our Justification before God; and Faith it self is not our
Righteousness, as it would be if it were a Condition, p. 105, 106.

Not to note the weakness and impertinence of this Answer, Reply.
I shall only take notice of what you here allow, and grant, That Faith is
appointed as an Instrument to receive and apply the Righteousness of Christ,
which is the alone matter of our Justification before God. Whence I infer three
Conclusions.

First, That we cannot be justified before God till we believe, except you can
prove, that the unaccepted and unapplied Righteousness of Christ does actually
justify our persons before God.

Secondly, That the justification of our persons before God, is, and must be
suspended (as by a non-performed Condition) until we actually believe. Which
two Conclusions yield up your Cause to my Argument, which you here seem to
oppose.

Thirdly, That hereby you perfectly renounce and destroy your Antinomian Fancy
beforementioned, That if Christ have fulfilled the Law, and purchased Heaven
for men, nothing can remain but to declare this to them, etc. for it seems by
this, they must receive and apply Christ's Righteousness by Faith, or they
cannot be justified (you say not declaratively in their own Consciences, but)
before God. And thus instead of answering, you have confirmed and yielded my
first Argument, and only oppose your own Mistakes, not the sense or force of my
Arguments, in all that you say to it, or the Scriptures produced to prove it.

To my second Argument, Argument 2.
recited p. 94. where I argued from God's Covenant with Abraham, and proved it
to be conditional; and yet by you acknowledged to be a pure Gospel Covenant:
all that you say, is, That you have dispatched that before, in your Discourse
about the Covenant of Circumcision, and therefore will say nothing to it here.

In saying nothing to it here, Reply.
you have said as much as you did before in the place you refer to; and
therefore finding nothing said here or there, I conclude you can say nothing to
it at all.

My third Argument was this. Argument 3.
If all the Promises of the Gospel be absolute and unconditional, then they do
not properly belong to the New Covenant. That cannot properly and strictly be a
Covenant which is not a mutual Compact, and in which there is no restipulation,
nor reobligation: it is a naked Promise, not a Covenant.

To this you answer three things. Answer. p. 113, 114.
In the first branch of your Answer you impudently beg the Question, by saying,
That you have proved already in your Replies to my former Arguments, that the
New Covenant is wholly free and absolute. Upon this absurd Petitio Principii
you make bold to invert my Argument thus in your second Reply. If all the
Promises of the Gospel be wholly absolute and unconditional, they do properly
and truly belong to the New Covenant: But so they are. Therefore, etc. Oh rare
Disputant! In the last place, in opposition to the Sequel of my Major
Proposition, you tell me you will oppose the Judgment of Dr. Owen on Heb. 8.
10. where he says, That a Covenant properly is a Compact or Agreement on
certain terms stipulated by two or more Parties, etc. and that the word (...)
there used, it signifies a Covenant improperly, etc.

If you call this an opposition to the Sequel of my Major, Reply.
either your Brains or mine do want Hellebore. Does he not say the very same
thing I do, that there must be a restipulation in ^ proper Covenant? And as for
the word (...), which (he says) signifies a Covenant improperly, but prop^rly
is a Testamentary Disposition, I fully concur with him therein. But I hope a
Testamentary Disposition may have a Condition in it; to be sure such a one as I
assert Faith here to be, which is the free gift of God; and in this sense I
showed you before where the Doctor yields Faith to be the Condition of the New
Covenant.

My fourth Argument was this. Argument 4.
If all the Promises of the New Covenant be absolute and unconditional, and
have no respect nor relation to any grace wrought in us, or duty done by us;
then the trial of our Interest in Christ by marks and signs of Grace is not our
duty, nor can we take comfort in Sanctification as it is an evidence of our
Justification, etc.

Your Answer is, Answer. p. 120.
That at this rate I may prove quidlibet a quolibet: for it does not follow,
that, because the New Covenant is absolute, therefore it has no respect nor
relation to any Grace wrought in us, nor Duty done by us, or that we may not
justly take comfort in Sanctification as an evidence of our Justification.

If I had a mind to learn the art of proving quidlibet a quolibet, Reply.
and make my self ridiculous to others by such foolish attempts, I know no Book
in the World fitter to instruct me therein, than yours. Certainly you have the
knack of it, and gave us an instance of it but now, in confuting the Sequel of
my Major by an Aldegation out of Dr. Owen, which expressly confirms and
establishes it. But to the Point, I would willingly know how it is possible for
Sanctification to be a true and certain mark and sign of Justification, when
(according to the Antinomian Principle, which you here too much comprobate and
espouse) a man may be justified before he believe, yea, before he is a man,
even from the time of Christ's death, and (as others of them speak) from
eternity. A true mark and sign must be proper to, and inseparable from that
which it signifies. Now if that be true which you said before, That after
Christ's fulfilling of the Law in his own person, etc. nothing can remain but
to declare this to men to incline them to believe and accept it, and to
prescribe in what way they shall come to inherit eternal life. If this be all
that can remain to us, then nothing but the Declarations and Prescriptions of
the Gospel, which are things without us, can remain to be marks and signs of
Justification to us: and consequently all those to whom those Declarations and
Prescriptions are made and given, have therein the marks and evidences of their
Justification. But I am truly weary of such stuff. I am sure the Apostle places
Vocation before Justification, Romans 8. 30. Whom he called, them he justified.
And without an immediate Testimony from Heaven, I know not how to evidence and
prove my Justification, but from, and by my faith, and other parts of
Sanctification; whereby I apprehended and applied the Righteousness of Christ:
if you can prove it from the Declarations and Prescriptions of the Gospel, I
cannot.

My Fifth and last Argument ran thus. Argument 5.
If the Covenant of Grace be altogether absolute and unconditional, requiring
nothing to be done on our part, to entitle us to its benefits; then it cannot
be man's duty in entering Covenant with God, to deliberate the terms, count the
cost, or give his consent by word, or writing, to the terms of this Covenant:
for where there are no terms at all (as in absolute Promises there are none)
there can be none to deliberate. But I showed you, this is man's duty, from
clear and undeniable Scriptures, etc.

You say by way of answer hereunto, Answer. p. 122, 123.
that, you must tell me, that the Scriptures do make a plain distinction
betwixt the New and Everlasting Covenant which God has been pleased to make
with Sinners in Jesus Christ; and the return of that sincere and dutiful
obedience which he requires of us, by way of answer thereunto. (2.) You say,
there are many things, which tho promised in the Covenant, and wrought in us by
the Grace of God; are yet duties indispensably required of us in order to the
participation of the full end of the Covenant in glory: and in respect hereof,
we are indeed to deliberate the terms, count the cost, and give up our selves
solemnly to him with sincere resolutions, etc. But then you thought I had
understood there had been a vast difference betwixt God's Covenant with us, and
our Covenant with God, citing Ezekiel. 16. 59, 60, 61. where God promises to give
them their Sisters for Daughters, but not by their Covenant. And with this you
compare Psalm. 89. My Covenant will I not break; where (you say) we find a plain
distinction betwixt God's Covenant with them, and their duty to God. And
lastly, you say, p. 105. that the want of a due observation of this plain
Scripture-distinction, betwixt God's free and absolute Covenant made with
Sinners in Christ, and our Covenants with God by way of return thereunto; is
the true reason of all our mistakes about the true nature of the
Gospel Covenant, whilst we jumble and confound together that which the
Scriptures do so plainly distinguish.

To your first Answer, I say: Reply.
It is true, the Scriptures do distinguish betwixt Covenant, and Covenant; that
of Works, and that of Grace. It also distinguishes the same Covenant of Grace
for substance, according to its various administrations, into the Old, and New
Covenant. It also distinguishes betwixt the promissory part of the same
Covenant of Grace, and the restipulatory part; not as of two opposite
Covenants, (as you distinguish them, Genesis 17.) but as the just and necessary
parts of one and the same Covenant. It also distinguishes betwixt Vows made by
Men to God in some particular Cases, and the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and
them. But what is all this to your purpose? Or in what point does it touch my
Argument? You desire me to cast mine eye upon Ezekiel. 16. and Psalm. 89. I have
done so, and that impartially; and do assure you, I admire why you produce them
against my Argument. That in Ezekiel. speaks of the enlargement of the Church by
the accession of the Gentiles to it; and the sense of those words seems to me
to be this; That this enlargement of the Church is a gracious addition, or
something beyond what God had ever done in his former dispensations of the
Covenant to that People. And for Psalm. 89. I know not what you meant to produce
it for, unless it be to prove what I never denied, That notwithstanding our
failures in duty toward God, God will still keep his Covenant with us; though
he will visit the Iniquities of his Covenant-p^ople with a Rod.

To your second Answer, That we are to deliberate the terms, and count the
cost, with respect to those duties, which are in order to the participation of
the full end of the Covenant in glory: by which, I suppose, you mean
Self-denial, Perseverance, etc. I have no Controversy with you about that. Our
Question is, Whether there be no deliberations required of, or to be performed
by men, who are not yet in Christ by justifying Faith, but under some
preparatory works toward Faith? And whether at the very time of their closing
with Christ, there be not a consent of the Will unto those terms required of
them? If you say there be (as by the places I alleged it evidently appears
there are) then you yield the point I contend for. If you say they are not
before, or at the time of believing, to consider any terms, or give their
consent to them by word or writing; such an Answer would fly in the very face
of those Scriptures I produced: for then a man may be in covenant without his
own consent: he that deliberates not, consents not; non consentit, qui non
sentit. And therefore you durst not speak it out (for which modesty I commend
you) and so leave me with half an answer, not touching that part, viz.
Antecedent deliberations which were concerned in this Argument. And now let
your most partial Friends judge, Whether from this performance of yours, you
have any just ground for that vain boast which concludes your Answer, viz. That
the Covenants themselves, which those Privileges are bottomed on, are now
repealed, and that there is no room left for any other Argument to infer the
Baptism of Infants: at least, I shall willingly commit it to the judgment of
all intelligent and impartial Readers, Whether Mr. Carry has any real ground in
this performance of his, for such a Thrasonical Conclusion, such a vain and
fulsome Boast?

I find that with like confidence he has also attempted a Reply to Mr. Joseph
Whiston, a Reverend, Learned, and Aged Divine, who has accurately and
successfully defended God's Covenant with Abraham, against Mr. Cox; and doubt
not, if Mr. Carry, and his Party, have but confidence enough to expose it to the
public view, and to adventure the Cause of Infant Baptism upon it, the World
will quickly see an end of this long-continued and unhappy Controversy, which
has vexed the Church of God, and alienated the Affections of good Men: and
that the Wisdom of Providence has permitted and overruled this last Attempt,
to the singular advantage of the Truths of God, and tranquillity of good Men,
whose concernment (at this time especially) is rather to strengthen their
Faith, and heighten their Encouragements from God's gracious Covenant, than to
undermine it, when all things beside it are shaking and tottering round about
them.

And now, Sir, for a Coronis to all those things that have been controverted
betwixt us about the Covenants of God, and the right of Believers Infants to
Baptism resulting from one of them, which I have asserted and argued against
you in my first Answer, and you have silently and wholly passed over in your
Reply, hoping to destroy them all at once, by proving God's Covenant with
Abraham, Genesis 17. to be a pure Adam's Covenant of Works; I judge it necessary,
as matters now lie between us, to give the Reader the grounds and reasons of my
Faith and Practice with respect unto the Ordinance of Infant Baptism, and that
as succinctly and clearly as I can, in the following Theses; which being laid
together by an unprejudiced and considerative Reader, will, I think, amount to
more than a strong probability, That it is the will of God, that the
Infant Seed of Believers ought now to be baptized.

But here I must remind the Reader, P. ^1, 62.
and beg him to review what I have said before in the third Cause of Errors,
That to arrive to satisfaction in this point, requires a due and serious search
of the whole Word of God, with a sedate, rational, and impartial mind;
comparing one thing with another, though they lie scattered at a distance in
the Scriptures; some in the Old Testament, and some in the New. Bring but these
things to an interview, as we do in discovering the change of the Sabbath, and
we may arrive unto a due satisfaction of the Will of God herein. This, I
confess, calls for strength of mind, great sedulity, attention and
impartiality; and yet what man would think all this too much, if it were but to
clear his Childrens Title unto a small Earthly Inheritance? I intend not to
give the Reader here an account of all the Arguments drawn from several
Scripture Topics by the strenuous Defenders of Infants Baptism; but to keep
only to the Arguments drawn from God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. which is
the Scripture mainly controverted betwixt us: You affirming boldly and
dangerously, that Covenant to be no other than an Adam's Covenant of Works; and
I justly denying and abhorring your Position upon the grounds and reasons
before given, which you neither have, nor ever will be able to destroy. Now
that the Reader, who has neither time, nor ability, to read the Larger, and
more elaborate Treatises on this Subject, may (...), in one short view, see the
deduction of Believers Infants right to Baptism from this Gospel Covenant of
God with Abraham, I shall gather the substance of what I contend for, and lay
it as clearly as I can before the Eyes of my Reader in the following Theses;
which being distinctly considered as to the evident truth of each, and then
rationally compared one with the other, he will see how each fortifies other,
and how all together do strongly confirm this Conclusion, That the Infants of
Believers under the Gospel, as they naturally descend from Abraham's Spiritual
Seed, are therefore Partakers at least of the External Privileges of the
visible Church, and therefore ought now to be baptized.

Thesis I.
It has pleased God in all Ages of the World, since man was created, to deal
with his Church and People by way of Covenant, and in the same way he will
still deal with them unto the end of the World.

God might have dealt with us in a supreme way of mere Sovereignty and
Dominion, commanding what Duties he pleased, and establishing his Commands by
what Penalties he had pleased, and never have brought himself under the tie and
obligation of a Covenant to his own Creatures: but he chooses to deal familiarly
with his People, the way of Covenanting being a familiar way, 2 Samuel 7. 19. Is
this the manner of men, O Lord God! or (as Iunius renders it) and that after
the manner of men, O Lord God! It Is a way full of condescending grace and
goodness: he is willing hereby his People should know what they may certainly
expect from their God, as well as what their God requires of them. Hereby also
he will furnish them with mighty Pleas and Arguments in Prayer, succor their
Faith against Temptations; strengthen their hands in duties of Obedience,
sweeten their Obedience to them, and discriminate his own People from the World.

As soon therefore as man was created and placed in Paradise, being made
upright, and thoroughly furnished with Abilities lities perfectly and completely
to obey all the Commands of his Maker; the Lord immediately entered into the
Covenant of Works with him, and with all his natural Posterity in him: and in
this Covenant his standing or falling was according to the perfection and
constancy of his personal Obedience, Genesis 2. 17. Gal. 3. 10. But in this First
Covenant of Works no provision at all was made for his recovery (in case of the
least failure) by his repentance or better obedience; but the Curse immediately
seized both Soul and Body: and Sin by the Fall entering into Man's nature,
totally disabled him to the perfect performance of any one Duty, as that
Covenant required it to be done, Romans 8. 3. nor would God accept any
Repentance, or after-endeavours, in lieu of that perfect Obedience due by Law.
So that from the Fall of Adam, to the end of the World, this Covenant cease
as a Covenant of Life, or a Covenant able to give Righteousness and Life unto
all Mankind for evermore, Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law there
shall no stesh be justified in his sight. Gal. 2. 16. ^y the works of the Law
shall no (...) justified. Gal. 3. 11. But that no Man is justified by the Law
in the sight of God, is evident. And it being so evident, that Righteousness
and Life being for ever impossible to be obtained upon the terms of Adam's
Covenant, it must therefore be a self-evident truth, That since the Fall, God
never did, and to the end of the World he never will open that way or door to
Life (thus blocked up by an absolute impossibility) for the justification and
salvation of any Man.

Thesis II.
Soon after the violation and cessation of this first Covenant, as a Covenant
of Life, it pleased the Lord to open and publish the second Covenant of Grace
by Jesus Christ, the first dawning whereof we find in Genesis 3. 15. where the
Seed is promised which shall bruise the Serpent's head. And though this be but
a very short, and somewhat obscure discovery of Man's Remedy and Salvation by
Christ; yet was it a joyful sound to the ears of God's people, it was even life
from the dead to the Believers of those times. For we may rationally conclude,
That that space of time betwixt the breaking of the first, and making of the
second Covenant; was the most dismal period of time that ever the World did, or
shall see. This Covenant of Grace now took place of the Covenant of Works,
comprehended all Believers in the bosom of it. The Covenant of Works took place
from the time it was made until the fall of Adam, and then was abolished as a
Life-giving Covenant. The second Covenant took place from the time it was made
soon after the fall, and is to continue to the end of the World. And these only
are the two Covenants God has made with Men; the latter succeeding the former,
and commencing from its expiration; but both cannot possibly be in force
together at the same time, and upon the same persons, as coordinate Covenants
of Life and Salvation. For in co-ordination they expel and destroy each other,
Gal. 5. 4. Whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace.
The first Covenant was a Covenant without a Mediator; the second is a Covenant
with a Mediator. Place a Believer under both at once, or put these two
Covenants in co-ordination, and that which results will be a pure
contradiction, viz. That a Man is saved without a Mediator, and yet by a
Mediator. Moreover, if there be a way to Life without a Mediator, there was no
need to make a Covenant in and with a Mediator; nor can those words of Christ
be true, Ioh. 4. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes to the
Father but by me.

The Righteousness of the first Covenant was within Man himself; the
Righteousness of the second Covenant is without Man in Christ. Put these two in
co-ordination, and that which results is as pure a contradiction as the former;
viz. That a Man is justified by a Righteousness within him, and yet is
justified by a Righteousness without him; expressly contrary to the Apostle's
conclusion, Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh
be justified in his sight. It is therefore an intolerable absurdity to place
believers under both these Covenants at the same time; under the Curse of the
first, and Blessing of the second. For whenever the state of any person is
changed by Justification, his Covenant is changed with his State, Col. 1. 13.
It Is as unimaginable that a Believer should thus stand under both Covenants, as
it is to imagine that a Man may be born of two Mothers, Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25.
or a Woman lawfully Married to two Husbands, Romans 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. and more
absurd (if it be possible any thing can be more absurd) to attribute the most
glorious privilege of the Covenant of Grace, (viz. I will be a God to thee, and
to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17. 7.) to the impotent and abolished Covenant of
Works; both which absurdities are asserted in defense of Antipoedobaptism.

And though it be true, that after the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace,
the matter of the first Covenant was represented to the Israelites in the Moral
Law; yet that representation was intended and designed to be subservient, and
added to the Promise, Gal. 3. 19. and so (as an Acute and Learned Divine
Turrettini, Pars 2da. loc. 12. p. 248.
speaks) the very Decalogue or Moral Law it self pertained to the Covenant of
Grace; yea, in some sort flowed out of this Covenant, as it was promulged by
the Counsel of God to be serviceable to it; both anteccdently to lead Men by
the conviction of sin, fear of wrath, and self-despair, to the Covenant of
Grace; and also consequently as it is a pattern of Obedience and Rule of
Holiness. For had it been published as a Covenant designed intentionally to its
primitive use and end, it had totally frustrated the Covenant of Grace.

Thesis III.
Though the primordial Light or first glimmerings of this Covenant of Grace,
were comparatively weak and obscure; yet from the first publication of it to
Adam, God in all Ages has been amplifying the privileges, and heightning the
glory of this second Covenant in all the after expressures and editions of it
unto this day, and will more and more amplify and illustrate it to the end of
the World.

That first Promise, Genesis 3. 15. is like the first small Spring or Head of a
great River, which the farther it runs, the bigger it grows by the accession of
more Waters to it. Or like the Sun in the Heavens, which the higher it mounts,
the more bright and glorious the day still grows.

In that period of time, betwixt Adam and Abraham, we find no token of God's
Covenant ordered therein to be applied to the Infant Seed of Believers. But in
that second Edition of the Covenant to Abraham, the privileges of the Covenant
were amplified, and his Infant Seed, not only taken into the Covenant (as they
were before) but also added to the visible Church, by receiving the token of
the Covenant, which then was Circumcision; and so here is a great addition made
to the visible Church, even the whole Infant Offspring of adult Believers.

From that period, until the coming of the Messiah in the flesh, the Jewish
Church, and their Infant Seed, except only some few Proselytes out of the
Gentile Nations, made up the visible Church of God, and the poor Gentiles were
without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World,
Ephesians. 2. 12. but in this glorious third period, the Covenant again enlarges it
self more than before, and the Privileges of it are no longer limited and
restrained to the Jewish Believers and their Infant Seed; but the Gentiles also
are taken into the Covenant, and the door of Faith was opened unto them, Acts
14. 27. the partition wall was now broken down, which separated the Church from
the Gentile World, Ephesians. 2. 14. This was a glorious enlargement of the Covenant,
and many glorious Prophecies and Promises were fulfilled in it; such as those,
Isa. 11. 10. and 42. 1, 6. 49. 22. 54. 3. 60. 3, 5, 11, 16. 62. 2, etc.

And though the Covenant, as to its external part, seems to have lost ground in
the breaking off of the Jewish Nation from the Church; yet, like the Sea, what
it loses in one place, it gains with advantage upon another; the addition of
many Gentile-Nations to the Church, more than recompenses for the present
breaking off of that one Nation of the Jews. And indeed they are broken off but
for a time; for God shall Graff them in again, Romans 11. 23. This therefore
being the design of God, and steady Course of his Covenant of Grace, more and
more to enlarge it self in all Ages; nothing can be more opposite to the nature
of this Covenant, than to narrow and contract its privileges in its farther
progress, and cut off a whole Species from it, which it formerly took in.

Thesis IV.
It is past all doubt and contradiction, that the Infant Seed of Abraham, under
the second edition of the Covenant of Grace, were taken with their believing
Parents into God's gracious Covenant, had the Seal of that Covenant applied to
them, and were thereby added to the visible Church, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
which was a gracious Privilege of the Covenant superadded to all the former,
and such as sweeps away all the frivolous and groundless cavils and exceptions
of those that object the incapacity of Infants to enter into Covenant with God,
or receive benefit from the external privileges of the visible Church. Nor can
the subtilest enemy to Infants Baptism, give us a convincing reason why the
Infants of Gentile Believers are not equally capable of the same benefits that
the Infants of Jewish Believers were, if they still stand under the same
Covenant that the former stood under; and God has no where repealed the
gracious Grant formerly made to the Infant Seed of his Vovenant People.

Thesis V.
It is to me clear beyond all contradiction, from Romans 11. 17. If some of the
branches be broken off, and thou being a wild Olive Tree, were grafted in
amongst them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the
Olive Tree: I say, I can scarce desire a clearer Scripture Light than this Text
gives, to satisfy my understanding in this case, That when God brake off the
unbelieving Jews from the Church, both Parents and Children together; the
Believing Gentiles, which are as truly Abraham's Seed as they were, Gal. 3. 29.
yea, the more excellent Seed of Abraham, were implanted or ingrafted in their
room, and do as amply enjoy the Privileges of that Covenant, both internal and
external, for themselves, and for their Infant Seed, as ever any Members of the
Jewish Church did or could do.

Our Adversaries in this Controversy do pitifully and apparently shuffle here,
and invent many strange and unintelligible distinctions to be-cloud the light
of this famous Text. What they are, and how they are ba^fled, the Reader will
easily discern from what has already passed betwixt my Antagonist and me, in
p. 108, etc. of my Vindiciae Legis and foederis. It is plain, that Abraham is
the root, the Olive Tree the Visible Church; the Sap and Fatness of the Olive,
are Church Ordinances and Covenant-Privileges; the Gentile Believers, who are
Abraham's Seed according to Promise, are the ingrafted Branches standing in the
place of the natural Branches, and with them, or in like manner as they did,
partaking of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree, that is, as really and
amply enjoying all the immunities, benefits and privileges of the Church and
Covenant (amongst which the initiating Sign was one, and a chief one too) as
ever the natural Branches that were broken off, that is, the Jewish Parents and
their Children, did or might have done. And to deny this (as before was noted)
is to straiten Covenant-privileges in their farther progress.

Thesis VI.
Suitably hereunto we find, that no sooner was the Christian Church
constituted, and the Believing Gentiles by Faith added to it; but the Children
of such Believing Parents are declared to be foederally Holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and
the unbelieving Jews, who were superstitiously fond of Circumcision, and
prejudiced against Baptism as an injurious innovation, are by the Apostle
persuaded to submit themselves to it, Acts 2. 38, 39. assuring them, that the
same Promise, viz. I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee, is now
as effectually sealed to them and their Children by Baptism, as it was in the
former Age by Circumcision: And that the Gentiles which are yet a far off,
whenever God shall call them, shall equally enjoy the same Privilege, both for
themselves and for their Children also.

We also find a Commission given by Christ to the Disciples, Matt. 28. 19, 20.
To disciple all nations, baptizing them, etc. from which Discipleship, Infants
ought not to be excluded, Acts 15. 10. Yea, we find, that as at the institution
of Circumcision, Abraham the Father and Master of the Family was first
circumcised in his own person, and then his whole household, Genesis 17. 23, 24.
Answerably, as soon as any person by Conversion, or public profession of
Faith, became a visible Child of Abraham, that person was first Baptized, and
the whole Household with him or her, Acts 16. 33. 15. It Is unreasonable to put
us upon the proof, that there were Infants in those Houses; it being more than
probable, that in such frequent Baptizing of Households belonging to Believers,
there were some Infants; but if there were none, it is enough for us to prove
from their foederal holiness, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and the extent of God's Promise to
them, Acts 2. 38, 39. If there had been never so many Infants in those
Households, they might and ought to have been Baptized. How the true sense and
scope of the two last mentioned Scriptures are maintained and vindicated
against Mr. Cary's corrupt glosses and interpretations; see my Vindiciae Legis
and Foederis, page 90. 91. We do not lay the stress of Infants Baptism upon
such strictures as the Baptizings of the Households of Believers, or Christ's
taking up in his Arms, and blessing the little ones that were brought to him.
These and many other such things found in the History of Christ, and Acts of
the Apostles, have their use and service to fortify that Doctrine. But if we
can produce no example of any Believer's Infant Baptized, the merit of the
Cause lies not in the matter of fact, but Covenant-right. For our Adversaries
themselves, if we go to matter of fact, will be hard put to it to produce us
one instance out of the New Testament of any Child of a Believing Christian
whose Baptism was deferred, or by Christ or his Apostles ordered to be
deferred, until he attained the years of maturity, and made a personal
profession of Faith himself.

Thesis VII.
The change of the Token and Seal of the Covenant from Circumcision to Baptism,
will by no means infer the change or diversity of the Covenants, especially
when the latter comes into the place, and serves to the same use and end with
the former, as it is manifest Baptism does, from Col. 2. 11, 12. as has been,
I think, sufficiently argued against Mr. Carry 's glosses and exceptions, page
100, 101. of my Vindiciae Legis and Foederis. The Covenant is still the same
Covenant of Grace, though the external initiating sign be changed. For what is
the substantial part of the Covenant of Grace now, but the same it was to
Abraham and his Seed before? Is not this our Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8. 10. I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people? And in what words was
Abraham's Covenant expressed, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between
me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee. This makes
Abraham's Covenant, sealed to him and his Seed, as truly and properly the
Covenant of Grace, as that which Baptism now seals to Believers and their Seed.
The rash ignorance of those that affirm, God may become a People's God in the
way of a special interest, by virtue of the broken and abolished Covenant of
works, rather deserves sharp reprehension, and sad lamentation, than a
confutation; which, nevertheless out of respect to my Friend Mr. Carry, I have
given it in its proper place in this Rejoinder.

I hope by this time I have made it evident, That the defenders of Infants
Baptism, as it is established upon God's Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. have
not so mistaken their Ground, as Mr. Carry has, by his endeavors to carry that
Covenant as an Adam's Covenant of Works, through such a multitude of other
errors and absurdities, as he draws along with it in his way of reasoning.

A Postscript to Mr. Carry.
SIR,
I Resolved not to disturb my mind with your passionate provoking Language, at
least whilst I was busily employed in searching for Reason and Argument (two
scarce Commodities) amongst heaps of vain and fulsome words. Nor will I now
imitate your folly and rudeness, lest I become an Offender, whilst I am to act
the part of a Reprover. When I read your Title, A Just and Sober Reply, and
presently fell in among rude insults, silly evasions, and such inartificial
discourses as follow in your Book; I began to challenge you in my thoughts, for
matching such bad stuff with so fair and lovely a Title: But a second thought
quickly corrected the former; for I considered no Man living could justly
forbid the Marriage betwixt your Book and its Title, since there is not the
least kindred or relation between them.

Had your Answers been just, you would have observed the Rules of a Respondent,
which you have not done: And if they had been sober, you had never been so free
in your reproaches, and sparing in your Arguments as you have been. Is this the
Man, of whom it is said in the Epistle to his Solemn Call, That his Lines are
free from reflection and reproach toward those of the persuasion he contends
with? Is this my old friendly Neighbor? It calls to my mind the Italian
Proverb, God keep us from our Friends, and we will do what we can to keep our
selves from our Enemies. And though you act the part of an Enemy, you shall be
my Friend whether you will or no. If you will not be my Friend out of Love, I
will make you so by a good improvement of your Hatred.

I have been musing with my self, what might be the true cause of all your rage
against my Book; One while I thought it proceeded from want of discretion, that
you were not able to distinguish betwixt an Adversary in a Controversy, and an
Adversary to the Person; but thought every blow that was given to your Error,
must needs be a mortal wound to your Reputation. But, Sir, how close and smart
soever my Discourses against your Errors be, I Am sure they are more full of
civility and respect to you, than such a Reply as you have made deserves: And
if in exposing your Errors, your Reputation be exposed, you must blame them for
occasioning it, and not me.

Some times I thought it an effect of your Policy, that when followed close,
and hard put to it, you endeavored an escape this way. Camero speaking of this
kind of subtilty in his Adversaries, says, Faciunt quod quarundam ferarum
ingenium est, ut foetore and graveolenti^, defectae jam viribus, ac fractae
venatorem abigunt. Some cunning Animals, as Foxes, etc. when pursued at the
heels, drive away both Dogs and Huntsmen with their intolerable stench. And
Hierom long ago told Helvidius, his Adversary, Arbitror te veritate convictum,
ad maledicta converti; being vanquished by Truth, he betook himself to ill
Language. After the same manner you act here, being no longer able to defend
your self by solid and sober ratiocination, you trust to your faculty in
crimination. Bad Causes only drive Men into such refuges.

In a word, I am satisfied nothing but your extravagant zeal for your Idolized
Opinion, could have thrown you into such disingenuous Methods and Artifices as
these. The Ephesians were quiet enough till their Diana began to totter. Your
passionate Outcries signify to me, something is touched to the quick, which you
are more fondly in love with than you ought. When one told Luther what hideous
Outcries his Enemies made against him, and how they reviled him in their
Books: I know by their roaring (said he) that I have hit them right.

You tell me in your Reply, p. 24. That you perceive I have a mighty itch to
find out your Absurdities. I wish, Sir, you were no more troubled with the itch
after them, than I am after the discovery of them. Had I affected such
Employments, I could easily have gathered three to one out of your Book, more
than I did: And have represented those I gathered, much more odiously (and yet
justly) than I did. But Friendship constrained me to handle them (because
yours) as gently as I could.

I might have justly charged you from what you say, p. 174, 175. of your Solemn
Call: where you place all the Believers on Earth, without exception of any,
under the Covenant of Works, as a ministration of Death and Condemnation; and
the severest Penalties of a dreadful Curse: I might thereupon have justly
charged you for presenting to the World such a monstrous Sight as was never
seen before since the Creation, viz. A whole Church of condemned and cursed
Believers. This I might as well have charged upon your Position, and done it no
wrong.

I could tell you from what you say, p. 76. of your Reply, That God does indeed
in the Covenant of Works make over himself to Sinners, to be their God in a way
of special Interest; but it being upon such hard terms, that it is utterly
impossible that way to attain unto life, etc. I could justly have told you,
That these Passages of yours, drop pure nonsense upon the Reader's
Understanding: as if Salvation were impossible to be attained by the same
Covenant wherein God becomes our God, and makes over himself by way of special
interest, to us.

Had I had an itch to expose the Burlesque and ridiculous Stuff, which lies
obvious enough in your Book; I should then have told your Reader, That
according to your Doctrine, how opposite and inconsistent soever the two
Covenants of Works and Grace be, yet the same Subjects, viz. Believers, may at
once, not only stand under them both, but that the same common Seal, viz.
Circumcision, equally ratifies and confirms them both; for you allow in your
Call, p. 205. That it sealed the Covenant of Grace to believing Abraham, and
yet was a Seal of the Covenant of Works, yea the very condition of that
Covenant, as you frequently affirm it to be. Vide, p. 81. of your Reply, and
Passim.

I could as easily and justly have told you, That the most malicious Papist
could scarcely have invented a more horrid Reproach against our famous Orthodox
Protestant Divines, than you (I dare not say maliciously, but) ignorantly have
done, when you charge such men as Mr. Francis Roberts, Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick;
and indeed all that assert the Law, complexly taken, to be an obscurer Covenant
of Grace; that they comprize perfect doing with the consequent Curse for
nonperformance; and believing in Christ unto life and salvation in one and the
same Covenant. This is an intolerable abuse of yours, p. 5. of your Reply. They
generally assert the Law, in that complex sense and latitude you take it, to be
a true Covenant of Grace, though more obscurely administered; and that the
distinction of the Covenants into Old and New, is no parallel distinction with
that of Works and Grace, or Christ's and Adam's Covenant. Your public
recantation of the Injury you have done the very Protestant Cause herein, is
your unquestionable duty, yet scarce a due reparation of the Injury.

In a word, I cannot but look upon it as a discovery of your great weakness,
That when you meet with such a difficulty as poses your Understanding, and you
cannot possibly reconcile with your Notion; as that of Paul's circumcising
Timothy, and you affirming that the very act of Circumcision did in its own
nature oblige all on whom it passed, to the perfect observation of the Law for
Righteousness. You will rather choose to leave the blessed Apostle in a
contradiction to his own Doctrine, than to your vain Notion; For what do you
say, p. 95. of your Reply? That however the case stood in that respect, this is
certain, etc. It also argues weakness in you to insist upon, aggravate, jeer,
and reproach at that rate you do, p. 83. of your Reply. For the mistake, and
misplacing of one Figure, viz. Genesis 12. for Genesis 17. as if the merit of the
whole Cause depended on it.

The like I may say of your charging me with Nonsense, for putting Genesis 17. 7,
8. for Genesis 17. 9, 10. when yet you your self, p. 205. of your Call, tell us,
That Circumcision was appointed as a Sign or Token of the Covenant, Genesis 17. 7,
8, 9. What pitiful Trifles are these to raise such a mighty triumph upon? When
Dureus accused our famous Whitaker for one or two trivial verbal Mistakes,
Whitaker returned him the same Answer I shall give you, Been habet, his in
rebus non vertuntur fortunae Ecclesiae. It Is well the Case of the Church
depends not upon such Trifles.

For a Conclusion; I do seriously w^rn all men to beware of receiving Doctri^es
so destructive to the great Truths of the Gospel as these are. And I do
solemnly profess, I have not designedly strained them, to cast reproach upon
him that published them; But the matters are so plain, that if Mr. Carry will
maintain his Positions, not only my self, but every intelligent Reader, will be
easily able to fasten all those odious Consequents upon him, after all his
Apologies.

Sir, in a word, I dare not say, but you are a good Man; but since I read your
two Books, you have made me Think more than once of what one said of Jonah
after he had read his History, that he was a strange Man of a good Man; yet as
strange a good Man as you are, I hope to meet you with a sounder Head, and
better Spirit, in Heaven.

The Second APPENDIX:
Giving a brief Account of the Rise and Growth of ANTINOMIANISM; the deduction
of the principal Errors of that Sect: With modest and seasonable Reflections
upon them.

THE Design of the following Sheets, cast in as a Mantissa to the foregoing
Discourse of Errors, is principally to discharge and free the Free Grace of God
from those dangerour Errors, which fight against it under its own Colors;
partly to prevent the seduction of some that stagger; and lastly, (though least
of all) to vindicate my own Doctrine, the scope and current whereof has always
been, and shall ever be, to exalt the Free Grace of God in Christ, to draw the
vilest of Sinners^ to him, and relieve the distressed Consciences of
Sin-burthened Christians.

But notwithstanding my utmost care and caution, some have been apt to censure
it, as if in some things it had a tang of Antinomianism: But if my public or
private Discourses be the faithful Messengers of my Judgment and Heart, (as I
hope they are) nothing can be found in any of them casting a friendly aspect
upon any of their Principles, which I here justly censure as erroneous.

Three things I principally aim at in this short Appendix.

1. To give the Reader the most probable Rise of Antinomianism. 2. An Account
of the principal Errors of that Sect. 3. To confirm and establish Christians
against them, by sound Reasons backed with Scripture-authority. And
I.
Of the Rise of Antinomianism.
The Scriptures foreseeing there would arise such a sort of Men in the Church
as would wax wanton against Christ, and turn his Grace into lasciviousness;
has not only precautioned us in general to beware of such Opinions as corrupt
the Doctrine of Free Grace, Romans 6. 1, 2. Shall we continue in sin that grace
may abound? God forbid: but has particularly indigitated and marked those very
Opinions by which it would be abused, and made abundant provision against them;
as namely,

1. All slighting and vilifying Opinions or Expressions of the Holy Law of God,
Romans 7. 7, 12.

2. All Opinions and Principles inclining men to a careless disregard and
neglect of the Duties of Obedience, under pretense of Free Grace and Liberty by
Christ, Iam. 2. Matthew. 25.

3. All Opinions neglecting or slighting Sanctification as the evidence of our
Justification, and rendering it needless or sinful to try the state of our Souls
by the Graces of the Spirit wrought in us, which is the principal scope of the
First Epistle of John.

Notwithstanding, such is the wickedness of some, and weakness of others, that
in all Ages (especially the last past, and present) men have audaciously broken
in upon the Doctrine of Free Grace; and notoriously violated and corrupted it,
to the great reproach of Christ, scandal of the World, and hardening of the
Enemies of Reformation. Behold (says Contzen the Jesuit on Matthew. 24.) the
fruit of Protestantism, and their Gospelpreaching.

Nothing is more opposite to looseness than the Free Grace of God, which
teaches us, That denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Nor can it without
manifest violence be made pliable to such wicked purposes. And therefore the
Apostle tells us, Jude 4. That this is done by turning the Grace of our Lord
into lasciviousness: (...), transferring it, scil. foeda interpretatione, by a
corrupt, abusive interpretation, to such uses and purposes as it abhors. No
such wanton, licentious Conclusions can be inferred from the Gospeldoctrines of
Grace and Liberty, but by wresting them against their true scope and intent, by
the wicked Arts and Practices of Deceivers upon them.

The Gospel makes Sin more odious than ever the Law did, and discovers the
punishment of it in a more severe and dreadful manner, than ever it was
discovered before, Heb. 2. 2, 3. For if the word spoken by Angels were
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward; How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? It shows our
obligations to duty, to be stronger than ever; and our encouragements to
holiness greater than ever; 2 Cor. 7. 1. and yet corrupt Nature will be still
tempting men to corrupt and abuse it. The more luscious the Food is, the more
men are apt to surfeit upon it.

This perversion and abuse of Free Grace and Christian-liberty, is justly
chargeable (though upon different accounts) both upon wicked, and good Men.
Wicked Men corrupt it designedly, that by entitling God to their Sins, they
might sin the more quietly and securely. So the Devil instigated the Heathens
to sin against the Light and Law of Nature, by representing their gods to them
as drunken and lascivious Deities. So the Nicolaitans, and School of Simon, and
after them the Gnostics, and other Heretics, in the very dawning of Gospel
Light and Liberty, began presently to loose the bond of restraint from their
Lusts, under pretense of Grace and Liberty. The Aetiani blushed not to teach,
August. de Haeres. Tom. 6. Haeres. 54.
That Sin, and perseverance in Sin, could hurt the Salvation of none, so that
they would embrace their Principles.

How vile and abominable Inferences the Manichaeans, Valentinians, and
Cerdonites, drew from the Grace and Liberty of the Gospel in the following
Ages, I had rather mourn over, than recite. And if we come down to the 15 th
Century, we shall find the Libertines of those days as deeply drenched in this
Sin, as most that went before them. (...) Libert. (...) 2.
Calvin mournfully observes, That under pretense of Christian-liberty, they
trampled all Godliness under foot. The vile Courses their loose Opinions soon
carried them into, plainly discovered for what intents and purposes they were
projected and calculated: and he that reads the Preface to that Grave and
Learned Mr. Thomas Gataker's Book, entitled, God's Eye upon Israel, will find,
That some Antinomians of our days are not much behind the worst and vilest of
them. One of them cries out, Away with the Law, away with the Law, it cuts off
a man's Legs, and th^n bids him walk. Another says, It Is as possible for Christ
himself to sin, as for a Child of God to sin. That if a man by the Spirit know
himself to be in the state of grace, though he be drunk, or commit murder, God
sees no sin in him: with much more of the same Bran, which I will not
transcribe.

But others there be, whose Judgments are unhappily tainted and leavened with
these loose Doctrines; yet being in the main godly persons, they dare not take
liberty to sin, or live in the neglect of known duties, though their Principles
too much incline that way. But though they dare not, others will, who imbibe
corrupt notions from them; and the renowned Piety of the Authors will be no
antidote against the danger, but make the Poison operate the more powerfully,
by receiving it in such a vehicle. Now it is highly probable such men as these
might be charmed into such dangerous Opinions upon such accounts as these.

(1.) It Is like some of them might have felt in themselves the anguish of a
perplexed Conscience under sin; and not being able to live with these terrors
of the Law, and dismal fears of Conscience, might too hastily snatch at those
Doctrines which promise them relief and ease, as I noted before in the 5th
Cause of my Treatise of Errors. And that this is not a guess at random, will
appear from the very Title Page of Mr. Saltmarsh's marsh's Book of Free Grace,
where (as an inducement to the Reader to swallow his Antinomian Doctrine) he
shows him this curious Bait. It is (says he) an experiment of Jesus Christ
upon one who has been in the bondage of a troubled Conscience at times for the
space of about twelve years, till now upon a clearer discovery of Jesus Christ
in the Gospel, etc.

(2.) Others have been induced to espouse these Opinions from the excess of
their Zeal against the Errors of the Papists, who have notoriously corrupted
the Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace; decried imputed, and exalted
inberent Righteousness above it. The Papists have designedly and industriously
sealed up the Scriptures from the People, lest they should there discover those
sovereign and effectual Remedies which God has provided for their distressed
Consciences, in the riches of his own Grace, and the meritorious Death of
Christ; and so all their Masses, Pilgrimages, Auricular Confessions, with all
their dear Indulgences, should lie upon their hands as stale and cheap
Commodities. Oh, (said Stephen Gardener) let not this gap of Free-grce be
op^ned to the People.

But as soon as the Light of Reformation had discovered the Free Grace of God
to Sinners, (which is indeed the only effectual remedy of distressed
Consciences) and by the same Light the horrid Cheats of the Man of Sin were
discovered; all good men, who were enlightened by the Reformation, justly and
deeply abhorred Popery, as the Enemy of the Grace of God, and true Peace of
Conscience, and fixed themselves upon the sound and comfortable Doctrines of
Justification by Faith through the alone Righteousness of Christ. Mean while
thankfully acknowledging, that they which believe, ought also to maintain good
Works. But others there were, transported by an indiscreet Zeal, who have
almost bended the Grace of God as far too much the other way, and have both
spoken and written many things very unbecoming the Grace of God, and tending to
looseness and neglect of Duty.

(3.) It Is manifest that others of them have been ingulphed, and sucked into
those dangerous Quicksands of Antinomian Errors, by separating the Spirit from
the written Word: If once a man pretend the Spirit without the Scriptures to be
his Rule, whither will not his own deluding Fancies carry him under a vain and
sinful pretense of the Spirit!

In the Year 1528. when Helsar, Traier and Seekler, were confuted by Hallerus;
and their Errors about Oaths, Magistrates, and Paedo-baptism were detected by
him, and by Colvius at Bern, that which they had to say for themselves was,
That the Spirit taught them otherwise than the letter of the Scriptures speaks.
So dangerous it is to separate what God has conjoined, and father our own
Fancies upon the Holy Spirit.

(4.) And it is not unlike, but a comparative weakness and injudiciousness of
mind meeting with a fervent zeal for Christ, and his Glory, may induce others
to espouse such taking and plausible, tho pernicious, Doctrines. They are not
aware of the dangerous Consequences of the Opinions they embrace, and what
looseness may be occasioned by them. I speak not of Occasions taken, but given,
by such Opinions and Expressions. A good Man will draw excellent Inferences of
duty from the very same Doctrine. Instance that of the shortness of time, from
whence the Apostle infers abstinence, strictness and diligence, 1 Cor. 7. 29.
but the Epicure infers all manner of dissolute and licentious practices, Let us
eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die, 1 Cor. 15 22. The best Doctrines are
this way liable to abuse.

But let all good men beware of such Opinions and Expressions as give an handle
to wicked men to abuse the Grace of God, which happily the Author himself dare
not do, and may strongly hope others may not do: but if the Principle will
yield it, it is in vain to think corrupt Nature will not catch at it, and make a
vile use, and dangerous improvement of it.

For example; If such a Principle as this be asserted for a truth before the
World, That men need not fear that any, or all the Sins they commit, shall do
them any hurt; let the Author, or any man in the World warn, and caution
Readers (as the Antinomian Author of that Expression has done) not to abuse
this Doctrine, it is to no purpose. The Doctrine it self is full of dangerous
Consequents, and wicked men have the best skill to infer and draw them forth to
cherish and countenance their Lusts: that which the Author might design for the
relief of the distressed, quickly turns it self into poison in the bowels of
the wicked; nor can we excuse it by saying any Gospel Truth may be thus abused:
for this is none of that number; but a Principle that gives offense to the
godly, and encouragement to the ungodly. And so much as to the rise and
occasion of Antinomian Errors.

II.
In the next place, let us view some of the chief Doctrines commonly called
Antinomian, amongst which there will be found a (...), the radical and most
prolifique Error, from which most of the rest are spawned and procreated.

Error I.
I shall begin with the dangerous mistake of the Antinomians in the Doctrine of
Justification. The Article of Justification is deservedly styled by our
Divines, Articulus stantis, vel cadentis Religionis, the very Pillar of the
Christian Religion.

In two things however I must do the Antinomians right. (1.) In acknowledging,
that though their Errors about Justification be great and dangerous, yet they
are not so much about the substance, as about the mode of a Sinner's
Justification: An Error far inferior to the Error of the Papists, who depress
the Righteousness of Christ, and exalt their own inherent Righteousness in the
business of Justification. (^.) I am bound in charity to believe, that some
among them do hold those Errors but speculatively, whilst the Truth lies nearer
their hearts, and will not suffer them to reduce their own Opinions into
practice. Now as to their Errors about Justification, the most that I have read
do make Justification to be an immanent and eternal act of God; Error 1.
and do affirm, the Elect were justified before themselves, or the World, had a
being. Others come lower, and affirm, the Elect were justified at the time of
Christ's death. With these Dr. Crisp harmonizes.

Error II.
That Justification by Faith is no more but a manifestation to us of what was
really done before we had a being. Hence Mr. Saltmarsh thus defines Faith. It
is (says he) a being persuaded more or less of Christ's love to us; so that
when we believe, that which was hid before, does then appear. God (says
another) cannot charge one sin upon that man, who believes this truth, That God
laid his Iniquities upon Christ.

Error III.
That men ought not to doubt of their Faith, or question, Whether they believe
or no. Nay, That we ought no more to question our Faith, than to question
Christ. Saltm. Of Free Grace, p. 92, 95.

Error IV.
That Believers are not bound to confess Sin, mourn for it, or pray for the
forgiveness of it: because it was pardoned before it was committed; and
pardoned Sin is no Sin. See Eaton 's Honeycomb, p. 446, 447.

Error V.
They say, that God sees no Sin in Believers, whatsoever Sins they commit. Some
of them, as Mr. Town, and Mr. Eaton, speak out, and tell us, That God can see
no Adultery, no Lying, no Blasphemy, no Cozening in Believers: For though
Believers do fall into such Enormities; yet all their Sins being pardoned from
Eternity, they are no Sins in them. Town's Assertions, 96, 97, 98. Eaton's
Honeycomb, chap. 7. p. 136, 137. with others of a more pious Character than
they.

Error VI.
That God is not angry with the Elect, nor does he smite them for their Sins;
and to say that he does so, is an injurious Reflection upon the Justice of God.
This is avouched generally in all their Writings.

Error VII.
They tell us, That by God's laying our Iniquities upon Christ, he became as
completely sinful as we, and we as completely righteous as Christ. Vide Dr.
Crisp, p. 270.

Error VIII.
Upon the same ground it is that they affirm, That Believers need not fear
either their own Sins, or the Sins of others; for that neither their own, nor
any other men's Sins, can do them any hurt, nor must they do any duty for their
own Salvation.

Error IX.
They will not allow the New Covenant to be made properly with us, but with
Christ for us; and that this Covenant is all of it a Promise, having no
Condition on our part. They do not absolutely deny that Faith, Repentance and
Obedience, are Conditions in the New Covenant; but say, They are not Conditions
on our part, but Christ's; and that he repented, believed, and obeyed, for us.
Saltmarsh, of Free Grace, p. 126, 127.

Error X.
They speak very slightingly of trying our selves by marks and signs of Grace.
Saltmarsh often calls it a weak, low, carnal way; but the New England
Antinomians, or Libertines, call it a fundamental Error, to make Sanctification
an evidence of Justification; that it is to light a Candle to the Sun; that it
darkens our Justification; and that the darker our Sanctification is, the
brighter our Justification is. See their Book, entitled, Rise, Reign. Error 72.

In this Breviate, or summary Account of Antinomian Doctrines, I have only
singled out, and touched some of their principal Mistakes and Error, into which
some of them run much farther than others. But I look upon such Doctrines to be
in themselves of a very dangerous nature, and the malignity and contagion would
certainly spread much farther into the World than it does, had not God provided
two powerful Antidotes to resist the malignity.

Viz.
1. The scope and current of Scripture. 2. The experience and practice of the
Saints.
(1.) These Doctrines run cross to the scope and current of the Scriptures,
which constantly speak of all unregenerate Persons (without exception of the
very Elect themselves, during that state) as Children of wrath, even as others,
without Christ, and under condemnation

They frequently discover God's Anger, and tell us his castigatory Rods of
affliction are laid upon them for their Sins.

They represent Sin as the greatest Evil; most opposite to the Glory of God,
and good of the Saints; and are therefore filled with Cautions and Threatenings
to prevent their sinning.

They call the Saint frequently and earnestly, not only to mourn for their Sins
before the Lord; but to pray for the pardon or remission of them in the blood
of Christ.

They give us a far different account of saving Faith, and do not place it in a
persuasion more or less of Christ's love to us, or a manifestation in our
Consciences of the actual remission of our Sins before we had a being; but in
our receiving Christ as the Gospel offers him, for righteousness and life.

They frequently call the People of God to the examination and trial of their
Interest in Christ by marks and signs; and accordingly furnish them with
variety of such marks from the diverse parts or branches of Sanctification in
themselves.

They earnestly, and everywhere, press Believers to strictness and constancy
in the duties of Religion, as the way wherein God would have them to walk. They
infer Duties from Privileges; and therefore the Antinomian Dialect is a wild
note, which the generality of serious Christians do easily distinguish from the
Scripture-stile and Language.

(2.) The Experience and Practice of the Saints recorded in Scripture, as well
as our Contemporaries, or those whose Lives are recorded for our imitation, do
greatly secure us from the spreading malignity of Antinomianism. Converse with
the living, or read the Histories of dead Saints, and you shall find, That in
their Addresses to God, they still bless and praise him for that great and
wonderful change of state which was made upon them when they first believed in
Christ, and on their believing passed from death to life; freely acknowledging
before God, they were before their conversion equal in sin and misery with the
vilest Wretches in the World: They heartily mourn for their daily Sins; fear
nothing more than Sin; no Afflictions in the World go so near their heart as
Sin does. They mourn for the hardness of their hearts, that they can mourn no
more for Sin. They acknowledge the Rods of God that are upon them, are not only
the evidences of his displeasure against them for their Sins; but the fruits of
their uneven walking with him. And that the greatest of their Afflictions is
less than the least of their Iniquities deserve. They fall at their Father's
feet as often as they fall into sin, humbly and earnestly suing for pardon
through the Blood of Christ. They are not only sensible that God sees Sin in
them; but that he sees such, and so great evils in them, as makes them admire
at his patience that they are not consumed in their Iniquities. They find cause
enough to suspect their own sincerity: doubt the truth of their Faith, and of
their Graces: and are therefore frequent and serious in the trial and
examination of their own states by Scripture-marks and signs. They urge the
Commands and Threatenings, as well as the Promises, upon their own hearts, to
promote Sanctification. Excite themselves to duty and watchfulness against Sin.
They also encourage themselves by the rewards of obedience, knowing their
labor is not in vain in the Lord. And all this while they look not for that in
themselves, which is only to be found in Christ: nor for that in the Law, which
is only to be found in the Gospel: nor for that on Earth, which is only to be
found in Heaven. This is the way that they take. And he that shall tell them,
their Sins can do them no hurt, or their Duties do them no good, speaks to
them, not only as a Barbarian, in a Language they understand not, but in such a
Language as their Souls detest and abhor.

Moreover, The zeal and love of Christ, and his Glory, being kindled in their
Souls, they have not patience to hear such Doctrines as so greatly derogate
from his Glory, under a pretense of honoring and exalting him. It wounds and
grieves their very hearts to see the World hardened in their prejudices against
Reformation, and a gap opened to all licentiousness.

But notwithstanding this double Antidote and Security, we find by daily
experience such Doctrines too much obtaining in the professing World. For my
own part, He that searches my Heart and Reins is witness, I would rather choose
to have my right hand wither, and my tongue rot within my mouth, than to speak
one word, or write one line to cloud or diminish the Free Grace of God. Let it
arise and shine in its Meridian Glory. None owes more to it, or expects more
from it, than I do. And what I shall write in this Controversy, is to vindicate
it from those Doctrines and Opinions, which under pretense of exalting it, do
really militate against it. To begin therefore with the first and leading Error.

Error I.
That the Justification of Sinners is an immanent and eternal act of God, not
only preceding all acts of sin; but the very existence of the sinner himself,
and so perfectly abolishing sin in our persons, that we are as clean from sin
as Christ himself, (...), as some of them have spoken. To stop the progress of
this Error, I shall, 1. Lay down the Sentence of the Orthodox about it. 2.
Offer some Reasons for the refutation of it.


(1.) That which I take to be the truth agreed upon, and asserted by sound
reformed Divines touching Gospel-Justification, is by them made clear to the
World in these following Scriptural distinctions of it.

Justification may be considered under a twofold respect or habitude.

1. According to God's Eternal Decree. Or, 2. According to the execution
thereof in time.
(1.) According to God's Eternal Decree and Purpose; and in this respect Grace
is said to be given us in Christ before the World began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. And we
are said to be predestined to the adoption of Children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
1. 5.

(2.) According to the execution thereof in time; So they again distinguish it,
by considering it two ways: 1. In its Impetration by Christ. 2. In its
Application to us.


That very mercy or privilege of Justification, which God from all Eternity,
purely out of his benevolent Love, purposed and decreed for his Elect, was also
in time purchased for them by the death of Christ, Romans 5. 9, 10. where we are
said to be justified by his Blood; and he is said to have made peace through
the Blood of his Cross, to reconcile all things to himself, Col. 1. 20. to be
delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25.
Once more, That God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses, 2 Cor. 5. 19. God the Father had in the death of
Christ a foundation of reconciliation, whereby he became propitious to his
Elect, that he might absolve and justify them. Again,

(2.) It must be considered in its application to us, which application is made
in this Life at the time of our effectual Calling. When an elect Sinner is
united to Christ by Faith, and so passes from Death to Life, from a state of
Condemnation, into a state of Absolution and Favor; this is our actual
Justification, Romans 5. 1. Acts 13. 39. John 5. 24. which actual Justification
is again considered two ways: 1. Universally, and in General, as to the State
of the Person. 2. Specially, and Particularly, as to the Acts of Sin.


As soon as we are received into Communion with Christ, and his Righteousness
is imputed by God, and received by Faith, immediately we pass from a state of
Death and Condemnation, to a state of Life and Justification, and all Sins
already committed, are remitted without Exception or Revocation; and not only
so, but a Remedy is given us in the Righteousness of Christ against Sins to
come; and tho these special and particular Sins we afterward fall into, do need
particular Pardons; yet, by renewed Acts of Faith and Repentance, the Believer
applies to himself the Righteousness of Christ, and they are pardoned

Again, they carefully distinguish betwixt.

1. It Is Application by God to our Persons. And 2. It Is Declaration or
Manifestation in us, and to us.
Which Manifestation or Declaration, is either, 1. Private in the Conscience of
a Believer. Or, 2. Public, at the Bar of Judgment.


And thus Justification is many ways distinguished. And notwithstanding all
this, it is still actus indivisus, an undivided act; not on our part, for it is
iterated in many acts; but on God's part, who at once decreed it; and on
Christ's part, who by one Offering purchased it, and at the time of our
Vocation universally applied it, as to the state of the Person justified; and
that so effectually, as no future Sin shall bring that Person any more under
Condemnation.

In this Sentence or Judgment, the Generality of Reformed Orthodox Divines are
agreed; and the want of distinguishing, (as they according to Scripture have
distinguished) has led the Antinomians into this first Error about
Justification, and that Error has led them into most of the other Errors. That
this Doctrine of theirs, (which teaches that Men are justified actually and
completely, before they have a being) is an Error, and has no solid Foundation
to support it, may be evidenced by these three Reasons.

1. Because it is Irrational. 2. Because it is Unscriptural. 3. Because it is
Injurious to Christ, and the Souls of Men.
It is Irrational to imagine that Men are actually justified, Reas. 1.
before they have a Being, by an immanent Act or Decree of God. Many things
have been urged upon this account to confute and destroy this Fancy, and much
more may be rationally urged against it. Let the following Particulars be
weighed in the Balance of Reason.

1. Can we rationally suppose, that Pardon and Acceptance can be affirmed, or
predicated of that which is not? Reason tells us, Non entis nulla sunt
accidentia; That which is not, can neither be condemned nor justified: But
before the Creation, or before a Man's particular Conception, he was not, and
therefore could not in his own Person be the Subject of Justification. Where
there is no Law, there is no Sin: Where there is no Sin, there is no
Punishment: Where there is neither Sin nor Punishment, there can be no Guilt
(for Guilt is an Obligation to Punishment). And where there is neither Law, nor
Sin, nor Obligation to Punishment, there can be no Justification. He that is
not capable of a Charge, is not capable of a Discharge. What remains then, but
that either the Elect must exist from Eternity, or be justified in time? It Is
true, future Beings may be considered, as in the purpose and decree of God from
Eternity; or as in the Intention of Christ, who died intentionally for the Sins
of the Elect, and rose again for their Justification. But neither the Decree of
God, nor the Death of Christ, takes place upon any Man for his actual
Justification, until he personally exist. For the Object of Justification is a
Sinner actually ungodly, Romans 4. 5. but so no Man is, or can be from Eternity.
In Election, men are considered without respect to Good or Evil done by them,
Romans 9. 11. not so in actual Justification.

2. In Justification there is a Change made upon the state of the Person, Romans
5. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. By Justification men pass from a state of Death
to a state of Life, Ioh. 5. 24. But the Decree or Purpose of God in it self
makes no such actual change upon the state of any person. It has indeed the
nature of an Universal Cause; but an Universal Cause produces nothing without
particulars. If our state be changed, it is not by an immanent act of God:
Hence no such thing does transire. A mere velle non punire, or intention to
justify us in due time and order, makes no change on our state, till that time
come, and the particular Causes have wrought. A Prince may have a purpose or
intention to pardon a Law-condemned Traitor, and free him from that
Condemnation in due time; but whilst the Law that condemned him stands in its
full force and power against him, he is not justified or acquitted,
notwithstanding that gracious intention, but stands still condemned. So is it
with us, till by Faith we are implanted into Christ. It Is true, Christ is a
surety for all his, and has satisfied the debt. He is a common Head to all
his, as Adam was to all his Children, Romans 5. 19. But as the Sin of Adam
condemns none, but those that are in him; so the Righteousness of Christ
actually justifies none but those that are in him; and none are actually in
him, but Believers. Therefore till we believe, no actual change passes, or can
pass upon our state. So that this Hypothesis is contrary to Reason.

As this Opinion is Irrational, Reas. 2.
so it is Unscriptural. For (1.) The Scripture frequently speaks of Remission
or Justification as a future act, and therefore not from Eternity, Romans 4. 23,
24. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; but
for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him, etc. And Gal. 3.
8. The Scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through faith,
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham. The Gospel was preached many years
before the Gentiles were justified: but if they were justified from Eternity,
how was the Gospel preached before their Justification?

(2.) The Scripture leaves all Unbelievers, without distinction, under
condemnation and wrath. The Curse of the Law lies upon them till they believe,
John 3. 18. He that believes on him, is not condemned; but he that believes
not, is condemned already. And Ephesians. 2. 3, 12, 13. The very Elect themselves
were by nature the Children of wrath even as others. They were at that time, or
during that state of nature (which takes in all that whole space betwixt their
conception and conversion) without Christ, without hope, without God in the
World. But if this Opinion be true, that the Elect were justified from
Eternity, or from the time of Christ's death; then it cannot be true, that the
Elect by nature are Children of Wrath, without Christ, without Hope, without
God in the World; except these two may consist together (which is absolutely
impossible) that Children of Wrath, without God, Christ, or Hope, are actually
discharged from their Sins and Dangers by a free and gracious act of
Justification.

But does not the Scripture say, Object.
Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? If none can
charge the Elect, then God has discharged them.

God has not actually discharged them as they are Elect, Sol.
but as they are justified Elect: for so runs that Text, and clears it self in
the very next words, It is God that justifies. When God has actually
justified an Elect Person, none can charge him.

(3.) It Is cross to the Scripture-order of Justification; which places it not
only after Christ's death in the place last cited, Romans 8. 33. but also after
our actual vocation, as is plain, verse. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he
justified, them he also glorified. Is it absurd to place Vocation before
Predestination, or Glorification before Justification? sure then it must be
absurd also to place Justification before Vocation: the one as well as the
other confounds and breaks the Scriptureorder. You may as well say, men shall
be glorified, that were never justified; as say they may be justified, before
they believed or existed. So that you see the notion of Justification from
Eternity, or before our actual existence, and effectual Vocation, is a notion
as repugnant to sacred Scripture, as it is to sound Reason.

And as it is found repugnant to Reason and Scripture, Reas. 3
so it is highly injurious to Jesus Christ, and the Souls of Men.

(1.) It greatly injures the Lord Jesus Christ, and robs him of the glory of
being our Savior. For if the Elect be justified from Eternity, Christ cannot
be the Savior of the Elect, as most assuredly he is: for if Christ save them,
he must save them as persons subject to perishing, either de facto, or de jure.
But if the Elect were justified from Eternity, they could in neither respect be
subject to perishing: for he that was eternally justified, was never condemned,
nor capable of condemnation; and he that never was, or could be condemned,
could never be subject to perishing; and he that never was, nor could be
subject to perishing, can never truly and properly be said to be saved.

If it be said, the Elect were not justified till the death of Christ: I demand
then what became of all them that died before the death of Christ? If they were
not justified, they could not be glorified: for this is sure from Romans 8. 30.
That the whole number of the glorified in Heaven is made up of such as were
justified on Earth: Let men take heed therefore, lest under pretense of
exalting Christ, they bereave him of the glory of being the Savior of his
Elect.

(2.) It bereaves him of another glorious Royalty. The Scripture everywhere
makes our Justification the result and fruit of the meritorious death of
Christ, Romans 3. 24, 25. Romans 8. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Gal. 3. 13, 14. Ephesians. 1.
7. But if men were justified from Eterternity, how is their Justification the
fruit and result of the blood of the Cross? as it plainly appears from these
Scriptures to be. Nay,

(3.) This Opinion leaves no place for the satisfaction of Justice by the Blood
of Christ for our Sins. He did not die, according to this Opinion, to pay our
debts. And here Antinomianism and Socinianism meet, and congratulate each
other. For if there were no debts owing to the Justice of God from Eternity,
Christ could not die to pay them: and it is manifest there were no debts due to
God's Justice from Eternity on the account of his Elect, if the Elect were from
Eternity justified; unless you will say, a person may be justified, and yet his
debts not paid: for all Justification dissolves the obligation to punishment.

If there were any debts for Christ to pay by his Blood, they must either be
his own debts, or the Elect's. To say they were his own, is a blasphemous
reproach to him: and according to this Opinion we cannot say they were the
Elect's; for if they were justified from Eternity, their debts were discharged,
and their bonds cancelled from Eternity. So that this Opinion leaves nothing to
the Blood of Christ to discharge or make satisfaction for.

(2.) And as it has been proved to be highly injurious to the Lord Jesus, so
it is greatly injurious to the Souls of men, as it naturally leads them into
all those wild and licentious Opinions which naturally flow from it, as from
the radical prolifique Error, whence most of the rest derive themselves, as
will immediately appear in the

II. Error.
That Justification by Faith is no more but the manifestation to us of what was
really and actually done before. Or a being persuaded more or less of Christ's
love to us. And that when persons do believe, that which was hid before, does
then only appear to them.

Refutation.
As the former Error dangerously corrupts the Doctrine of Justification, so
this corrupts the Doctrine of Faith; and therefore deserves to be exploded by
all Christians.

That there is a manifestation and discovery of the special love of God, and
our own saving concernment in the death of Christ to some Christians at some
times, cannot be denied. St. Paul could say, Gal. 2. 20, 21. Christ loved him,
and gave himself for him: but to say that this is the justifying act of Faith,
whereby a Sinner passes from condemnation and death, into the state of
righteousness and life; this I must look upon as a great Error, and that for
these following Reasons.

Reason I.
Because there be multitudes of believing and justified Persons in the World,
who have no such manifestation, evidence, or assurance, that God laid their
Iniquities upon Christ, and that he died to put away their Sins; but daily
conflict with strong fears and doubts, whether it be so or no. There are but
few among Believers that attain such a persuasion and manifestation, as
Antinomians make to be all that is meant in Scripture by Justification through
Faith. Many thousand newborn Christians live as the newborn Babe, which
neither knows its own Estate, or Inheritance, to which it is born, Vivit, and
est vitae nescius ipse suae.

A Soul may be in Christ, and a justified state, without any such persuasion or
manifestation, as they here speak of, Isa. 50. 10. And if any shall assert the
contrary, he will condemn the greatest part of the Generation of God's
Children. Now that cannot be the saving and justifying act of Faith, which is
not to be found in multitudes of believing and justified Persons.

But manifestation, or a personal persuasion of the love of God to a Man's
Soul, or that Christ died for him, and all his Iniquities are thereby forgiven
him, is not to be found in multitudes of believing and justified Souls.

Therefore such a persuasion or manifestation is not that saving, justifying
Faith, which the Scripture speaks of.

That Faith which only justifies the person of a Sinner before God, must
necessarily be found in all justified Believers, or else a man may be justified
without the least degree of justifying Faith, and consequently it is not Faith
alone, by which a man is justified before God.

Reason II.
That cannot be the justifying act of Faith, which is not constant and abiding
with the justified Person, but comes and goes, is frequently lost and
recovered, the state of the Person still remaining the same. And such
contingent things are these persuasions and manifestations; they come and go,
are won and lost, the state of the Person still remaining the same. Job was as
much a justified Believer when he complained that God was his Enemy, as when he
could say, I know that my Redeemer lives. The same may be said of David,
Heman, Asaph, and the greatest number of justified Believers recorded in
Scripture. There be two things belonging to a justified state. (1.) That which
is essential and inseparable, to wit, Faith uniting the Soul to Christ. (2.)
That which is contingent and separable, to wit, evidence and persuasion of our
interest in him. Those Believers that walk in darkness, and have no light, have
yet a real special interest in God as their God, Isa. 50. 10. Here then you
find Believers without persuasion or manifestation of God's love to them; which
could never be, if justifying Faith consisted in a personal persuasion,
manifestation or evidence of the love of God, and pardon of Sin to a Man's
Soul. That cannot be the justifying Faith spoken of in Scripture, which a
justified Person may live in Christ without, and be as much in a state of
pardon and acceptance with God, when he wants it, as when he has it. But such
is persuasion, evidence, or manifestation of a man's particular interest in the
love of God, or the pardon of his Sins. Therefore this is not the justifying
Faith the Scripture speaks of.

Reason III.
That only is justifying, saving Faith, which gives the Soul Right and Title to
Christ, and the saving benefits which come by Christ upon all the Children of
God. Now it is not persuasion that Christ is ours, but acceptance of him, that
gives us interest in Christ, and the saving benefits and privileges of the
Children of God, John 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power
to become the sons of God; even to them that believe on his name. So that
unless the Antinomians can prove, that receiving of Christ, and personal
persuasion of pardon, be one and the same thing; and consequently, that all
Believers in the World are persuaded or assured that their sins are pardoned;
and reject from the number of Believers all tempted, deserted, dark, and
doubting Christians; this persuasion they speak of, is not, nor can it be the
act of Faith, which justifies the person of a Sinner before God. That which I
think led our Antinomians into this Error, was an unfound and unwary definition
of Faith, which in their youth they had imbibed from their Catechisms, and
other Systems, passing without contradiction or scruple in those days, which
though it were a mistake, and has abundantly been proved to be so in latter
days; yet our Antinomians will not part with a notion so serviceable to the
support of their darling Opinion of Eternal Justification.

Reason IV.
A Man may be strongly persuaded of the Love of God to his Soul, and of the
pardon of his Sin, and yet have no interest in Christ, nor be in a pardoned
State. This was the Case of the Pharisees and others, Luke 18. 9. Rev. 3. 17.
Therefore this persuasion cannot be justifying Faith. If a persuasion be that
that justifies the persuaded person, then the Pharisees and the Laodiceans were
justified. Oh! How common and easy is it for the worst of Men to be strongly
persuaded of their good condition; whilst humble serious Christians doubt and
stagger? I know not what such Doctrine as this is useful for, but to beget and
strengthen that sin of presumption, which sends down multitudes to Hell, out of
the professing World: For what is more common amongst the most carnal and
unsanctified part of the World, not only such as are merely moral, but even the
most flagitious and profane, than to support themselves by false persuasions
of their good estate? When they are asked, in order to their conviction, what
hopes of Salvation they have, and how they are founded? Their common answer is,
Christ died for Sinners, and that they are persuaded, that whatever he has
done for any other, he has done it for them, as well as others: But such a
persuasion comes not of him that called them, and is of dangerous consequence.

Reason V.
This Doctrine is certainly unfound, because it confounds the distinction
betwixt Dogmatical, and Saving Faith; and makes it all one, to believe an
Axiom, or Proposition, and to believe savingly in Christ to Eternal Life. What
is it to believe, that God laid our iniquities upon Christ, more than the mere
assent of the understanding to a Scripture Axiom or Proposition, without any
consent of the will to receive Jesus Christ as the Gospel offers him? And this
is no more than what any unregenerated person may do; yea, the very Devils
themselves assent to the truth of Scripture Axioms and Propositions, as well as
Men, Iam. 2. 19. Thou believe there is one God, thou do well: the Devils
also believe and tremble. What is this more than a Scripture-Axiom or
Proposition, God laid the iniquity of us all upon Christ, Isa. 53. 6? And yet
(says Dr. Crisp, p. 296.) God cannot charge one Sin upon that Man that
believes this Truth, That God laid his iniquities upon Christ. The assent of
the understanding may be, and often is given to a Scripture Proposition,
whilst the Heart and Will remain carnal, and utterly averse to Jesus Christ. I
may believe Dogmatically, that the iniquities of Men were laid upon Christ,
and persuade my self presumptively, that mine, as well as other Men's, were
laid upon him, and yet remain a perfect Stranger to all saving Union and
Communion with him.

Reason VI.
This Opinion cannot be true, because it takes away the only support that bears
up the Soul of a Believer in times of temptation and desertion.

For how will you comfort such a distressed Soul that says, and says truly, I
have no persuasion that Christ is mine, or that my sins are pardoned; but I am
heartily willing to cast my poor sin-burthened Soul upon him, that he may be
mine; I do not certainly know that he died intentionally for me, but I lie at
his feet, cleave to him, wait at the door of hope; I stay and trust upon him,
though I walk in darkness, and have no light. Now let such Doctrine as this be
Preached to a Soul in this condition, (and we may be sure it is the condition of
many thousands belonging to Christ) I say, bring this Doctrine to them, and
tell them, That unless they be persuaded of the Love of God, and that God laid
their iniquities on Christ, except they have some manifestation that their
persons were justified from eternity, their accepting of Christ, consent of
their Wills, waiting at his Feet, etc. signifies nothing; if they believe not
that their particular sins were laid upon Christ, and are pardoned to them by
him, they are still unbelievers, and have no part or portion in him. Whatever
pretenses of spiritual comfort and relief the Antinomian Doctrine makes, you
see by this, it really deprives a very great, if not the greatest number of
God's people of their best and sweetest relief in days of darkness and
spiritual distress. So that this Doctrine, which makes manifestation and
assurance the very essence of justifying faith, appears hereby to be both a
false and very dangerous Doctrine. And yet there is as much or more danger to
the Souls of Men in their

III. Error.
That Men ought not to doubt of their Faith, or question whether they believe
or no. Nay, That they ought no more to question their Faith, than to question
Christ.

Refutation.
What an easy way to Heaven is the Antinomian way? Were it but as true and
safe to the Soul, as it is easy and pleasing to the Flesh, who would not
embrace it? What a charm of the Devil is prepared in these two Propositions? Be
but persuaded more or less of Christ's Love to thy Soul (says Mr. Saltmarsh)
and that is justifying Faith. Here Is a snare of the Devil laid for the Souls of
Men. And then (2.) to make it fast and sure upon the Soul, and effectually to
prevent the discovery of their Error, tell them they need no more to doubt or
question their Faith, than to question Christ, and the work is done to all
intents.

Now that this is an Error, and a very dangerous one, will appear by the
following Reasons.

Reason I.
The questioning and examining of our Faith, is a commanded Scriptureduty, 2
Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own
selves, etc. And 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give diligence to make your calling and election
sure. Let him that ^nketh he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
The second Epistle of John, verse 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not the
things which we have wrought: With multitude of other Scriptures, recommending
holy jealousy, serious self-trial and examination of our Faith, as the
unquestionable duties of the people of God. But if we ought to question our
Faith no more than we ought to question Christ, away then with all
self-examination, and diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; for
where there is no doubt nor danger, there is no place nor room for examination,
or further endeavors to make it surer than it is. How do you like this
Doctrine, Christians? How many be there among you, that find no more cause to
question your own faith or interest in Christ, than you do to question whether
there be a Christ, or whether he shed his Blood for the remission of any Man's
sins.

Reason II.
This is a very dangerous Error, and it is the more dangerous, because it
leaves no way to recover a presumptuous Sinner out of his dangerous mistakes;
but confirms and fixes him in them, to the great hazard of his eternal ruin. It
cuts off all means of conviction or better information, and Nails them fast to
the carnal state in which they are. According to this Doctrine it is impossible
for a Man to think himself something, when he is nothing; or to be guilty of
such a Paralogism and cheat, put by himself upon his own Soul, Iam. 1. 22. this
in effect bids a Man keep on right or wrong; he is sure enough of Heaven, if he
be but strongly persuaded that Christ died for him, and he shall come thither
at last. Certainly this was not the Counsel Christ gave to the self-deceived
Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17, 18. but instead of dissuading them from self-jealously
and suspicion of their condition, whether their Faith and State were safe or
not, he rather counsels them to buy Eye Salve, that is, to labor after better
information of the true state and condition they were in, and not cast away
their Souls by false persuasions and vain confidences.

Reason III.
This Doctrine cannot be true, because it supposes every persuasion, or strong
conceit of a Man's own heart, to be as infallibly sure and certain, as the very
fundamental Doctrine of Christianity. No truth in the World can be surer than
this, That Jesus Christ died for Sinners. This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all accep^ation, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a Foundation stone, a tried, precious
Cornerstone, a sure foundation laid by God himself, Isa. 28. 16. and shall
the strong conceits and confidences of Men's hearts vye and compare in point of
certainty with it? As well may probable and merely conjectural Propositions
compare with Axioms that are self-evident, or demonstrative Arguments, that
leave no doubts behind them. Know we not, that the heart is deceitful above all
things, the most notorious cheat and impostor in the World, Ier. 17. 9? Does it
not deceive all the formal hypocrites in the World in this very point? And
shall every strong conceit and presumptuous confidence, begotten by Satan upon
a deceitful heart, and nursed up by self-love, pass without any examination or
suspicion for as infallible and assured a truth, as that Jesus Christ came into
the World to save sinners? The Lord sweep that Doctrine out of the World by
Reformation, which is like to sweep so many Thousand Souls into Hell by a
remediless Self-deception.

Error IV.
The fourth Antinomian Error before mentioned, was this, That Believers are not
bound to confess their sins, or pray for the pardon of them; because their sins
were pardoned before they were committed; and pardoned sin is no sin.

Refutation.
If this be true Doctrine, then it will justify and make good such Conclusions
and Inferences as these which necessarily flow from it: viz.

1. That there is no Sin in Believers. 2. Or if there be, the evil is very
inconsiderable. Or, 3. Whatever evil is in it, it is not the will of God that
they should ^ither confess it, mourn over it, or pray for the remission of it:
Whatever he requires of others, yet they need take no notice of it, so as to
afflict their hearts for it; God has exempted them from such concernments:
There Is nothing but joy to a Believer, says Mr. Eaton. But neither of these
conclusions are either true or tolerable; therefore neither is the principle so
which yields them.
(1.) It is not true or tolerable to affirm, that there is no Sin in a
Believer, 1 Ioh. 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us. There Is not a just Man upon earth, that does good
and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. In many things we offend all, James 3. 2. The
Scriptures plainly affirm it, and the universal experience of all the Saints
sadly confirms it. It Is true, the Blood of Christ has taken away the guilt of
Sin, so that it shall not condemn Believers; and the spirit of Sanctification
has taken away the dominion of Sin, so that it does not reign over Believers;
but nothing, except Glorification, utterly destroys the existence of Sin in
Believers. The acts of sin are our acts, and not Christ's, and the stain and
pollution of those sinful acts, are the burdens and infelicities of Believers,
even in their justified State. Dr. Crisp indeed, p. 270, 271. calls that
objection (I suppose he means distinction betwixt the guilt of Sin and Sin it
self) a simple objection, and tells us, the very Sin it self, as well as the
guilt of it, passed off from us, and was laid upon Christ: So that speaking of
the Sins of Blasphemy, Murder, Theft, Adultery, Lying, etc. From that time
(says he) that they were laid upon Christ, thou ceasest to be a transgressor.
If thou have part in the Lord Christ, all these transgressions of thine become
actually the transgressions of Christ. So that now thou are not an Idolater, or
Persecutor, a Thief, a Murderer, and an Adulterer, thou art not a sinful
person; Christ is made that very sinfulness before God, etc. Such expressions
justly offend and grieve the hearts of Christians, and expose Christianity to
scorn and contempt. Was it not enough that the guilt of our sin was laid on
him, but we must imagine also, that the thing it self, Sin, with all the
deformity and pollution should be essentially transferred from us to Christ?
No, no. After we are justified, sin dwells in us, Romans 7. 17. warreth in us,
and brings us into captivity, ver. 23. Burdens and oppresses our very Souls,
v. 24. Methinks I need not stand to prove what I should think no sound
experienced Christian dares to deny, that there is much sin still remaining in
the persons of the justified. He that dares to deny it, has little
acquaintance with the nature of Sin, and of his own Heart.

(2.) It is neither true nor tolerable to say there is no considerable evil in
the sins of Believers, deserving a mournful confession or petition for pardon.
The desert of Sin is Hell; it is an artifice of Satan to draw men to Sin by
persuading them there is no great evil in it; but none except Fools will
believe it. Fools, indeed, make a mock of Sin; but all that understand either
the intrinsic evil of it, or the sad and dismal effects produced by it, are
far from thinking it a light or inconsiderable evil. The sins even of Believers
greatly wrong and offend their God, Psalm. 51. 4. and is that a light thing with
us? They interrupt and clog our Communion with God, Romans 7. 21. They grieve the
good Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. Certainly these are no inconsiderable
mischiefs.

(3.) Now if there be sin in Believers, and so much evil in their sins (neither
of which any sober Christian will deny) then undoubtedly it is their duty to
confess it freely, mourn for it bitterly, and pray for the pardon of it
earnestly, unless God have any where discharged them from those Duties, and
told them these are none of their concernments, and that he expects not these
things from justified persons; but that these are Duties properly and only
belonging to other Men. But on the contrary, you find the whole current of
Scripture running strongly and constantly in direct opposition to such idle and
sinful notions. For first,

(1.) He has plainly declared it to be his will, that his people should
confess their sins before him, and strongly connected their Confessions with
their Pardons, 1 John. 5. 9. and frequently suspends from them the comfortable
sense of forgiveness, till their Hearts be brought to this duty, Psalm. 32. 5.
compared with verse. 3. 4. the more to engage them to this duty by the sensible
ease and comfort attending and following it.

(2.) He also enjoins it upon them, That they mourn for their Sins, Isa. 22.
12. expresses his great delight in contrition and brokenness of spirit for sin,
Isa. 66. 2. To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit. Christ himself pronounces a blessing upon them that mourn,
Matt. 5. 4. Justified Paul mournfully confesses his former blasphemies,
persecutions and injuries done against Christ, 1 Timothy 1. 13. So did Ezra,
Daniel, and other eximious Saints.

Yes, say some, Object.
they did indeed confess their sins committed before their justification, but
not their after-sins.

According to Antinomian Principles, Reply.
I would demand, If all the Elect were justified from Eternity, what sins any
of them could confess which they had committed before their Justification? Or
if they were justified from the time of Christ's death, what were the Sins any
of us have to confess who had not a being, and therefore had not actually
sinned long after the death of Christ? But I hope none will deny that the
mournful complaints the Apostle makes for Sin, Romans 7. 23, 24. were after he
was a sanctified and justified person.

(3.) It is not the Will of Christ to exempt any justified person upon Earth,
from the Duty of Praying frequently and fervently for the remission of his
sins. This the most eminent Saints upon Earth have done. The greatest
favorites of Heaven have freely confessed and heartily prayed for the
remission of sin, Dan. 9. 4, 19. And that the Gospel gives us no exemption from
this Duty, appears by Christ's injunction of it upon all his people Matt. 6. 12.

Error V.
To give countenance to the former Error, they say, That God sees no sin in
Believers, whatsoever sins they commit; and seek a covert for this Error from
Numb. 23. 21. and Ier. 50. 20. In the former place it is said by Balaam, He
has not beheld inquity in Jacob, nor seen perverseness in Israel. And in the
other place it is said, In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins
of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them, whom I reserve.

Refutation.
Now that this Opinion of our Antinomians is Erroneous, will appear four ways.

1. By its repugnancy to God's Omniscience. 2. By its inconsistency with his
Dispensations. 3. By its want of a Scripture-foundation. 4. By its
contradictoriness to their other Principles.
It Is true, and we thankfully acknowledge it, that God sees no Sin in
Believers, as a Judge sees Guilt in a Malefactor, to condemn him for it; that is
a sure and comfortable truth for us: but to say he sees no Sin in his Children
as a displeased Father to correct and chasten them for it, is an Assertion
repugnant to Scripture, and very injurious to God. For,

(1.) It Is injurious to God's Omniscience, Psalm. 139. 2. Thou (says holy
David) know my down-sitting, and my uprising, and understandest my thoughts
of afar off, and art acquainted with all my ways. Job 28. 24. He looks to the
ends of the Earth, and sees under the whole Heavens. Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of
the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good. Psalm. 33. 14, 15.
From the place of his habitation he looks upon all the Inhabitants of the
Earth; he fashioneth their hearts alike, he considers all their works. He
that denies that God sees his most secret Sins, therein in consequentially
denies him to be God.

(2.) This Assertion is inconsistent with God's Providential Dispensations to
his People. When David, a justified Believer, had sinned against him in the
matter of Vriah, it is said, 2 Samuel 11. 27. The thing that David had done,
displeased the Lord: and as the effect of that displeasure, it is said, Chap.
12. 15. The Lord struck the Child that Uriah's Wife bare unto David, and it was
very sick. Among the Corinthians some that should not be condemned with the
World, were judged and chastened of the Lord for their undue approaches to his
Table, 1 Cor. 11. 32. Now I would ask the Antinomian these two Questions. (1.
Qu.) Whether it can be denied, that David under the Old Testament, and these
Corinthians under the New, were justified Persons; and yet the former stricken
by God in his Child, with its sickness and death; and the latter in like manner
smitten by God in their own persons; and both for their respective sins
committed against God; and yet God saw no sin in them? Did God smite them for
sin, and yet beheld no sin them? Beware lest in ascribing such strokes to god,
you strike at once both at his Omnisciency and Justice. (2. Qu.) How God upon
Confession and Repentance can be said to put away his People's sins (as Nathan
there assures David he had done) when in the mean time he saw no sin in him,
either to chastise him for, or to pardon in him? Do you think that God's
A^flictions or Pardons are blindfold Acts, done at random? how inconsistent is
this with Divine Dispensations?

(3.) This Opinion is altogether destitute of a Scripture-foundation: it is
evident it has none in the only places alleged for it. It has no footing at
all in Numb. 23. 21. Grave and learnned Gataker has learnedly and
industriously vindicated that Scripture from this abuse of it by Antinomians,
in his Treatise upon that Text, entitled, God's Eye upon his Israel; where
after a learned and critical search of the Text, he tells us, it sounds
word for word thus from the Original: He has not beheld wrong against Jacob,
nor has he seen grievance against Israel: So that the meaning is not, That God
did not see sin in Israel, but that he beheld not with approbation the wrongs
and injuries done by others against his Israel; and shows at large by diverse
solid Reasons, why the Antinomian sense cannot be the proper sense of that
place, it being cross to the main tenor of the Story, and truth of God's Word,
which shows, that God often complained of their Sins, often threatened to avenge
them; yea, did actually avenge them by destroying them in the Wilderness; nay,
Balaam himself, who uttered these words unto Balak, did not so understand them,
as appears by the advice he gave to Balak, to draw them into sin, that thereby
God might be provoked to withdraw his protection from them.

And for Ier. 50. 20. it makes nothing to their purpose. Many expound the sin
there sought after, and not found, to be the Sin of Idolatry, which Israel
should be purged from by their Captivity, according to Isa. 27. 9. But the
generality of sound Expositors are agreed, That by the not finding of Israel's
and Judah's Sin, is meant no more, but his not finding those Bonds or
Obligations against them to eternal punishment, which their Sins had put them
under.

(4.) In a word, This Opinion clashes with their other Principles. For they
say, That though there was pardon and remission under the Old Covenant (which
they allowed to be a Covenant of Grace) yet it was but gradatim and
successively, as they offered Sacrifices. If a man had sinned ignorantly, until
he brought a Sacrifice, his sin lay upon him, it may be a week, a months
distance between, before they could have their pardon. Vide Dr. Crisp of the
two Covenants, p. 256, 257. Now I demand, If this were the state and case of
all God's Israel under the Old Testament, Why do these men affirm that God can
see no sin in a Believer? and why do they expound the words of Balaam so
contradictorily to this their other Opinion? For they will not deny but God
sees unpardoned Sins in all; and here is a week, or month, or more time,
allowed between the commission and remission of their Sin. And so much of the
5th Antinomian Error.

Error VI.
That God is not angry with the Elect, nor does he smite them for their Sins;
and to say that he does so, is an injurious reflection upon the Justice of God,
who has received full satisfaction for all their Sins from the hand of Christ.

There are several Mistakes and Errors in these Assertions; and I suppose our
Antinomians were led into them, (1.) By their abhorrence of the Popish
Doctrine, which errs more dangerously in the other extreme: for they wickedly
assert our Sufferings to be satisfactory for our Sins, which is the ground of
Popish Penances, and voluntary Self-castigations. (2.) From a groundless
apprehension, That God's Corrections of us for our Sins, are inconsistent with
the fullness of Christ's satisfaction for them. Christ having paid all our
Debts, and dissolved our Obligations to all punishment, it cannot consist with
the Justice of God to lay any Rod upon us for our Sins after Christ has born
all that our Sins deserved.

This mistake of the end of Christ's death, occasions them to stumble into the
other Mistakes: they imagine that Christ's Satisfaction abolished God's hatred
of Sin in Believers. But this cannot be; God's antipathy to Sin, can never be
taken away by the Satisfaction of Christ, though his hatred to the Persons of
the redeemed be: for the hatred of Sin is founded in the unchangeable Nature of
God; and he can as soon cease to be holy, as cease to hate Sin, Hab. 1. 13. Nor
was Christ's death ever designed to this end: though Christ has satisfied for
the Sins of Believers, God still hates Sin in Believers. His hatred to their
Sins, and love to their Persons, are not inconsistent. As a man may love his
Leg or Arm, as they are Members of his own Body, and notwithstanding that love,
hate the Gangrene which has taken them; and lance or use painful corrosives
for the cure of them.

Neither do our Antinomians distinguish as they ought, betwixt vindictive
Punishments from God, the pure issues and effects of his Justice and Wrath
against the Wicked; and his Paternal Castigations, the pure issues of the Care
and Love of a displeased Father. Great and manifold are the differences betwixt
his vindictive Wrath upon his Enemies, and the rebukes of the Rod upon his
Children. Those are Legal, these Evangelical. Those out of wrath and hatred,
these out of love. Those unsanctified, but these blessed and sanctified to
happy ends and purposes to his People. Those for destruction, these for
salvation.

To narrow the matter in Controversy as much as we can, I shall lay down three
Concessions about God's Corrections of his People.

Concession I.
We cheerfully and thankfully acknowledge the perfection and fullness of the
satisfaction of Christ for all the Sins of Believers: and with thankfulness do
own, that if God should cast all, or any of them, into an ocean of temporal
Troubles and Distresses; in all that sea of Sorrow, there would not be found
one drop of vindictive Wrath. Christ has drunk the last drop of that Cup, and
left nothing for Believers to suffer by way of satisfaction.

Concession II.
We grant also, That all the Sufferings of Believers in this World, are not for
their Sins; but some of them are for the prevention of Sin, 2 Cor. 12. 7. some
for the trial of their Graces, Iam. 1. 2, 3. some for a confirming testimony to
his Truths, Act. 5. 41. Such Sufferings as these have much heavenly comfort
concomitant with them.

Concession III.
We do not say, That God's displeasure with his People for Sin, evidenced
against them in the smartest rebukes of the Rod, is any argument that God's
love is turned into hatred against their Persons: no, no, his love to his
People is unchangeable. Having loved his own, he loved them to the end, John
13. 1. yet notwithstanding all this, three things are undeniably clear, and
being thoroughly apprehended, will end this Controversy.

1. That God lays his correcting Rod in this World on the Persons of Believers.
2. That this Rod of God is sometimes laid on them for their Sins. 3. That these
Fatherly Corrections of them for their Sins, are reconcilable to, and fully
consistent with his Justice, completely satisfied by the Blood of Christ for
all their Sins.
1. That God lays his correcting Rod in this World upon the persons of
Believers. This no man can have the face to deny that believes the Scriptures
to be the Word of God, or that the Troubles of good men in this life fall not
out by casualty, but by the counsel and direction of Divine Providence. He that
denies the hand of God to be upon the Persons of Believers in this life in the
way of painful Chastisements and Sufferings, must either ignorantly, or
wilfully, overlook that Scripture, Heb. 7. 8. What Son is he whom the Father
chasteneth not? but if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers,
then are ye Bastards, and not Sons. Nor will any sober Christian deny these
Troubles of Believers to be the effects of God's governing-Providence in the
World, or once imagine or affirm them to be mere Casualties and Contingences:
for affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring out of
the ground, Job 5. 6. In what Eutopia does that good man live upon Earth, that
feels not the painful Rod of God upon himself, nor hears the sad laments and
moans of other Christians under it! This sure is undeniable, that the Rod of
God is everywhere upon the Persons and Tabernacles of the Righteous; and if
any doubt it, his own sense and feeling may in a little time give him a painful
demonstration of it.

2. And for the second, That this Rod of God is sometimes laid upon Believers
for their Sins, methinks no sober modest Christian in the World should doubt,
or deny it, when he considers, That 1. God himself has so declared it. 2. The
Saints in all Ages have freely confessed it to be so.


1. God himself has fully and plainly declared it to be so, 2 Samuel 12. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do
evil in his sight? now therefore the Sword shall never depart from thy House,
etc. Here Is the Sword, a terrible and painful Evil, upon David's House, a man
after God's own heart, and that expressly for his Sin in the matter of Vriah. So
Moses, one of the greatest Favorites of Heaven, for his sinful shifting of the
Lord's Work, Exodus 4. 13, 14. The anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses:
For the multitude of thine iniquities, because thy sins were increased, I have
done these things unto thee, says God to his own Israel, Ier. 30. 15. To
instance in all the Declarations made by God himself in this case, were to
transcribe a great part of both Testaments.

2. And as God has declared the Sins of his People to be the provoking causes
of his rods upon them; so they have freely and ingenuously confessed and
acknowledged the same, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Wherefore does the living man complain?
a man for the punishment of his Sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord. This was spoken by Jeremy in the name of the whole captive
Church. So Psalm. 38. 3, 5. There is no soundness in my flesh (says David)
because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my
Sin. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness. And were it
not an hideous and unaccountable thing to hear any Child of God, under his Rod,
to stand upon his own justification, and say, Lord, my Sins have not deserved
this at thy hand, nor is it justice in thee thus to chastise me after thou have
received satisfaction for all my Sins from the hand of Christ. Would it not
look like an horrid Blasphemy, to hear the best man in the World disputing and
denying the Justice of God in the troubles he lays him under? For my own part,
let the Lord lay on as smartly as he will upon me, I desire to follow the holy
Patterns and Presidents recorded in Scripture for my imitation, and to say with
the People of God, Ezr. 9. 13. Thou have punished me less than mine iniquities
deserve. And Mica 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. And he that refuses so to do, gives little evidence of the
Spirit of Adoption in him, but a very clear evidence of the pride and ignorance
of his own heart. Job indeed stiffly stood upon his own vindication; but that
was when he had to do with men, who falsely charged him, laying those Sins as
the causes of his trouble, which he was innocent of, Job 22. 5, 6. But when he
had to do with God, he disputes no more, but says, Behold, I am vile, what
shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. q. d. I have done,
Father, I have done; Whether these Chastisements be for my Sins or no, sure I
am, my Sin not only deserves all this, but Hell it self: Thou art holy, but I
am vile.

3. Nor can it at all be doubted, but that these Fatherly Corrections of the
Saints for their Sins, are reconcilable to, and fully consistent with his
Justice, satisfied by the Blood of Christ for all their Sins. For (1.) If it
were not so, the just and righteous God would never have inserted such a clause
of reservation in his gracious Covenant with his People, to chasten them as he
saw need, after he had taken them into the Covenant, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33.
If they transgress, he will visit their Transgressions with a Rod, and their
Iniquity with Stripes; nevertheless (says he) my loving kindness will I not
take away. That [ Nevertheless] clearly proves the consistency of his stripes
for sin, with his loving kindness to his People, and with Christ's satisfaction
for their Sins. (2.) If this were not consistent with the Justice of God, to be
sure he would never single them out to spend his Rods upon, rather than others.
It Is most certain the holiest men have most lashes in this life. Asaph said,
Psalm. 73. 12, 14. The ungodly prosper in the World, but he was chastned every
morning. And verse. 5. The Wicked are not in trouble as other men. 1 Pet. 4. 17.
Judgment must begin at the House of God; and if Piety would give men an
exemption from all troubles, pains, and chastisements, then men might discern
love or hatred by the things that are before them, contrary to Eccl. 9. 1, 2.
Neither could those that are in Christ suffer the painful Agonies of Death
because of sin, expressly contrary to Paul, Romans 8. 10. And if Christ be in you,
the Body is dead because of sin. (3.) In a word, As Christ never shed his Blood
to extinguish or abolish God's displeasure against sin in whomsoever it be
found, so he never shed it to deprive his People of the manifold blessings and
advantages that accrue to them by the Rods of God upon them. It was never his
intent to put us into a condition on Earth, that would have been so much to our
loss. So then, if the hand of God be upon his People for sin, and consistently
enough with his Justice, it must be an Error to say, God smites not Believers
for their sins, and it would be injustice in him so to do, which is their 6th
Error.

Error VII.
They tell us, That by God's laying our Iniquities upon Christ, he became as
completely sinful as we, and we as completely righteous as Christ. That not
only the guilt and punishment of sin was laid upon Christ; but simply the very
faults that men commit, the transgression it self became the transgression of
Christ: Iniquity it self, not in any figure, but plainly sin it self, was laid
on Christ: and that Christ himself was not more righteous, than this Person is,
and this Person is not more sinful than Christ was.

Refutation.
These two Propositions will never go down with sound and Orthodox Christians.
The first sinks and debases Christ too low, the other exalts the sinful
Creature too high. The one represents the pure and spotless Lord Jesus as
sinful: the other represents the sinful Creature as pure and perfect: and both
these Propositions seem evidently to be built upon these two Hypotheses. (1.)
That the righteousness of Christ is subjectively and inherently in us, in the
same fullness and Perfection it is in Christ: grant that, and then it will
follow indeed, That Christ himself is not more righteous than the Believer is.
(2.) That not only the guilt and punishment of sin was laid on Christ by way of
imputation; but sin it self, the very transgression, or sinfulness it self, was
transferred from the Elect to Christ: and that by God's laying it on him, the
sinfulness or fault it self was essentially transfused into him; and so sin it
self did transire a subjecto in subjectum. Grant but this, and it can never be
denied but Christ became as completely sinful as we.

But both these Hypotheses are not only notoriously false, but utterly
impossible, as will be manifested by and by; But before I come to the
Refutation of them, it will be necessary to lay down some Concessions to clear
the Orthodox Doctrine in this Controversy, and narrow the matter under debate,
as much as may be.

(1.) And first we thankfully acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ to be the
Surety of the New Testament, Heb. 7. 22. and that as such, all the Guilt and
Punishment of our Sins, was laid upon him, Isa. 53. 5, 6. That is, God imputed,
and he bare it in our room and stead. God the Father, as Supreme Lawgiver, and
Judge of all, upon the Transgression of the Law, admitted the Sponsion or
Suretiship of Christ, to answer for the sins of men, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. And for
this very end he was made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. And that Christ
voluntarily took it upon him to answer as our Surety, whatsoever the Law could
lay to our charge; whence it became just and righteous that he should suffer.

(2.) We say, That God by laying upon, or imputing the Guilt of our Sins to
Christ, thereby our Sins became legally his; as the Debt is legally the
Sureties Debt, tho he never borrowed one farthing of it: Thus God laid, and
Christ took our Sins upon him, tho in him was no sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin (i. e.) who was clean and altogether
void of sin.

(3.) We thankfully acknowledge, that Christ has so fully satisfied the Law for
the sins of all that are his, that the Debts of Believers are fully discharged,
and the very last mite paid by Christ. His Payment is full, and so therefore is
our Discharge and Acquittance, Romans 8. 1, 31. And that by virtue hereof the
Guilt of Believers is so perfectly abolished, that it shall never more bring
them under Condemnation, John 5. 24. And so in Christ they are without fault
before God.

(4.) We likewise grant, That as the Guilt of our Sins was by God's Imputation
laid upon Christ, so the Righteousness of Christ is by God imputed to Believers
by virtue of their Union with Christ; and becomes thereby as truly and fully
theirs, for the justification of their particular Persons before God, as if
they themselves had in their own Persons fulfilled all that the Law requires,
or suffered all that it threatened: No inherent Righteousness in our own
Persons, is, or can be more truly our own for this end and purpose, than
Christ's imputed Righteousness is our own. He is the Lord our Righteousness,
Jer. 23. 6. We are made the righteousness of God in him, 1 Cor. 5. 21. Yea, the
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in them that believe, Romans 8. 4.

But notwithstanding all this, we cannot say, (1.) That Christ became as
completely sinful as we. Or (2.) That we are as completely righteous as Christ;
and that over and above the Guilt and Punishment of Sin, (which we grant was
laid upon Christ) Sin it self simply considered, or the very Transgression it
self, became the Sin or Transgression of Christ; and consequently that we are
as completely Righteous as Christ, and Christ as completely Sinful as we are.

1. We dare not say, That Sin simply considered, as the very Transgression of
the Law it self, as well as the Guilt and Punishment, became the very Sin and
Transgression of Christ: For two things are distinctly to be considered and
differenced, With respect to the Law, and unto Sin. As to the Law, we are to
consider in it, 1. Its Preceptive part. 2. Its Sanction.


(1.) The preceptive part of the Law, which gives Sin its formal Nature, 1 Ioh.
3. 4. For sin is the transgression of the law. All Transgression arises from
the Preceptive part of the Law of God: He that transgresses the Precepts,
sins; and under this consideration sin can never be communicated from one to
another: The Personal sin of one cannot be in this respect the Personal sin of
another: There is no Physical Transfusion of the Transgression of the Precept
from one subject into another: This is utterly impossible; even Adam's personal
sins considered in his single private capacity, are not communicable to his
Posterity.

(2.) Besides the Transgression of the Preceptive part of the Law, there is an
obnoxiousness unto Punishment, arising from the Sanction of the Law, which we
call the Guilt of Sin; and this (as Judicious Dr. Owen observes) is separable
from sin: Owen of Justification, p. 285.
And if it were not separable from the former, no sinner in the world could
either be pardoned or saved: Guilt may be made another's by Imputation, and yet
that other not rendered formally a sinner thereby: Upon this ground we say, the
Guilt and Punishment of our Sin, was that only which was imputed unto Christ;
but the very Transgression of the Law it self, or Sin formally and essentially
considered, could never be communicated or transfused from us into him. I know
but two ways in the world by which one man's sins can be imagined to become
another's, viz. Either by Imputation, which is Legal, and what we affirm; or by
Essential Transfusion from subject to subject (as our Adversaries fancy) which
is utterly impossible; and we have as good ground to believe the absurd
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as this wild notion of the Essential
Transfusion of Sin. Guilt arising from the Sanction of the Law, may and did
pass from us to Christ by Legal Imputation; but sin it self, the very
Transgression it self, arising from the very Preceptive part of the Law, cannot
so pass from us to Christ: For if we should once imagine that the very acts and
habits of sin, with the odious deformity thereof, should pass from our Persons
to Christ, and subjectively to inhere in him, as they do in us; then it would
follow,

First, That our Salvation would thereby be rendered utterly impossible. For
such an inhesion of Sin in the Person of Christ, is absolutely inconsistent
with the Hypostatical Union, which Union is the very Foundation of his
Satisfaction, and our Salvation. Tho the Divine Nature can, and does dwell in
Union with the pure and Sinless human Nature of Christ, yet it cannot dwell in
Union with Sin.

Secondly, This Supposition would render the Blood of the Cross altogether
unable to satisfy for us. He could not have been the Lamb of God to take away
the Sins of the World, if he had not been perfectly pure and spotless, 1 Pet.
1. 19.

Thirdly, Had our Sins thus been essentially transfused into Christ, the Law
had had a just and valid Exception against him; for it accepts of nothing but
what is absolutely pure and perfect. I admire, therefore, how any good Man
dares to call our Doctrine which teaches the Imputation of our Guilt and
Punishment to Christ, a simple Doctrine; and assert, that the Transgression it
self became Christ's; and that thereby Christ became as completely sinful as
we. And,

Fourthly, If the way of making our Sins Christ's by imputation, be thus
rejected and derided; and Christ asserted by some other way to become as
completely sinful as we; then I cannot see which way to avoid it, but that the
very same Acts and Habits of Sin must inhere, both in Christ, and in Believers
also. For, I suppose our Adversaries will not deny that, notwithstanding God's
laying the Sins of Believers upon Christ, there remain in all Believers after
their Justification, sinful Inclinations and Aversations; a Law of Sin in their
Members, a Body of Sin and Death. Did these things pass from them to Christ,
and yet do they still inhere in them? Why do they complain and groan of
in-dwelling Sin? as Romans 7. If Sin it self be so transferred from them to
Christ? Sure, unless Men will dare to say, the same Acts and Habits of Sin
which they feel in themselves, are as truly in Christ as in themselves; they
have no ground to say, that by God's laying their Iniquities upon Christ, he
became as completely sinful as they are; and if they should so affirm, that
Affirmation would undermine the very Foundation of their own Salvation.

I therefore heartily subscribe to that sound and holy Sentence, of a clear and
learned Divine, Owen, Of Justification, p. 283.
Nothing is more absolutely true, nothing more sacredly and assuredly believed
by us, than that nothing which Christ did or suffered, nothing that he
undertook, or underwent, did, or could constitute him subjectively, inherently,
and thereupon personally a Sinner, or guilty of any Sin of his own. To bear the
Guilt or Blame of other Men's Faults, to be alienae culpae reus, makes no Man a
Sinner, unless he did unwisely or irregularly undertake it. So, then this
Proposition, that by God's laying our Sins upon Christ (in some other way, than
by Imputation of Guilt and Punishment) he became as completely sinful as we,
will not, ought not to be received as the sound Doctrine of the Gospel. Nor yet
this

Second Proposition.
That we are as completely Righteous as Christ is; or, that Christ is not more
Righteous than a Believer.

I cannot imagine what should induce any Man so to express himself, unless it
be a groundless conceit and fancy, that there is an essential Transfusion of
Christ's justifying Righteousness into Believers, whereby it becomes theirs by
way of subjective inhesion, and is in them in the very same manner it is in
him: And so every individual Believer becomes as completely Righteous as
Christ. And this conceit they would fain establish upon that Text, 1 Ioh. 3. 7.
He that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous.

But neither this expression, nor any other like it in the Scriptures, gives
the least countenance to such a general and unwary Position. It is far from the
mind of this Scripture, That the righteousness of Christ is formally and
inherently ours, as it is his. Indeed it is ours relatively, not formally and
inherently; not the same with his for quantity, though it be the same for
verity. His Righteousness is not ours in its Universal value, though it be
ours, as to our particular use and necessity. Nor is it made ours to make us so
many causes of Salvation to others; but it is imputed to us as to the Subjects,
that are to be saved by it our selves.

It Is true, we are justified, and saved by the very Righteousness of Christ,
and no other; but that Righteousness is formally inherent in him only, and is
only materially imputed to us. It was actively his, but passively ours. He
wrought it, though we wear it. It was wrought in the person of God-man for the
whole Church, and is imputed (not transfused) to every single Believer for his
own concernment only. For,

(1.) It is most absurd to imagine that the Righteousness of Christ should
formally inhere in the person of all, or any Believer, as it does in the person
of the Mediator. The impossibility hereof appears plainly from the incapacity
of the Subject. The Righteousness of Christ is an Infinite Righteousness,
because it is the Righteousness of God-man, and can therefore be subjected in
no other person beside him. It is capable of being imputed to a finite
creature, and therefore in the way of imputation we are said to be made the
righteousness of God in him: but though it may be imputed to a finite creature,
it inheres only in the person of the Son of God, as in its proper subject. And
indeed,

(2.) If it should be inherent in us, it could not be imputed to us as it is,
Romans 4. 6, 23. Nor need we go out of our selves for justification, as now we
must, Phil. 3. 9. but may justify our selves by our own inherent Righteousness.
And

(3 dly,) What should hinder, if this Infinite Righteousness of Christ were
infused into us, and should make us as completely righteous as Christ; but that
we might justify others also, as Christ does: and so we might be the Saviors
of the Elect, as Christ is? Which is most absurd to imagine. And

(4 thly,) According to Antinomian Principles, What need was there that we
should be justified at all? Or, what place is left for the justification of any
sinner in the World? For according to their Opinion, the justification of the
Elect is an immanent act of God before the World was; and that Eternal act of
Justification, making the Elect as completely Righteous as Christ himself,
there could not possibly be any the least guilt in the Elect to be pardoned;
and consequently no place, or room could be left for any Justification in time.
And then it must follow, that seeing Christ died in time for sin, according to
the Scriptures; It must be for his own sins that he died, and not for the sins
of the Elect; Diametrically opposite to Romans 4. 25. and the whole current of
Scripture, and faith of Christians.

It Is therefore very unbecoming and unworthy of a justified person, after
Christ has taken all his guilt upon himself, and suffered all the punishment
due thereunto in his place and room: Instead of an humble and thankful
admiration of his unparalled grace therein, to throw more than the guilt and
punishment of his sins upon Christ, even the transgression it self: and
comparing his own Righteousness with Christ's, to say he is as completely
Righteous as Christ himself. This is as if a company of Bankrupt Debtors
Arrested for their own Debts, ready to be cast into Prison, and not having one
Farthing to satisfy, after their Debts have been freely and fully discharged by
another, out of his immense treasure; should now compare with him, yea, and
think they honored him, by telling him, that now they are as completely Rich
as himself.

I am well assured no good Man would embrace an Opinion so derogatory to
Christ's Honor as this is; did he but see the odious consequences of it,
doubtless he would abhor them as much as we. And as for those now in Heaven,
who fell into such mistakes in the way thither, were they now acquainted with
what is transacted here below, they would exceedingly rejoice in the detection
of those mistakes, and Bless God for the refutation of them.

Error VIII.
They affirm, That Believers need not fear their own sins, nor the sins of
others; for as much as neither their own, or others sins can do them any hurt,
nor must they do any duty for their own good, or salvation or for eternal
rewards.

That we need fear no hurt from sin, or may not aim at our own good in Duty,
are two Propositions that sound harsh in the ears of Believers: I shall
consider them severally, and refute them as briefly as I can.

Proposition I.
Believers need not fear their own sins, or the sins of others; because neither
our own, or others sins can do us any hurt.

They seem to be induced into this Error, by misunderstanding the Apostle, in
Romans 8. 28. as if the scope of that Text were to assert the benefits of sin to
justified persons; whereas he speaks there of Adversities and Afflictions
befalling the Saints in this Life. Vniversalis restringenda est ad materiam
subjectam, loquitur enim de afflictionibus piorum. The subject matter (says
Pareus on the place) restrains the Universal expression of the Apostle: For
when he there says, All things shall work together for good; he principally
intends the afflictions of the Godly, of which he treats there in that context.
It may be extended also to all providential events; Omnia quaecunque eis
accedunt forinsecus, tam adversa, quam prospera: All adverse and prosperous
events of things without us, as Estius upon the place notes. Nothing is spoken
of sin in this Text. And the Apostle distributing this General into
Particulars, verse 38. plainly shows, what are the things he intended by his
Universal expression, verse 28. as also in what respect no creature can do the
Saints any hurt, namely, that they shall never be able to separate them from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And in this respect it is
true that the Sins of the Elect shall not hurt them, by frustrating the purpose
of God concerning their Eternal Salvation; or totally and finally to separate
them from his Love. This we grant, and yet we think it a very unwary, and
unsound expression, That Believers need not fear their own sins, because they
can do them no hurt: It Is too general and unguarded a Proposition to be
received for truth. What if their sins cannot do them that hurt, to frustrate
the purpose of God, and Damn them to Eternity in the World to come? Can it
therefore do them no hurt at all in their present state of conflict with it in
this World? For my part, I think the greatest fear of caution is due to sin,
the greatest evil; and that Chrysostom spoke more like a Christian, when he
said, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing but sin. Though sin cannot
finally ruin the Believer, yet it can many ways hurt and injure the Believer;
and therefore ought not to be misrepresented as such an innocent and harmless
thing to them. In vain are so many terrible threatenings in the Scriptures
against it, if it can do us no hurt; and it is certain nothing can do us good,
but that which makes us better, and more Holy: But Sin can never pretend to
that, of all things in the World. But to come to an issue, Sin may be
considered three ways.

1. Formally. 2. Effectively. 3. Reductively.
First, Formally, as a transgression of the Preceptive part of the Law of God,
and under that consideration it is the most formidable evil in the whole World.
The evil of evils, at which every gracious heart trembles, and ought rather to
choose Banishment, Prison, and Death it self in the most terrible form, than
Sin, or that which is most tempting in Sin, the pleasures of it; as Moses did,
Heb. 11. 25.

Secondly, Sin may be considered Effectively, with respect to the manifold
mischiefs and calamities it produces in the World, and the Spiritual and
Corporeal Evils it infers upon Believers themselves: Though it cannot Damn
their Souls, yet it makes War against their Souls, and brings them into
miserable Bondage and Captivity, Romans 7. 23. It wounds their Souls, under which
wounds they are feeble and sore broken; yea, they roar by reason of the
disquietness of their hearts, Psalm. 38. 5, 8. Is War, Captivity, Festering
painful Wounds, causing them to roar, no hurt to Believers? It breaks their
very Bones, Ps. 51. 8. And is that no hurt? It draws off their Minds from God,
interrupts their Prayers and Meditations, Romans 7. 18, 19, 20, 21. And is there
no hurt in that? It causes their Graces to decline, wither, and languish to
that degree, that the things which are in them are ready to die, Rev. 3. 1. and
Rev. 2. 4. And is the loss of Grace and Spiritual strength, no hurt to a
Believer? It hides the Face of God from them, Isa. 59. 2. And is there no hurt
in spiritual withdrawments of God from their Souls? Why then do deserted Saints
so bitterly lament and bemoan it? It provokes innumerable afflictions and
miseries, which fall upon our Bodies, Relations, Estates; and if Sin be the
cause of all these inward and outward miseries to the People of God, sure then
there is some hurt in Sin, for which the Saints ought to be afraid of it.

Thirdly, Sin may be considered Reductively, as it is overruled, reduced, and
finally issued by the Covenant of Grace. Under this consideration of sin, which
rather respects the future, than present state, the Antinomians only respect
the hurt, or evil of it; over-looking both the former considerations of sin,
which concern the present state of Believers, and so rashly pronounce, sin can
do Believers no hurt. An Assertion tending to a great deal of looseness and
licentiousness. A Man drinks deadly Poison, and is after many months recovered
by the skill of an excellent Physician; shall we say, there was no hurt in it,
because the man died not of it: sure those fearful twinges he felt, his loss of
strength and stomach, were hurtful to him, tho he escaped with life, and got
this advantage by it, to be more wary for ever after. Tantum Religio potuit
suadere malorum.

And then for other men's sins, (which they say we need not fear) it is an
Assertion against all the Laws of Charity. For the sins of wicked men eternally
damn them: Disturb the Peace and Order of the World: Draw down National
Judgments upon the whole Community: Cause Wars, Plagues, Persecutions, etc.
Which Considerations of the sins of others, opened fountains of tears in
David's Eyes, Psalm. 119, 136. caused horror to take hold upon him, verse. 53.
And yet if you will believe the Antinomian Doctrine, Believers have no need to
fear, much less be in horror (which is the extremity of fear) for other men's
sins. How is Satan gratified, and temptations to sin strengthened upon the Souls
of men, by such indistinct, unwary, and dangerous Expressions as these are? A
good Intention can be no sufficient salvo for such Assertions as these.

Secondly, They tell us, That as the Saints need fear no sin for any hurt it
can do them, so they must do no duty for their own good; or with an eye to
their own Salvation, or Eternal Rewards in Heaven.

Refutation.
This, as the former, is too generally and indistinctly delivered. He that
distinguishes well, teaches well. The confounding of things which ought to be
distinguished, easily runs men into the bogs of Errors. Two things ought to
have been distinguished here: in Duties.
1. Ends 2. Self Ends


First, Ends in Duty; There are two ends in Duties: one supreme and ultimate,
viz. the glorifying of God, which must, and ought to take the first place of
all other ends. Another secondary and subordinate, viz. the good and benefit of
our selves. To invert these, and place our own good in the room of God's Glory,
is sinful and unjustifiable; and he that aims only at himself in Religion, is
justly censured as a mercenary Servant, especially if it be any external good
he aims at; but spiritual good, especially the enjoyment of God, is so involved
in the other, viz. the glory of God, that no man can rightly take the Lord for
his God, but he must take him for his Supreme Good, and consequently therein
may, and must have a due respect to his own happiness.

Secondly, Self Ends must also be distinguished into 1. Corrupt, or carnal
Self Ends. 2. Pure and spiritual Self Ends.


As to carnal and corrupt Self Ends, inviting and moving men to the performance
of Religious Duties: when these are the only Ends men aim at, they bewray the
Hypocrisy of the Heart: and accordingly God charges Hypocrisy upon such
Persons, Hosea 7. 14. They have not cried unto me with their heart, when they
howled upon their Beds: they assemble themselves for Corn and Wine, etc. God
reckons not the most solemn Duties animated by such Ends, to be done unto him,
Zech. 7. 5. Did ye at all fast to me?

But beside these, Man has a best self, a spiritual self, to regard in duty,
viz. The conformity of his Soul to God in holiness, and the perfect fruition of
God in glory. Such holy Self Ends as these, are often commended, but nowhere
condemned in Scripture. 'Twas the Encomium of Moses, That he had respect unto
the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 26. These ordinate respects to our spiritual
best self, are so far from being our sin, that God both appoints and allows
them for great uses and advantages to his People in their way to glory. They
are (1.) Singular Encouragements to the Saints under Persecution, Streights and
Distresses, Heb. 10. 34. And to that end Christ proposes them, Luke 12. 32. And
so the best of Saints have made use of them, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. (2.) They are
Motives and Incentives to Praise and Thankfulness, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. 1 Coloss.
12. (3.) They stir up the Saints to cheerful and vigorous industry for God,
Col. 3. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 15. 58.

Now to cut off from Religion all these spiritual and excellent Self-respects,
and to make them our sins, and marks of our Hypocrisy, is an Error very
injurious to the Gospel, and to the Souls of Men. For (1.) it crosses the
strain of the Gospel, which commands us to strive for our Salvation, Luke 13.
24, 25. Phil. 2. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 16. (2.) It blames that in the Saints as sinful,
which the Scripture notes as their excellency, and records to their praise,
Heb. 11. 26. (3.) It makes the Laws of Christianity to thwart and cross the
very fundamental Law of our Creation, which inclines and obliges all men to
intend their own Felicity. And on this account, not only our Antinomians are
blameworthy, but others also, who are far enough from their Opinion, who urge
humiliation for sin beyond the Staple: teaching men, they are not humbled
enough till they be content to be damned. (4.) It unreasonably supposes a
Christian may not do that for his own Soul, which he daily does, and is bound
to do for other men's Souls, viz. to pray, preach, exhort and reprove for their
Salvation.

Error IX.
They will not allow the New Covenant to be properly made with us, (...)
but with Christ for us. And some of them affirm, That this Covenant is all of
it a Promise, having no Condition upon our part. They acknowledge indeed Faith,
Repentance and Obedience, to be Conditions, but say they are not Conditions on
our part, but on Christ's; and consequently affirm, That he repented, believed,
and obeyed for us.

Refutation.
(1.) The confounding of distinct Covenants, leads them into this Error; we
acknowledge there was a Covenant properly made with Christ alone, which we call
the Covenant of Redemption. This Covenant indeed, though it were made for us,
yet it was not made with us. It had its Condition, and that Condition was laid
only upon Christ: viz. That he should assume our Nature, and pour out his Soul
unto death, which Condition he was solely concerned to perform; but beside
this, there is a Covenant of Grace made with him, and with all Believers in
him: with him primarily as the Head, with them as the Members, who personally
come into this Covenant, when they come into union with him by Faith. This
Covenant of Grace is not made with Christ alone, personally considered, but
with Christ, and all that are his, mystically considered, and is properly made
with all Believers in Christ; and therefore it is called their Covenant, Zech.
9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant I have sent forth thy
Prisoners out of the Pit wherein is no water. So when God entered into the
Covenant of Grace with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant (says
he) between me and thee, thy Seed after thee. So when he took the People of
Israel into this Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. 8. I swear unto thee (says he) and entered
into a Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine.

This Covenant of Grace made with Believers in Christ, is not the same, nor
must it be confounded with the Covenant of Redemption made with Christ before
the World began. They are two distinct Covenants; for in the Covenant of Grace,
into which Believers are taken, there is a Mediator, and this Mediator is
Christ himself; but in the other Covenant of Redemption there neither was, nor
could be any Mediator, which manifestly distinguishes them. Besides, In the
Covenant of Grace Christ bequeaths manifold and rich Legacies, as he is the
Testator; but no man gives a Legacy to himself. This Covenant is really and
properly made with every Believer as he is a Member of Jesus Christ the Head;
and they are truly and properly federates with God: the Covenant binds them to
their Duties, and encourages them therein by promises of strength to be derived
from Christ to enable them thereunto.

(2.) We thankfully acknowledge, That the glory of the New Covenant is chiefly
discovered in the Promises thereof: upon the best Promises it is established.
And all the Promises are reducible to the Covenant. They meet, and center in it
as the Rivers in the Sea, or Beams in the Sun. But yet we cannot say, that
nothing but Promises is contained in this Covenant: for there are Duties
required by it, as well as Mercies promised in it.

Nor may we say, That those Duties required by it, are required only to be
performed by Christ, and not by us; but they are required to be performed by us
in his strength. Nor is it Christ that repents, and believes for us, but we our
selves are to believe and repent in the strength of his Grace. And till we do
so actually in our own persons, we have no part or portion in the Blessings and
Mercies of this Covenant. If Christ by believing for us, give us an actual
Right and Title to the Promises and Blessings of the New Covenant, then it will
unavoidably follow,

(1.) That men, who never repented for one sin in all their lives, may be, nay,
certainly are pardoned as much as the greatest Penitents in the World; because
though they never repented themselves, yet Christ repented for them: expressly
contrary to his own words, Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. And contrary to his own established Order, Luke 29. 47. Acts 3. 19.

(2.) It will also follow, That Unbelievers, who never had union with Christ by
one vital act of Faith in all their lives, may be, nay certainly shall be
saved, as well as those that are actual Believers: because though they be
Unbelievers in themselves, yet Christ believed for them: expressly contrary to
Mark 16. 16. He that believes not, shall be damned. John 3. 36. He that
believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.
And Luke 12. 46. He will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his portion
with unbelievers.

(3.) It will also follow from hence, That men may continue in a state of
disobedience all their days, and yet may be saved as well as the most obedient
Souls in the World: expressly contrary to Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with
vain words; for because of these things, comes the wrath of God upon the
Children of disobedience. And Romans 2. 8. But unto them that are contentio^s,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath.
And 1 Pet. 4. 17. What shall the end of them be that obey not the Gospel of God!

This Language sounds strange and harsh to the Ears of Christians; a repenting
Christ saving the impenitent Sinner: A believing Christ saving Unbelievers: An
obeying Christ saving obstinate and disobedient Wretches. Whither does such
Doctrine tend, but to encourage and fix men in their impenitence, unbelief, and
disobedience? But the Lord grant no poor Sinner in the World may trust to this,
or build his hopes of Eternal Life upon such a loose, sandy foundation as this
is. Reader, All that Christ has done without thee, will not, cannot be
effectual to thy Salvation, unless Repentance, Faith and Obedience be wrought
by the Spirit in thy Soul. It Is Christ in thee that is the hope of glory, Col.
1. 27. Beware therefore on what ground thou buildest for Eternity.

Error X.
They deny Sanctification to be the evidence of Justification; and deridingly
tell us, This is to light a Candle to the Sun; and the darker our
Sanctification is, the brighter our Justification is.

Refutation.
I am not at all surprised at this strange and absonous Language. It Is a false
and dangerous Conclusion, yet such as naturally results from, and by a kind of
necessity follows out of their other Errors. For if the Elect be all justified
from Eternity, and that neither Repentance, Faith or Obedience be required of
us in the Covenant of Grace; but were all required of, and performed by Christ,
who repented, believed, and obeyed for us; then indeed I cannot understand what
relation our Sanctification has to our Justification; or how it should be an
evidence, mark or sign thereof: or what regard is due from Christians to any
Grace or Work of the Spirit wrought in them, to clear up their Interest in
Christ to them. For we being in Christ, and in state of Justification, before
we were naturally born, we must necessarily be so before we be regenerated, or
newborn; and consequently, no work of Grace wrought in us, or holy Duties
performed by us, can be evidential of that which from Eternity was done before
them, and without them.

(1.) I grant indeed, That many vain Professors do cheat and deceive themselves
by false unscriptural signs and evidences, as well as by true ones misapplied.

(2.) I grant also, That by reason of the deceitfulness of the Heart,
instability of the Thoughts, similar works of common Grace in Hypocrites,
Distractions of the World, Wiles of Satan, weakness of Grace, and prevalency of
Corruptions: the clearing up of our Justification by our Sanctification, is a
work that meets with great and manifold Difficulties, which are the things that
most Christians complain of.

(3.) I also grant, That the evidence of our Sanctification in this, or any
other method, is not essential, and absolutely necessary to the being of a
Christian. A man may live in Christ, and yet not know his interest in him, or
relation to him, Isa. 50. 10. Some Christians, like Children in the Cradle,
live, but understand not that they live: are born to a great Inheritance, but
have no knowledge of it, or present comfort in it.

(4.) I will further grant, That the Eye of a Christian may be too intently
fixed upon his own gracious qualification; and being wholly taken up in the
reflex Acts of Faith, may too much neglect the direct Acts of Faith upon
Christ, to the great detriment of his Soul.

But all this notwithstanding, The examination of our Justification by our
Sanctification, is not only a lawful, and possible, but a very excellent and
necessary work and duty. It Is the course that Christians have taken in all
Ages. And that which God has abundantly blessed to the joy and encouragement
of their Souls.

He has furnished our Souls to this end with noble self-reflecting Powers and
Abilities. He has answerably furnished his Word with variety of marks and
signs for the same end and use. Some of these marks are exclusive to detect and
bar bold presumptuous Pretenders, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Rev. 21. 8, 27. Some are
inclusive marks, to measure the strength and growth of Grace by, Romans 4. 20.
And others are positive signs, flowing out of the very essence of Grace, or the
New Creature, 1 John 4. 13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit.

He has also expressly commanded us to examine and prove our selves: upbraided
the neglectors of that duty, and enforced their duty upon them by a thundering
Argument, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove
your own selves; know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates. In a word, For this end and purpose, amongst others,
were the Scriptures written, 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written to you,
that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life. And therefore to neglect this duty, is exceeding dangerous; but
to deny, and deride it, intolerable. It may justly be feared, such men will be
drowned in perdition, who fall into the waters, by making a bridge over them
with their own shadows.

For my own part, I verily believe that the sweetest hours Christians enjoy in
this World, is, when they retire into their Closets, and sit there concealed
from all eyes, but him that made them; looking now into the Bible, then into
their own Hearts, and then up to God: closely following the grand Debate about
their Interest in Christ, till they have brought it to the happy desired issue.

And now, Reader, for a close of all, I call the Searcher of Hearts to witness,
That I have not intermedled with these Controversies of Antipaedobaptism, and
Antinomianism, our of any delight I take in Polemical Studies, or an
unpeaceable contradicting Humor, but out of pure zeal for the Glory and Truths
of God, for the vindication and defense whereof, I have been necessarily
engaged therein. And having discharged my duty thus far, I now resolve to
return (if God will permit me) to my much sweeter and more agreeable Studies;
Still maintaining my Christian Charity for those whom I oppose; not doubting
but I shall meet those in Heaven, from whom I am forced in lesser things to
dissent and differ upon Earth.

FINIS.
GOSPEL-UNITY Recommended to the CHURCHES OF CHRIST: IN A SERMON Preached by I.
F. Author of the Foregoing DISCOURSE. FROM I COR. I. 10. Now I beseech you,
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, That ye all speak the same
thing; and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
WHEN I consider this Healing and Uniting Text, and the scandalous Divisions of
the Congregations to which I recommend it, I could choose rather to comment
thereon with Tears, than Words. It Is just matter of lamentation, to think what
feeble influences such Divine and Pathetical Exhortations have upon the minds
and hearts of professed Christians. But it is not Lamentations, but proper
Counsels, and convictions obeyed, must do the work.

The Primitive and Purest Churches of Christ, consisted of imperfect Members,
who notwithstanding they were knit together by the same internal bond of the
Spirit, and the same external bonds of common Profession, and common Danger,
and enjoyed extraordinary helps for uniting, in the Presence and Doctrine of
the Apostles among them; yet quickly discovered a Schismatical Spirit, dividing
both in Judgment and Affection, to the great Injury of Religion, and Grief of
the Apostle's Spirits. To check and heal this growing-Evil in the Church at
Corinth, the Apostle addresses his Pathetical Exhortation to them, and to all
future Churches of Christ, whom it equally concerns, in the words of my Text.
Now I beseech you, brethren, etc. Where note 1. The Duty exhorted to. 2. The
Arguments enforcing the Duty.


1. The Duty exhorted to; namely, Unity; the Beauty, Strength, and Glory, as
well as the Duty of a Church. This Unity he describes two ways, 1. As it is
Exclusive of its opposite, Schism or Division. All Rents, and rash Separations,
are contrary to it, and destructive of it: I beseech you, brethren, that there
be no Divisions [or Schisms] among you. 2. As it is inclusive of all that
belongs to it; namely, the Harmony and Agreement of their Judgments, Hearts,
and Language. (1.) That ye all speak the same thing. (2.) That ye be perfectly
joined together in one Mind. And (3.) In the same Judgment. This threefold
Union in Judgment, Affection, and Language, includes all that belongs to
Christian Concord, makes the Saints (...), men of one Heart and Soul, the
loveliest sight this World affords, Acts 2. 46, 47.

(2.) The Arguments enforcing this Duty upon them, comes next under
consideration. And these are Three. (1.) I beseech you. (2.) I beesech you,
Brethren. (3.) I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
These Arguments are not of equal Force and Efficacy: The first is great: The
second greater: The last the most efficacious, and irresistible, of all the
rest: But all together should come with such Power, and irresistible Efficacy
upon the Judgments, Consciences, and Hearts of Christians, as should perfectly
knit them together, and defeat all the Designs of Satan, and his Agents,
without them, or of their own Corruptions within them, to rend asunder their
Affections or Communion.

And first, Arg. 1.
he enforces the Duty of Unity by a solemn Apostolical Obsecration and
Adjuration; I beseech you, says he; he had Power to command them to this Duty,
and threaten them for the neglect of it: He had in readiness to revenge all
Disobedience, and might have shaken that Rod over them; but he chooses rather
to entreat and beseech them: Now I beseech you, Brethren: Here you have, as it
were, the great Apostle upon his knees before them, Meekly and Pathetically
entreating them to be at perfect Unity among themselves. It Is the entreaty of
their Spiritual Father, that had begotten them to Christ. Now [I] beseech you,
brethren, I who was the Instrument in Christ's hand, of your Conversion to him:
I, that have planted you a Gospel Church, and assiduously watered you: I
beseech you by all the spiritual ties and endearments betwixt me and you, that
there be no Divisions among you. This is the first Argument, wrapped up in a
solemn Obsecration.

Next, he enforces the Duty of Unity, by the nearness of their Relation; I
beseech you, Brethren: Brotherhood is an endearing thing, and naturally draws
Affection and Unity with it, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Be ye all of one mind; having
compassion one of another; love as brethren; be pitiful, be courteous; ye are
the children of one Father, joint-heirs of one and the same inheritance. To see
an Egyptian smiting an Israelite, is no strange sight; but to see one Israelite
quarrelling another, is most unnatural and uncomely: The nearer the Relation,
the stronger the Affection: How good and how pleasant is it, (says the
Psalmist) for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Psalm. 133. 1.

But the greatest Argument of all is the last, viz. In the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. In this name he beseeches and entreats them to be at perfect
Unity among themselves. In the former he sweetly insinuated the duty by a
loving compellation, but here he sets it home by a solemn Adjuration; I beseech
you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ: That is to say, (1.) For
Christ's Sake, or for the Love of Christ; by all that Christ has done,
suffered, or purchased for you; and as Christ is dear and precious to you, let
there be no Divisions. If you have any Love for Christ, don't grieve him, and
obstruct his great design in the world, by your Scandalous Schisms. Mr. John
Fox never denied a Beggar that asked an Alms of him, for Christ jesus Sake.

2. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, in the Authority of Christ;
for so his Name also signifies, 1 Cor. 5. 4. and it is as if he had said, If
you reverence the Supreme Authority and Sovereignty of Christ, which is the
Fountain out of which so many solemn Commands of Unity do flow; then see, as
you will answer it to him at the Great Day, that ye be perfectly joined
together in one Mind, and in one Judgment. The Point will be this:

DOCT.
Unity amongst Believers, especially in particular Church-Relation, is as
desirable a Mercy, as it is a necessary and indispensable Duty.

How desirable a Mercy it is, and how necessary a Duty, let the same Apostle,
who presses it upon the Corinthians in my Text, be heard again, enforcing the
same Duty with the same warmth, upon the Church at Philippi, chap. 2. v. 1, 2.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. In
handling this Point, I will show, 1. What Unity among Believers is. 2. How the
necessity and desirableness of it, may be evinced. 3. And then lay down the
Motives and Directions about it.


(1.) What Unity amongst Believers is, and more particularly such Believers as
stand in particular Church-Relation to each other.

There is a twofold Union, one Mystical, betwixt Christ and Believers; another
Moral, betwixt Believers themselves: Faith knits them all to Christ, and then
Love knits them one to another. Their common relation to Christ their Head,
endears them to each other as Fellow Members in the same Body. Hence they
become Sanguine Christi conglutinati; Glued together by the Blood of Christ.
Union with Christ is fundamental to all Union among the Saints. Perfect Union
would flow from this their common Union with Christ their Head, were they not
here in an imperfect state, where their corruptions disturb and hinder it; and
as soon as they shall attain unto complete Sanctification, they shall also
attain unto perfect Unity. How their Unity with one another comes by way of
necessary resultancy from their Union with Christ; and how this Unity among
themselves shall at last arise to its just perfection, that one Text plainly
discovers, John 17. 23. I in them, and thou in me; that they may be made
perfect in one,etc.

Unity amongst those that hold not the Head, is rather a Conspiracy, than a
Gospel-unity. Believers and unbelievers may have a Political or Civil union;
but there is no Spiritual unity, but what flows from joint-membership in Christ.
I will not deny, but in particular Churches there may be, and still are some
Hypocrites, who hold Communion with the Saints, and pretend to belong unto
Christ, the same Head with them; but as they have no real Union with Christ, so
neither have they any sincere affection to the Saints; and these for the most
part, are they that raise tumults and divisions in the Church, as disloyal
Subjects do in the Commonwealth. Of these the Apostle speaks, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that it might be
made manifest that they were not all of us.

Sincere Christianity holds fast the Soul by a firm bond of Life to the truly
Christian Community, wherein they reap those spiritual pleasures and advantages
which assure their continuance therein to a great degree: But those that join
with the Church upon carnal and external inducements, make little conscience of
rending from it; and God permits their Schismatical Spirits thus to act, for
the discovering of their Hypocrisy, or (as the Text speaks) that it might be
made manifest they were not of us; as also that they which are approved, may by
their constancy be also made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19.

It has indeed been said, That it is never better with the Church, than when
there are most Hypocrites in it; but then you must understand it only with
respect to the external tranquillity and prosperity of the Church; for as to
its real, spiritual advantage, they add nothing: And therefore it behooves
Church Officers and Members to be exceeding careful (especially in times of
Liberty and Prosperity) how they admit Members, as the (...) Solomon^ time were
of admitting Proselytes. It Is said, Amos 3. 3. How can two walk together except
they be agreed? I deny not but persons that differ in some lesser points as to
their Judgment, may, and ought to be one in Affection: But of this I am sure,
that when Sanctified persons, agreed in Judgments and Principles, do walk
together under pious and judicious Church Officers, in tender affection, and
the exercise of all duties tending to mutual edification, glorifying God with
one mouth, Romans 15. 6. and cleaving together with oneness of heart, Acts 2. 42.
This is such a Church-unity as answers Christ's end in the ^^stitution of
particular Churches, and greatly tends to their own comfort, and the
propagation of Christianity in the World. Tongue-unity flows from Heart-unity;
Heart-unity, in a great measure, from Head-unity; and all three from Union with
the Lord jesus Christ. The divisions of our Tongues come mostly from the
divisions of our Hearts; were Hearts agreed, Tongues would quickly be agreed;
And then what ble^^ed times might be expected? And so much briefly for the
nature of Unity. Next,

(2.) Let us evince both the necessity and desirableness of this Unity among
Believers; and this will appear in a threefold respect: viz.

1. With respect to the Glory of God. 2. The Comfort and Benefit of our own
Souls. 3. The Conversion and Salvation of the World.
(1.) With respect to the Glory of God. The manifestative Glory of God (which
is all the Glory we are capable of giving him, is the very end of our Being,
and should be dearer to us than our Lives) is exceedingly advanced by the Unity
of his people. Hence is the Apostle's Prayer, Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the God of
patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus, that you may with one mind and one mouth glorify
God. It Is highly remarkable, That the Apostle in this Petition for the Unity of
the Saints, does not only describe that Unity he prays for, one Mouth and one
Mind, and shows how much God would be glorified by such an Union; but he also
addresses himself to God for it, under these two remarkable Titles, the God of
patience and consolation; thereby intimating two things; (1.) How great need
and exercise there is of patience, in maintaining Unity among the Saints: They
must bear one another's burdens; they must give allowance for mutual
infirmities: For the Church here is not an Assembly of Spirits of just Men made
perfect. The Unity of the Saints therefore greatly depends upon the exercise of
Patience one toward another; and this he begs the God of Patience to give
them. And to endear this Grace of Patience to them, He (2.) joins with it
another Title of God, viz. the God of Consolation, wherein he points them to
that abundant comfort which would result unto themselves from such a blessed
Unity continued and maintained by the mutual exercises of patience and
forbearance one toward another. And to set home all, he lays before them the
pattern and example of Christ; The God of patience and consolation grant you to
be like minded according to Christ. How many Thousand infirmities and failures
in Duty, does Christ find in all his people? Notwithstanding which, he
maintains Union and Communion with them; and if they, after his example,
shall do so likewise with one another, God will be eminently glorified therein.
This will evidence both the Truth and Excellency of the Christian Religion,
which so firmly knits the hearts of its Professors together.

(2.) Secondly, The necessity and desirableness of this Unity farther appears,
by the deep interest that the comfort and benefit of our Souls have in it. A
great example hereof we have in Acts 2. 46, 47. Oh! what cheeriness, strength,
and pleasure, did the Primitive Christians reap from the Unity of their Hearts
in the ways and worship of God? Next unto the pleasure and delight of immediate
Communion with God himself, and the shedding abroad of his Love into our Hearts
by the Holy Ghost; none like that which arises from the harmonious exercises
of the graces of the Saints in their mutual Duties and Communions one with
another. How are their Spirits dilated and refreshed by it? What a lively
emblem is here of Heaven! the Courts of Princes afford no such delights.
Whereas on the other side, when Schisms have rent Churches a-sunder, they go
away from each other exasperated, grieved and wounded, crying out, Oh, that I
had a Cottage in the Wilderness! or, oh! that I had the Wings of a Dove, that I
might flee away, and be at rest

(3.) Lastly, The necessity and desireableness of this Union further appears
with respect unto the World, who are allured to Christ by it, and scared off
from Religion by the feuds and divisions of Professors. To this the Prayer of
Christ has respect, Ioh. 17. 23. That they may be made perfect in one, that
the world may know that thou have sent me. q. d. This, O Father, will be a
convincing evidence to the World, of the Divinity both of my Person and
Doctrine, and a great ordinance for their conversion to me, when they shall see
my people cleaving inseparably unto me by Faith, and to one another by Love.
And on the other side, it will be a fatal stumbling block in the way of their
conversion, to observe my followers biting and devouring, rending and tearing
one another.

A Learned and Judicious Divine Commenting upon those words, Mr. John Cotton.
Cant. 2. 7. I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the
Hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till ^e please;
gives the sense thus; By Roes and Hinds of the Field (says he) understand weak
comers on toward Christ, persons under some preparatory works toward
Conversion, who are as shy and as timorous as Roes and Hinds of the Field; and
as they will be scared by the yelp of a Dog, or sound of a Gun; so will these
at any offensive miscarriages in the Churches of Christ.

Alexander Severus, finding two Christians contending with one another,
commanded them that they should not presume to take the name of Christ upon
them any longer; for (says he) you greatly dishonor your Master, whose
Disciples you profess your selves to be. And thus briefly of the nature of
Church-unity, and the necessity and desirableness thereof among all that stand
in that Relation.

USE.
The only improvement I shall make of this point, shall be for, 1. Exhortation
to Unity. 2. Directions for the maintaining of it.


The first Use for Exhortation. Use 1.


And first, having briefly discoursed the nature, necessity and desireableness
of Unity among all Christians, and especially of those in particular
Church-relation, I do in the Bowels of Christ, and in the words of his Apostle,
Phil. 2. 1, 2. earnestly and humbly entreat all my Brethren, That if there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill ye my joy; that ye be likeminded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. He speaks not as one
doubting; but as one disputing, when he says, If there be any consolation in
Christ: And it is as if he had said, I passionately and earnestly entreat you by
all that comfort and joy you have found in your mutual Communion from Christ,
and his Ordinances, wherein you have comfortably walked together, by all that
comfort resulting from the mutual exercises, and fruits of Christian Love; by
the unspeakable joys and delights the Spirit of God has shed down upon you,
whilst you walked in Unity, in the ways of your Duty; by all the bowels of
compassion and mercy you have for your selves, for your Brethren, or for the
poor carnal World, who are in hazard of being destroyed by your divisions: Or
for me, your Minister, whose joy and comfort is bound up in your unity and
stability; That ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord,
of one mind. What heart that has one spark of the Love of Christ in it, yields
not to such an Exhortation as this, enforced by the consolation of Christ,
comfort of Love, fellowship of the Spirit, and Bowels of Mercy? More
particularly, suffer ye this word of Exhortation from the consideration of the
following Arguments or Motives, what distances soever you are at from one
another.

Motive 1.
Reflect upon the late long and continued troubles you have been under, as the
just rebukes of God for your former contentions and follies.

I need not tell you, you are but lately plucked as brands out of the burning,
and that the smell of Fire is yet upon you. The time lately was, when you gat
your Bread with the peril of your lives; when God handed it to you behind your
Enemies backs; when your eyes did not, could not behold your former Teachers,
except in Corners or Prisons, when your Souls were sorrowful for the solemn
Assemblies; when you mournfully confessed before the Lord, that these were the
just and deserved punishments for your wantonness, barrenness, and provoking
animosities. These things were not only the matter of your humble confessions;
but the reformation of those evils was what you solemnly promised the Lord,
when he should again restore you to your liberty. What! And is the Rod no
sooner off your backs, but you will to the old work again? Read Ezra 9. 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. and view the face of this Sin in that glass. Have we been so many
years in the furnace, and our dross not purged? Such sharp and long-continued
afflictions produce no better effects? It may be said of our troubles, as of
the Siege of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 29. 18. Every head was made bald, and every shoulder
peeled. Some of us went young Men into persecution and trouble, and are come
forth old; and which is worst of all, we bring our old corruptions forth with
us. Either we did confess and bewail these sins in the days of our affliction,
or we did not. If we did not, we were incorrigible, and defeated the design of
the Rod. If we did, our Confessions and Sorrow were either sincere or
hypocritical: If sincere, certainly they would effectually caution us, that we
return not again to folly, Ezra 9. 13, 14. After all that is come upon us for
our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou, our God, have
punished us less than our iniquities deserve; and have given us such a
deliverance as this; Should we again break thy Commandment?

Motive II.
Consider the common imminent danger that now threatens us, both from Enemies
upon our Borders, and within our own Bowels. The Canaanites are in the Land,
let there be no strife therefore betwixt Brethren; our natural, civil, and
spiritual comforts are all shaking and trembling about us. If wanton Children
fall out and quarrel at a full Table, our Enemies stand ready to take away the
Cloth. They are not so far from us, and out of sight, but God can call them in
a few hours to end the strife amongst us. We act not only beneath the Rules of
Religion, but of Reason also. Brute creatures will depose their very
Antipathies in a common danger. Mr. Tho. Fuller, in his History of the Worthies
of England, tells us, That when the Severn-Sea overflowed the lower Grounds of
Somersetshire, it was observed that Dogs and Hares, and Cats and Rats, swimming
to the Buroughs and Hills to preserve their lives, stood quiet during the
Flood; not offering the least injury one to another. It Is pity that sense
should do more with Beasts, than Reason and Religion with Men.

Motive III.
Reflect upon the scandal your divisions give to the World; how it harddens and
prejudices them against Religion and Reformation. And thus the Souls of Men are
eternally hazarded by the follies of Professors: They are ready enough to take
occasions against Religion, where none are given, and much more to improve them
where occasions are given. Woe unto the world (says Christ) because of
offenses: for it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that man by whom
the offense comes, Matt. 18.

7. The woe is not only denounced against the taker, but the giver of the
offense. It fixes such prejudices in the hearts of carnal Men, that some of
them will never have good thoughts of Religion any more; but utterly distaste
and nauseate those Assemblies and Ordinances from which their Conversion may
with greatest probability be expected.

How long and how anxiously have we prayed, and waited for such a day of
Gospel-liberty as we now enjoy? It has been one of the sorest afflictions we
have grapled with in the days of our restraint, that we could not speak unto
the carnal World. If we had opportunity to speak at all, it was for the most
part to such as stood in need of Edification more than of Conversion. God has
now, beyond thoughts of most hearts, opened to us a door of Liberty to Preach,
and for all that will, to hear. Some fruits we have already seen, and more we
expect. The Children are as it were coming to the birth, and will you obstruct
it? Will you give the Gospel a miscarrying-womb? Be instruments at once, by
your contentions, to destroy the Souls of Men, and break the very hearts of
your Ministers, whose greatest comfort is bound up in the success of their
Labors? Brethren, I beseech you read these words as if they were delivered to
you upon my bended knees; I beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and
for the hopes sake of saving the precious immortal Souls of Men; and for your
poor Ministers sake, who have scarce any thing besides the fruits of their
Labors, to recompense their long-continued and grievous sufferings, depose
your animosities, maintain the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; help
us, but don't hinder us in our hard labors. What good will our Lives do us, if
we must labor in vain, and spend our strength for naught? We find it difficult
enough to persuade sinners to come unto Christ, when no such stumbling blocks
are laid in the way; the counter-pleas of Satan, the unbelief and sensualities
of unsanctified nature, are difficulties too great for us to grapple with; but
if to these must be added prejudices against Religion, from your dividing
Lusts, and scandalous Breaches, what hope then remains? If you have no pity for
your selves, pity perishing Souls, and pity your poor discouraged Ministers;
have a care you make us not to groan to God against you; or if that be a small
thing in your eyes, have a care lest the Blood of Souls be charged to your
account in the great day. Are there none in the Towns or Neighbourhoods where
you live? Are you sure there are none that have hopeful inclinations toward
Religion? desires and purposes to attend on the same means of Grace you sit
under, who will charge the occasion of their Damnation upon you at the Bar of
Christ, and say, Lord, we had some weak convictions upon our Consciences, that
we needed a rouzing and searching Minister; we were convinced that the profane
and carnal World, among whom we had our conversation, were not in the right
path that leads to Salvation. We felt in our selves inclinations to cast off
our old Companions, and associate with those that professed more strictness and
holiness, and place our selves under the most fruitful and advantageous
Ministry, and accordingly improved opportunities to get acquaintance with them;
but when we came nearer to them, we found such wrath and envy, such wranglings
and divisions, such undermining and supplanting each others reputation; such
whisperings and tale-bearings, such malicious aggravations and improvements of
common failings and infirmities, such covetousness and worldliness, such pride
and vanity, as gave us such a disgust and offense at the ways of Reformation,
that we could never more be reconciled to them. Beware, I say, how you incur
the guilt of such a dreadful charge as this, by giving liberty to such Lusts
and Passions under a profession of Religion, and pretense to Reformation.

Motive IV.
Consider the contrariety of such Practices to that solemn and fervent Prayer
of Jesus Christ, recorded in John 17. It Is highly remarkable, how in that
Prayer, which he poured out a little before his death with such a mighty
Pathos, and fervency of Spirit, he insists upon nothing more than Unity among
his People. He returns upon his Father again and again, for the obtaining of
this one thing: Four times does he beg for Unity among them, and every time he
seems to rise higher and higher, beseeching his Father, (1.) That they may be
one. (2.) That they may be one in us. (3.) That they may be one as thou and I
are one. and lastly, That they may be made perfect in one; By all this showing
how intent his Spirit was upon this one thing.

Brethren, If you would study how to frustrate the design, and grieve the Heart
of your Lord Jesus Christ (to whom you profess love and obedience) you cannot
take a readier way to do it, than by breaking the bonds of Unity among your
selves. I beseech you therefore in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
so earnestly prayed for the unity of his People, That ye be perfectly joined
together in one heart, and in one mind, as the Text speaks.

Motive V.
Consider how directly your Divisions cross and frustrate the Design and End of
Church Fellowship which is instituted for the improvement of each other's
Graces, and helping on the mortification of each other's Corruptions.

God has distributed variety of gifts and graces in different degrees amongst
his People; the improvement of these gifts and graces to the glory of God, and
our mutual edification, is the very scope and end of particular
Church Fellowship and Communion: every man has his proper gift of God, and (as
a late Worthy notes) the gifts and graces of all, Torshell's help to
Christian-fellowship p. 6, 7.
are this way made useful and beneficial. Job was exemplary for plainness and
patience: Moses for faithfulness and meekness: Iosieh for tenderness, and a
melting Spirit: Athanasius was prudent and active: Basil heavenly, and of a
sweet Spirit: Chrysostom laborious, and without affectation: Ambrose resolved
and grave. One has quickness of parts; but not so solid a Judgment: Another is
solid, but not ready and presential. One has a good Wit, another a better
Memory, a third excells them both in utterance. One is zealous, but ungrounded;
another well principled, but timorous. One is wary and prudent; another open
and plain-hearted. One is trembling and melting; another cheerful, and full of
comfort. Now the end and use of Church Fellowship is to make a rich improvement
unto all by a regular use and exercise of the gifts and graces found in every
one. One must impart his light, and another his warmth. The Eye ( viz. the
knowing man) cannot say to the hand ( viz. the active man) I have no need of
thee. Unspeakable are the benefits resulting from spiritual and orderly
Communion; but whatever the benefits be, they are all cut off by Schisms and
Dissentions; for as Faith is the grace, by which we receive all from God; so
Love is the grace by which we share and divide the comfort of all among our
selves. The excellent things of the Spirit are lodged in earthen Vessels, which
death will shortly break, and then we can have no more benefit by them; but
these Jars and Divisions render Saints, as it were, dead one to another, whilst
they are alive. Ah how lovely, how sweet and desirable it is to live in the
communion of such Saints as are described! Mal. 3. 16. To hear them freely, and
humbly to open their hearts and experiences to one another! After this manner,
some say, the art of Medicine was found out: As any one met with an Herb, and
discovered the virtue of it by any Accident, he was to post it up, and so the
Physicians skill was perfected by a collection of those posted Experiments. But
woe to us! we are ready to post up each other's Failings and Infirmities to the
shame and reproach of Religion, and to furnish our common Enemies with matter
of contempt and scorn against us all.

Motive VI.
In a word, These Schisms and Dissentions in the Churches of Christ are ominous
presages, and foreboding signs of some sweeping Judgment, and common Calamity
near approaching us. It Is a common observation with Shepherds, That when the
Sheep push one another, a storm speedily ensues. I am sure it is so here, if God
turn not our hearts one toward another, he will come and smite the Earth with
a Curse, Mal. 4. 6. I believe it, Sirs, you will have other work to do shortly.
There be those coming, (if God prevent not) that will part the fray.

USE II* Use 2.
for Direction.
In the last place therefore give me leave to lay before you some necessary and
proper Directions and Counsels for the prevention and healing of Schisms and
Divisions amongst the Churches of Christ: for it is not Complaints and
Lamentations, but proper Counsels and Directions; and those not only
prescribed, but obeyed, that must do the work. When Joshua lay upon his face
before the Lord, Joshua 7. 8, 9, 10. bewailing the sins and miseries of Israel;
Up(says God) sanctify the people; wherefore lie thou upon thy face? As if he
should say, Thy moans and lamentations are good and necessary in their place;
but speedy action and vigorous endeavors must be also used, or Israel will
perish. So say I, up, up, fall speedily to your duties as men in earnest; and
for your guidance in the paths of duty, I will lay before you the following
plain and necessary Directions.

Direction I.
The orderly gathering, and filling of particular Churches, is of great
influence unto the peace and tranquillity of those Churches: and therefore it
greatly concerns all that are interested therein, especially such as are vested
with Office-power to beware whom they receive into their Communion.

The Scriptures do plainly discover to us, that Church Members ought to be
visible Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1, 2. Acts 2. 41, to the end. Ephesians. 2.
7. 1 These. 1. 2, 3. Romans 1. 7. Col. 1. 2. Hence particular Churches are called
the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33. If admissions belax and negligent,
so much heterogeneous matter fills the Church, that it can never be quiet.
Christians and Christians may live together harmoniously and coalesce in one
orderly and comfortable Society, as having one and the same Head, one Spirit,
the same general Design and End; but godly and ungodly, spiritual and carnal
are acted by contrary Principles, pursue opposite Designs, and can never
heartily coalesce. There is a spirit of discerning, a judgment of discretion in
the Saints, and it is especially desirable in a more eminent degree in those
that have Office-power in the Church, to judge of men's fit qualifications for
Church Communion. We all allow, that gross ignorance and profaneness are just
bars to men's admission: and to deny this, were to take all power from the
Church to preserve the purity of God's Ordinances, or to cast out notorious
Offenders. None ought to be admitted into Church Communion, but such as do
appear to the judgment of Charity (comparing their Professions and
Conversations) to be Christians indeed, that is, men fearing God, and working
Righteousness.

And I make no doubt, but some Opinions as well as practices, render men unmeet
for Church Communion, Tit. 3. 10. 2 John 10. All Opinions which overthrow
Doctrines necessary to be believed, which the Apostle comprehends under the
name of Faith; and all such Opinions as are inconsistent with an holy Life, and
overthrow the power of Godliness, which the Apostle comprehends under the name
of a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. whosoever shall hold or maintain any
such Opinions as these, he is either to be kept out, if not admitted; or cast
out, if he be in Church Fellowship. In receiving such, you receive but Spies
and Incendiaries among you. What a Firebrand did Arius prove, not only in the
Church of Constantinople, but even to the whole World? Men of graceless Hearts,
and erroneous Heads, will give a continual exercise to the patience of Sober
Christians. I deny not but out of the purest Churches men may arise speaking
perverse things; and yet the Officers and Members of those Churches be
blameless in their admission: But if they can be discerned before they be
admitted, a little preventive care would be of singular and seasonable use to
the tranquillity of Church-Societies.

Direction II.
Let all Officers and Members of Church study their Duties, and keep themselves
within the bounds of their proper places. Ordinate Motions are quiet Motions, 1
These. 4. 11. Study to be quiet, and do your own business, and work with your
own hands, as we commanded you. In which words he condemns two vices, which
disturb and distract the Churches of Christ, viz. Curiosity in matters which
pertain not to us, and Idleness in the Duties of our particular Callings. Two
things I will drop by way of Caution:

(1.) Let it be for Caution to Ministers that they mind their proper work, A
Doctore glorioso, a pastore contentioso and inutilibus Questionibus liberet
Ecclesiam Deus. Luther's Prayer.
study the Peace of the Church, impartially dispense their respects to the
Saints committed to their charge, not siding with a Party. There be few Schisms
in Churches, in which Ministers have not some hand. Jerome upon those words,
Hosea 9. 8. has this memorable note; Veteres scrutans historias, invenire non
possum scidisse Ecclesiam, praeter eos qui Sacerdotes a Deo positi fuerunt.
Searching the Ancient Histories (says he) I can find none that has more rent
the Church of God, than those that sustain the Office of Ministers. This is a
sad charge, and it is too justly laid upon many of that Order: Oh what a
Blessing is a Prudent, Patient, Peaceable Minister, to the Flock over which he
watches!

(2.) Let the People keep their places, and study their proper Duties. There be
in most Congregations, some idle people, who having little to do at home, are
employed upon Satan's Errands to run from house to house, carrying tales to
exasperate on Christian against another. These the Apostle particularly marks,
and warns the Churches of, 1 Timothy 5. 13. And withal they learn to be idle,
wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but tatlers also, and
busybodies, speaking things which they ought not. If that one rule of Christ,
Matthew. 18. 15, 16. were conscientiously and strictly attended to, to tell a
trespassing Brother his sault privately, then with one or two more, if
obstinacy make it necessary, and not to expose him to the whole Church, and
much less to the whole World, without a plain necessity, How many thousand
Ruptures would be prevented in Christian Societies? But instead of regularly
admonishing and reproving those irregular and idle Tatlers (as the Apostle
calls them) who make it their business to sow jealousies, to make and widen
breaches amongst brethren.

Direction III.
Let all Christians govern their tongues and keep them under the command of the
law of kindness in their mutual converses with one another. A soft answer
(says Solomon) Prove. 15. 1. turns away wrath; but grievous words stir up
anger: Hard to hard will never do well: How easily did Abigail disarm angry
David by a gentle Apology? What more boisterous than the wind? Yet a gentle
Rain will allay it. It may be strongly presumed that a meek and gentle answer
will more easily allay the Passions of a godly man than of one that is both
ungodly and full of Enmity toward us; and yet sometimes it has done the
latter. A company of vain wicked men having inflamed their Blood in a Tavern at
Boston in New England, and seeing that Reverend, Meek, and Holy Minister of
Christ, Mr. Cotton coming along the street, one of them tells his companions,
I Will go (says he) and put a trick upon the old Cotton; down he goes, and
crossing his way, whispers these words into his ear, Cotton (said he) thou art
an old fool: Mr. Cotton replied, I confess I am so; the Lord make both me and
thee wiser than we are, even wise to salvation: He relates this passage to his
wicked companions, which cast a great damp upon their spirits in the midst of a
frolic: What peaceful Societies should we have, if our lips transgressed not
the laws of love and kindness?

Direction IV.
Respectful Deportments to those that are beneath us in Gifts or Estates, is an
excellent conservative of Church-Peace. Lofty and Contemptuous carriages
toward those that are beneath us in either respect, is a frequent occasion of
bitter Jars and Animosities. The Apostle charge it upon the Corinthians, That
no one be puffed up for one against another; for who makes thee to differ from
another? 1 Cor. 4. 6, 7. What respectful language did Holy Mr. Brewen give to
his own godly servants? Remember, Christians, that there is neither rich nor
poor, bond nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus. This indeed destroys not
the civil differences God has made between one and another. Grace will teach
the godly servant to give double honor to a Religious Master or Mistress, the
private Christian to a godly Magistrate or Minister. It will teach the People
to know them which labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and
admonish them, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and
to be at peace among themselves, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. and it will also teach
Superiors to condescend to men of low degree, and not to think of themselves
above what they ought, but with all lowliness, meekness and long suffering to
forbear one another in love, keeping (this way) the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3.

Direction. V.
This gentle language and respectful deportment, would naturally and constantly
flow from the Uniting Grace of Wisdom, Humility and Love, were they more
exalted in the hearts of Christians.

Wisdom would allay those unchristian heats, Prove. 17. 27. a man of
understanding is of an excellent Spirit, so we render it, but the Hebrew
signifies a cool Spirit; the wisdom that is from above is gentle and easy to
be entreated, James 3. 17.

Humility takes away the fuel from the fire of Contention; only from Pride
comes Contention, Prove. 13. 10. How dearly has Pride, especially Spiritual
Pride cost the Churches of Christ?

Love is the very Cement of Societies, the fountain of Peace and Unity; it
thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. puts the fairest sense upon doubtful words and
actions, it bears all things. Love me (says Anstin) and reprove me as thou
please: It Is a radical grace, bearing the fruits of Peace and Unity upon it.

Direction VI.
Be of a Christ-like, forgiving Spirit one toward another, Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Let
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put
away from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Has thy
Brother offended thee? how apt art thou also to offend thy Brother? and which
is infinitely more, how often do thou every day grieve and offend Jesus
Christ, who yet freely forgives all thy offenses? Remember Friend, that an
unforgiving is a sad sign of an unforgiven person. They that have found mercy,
pity and forgiveness should of all men in the World be most ready to show it.

Direction VII.
Be deeply affected with the mischievous effects and consequents of Schisms and
Divisions in the Societies of the Saints, and let nothing beneath a plain
necessity divide you from Communion one with another; hold it fast till you can
hold it no longer without Sin. At the fire of your contentions your enemies
warm their hands, and say, aha, so would we have it: Your Prayers are
obstructed, Mat. 5. 24. First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift. Edification is hindered: Feverish bodies thrive not, Ephesians. 4.
15. God is provoked to remove his Gracious presence from among you. Be of one
mind (says the Apostle) live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you,
1 Cor. 13. 11. implying that their contentions would deprive them of his
blessed company with them. The glory of your society is clouded; if ye have
bitter envyings and strife in you hearts, glory not, James 3. 14. Glory not in
your Church Privileges, personal gifts and seize; whatever you think of
your selves you are not such Christians as you vogue your selves for, living in
a Sin so directly contrary to Christianity. The name of Christ is dishonored.
You are taken out of the world, to be a people for his name, that is, for his
honor; but there is little credit to the name of Christ from a dividing,
wrangling people. The alluring beauty of Christianity, by which the Church
gains upon the world, Acts 2. 46, 47. is sullied and defaced, and thereby (as I
noted before) conversion hindered, and a new stone, as it were, rolled over the
graves of poor sinners, to keep them down in their impenitency: Tremble
therefore at the thoughts of Divisions and Separations. St. Augustine notes
three sins severely punished in Scripture. The Golden, Calf with the Sword;
Iehojakims cutting the Sacred Roll, with a dreadful Captivity; but the Schism
of Korah and his Accomplices, with the Earth's opening her mouth and swallowing
them up quick.

Direction VIII.
Let all Church Members see that they have Union with Christ, evidencing it
self in daily sweet Communion with him. Lines drawn from a Circumference come
nearest to one another in the Center. When God intends to make the hearts of
men one, he first makes them new, Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will give them one heart, and
I will put a new spirit within you. And the more any renewed heart tastes the
sweetness of Communion with God, by so much it is disposed for Unity and Peace
with his People. Our frowardness and peevishness plainly discovers all is not
well betwixt God and us. Nothing so opposite to, or abhorred by a soul that
enjoys sweet Peace and Communion with Christ, than to live in sinful jars and
contentions with his people. Return therefore to the Primitive Spirit of Love
and Unity; forbear one another; forgive one another; mortify your dividing
Lusts; cherish your Uniting Graces; mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them, Romans 16.
17. In a Word, and that the Word of the Apostle in the Text, I beseech you,
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same
thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

FINIS.

