FIVE New Letters FROM OSTEND, Sent by some English Soldiers Which were in the
late BATTLE BEFORE MONS, To their Friends in London.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1678.

Letters from OSTEND.
LETTER I. To the Dear Mrs. A. N. living in Old-street.
THat ravenous Bullet, my dear Nancie, which robbed me of my Left Hand, was yet
merciful in its choice, that it spared me my Right one to write you of the
Misfortune; yet it is well it mist my Heart, since your fair Idea is so deeply
imprinted therein, that it would have been not only guilty of depriving me of
Breath, but of that much more cruel and Sacrilegious Fact of destroying you in
Effigy. In the heat of Battle, the Martial noise of Drum and Trumpets Chorus'd
with the dreadful shreiks of dying Men, could not drive you out of my Memory;
but on the contrary, the hopes of that undisturbed happiness I shall enjoy when
I shall graspe you in my Arms, fired me to do Actions worthy so incomparable a
felicity. Should I hear that you were too lavish of your Tears at the news of
my Wound, the tidings of your grief would trouble me more than either my pain
or misfortune: but to prevent that watrie tribute which I am confident your
affectionate Heart will be too prone to exact from your fair eyes, I do assure
you the Surgeon does not doubt of my Recovery.

I am at present in good temper of Body, and do enjoy in common with the rest
of the Wounded Men here about me, all things fit for persons in our condition;
so that I doubt not but to live to tell you what dangers I have been in, and
what more I would willingly embrace to be esteemed, as indeed I am,

The most faithful, etc. of your Servants, I. D.

LETTER II.
I Doubt not, dearest Betty, but you have heard of the late Engagement; but
could you imagine what danger I was in, you would either have concluded you
should never hear from me again, or if you did, that I must have dated my
Letter from the Grave. I know not what our Ghosts do, or where they inhabit
after Death; but sure I am, if they retain any tincture of our Souls whilst we
live, mine would sometime or other have been so kind, as to whisper you in the
ear, that I dyed yours. Your fair form, ever since I had the first blessing to
behold it, filled my Amorous Breast so full of Love, that there has never since
been any room or vacuity left for the re-acception of any other passion. This I
but lately experienced for a truth: for although it was my fortune to be placed
in the midst of this obstinate Rencounter, where I might easily behold all the
dismal effects of a Bloody Battle, wherein all the circumstances of Horror and
Amazement were drawn to the Life, and I my self one of the busy Agents to make
it more terrible; yet neither the consideration of my own danger, nor a
compassion of my fellow creatures misery, could work in my replenisht Breast
the least propensity either to fear or pity; so full was I of you, that
methought every Man I saw was your Enemy, and I only stood in your Vindication:
this imagination whetted my Sword, and poisoned my Bullets against the Enemy,
so that in effect, I fought for you as the dearest pledge in the World, I
invokt you as my Saint, I prayed to you, and in fine, was either delivered by
you, or for you; in hopes of the latter,

Yours or Deaths, R. W.

LETTER III. To Mrs. H. L. in White-chappel.
THe Affection, dear Hannah, you ever doubted, is now come to the test, and by
good fortune I have lighted on your Brother to do me this favor of writing you
my Condition. He assures me also to acquaint you that Heaven and you are the
two last things I shall think of in this world; and indeed I do not know but
this very thought wherewith I instruct him what I would have you know, will be
my last, it being my good fortune (for since your cruel denial you know I never
coveted to live) in the beginning of this Engagement to be shot off by a
Cannon-bullet almost in the middle: my Intrals are not only discernable, but
some of them broken, so that I am in continual expectation that friendly Death
will now quickly rid you of that wretched Creature whom you never thought
worthy your Esteem. Ah, my dear Mistress, could Passion compound for an Estate,
or might an entire Affection have been thought sterling. I had certainly been
the richest man in the world. I was indeed a Miser in Love; my Heart was the
Coffer, and with a greedy ambition, if it were possible, I too much Idolized
the Treasure I hid therein. Envy me not my presumption in adoring you, since my
inpropitious Stars have on your side espoused the Affront, and sufficiently
revenged my sacrilegious Attempt; yet since my Crime was only Love, and that
so pure, that Angels might own it without giving the least blot to their
more-refined Conversations: since, I say, my Crime was only LOVE, let your
Hatred die with me. Pursue not your Cruelty to the Grave, nor let your potent
Frowns disturb my melancholy Perambulations in the other world; where if, when
your happy days shall be expired, it shall be my fortune to meet you, I will
tell you so sad a story of my former Affection, that Hero shall weep, and
Leander be ashamed, that they could not love like

Your Dying Servant, M. S.

LETTER IV. For Mrs. J. F. in Golden-lane.
WHen I had escaped the danger I was in by our engaging the French before Mons,
I could not, my dear Jenny, (with whom I have ever wasted my most happy
minutes, and in whose retentive Bosom I have often lodged, with good success,
my most important secrets) but hold my self obliged both by the Laws of Love
and Friendship to give you information of my safety. It Is true, at first when I
saw both sides draw up into Battalia, I quarreled with my self that I could not
shake off some little fear, which in spite of all my resolution crept into my
thoughts at the apprehension of those dismal effects which must needs be the
result of so desperate a Detachment: 'Twas then I turned my Face homewards, and
with a deep Sigh and heavy Heart, gave thee a loud Farewell; which I had hardly
done before the Martial sound of War called us to Battle; ar which, as if I had
been in a Trance before, a native rage fled through my English-blood, and quite
dispersed those timorous thoughts which plagued my breast before. I shall
forbear the particulars of that great Action, because I question not but you
have heard them ere this: I shall only therefore acquaint you that our
English, according to their old custom, behaved themselves to admiration. That
R. B. and T. M. had the honor to die in the field of Honor.

Your truly loving Friend and Servant, I. C.

LETTER V. To E. W. in St. Giles's in the Fields.
THou know, honest Comrade, I ever had a strange curiosity to be some petty
Actor in a remarkable Fight: Methought the discreet ordering of an Army, the
expert drawing up of several men, and they of diverse Nations and Languages,
into Battalia, and making them capable of obedience under the same words of
Command; the glittering of Swords, the clangor of Trumpets, the noise of Drums,
the shouts of the Victorious, the shreiks of the Oppressed, the neighing of
Horses, the roaring of Cannon, the clattering of Muskets, the flourishing of
Colors, and a thousand other remarkables which must needs happen in those
fatal Conjunctures, were objects too glorious for a common eye. And therefore I
had a great desire to be an Agent in the Debate betwixt us and the French on
the 14 instant, where I beheld all, and more than I could imagine before: and
trust me, honest Ned, it did me good to see it so bravely disputed on both
sides; but especially to behold my Countrymen under the Command of our
never-enough-to-be-celebrated General, doing wonders, and like Bulworks under
showers of Bullets, which rained on them from all sides. To see whole heaps of
the slaughtered on both sides lying hudled together, whilst their blushing
Blood, as if ashamed of their lifeless Trunks, in the heat of action collected
into Rivulets, and silently glided through the busy Army. I could write thee
Miracles, but want leisure at present: Know then, that D. T. was wounded, and
R. H. killed in the Battle; and that I continue, as I ever was,

Thy true Friend, etc. L. S.

FINIS.

