The Five strange WONDERS, In the North and West of ENGLAND: AS They were
communicated to diverse Honorable Members of Parliament, from several Country
Gentlemen and Ministers; concerning the strange and prodigious flying in the
Air of a Black Coffin betwixt Liecester and Nottingham, on Sabbath day last was
a fortnight, with a flaming Arrow, and a Bloody Sword, casting forth streams of
Fire, to the great wonder and astonishment of many Hundreds of People that
beheld the sparkling and glittering Rays, as far as Newark Beaver,
Loughborough, Melton and diverse other places: With a Conjecturation thereupon,
what these dreadful Signs from Heaven, may denote and signify to the People on
Earth this present Summer.

Likewise, the great and wonderful Warlike Prodigies, which appeared over
Marston-Moor, near the City of York, between two fiery or flaming Pillars. And
the three Monstrous Creatures found in three Eggs, laid by one Hen bought in
Exceter Market one Night, wherein was found a Serpent, a Cockatrice, and a
Toad. Together with the opening of the Sky in a fearful manner over Standish
town five miles from Gloucester, and the appearing of a terrible fiery shaking
Sword from the Heavens, with its Point downward toward the Earth; as also the
color thereof, and what proceeded from it, running along the ground.

ATtested by an Eyewitness; and entered upon Record, in the Original Mirror,
or Looking Glass: And for more general satisfaction, presented to the view of
the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

London, Printed for W. THOMAS, 1659.

The Worlds New Wonders; OR, The Fiery and Flaming Prodigies, in the North and
West of England.
MAny of the People of God who live in such backsliding Times, wherein public
dangers are approaching, being conscious to their own infirmities, and
weakness, are many times much perplexed with the fears and apprehensions of
ensuing perils (especially upon the appearing of such strange Prodigies in the
Skies, even in these latter days:) and through weakness of Faith, much
question, Whether they be able to undergo such Conflicts, and endure such
Temptations, as many despised Creatures of this Earthly Fabric formerly have
done? Or whether the power of God does so eminently appear in these latter
Times for his Church and and Children, as in precedent Ages, and in the first
primitive times of, the Gospel it did? But certainly the Name of God is
wonderful still: His glorious Arm is not shortened, that it cannot save; nor his
Ear heavy, that it cannot hear: So that we may assure our selves, that he will
preserve us from, or support us under, or deliver us from the rage and subtilty
of the grandest Serpents, notwithstanding the various Changes, and unparalled
Revolutions, either in State or Commonwealth: For observable it is, both of
the ancient and modern Times, that the greatest Prince who ever reigned in
Tyranny, had (at the last) a final subversion in defamation and misery; and
those that think to palliate their black and wicked Designs, under the specious
pretenses of Religion and Liberty; must know, that the time is near, of their
disguising, and the Stalking-horse discovered, under the Name of Gospel and
Reformation: For as the Comets appeared before the death of Manasses King of
Judah, for his cruel Tyranny against the good Prophet Esaias, so does the
prodigious Exhalations in the Air (in this our Age) denote the great Fall of
those who shall usurp the Peoples Liberties; and as three Suns and a fie^y
Dart, were seen in the Heavens before the death of Dio^lesian the Tyrant, so
likewise appeared very strange Prodigies, upon the change of a great and high
Potentate, who by the good hand of Providence was timely removed and taken from
us.

Amongst the rest, that which is most observable, is, the Dismal sight in the
Air, on Sabbath day last was a fortnight, prodigously reprepresenting it self
from one of the clock in the forenoon, till about a quarter and a half after
three, in the perfect Figure and Form of a black Coffin, with a fiery Dart, and
a flaming Sword flying to and again, backwards and forwards, toward the head
of the said Coffin, which was with great wonder and admiration beheld by many
hundreds of People between Liecester and Nottinghamshire; the luster whereof,
at its breaking, was of so large an Extent, that the streams thereof were seen
glittering and sparkling as far as Newark, Beaver, Nottingham, Loughborough,
Melton, and diverse other Country Towns, and parts adjacent; to the great
astonishment of the Inhabitants.

And very observable it is, that the fiery Dart, or Arrow, during the time that
the Coffin lay havering and flying up and down in the Air, seemed as it were to
charge each other, and with such clashing, and streaks of fire, as the like is
not to be paralleled in any Age; but upon the dissolution of the Coffin,
abundance of streams of fire proceeded from it, which appeared so conspicuous,
That the Heavens seemed to receive its Light and Serenes from its illustrious
influences: But no sooner were these serene and bright Rays clouded and
eclipsed by the black and louring Clouds, but the great splendour of the fiery
streams, proceeding from the Sword and Arrow, immediately took their center
within their own Region and Horizon, and were seen no more from that day, etc.
The truth hereof is attested from the hands of several Gentlemen of quality,
and Reverend Divines, to diverse honorable Members of Parliament, persons of
great worth and integrity, and several conjectures (possibly) may be made
thereupon: But that the Coffin denotes Mortality, too sad and woeful Experience
we have in these our days, both in city and country; and probably the other
two Signals from Heaven, may represent a War or Famine: But the Lord of his
infinite mercy divert these sad and just-deserved Judgments from falling upon
these Nations, notwithstanding the great confederacy of her potent Enemies,
and grant, that there may be redintegrate imbracings, and renewings of love
between the People and their Representative, as being far better for all the
Plants of this Commonwealth to be watered by the sweetest Dewes and showers of
Heaven, than by the most liberal hand of any person whatsoever, which is always
consummating.

The next thing that presents it self to public view, is, the great fleak or
sheet of fire, which appeared in the Sky over the Town of Oukam In Rutland, on
Sunday was fortnight, the manner thus: About four of the clock in the
afternoon, as people were coming from the Church, great sparklings, and
illustrious Rays were seen to descend from the Firmament and immediately after a
great sheet or fleak of Fire appeared, which at the last flew quite down the
Town, to the sign of the Crown, where it centered, burnt, and extinguished. A
sad Omen for those that shall assume the Royal Dignity without Authority.

In a word the next Prodigy that we shall here insist upon is, another
Exhaliaton in the Air as full of wonder as admiration, as evidently appears, by
the testimony given by the York shire Carriers, who affirm, that about the
beginning of this month two Fiery Pillars were visible seen at Noonday over
Marston Moor, about five miles from the City of York; the brightness whereof
extended as far as Wakefield, Wetherby, Pontefract, Sandwich, Doncaster, Leeds,
Hallifax, and diverse other places; and between these two Pillars intervened
several armed Troops and Companies in Battle array, presenting each other with
several Vollies, and after some Dispute, the Northern Army vanquished the
Southern Army: which being done, the two Pillars vanquished.

What this portends, no man can conjecture aright: but it may be supposed, the
two Pillars represent his Highness and the Parliament, and the Northern Army
the Forces of this Common wealth, vanquishing their Enemy, and maugre the
Designs of all Foreign and Popish Confederates. Who need not in the least be
feared, if the mutual closings and claspings of redintegrate affections and
endearments be insisted upon between the Supreme Authority and People, and each
member of this Commonwealth, to return to his duty and proper station, and
firmly to unite together, for the recovery of our long-lost Liberties, and
dear-earn'd Privileges.

And as there appeared a fiery Meteor in the Air near Bristow, on the South
side of the City, for diverse nights together, in form long, with fiery streams
shooting out East and West; which was the week before the be heading of the
late King Charles: So have we had sundry other Mutations, since those dismal
and gloomy days; as fiery Comets, Blazing Stars, Warlike Troops, and visible
Bands of Foot, which caused great admiration to many hundred Spectators at
Newmarket-Heath, on Tuesday last was seven night, where many of the Inhabitants
thereabouts were much astonished, especially at the dreadful noise of Drums
beating, and Trumpets sounding, which caused as great astonishment, as wonder;
by reason they saw no Warlike Bands visible at present: Yet no sooner had this
Echo possessed them with various Ruminations, but immediately they began to
discern several Warlike Troops and Companions, arraying themselves in Battalia;
and after some pickeering, and vollies presented between several Parties, as it
were Forlorn Hopes, the two main Bodies joined Battle, disputing very
puisiantly, and with great vigor. During this Engagement, there seemed to be
an extraordinary Light, and glittering of Swords, and Men in Armor, which
continued for the space of half an hour; and then the one seemed to vanquish
the other, taking their pursuit toward the City of London.

And as this was no small terror to the Beholders, so was the succeeding
Thunder as great a Wonder to the Spectators, who after sundry great Claps from
an Angry God, even like unto an Enemies Warning-Piece, presented to the Earth a
mighty Thunderbolt, much like unto the Shell of a great Granado; which was
taken up and carried to Justice Foster's house neae adjacent, where it now
lies, and is there to be seen at this day; as it was affirmed by Captain
Neilson, the Nersolk Post, and some others, who came to London, and lodged at
the Sign of the Ram-Inne, in West-Smithfield.

It is observable, That not long after this Wonder from Heaven, had presented
it self to the Inhabitants of the Earth, but a bright Star of a great
Magnitude, was seen glittering and sparkling up and down, even like unto that
in the West; whose Luster was of so large an Extent, and appeared so
conspicuous, That although the Air was dark, yet bright and serene were the
glorious Rays which streamed forth by its great splendour, as if the Heavens
received all its Screnes from its illustrious influences. This Star was seen
for the space of two Nights constantly about ten of the Clock: yet in several
Forms; as sometimes like a fiery Dragon; sometimes like a flaming Sword; and
sometimes in an Oval Form, casting forth a round flame as big as a bushel, and
diverse sparkling Coals.

As these pr^digies port^nd no little wonder; so does Beheaded Dr. John Hewytts
Ghost, produce as great admiration, amongst many; who by its pleading and
crying, calls for Justice; which to some seems already executed; and begins
thus; saying he is by Birth a Freeman of England, and that it is the undoubted
ancient inseparable Birthright, Privilege, and Inheritance of every English
Freeman both by the Common Laws, Franchises, Great Chatters, Statutes and
Usages of this Land, ratified from Age to Age by the Votes, Resolutions,
Declarations, Jndgements of the High Court of Parliament, and other public
Courts of Justice: That no Freemen of England may or ought to be taken or
imprisoned, or disseised, or disinherited of his freehold, Libertyes, or Free
Customs, or to be outlawed, exiled, or any way destroyed, or pur to death, upon
any accusation whatsoever, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the
Law of the Land, upon Inquest and Presentment by the Oaths of 12 good and
lawful men, upon good and probable evidence and witness. And that if any thing
be done to the contrary of the Premises, it shall be void in Law, holden for
error, and naught.

An Exact Relation touching the descending down from Heaven great Fleaks and
sheets of fire, near Coventry and Litterworth.
ON the 24th of this instant March, 1659. By several persons of worth it was
certified, That about the beginning of this Month, great Apparitions and
wonderful Signs and Lightnings of Fire were seen in the Air; and a Flaming
Flake of Fire, about the bigness of an ordinary Sheet, were seen at the
Market Town of Litterworth in Leicestershire, taking its flight toward
Cotsbich Grounds, where it descended to the Earth, and immediately extinguished,
without doing any harm; although many hundreds of the Country People beheld
the same, to their great wonder and astonishment. The like also appeared at a
Town in Warwickshire, called Non-Eaton, about 7 miles from Coventry, where a
great Sheet of Fire were seen hovering and flying in the Air about the 7th
instant, toward the Evening; and after some time flying up and down, at last
took its descent down into the Churchyard, where a great company of Boys were
playing, falling just amongst them; yet did no harm, not so much as a hair of
any of their heads perishing: for no sooner was it come to the ground, but it
immediately extinguished likewise, although it seemed of a light flame upon its
falling down. What these strange Signs and Wonders portend, no man knows: yet
this conjecture may fitly be applied, That it denotes great Changes,
Alterations, and Mutations, in several Nations: for it is observable, That
sundry Examples of diverse Prodigies, are still fresh in the Memory of Man; As
the raining of Blood in the North, presently after the Scots came into England,
to assist the Parliament, which covered the Church and Churchyard of Bencastle
in Cumberland. And the day before Edgehill sight three Suns were seen in the
North. God divert his heavy Judgments from falling upon these Nations.

To conclude, in the next place, be pleased to observe, that amongst the
greatest of Wonders, that shall arise from the forementioned Prodigies: this
may be fitly ranked amongst the most strangest of them, viz. That about a
fortnight ago, a Woman buying of a Hen in Exceter-market, with a resolution to
kill her the next day, put her over night in a Coop, and the next morning
coming to take her out, found that she had laid three Eggs, which made her
exceedingly astonished; insomuch, that acquainting some of her Neighbors with
it, they advised her to break them, which she did; and in the first discovered
the perfect sign and shape of a Serpent, dead: in the second, a Cockatrice; and
in the third a Toad: both which last, seemed to stir at the first, but
immediately died. These may fitly signify the Death of an old Serpent, the
surviving of a Cockatrice, and a resemblance of the most unworthy Actions of
many in Authority, whom we leave for true Justice to rectify. Desiring rather,
that each member would endeavor to sail in the Ocean of Security to the
desired Haven, than split against the Rocks of Ambition and injustice.

Thus having given you an account of these strange Prodigies which has lately
happened in these our days, give me leave to wind up the truth of all, with
one President or Example, that happened upon the 30 day of Jan. in the year 1650.
which was thus, Upon St. Andrews day, a little before, or about Sunrising, the
Sky opened in a fearful manner, in the South-West over Standish, a Town five
miles from Gloucester, and there appeared a terrible fearful fiery flaming
Sword, with the hilt upwards, toward the Heavens, the point downwards to the
Earth; the Hilt seemed to be blue, the Sword was a great length, shaking hither
and thither, and coming lower toward the Earth. There was a long flame of
fire toward the point, sparkling, and flaming in a fearful manner, to the
great astonishment of the Spectators, who were many. At last the Haven closing,
the Sword vanished, and the fire fell to the Earth, and ran upon the ground.

This is entered upon Record, by an Eye witness, and published for general
satisfaction to the Nations.
FINIS.

