FIVE LETTERS From a GENTLEMAN in SCOTLAND TO His Friend in London; Being a
True Account Of what Remarkable Passages have happened since the Prince's
Landing; the manner of the taking of the Chancellor, and his Lady in Man's
Apparel, the burning of the Pope, Demolishing of the Popish Chapels, etc. with
the total overthrow of the Roman Catholics.
Edinburgh, December. 3. 1688.
THE Students of the University here, designed, some time ago, to burn the
Pope's Effigies; but that was not more zealously desired to be prevented by
some, than to be done by others; notwithstanding all the imaginable care taken
to prevent it, yet it was done about Ten Days ago, after daylight gone, at the
Cross, and blown up with art, that seems to have been beyond their invention,
above Four Stories high. Two days thereafter they went to the Parliament House,
at midday, passing by the Guards, crying, No Pope, No Papist; and being got
into the Parliament House, (after they had required the Guards to be present at
the Sentence) and having got upon the Bench, they Arraigned his Holiness before
his Judges, and gave the Jury their Commission, who brought him in Guilty;
whereupon, he was sentenced to be burnt publicly at the Cross the Twenty Fifth
of this instant; and withal declared and protested for a Free Parliament.

On Sunday last, advertisement was giving by a Papist, to a Gentlewoman to
remove her self out of this City, and to carry out her Husbands papers
forthwith, because that Night there should be here a hot wakening, such as had
not been heretofore, and advised her to give the same advice to any of her
friends she pleased.

Your friend Mr. M. being acquainted with this, he revealed the same to several
of our Magistrates, (which, as is alleged, was not regarded,) he went
thereafter and acquainted the Guard of our Trained-bands therewith; whereupon,
Captain Patrick Johnstone, (Hilton's Brother) caused to beat the Drums, and the
noise having gone abroad, and several persons having ordered their Arms, and
people flocking together to consider what was fit to be done, the Magistrates,
with the Council, convened for the same purpose. A great many Boys met also,
and went through the whole Town, crying aloud, No Pope. No Papist, No Popish
Chancellor, No Melfort, No Father Petres. But the Gates were shut, the
Magistrates went along the streets for the keeping of the peace; and nothing
more was done that night, except the breaking of three or four Glass-windows of
Papists Houses, and that some of the Boys got up to the Cross, and Proclaimed a
Free-Parliament, and offered Two Thousand Pounds for Melfort's Head; so that
Night past over, when all people here were in fear of some ill designs, and the
rather, because of their certain knowledge that there were lying in the Suburbs
a great many Hundreds of Highland men, (or rather Thousands) and that all that
day the Abbey Gates were exactly kept by Soldiers, Commanded by Captain
Wallace, a Papist, and none admitted to enter except Papists or Highland-men.

On Monday, about midday, the Chancellor parted thence, and went toward the
Highlands, by advice of several of the Privy Council and his friends, and took
a good Guard with him. At Night the Students went (without Arms) to the Abbey,
to condemn the Pope, and to Proclaim a Free Parliament, and perhaps to burn
what was contained in the Chapel, but without asking questions, were repulsed
by a shower of Ball whereby several were wounded, and some since dead of their
wounds, which coming to the Privy Councils knowledge (which was then fitting)
they called the Town Council, (then also met) and Captain Grahame; desired them
to see to the preservance of the peace, and sent Six Heralds with an order to
Captain Wallace, and his men, to lay down their Arms, render themselves
Prisoners, and deliver their Guards to the Magistrates, but they were answered
by Ball, which being reported to the Privy Council, they forthwith ordered
Captain Grahame, and his Company, Trained-bands and Militia, to fall upon them,
which they did; Wallace and his men fled, several of them were taken, and some
wounded, as were some of Captain Grahame's men. The Rabble were so incensed
upon the firing, and supposition that it was Boys were killed, that they burnt
all that was contained in the Chapels, the Jesuits College, the Popish
Printing House, the Abbey Church, the Chancellors Lodgings, and generally, all
that was contained in the Houses of Papists, in the Town and Cannon-gate,
excepting what was taken away by some people who designed plunder.

They had fires in the Abbey-Court, and at the Cross, all the Night, and spared
nothing they got in Papists Houses. Some few Houses were spared at the
intercession of some Protestants their friends, and after true enquiry, I heard
the loss is called greater than it is. None of the Papists themselves were
killed or wounded. They met with few of them; those they got they carried into
the Guard.

In some of the Popish Houses they found Arms and Barrels of Powder, which
provoked to a more narrow search. All this time the Castle never fired one Gun,
which is more attributed to the Duke of Gordon, than to any other inferior
Officer. I am told the Council sent and discharged an Execution from the
Castle. Some of the Boys are dead of their wounds. Traquair (a Popish Lord) and
several others went to, and continue in the Castle for their security. The
Council ordered the searching for Ammunition and Arms in some Popish Houses in
the Country, and this day committed a Warrant for the restoring of what was
plundered out of the Papists Houses.

I had forgot to tell you, that on Monday last the Privy Council disbanded Six
Hundred Men, taken on the Friday before, and commanded all the Highlanders
forthwith to depart upon pain of death, and yesterday ordered all Gentlemen to
depart out of the Town, excepting such as should give account of their business
to some of the Privy Council. I am credibly informed, that this day in the
Privy Council, was voted an Address to be made to his Majesty for a Free
Parliament; there are several Noblemen and Gentlemen gone from hence into
England, and more to follow, but its suspected they are going to the Prince of
Orange.


Edinburgh, December. 20.
WHen the Chancellor went away privately from the Abbey for Castle Drummond, he
gave strict command to Captain Wallace to preserve the Chapel, etc. The Rabble
having gathered, and procured Links, without any Firearms, about Six at Night
went to the Abbey, and were denied access; whereupon, some pressing forward,
Wallace commanded his Soldiers to Fire; which they did, and killed and wounded
about Twenty, whereof one half died shortly after. The Rabble retired to the
City with a great noise, toward the Entry to the Court of the
Parliament House, where some of the Lords of the Privy Council were sitting.
There some West-Country Gentlemen encouraged them to prosecute a Revenge, and
got the Provost of the City to go to the House of Lords; and told them, if they
would not give a Warrant to Assault Wallace, and force him from the Abbey, they
would do it without it. The Lords being alarmed with the slaughter, and a
report that several Gentlemen's Sons were killed, and some of their own; they
ordered a Herald at Arms, with sound of Trumpet, to command Wallace in the
Kings Name to give up his Guard at the Abbey to the City: And the Company under
the Cities Pay marched first, commanded by Captain Grahame; and after them all
the Train'd-bands and Militia, to force him in case of refusal; several
Gentlemen accompanying Grahame, and the Magistrates attending, Wallace refused
the Herald, and fired upon Grahame, and the rest behind; wounded some Gentlemen
and a few Soldiers: But Grahame Marched quickly down a Lane on the South Side
of the Porch of the Abbey-Court, where Wallace was Posted, and by a back way
entered the Court, came upon Wallace's Rear, and the Town Companies Fronting
him; after the first Fire he and all his Men fled; only a few of them were
taken, the most part escaping under the darkness of the Night. The City being
thus Master of the Abbey the Rabble immediately, without opposition, went first
to the Chapel, forced the Doors, broke all to pieces, and carried several
parcels in Triumph up to the Cross, and burnt them there.

The next day strong Guards were set through the whole City and Suburbs, in
convenient places, to repress any farther Tumult; and so all was quiet, and
continues so.

This Morning there was coming into Leith a Boat from Burnt-Island, with Eighty
Men a-board, being a part of Two or Three Hundred which had been sent for by
the Duke of Gordon from the North, to enforce the Castle; the rest were to
follow. But the Bailiff of Leith having notice beforehand of their coming, sent
on Board and discharged their coming into the Harbor, and desired to speak with
their Commander; who came ashore, and owned the design; being believed to be
all Papists: He was seized, and the Men commanded back to the other shore,
under the highest pains.

The Lords of the Treasury have called in all Commissions given to Papists, for
Collecting His Majesty's Revenue.


Edinburgh, December. 22.
THE Chancellor, thinking as Affairs stood, he was not secure at home, resolved
for France; and with all the privacy imaginable, he in Woman's and his Lady in
Man's Clothes, got a-board a Vessel bound from this Firth the 20th. instant,
being Thursday; which set Sail, the Wind being fair: But a certain person on
Horseback, Riding by Kircaldie, where the Seamen use to walk, called to them,
and told them, there was a good Prize in that Ship under Sail, namely, the
Chancellor of Scotland. Whereupon, about Thirty Six common Seamen, Commanded by
one Wilson, that had been a Bucaneer in America, which had Guns or Muskets,
manned a light Boat; and with out any Provisions, save a little Brandy, or any
Order from a Magistrate, set Sail immediately, and came up with the Ship that
Night, Boarded her, inquired for the Chancellor, whom they denied to be
a-board; but after search, found him and his Lady clothed as aforesaid;
brought the Ship back, and carried the Prisoners, with Mr. Nicolson, (a Priest,
late Regent in the College of Glasgow) ashore to Kircaldie Talbooth (or
Prison.) The Chancellor wrote Letters yesterday to several of the Privy
Council, complaning of the injury done him. The Council have ordered him to be
carried by the Earl of Mar, and a Company of the Militia, to Stirling Castle.

The Duke of Gordon has been desired by the Council to lay down his Charge of
Governor of the Castle; but he still declines it; alleging, that seeing he
has his Commission immediately from the King, and to be accountable to none
else, he cannot in honor lay it down till he has His Majesty's command for it;
and says, he had sent a Gentleman expressly to know His Majesty's pleasure upon
that point fourteen days ago, and expects his return every day: And in the mean
time, has assured the Council by Letters, and this day the Provost and
Magistrates of the City, whom he sent for to speak with, that he will upon his
Word of Honor be a good Neighbor, and not do them or the City any prejudice.

Two days a-go his Captain put an Oath to the Soldiers, whereby they bound
themselves to be faithful to His Majesty, and their Superior Officers, and to
defend the Protestant Religion; which being refused by Twenty or Thirty,
whereof Five were Papists, they were turned out.

There was a Pink Arrived at Leith on Thursday, sent by his Majesty. The
Searchers feized Two Boxes in it directed to the Chancellor, etc. and being
brought to the Council, there were found in them several Precepts upon the
Treasury, for payment of certain Sums to Papists, and some Commissions; in
particular, a Commission to one Peter Winste, (a Papist) to be Major of the
Gates of the Castle, and have power of all the Keys, without being accountable
to the Lieutenant (who is a Protestant;) but only to the Duke, and his Deputy,
who is a Papist too.


Edinburgh, December. 25.
THis day the Students burnt the Pope solemnly at the Cross before Thousands of
Spectators; our Privy Counselors and Magistrates were Spectators, and no
inconveniences followed. The Students were divided according to their Classes,
(that is their years of standing) each Class with its Captain. They advanced
orderly with Swords in their hands and Hoitboys before them; the College Mass
was carried before them by the under Janitor in his Gown, and bare.

We have many reports here of the Landing of Irish-men, but false; the whole
Country is in Arms, and Apprehends the Papists, and at Drumfreise they have
taken and imprisoned the Provost, with some other Papists and Priests, and
guard their Town with Six Companies a-Night, and have planted Cannon (taken
from their Ships) at the Cross and Ports, and recovered their Ammunition which
was sent to Carlavorock Castle.


Edinburgh, December. 27.
OUR Council has sent an Address to the Prince of Orange, at least it may go
hence on Saturday next. At Glalgow the Prince of Orange was Proclaimed the
Protestant Protector. The whole Country is up for the Prince, or at least under
pretense for the safety against Papists; but there is no fear of them in this
Kingdom, unless it be in Nithisdale and Galloway; and I think neither there:
However, there were some long Knives, or Bagonets of a strange shape, taken at
Kirkubright.


LONDON, Printed in the Year 1689.


