A Flaming Whip for Lechery: OR, THE Whoremasters SPECULUM.

CONTAINING, A fearful Historical RELATION of such Wicked unclean Persons, as
have been made Public and Private Examples of GOD'S Divine Vengeance, for
polluting themselves and others with such Abomination and Defilements. Taken
out of Sacred and Profane History.

ALSO, Some dreadful Examples of GOD'S Righteous Judgment, not Recorded in
either with curious Remarks, by way of a fuller Explanation of the most eminent
Sins of this kind, particularly those mentioned in Holy Writ; much Enlightening
the several Texts thereto referring; drawing from thence good Council and
Advice: With timely Warning, and serious Admonitions to Amendment of Life, and
speedy Reformation of Manners.

IN ORDER To prevent GOD'S heavy Judgments hanging over this sinful Land.

LONDON: Printed for ELIZ. HARRIS, at the Harrow, in Little-Britain, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of the following Essay is not to minister Fuel to those Impure
Flames which have consumed so many particular Persons, Families, and Nations,
but is intended as a Caveat and Warning to all those who are guilty of that
reigning Sin of Uncleanness, to repent and reform, lest their Practices bring
as great or greater Judgments upon themselves, and the Nations wherein they
live, as those they will find here related.

We have begun at the Creation, and traced this Sin, from its original, through
all the most remarkable Instances of it, from Lamech, the first whom we find
upon Record to have broken the divine Institution of Marriage betwixt one Man
and one Woman, to the time of Augustulus, the last of the Roman Emperors,
(properly so called) who died about the Year of Christ 476; so that, according
to the vulgar Account, we have run through the most observable Instances that
happened of this nature for the space of 5190 Years.

In the first place, we have taken all the Instances of the Old and New
Testament, with the Notes of Commentators upon the Crimes and Punishments, and
have now and then intermixed some Observations of our own. It Is not doubted but
this part will be pleasant and edifying to all Men of sober Minds, and may be
of great use to be put into the Hands of Youth, as a good Monitor to beware of
Youthful Lusts, against which they will see here that GOD has all-along
testified so much Wrath, and been as good as his Word (if we may make use of
that familiar Expression) in punishing Whoremongers and Adulterers. It may be
also of use to confirm and strengthen them against the Blasphemers of our Age,
who cry down the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, for here they will find
Proofs from Profane History, that those Threatenings denounced in the Holy
Scriptures against Empires, Kingdoms, and Cities, for Uncleanness and other
Sins, were exactly fulfilled; as will appear by the destruction of the
Assyrian, Babylonian, and Persian Empires, the several Captivities of the Jews,
and the Destructions of the Cities of Babylon, Nineveh, and Jerusalem.

They will here also meet with Solomon's Character of Whoredom, Whoremongers,
and Whores, collected from the several Chapters of the Proverbs, where he
treats of that Sin, than which nothing can be more abominable and odious, and
such as if any Man should give to the Beaux and Debauchees of this present Age,
he would run a hazard of being whipped through the Lungs, with a Damn him for a
canting foul-mouthed Coxcomb; so much do those Men hate their own Picture,
though drawn to the life by an infallible Hand: And therefore it is no Wonder
that they do as much as in them lies to break the Glass which shows them their
own deformed Aspect, that is, cry down the Divine Authority of the Bible, which
describes them as graphically as if it had been writ in our own Days.

Their Rampant Malice against the Gospel, and the Godhead of our Savior,
proceeds from the same Cause: The divine Lawgiver, by his Commentaries upon his
own Text, has abridg'd corrupt Mankind of that Liberty which they assumed to
themselves under the Law, and for which they pleaded Prescription, and has not
only forbid Polygamy and Concubinage, but declared Lustful Thoughts to be
Criminal, and that Whoremongers and Adulterers shall be excluded the Kingdom of
Heaven. No Wonder then that such Persons as live in open Rebellion to his
Dictates, and have bid Defiance to his Threats, do all they can to persuade
themselves and others, that it is not GOD, but Man, that they fight against. It
were to be wished, that most of those who embrace and countenance Deism and
Socinianism would answer from their own Consciences, whether a loose
Conversation, and Love to an uncontrollable pursuit of their Sensual Pleasures,
did not at first beget in them a good Opinion of those newly revived, yet old
and stinking, Heresies: But whether they do it, or not, it is observable enough,
that the most of their Proselites in these Nations smell rank of Goatish Lust;
and therefore it is but natural that they should declare War against his
Godhead, who is to be their Judge at the last day, and will assign them their
Place then on his Left Hand, amongst the Goats, if Repentance don't prevent it.

And would to God that those Men would but seriously consider with themselves,
whether they have not reason to look upon the dissolute Lives of most of their
Fraternity, as a just Judgment upon them from God, for growing vain in their
Imaginations, and rejecting all those Principles of Religion which they cannot
fathom with their shallow and corrupted Reason, according to that of the 1st of
the Romans, Because they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their Imaginations, their foolish Heart was darkened, and
professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. Wherefore God also gave
them up to vile Affections and Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own Hearts
to dishonor their own Bodies; of which they will meet with dreadful Instances
in this Treatise amongst the Grecians and Romans, in their Eleusina Sacra,
Bacchanalia, Ludi Florales, etc. though they called themselves, as indeed they
were, the wisest and most polite Nations in the World.

If it be objected, That the denying the Godhead of Jesus Christ has no
tendency to encourage Men in the practice of Uncleanness; it may be readily
answered, That seeing it was Jesus Christ who recalled Marriage to its first
Institution, and took away that Liberty of Poligamy and Concubinage which the
holiest Men under the Old Testament (and some of them Prophets too, as Abraham
and David) thought lawful, the denying of our Savior's Godhead overthrows his
Authority in this and all other things that he has taught us, inasmuch as it
makes him a Liar; for, that he asserted his own Godhead, and was cut off by the
Jews for making himself Equal with God, appears plainly from the History of
that Matter left us by the Evangelists: but if it be so, that he is not only
not God, but died for asserting a Lie, that he was so, then certainly the
Practice of Abraham, David, Solomon, etc. is a better Warrant for Poligamy and
Concubinage than his Word is against it. Thus it is apparent that the denying of
Jesus Christ to be God is introductory of Uncleanness, especially Concubinage,
which some of our Gallants do so much plead for, and will boldly assert, that
there is no harm in keeping an Unmarried Woman for a Miss. And, that the
Socinian Books, and the Spreaders of that Heresy, are entertained chiefly by
Men of such Principles and Practices, is so plain, that it cannot well be
denied.

To return to our Account of this Work. We have in the next place taken all
those Instances in the celebrated History of Josephus, that did any way make
for our purpose. We have likewise taken those in Justin, Plutarch's Lives, and
Quintus Curtius, relating to the Greeks, Persians, and other Eastern Nations
treated of by the Ancients, and have turned over the Roman Histories, from the
foundation of Rome to the Reign of Augustulus, wherein the Reader will find
that this Sin of Uncleanness has had Tragical Effects upon Empires and
Emperors, Monarchies and Monarchs, occasioned many Revolutions of Government,
and that neither the Victories of Alexander, Julius Coesar, and Pompey, nor the
great Dignity, universal Esteem, and Princely Qualities of Augustus and Titus
the Son of Vespasian, have been able to rub out the Stains which their impure
Lusts have fixed upon their Memories. Nor indeed is there any reason to think
it should, when the Faith of Abraham, the Holiness of David, and the Wisdom and
Grandeur of Solomon, have not been able to secure them against those
Punishments which their UnUncleanness brought upon their Persons, Families, and
Reputations; so infallibly true has it always been found what the Wiseman
has foretold of the Adulterer, in the 6th of the Proverbs, That a Wound and a
Dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach shall not be wiped away.

We have also looked into the Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Socrates,
Evagrius, etc. for such Instances as relate to our Subject, which we have
faithfully set down, to show how hateful and abominable Unclean Persons were in
the Eyes of the Ancient Church, what severe Penances were enjoined them, and
with how much Difficulty they were received again into its Communion.

It was designed to have taken a View of the Histories of all Nations extant,
and, amongst others, to have inserted the horrid Instances that are to be found
in the Lives of the Popes and other Heresiarchs, and, in a word, to have
brought the History down to our Time, but finding that the Volume swelled, I
thought fit to deferr that to a Second Essay.

AN Alphabetical Table OF THE CONTENTS.
A
ABimelech, how punished for ta^ing Sara. Page 18 -- His Testimony against
Adultery. ibid. Abraham's Polygamy, how occasioned and punished. 10, 11, 12
Abner's Uncleanness and Punishment. 64 Absalom's Incest and Punishment, the
Opinions of the Rabbis upon it. 71, 73 -- The weight of his Hair, how much;
the Opinion of the Rabbis how David delivered him from Hell. ibid.
Achitophel's unclean Counsel and Punishment. 73 Adonijah's Uncleanness and
Punishment. 79 Adulter^r, who the first. 2 Adultery, how said not to be known
at Sparta. 190 Agathocla, Agathocles, and Evanthes Whoredom and Punishment. 162
Agathocles's Whoredom and Punishment. 159 Ageus, how he knew Theseus to be his
Son. 187 Agis King of Lacedemon betrayed by his Adulterous Queen; 144 Ahab and
Zedekia's uncleanness and punishment. 94 Alcibiades, why banished, the manner
of his Death. 145 Alexander the Great, his lustfulness and punishment. 149,
154, 156, 195, 196 Alexander K. of Pherea. 198 Amazons, what they were, their
original and way of propagation. 141 Amnon's Incest and punishment. 67 -- The
cause of his hatred to Tamar after he had ravished her. 69 Anilaeus's
uncleanness and punishment. 115 Antony's Debauches and Death. 215, 270, 221
Antiochus desperately in love with his Father's Wife, how discovered, obtains
her. 213 Apparel, Roman Luxury in it. 295 Appius Claudius's uncleanness and
punishment. 13 Apicius's Gluttony, poisons himself. 278 Archelaus's uncleanness
and punishment. 99 Archias ruined by Whoredom. 197 Aristotimus's Whoredom and
Punishment 160 Arsinoe, her Incest and Punishment. 160, 161 Artaxerxes's
uncleanness and punishment. 148, 224 Assyrian Empire overturned by Lust. 135
Athenians ruined by Luxury. 145 Athens and Rome both founded by Lust, and
Enemies to Christianity. 187 Augustus's Lust and Punishment. 231 -- Unhappy in
his Children. 232 -- His luxurious Feast. 234 Aurelius Commodus's Lusts,
Persecution, and Death. 257 St. Austin, how converted. 124 Adulteresses
punished by being shut up in a Brothelhouse; that Custom abolished by
Theodosius. 306
B
Baalpeor, what. 46 Babylonians ruined by Whoredom. 95, etc. Bacchanalian
Rites, what, how discovered and abolished. 181, 186 -- The Consul's Speech
against 'em. 185 Bacchus's Worship, why ridiculed by the Scythians. 120 Bagoas,
Alexander's Catamite, his Cruelty. 156 Balaam's filthy advice and punishment.
46 -- Why the Jews say he was guilty of Bestiality with his Ass. 52 Barges of
Heliogabalus described. 294 Baths, Luxury of the Romans in 'em. 288 Bedsteds of
Silver and Gold. 294 Benjamites, their uncleanness and punishment. 60
Berecinthia her Worship, what. 263 Births heterogeneous, their cause. 53
Bonosus's Drunkenness. 273 Bridge over the Sea by Caligula. 285 Brutus cuts off
the Tarquins for their uncleanness. 168 Buildings, Roman Luxury therein. 291
Bells rung by Prostitutes at Rome to invite Passengers. 307
C
Caligula's Lust and Punishment. 237, etc. -- His extravagant Taxes, his Death,
Sueton's Character of him. 281 Canaanites uncleanness and punishment, 52, 53
Capua ruined by Lust. 176 Car^calla's Lust and Death. 259 Carinus killed for
Adultery. 260 Catiline's Whoredom. 223 Cato the younger's false Notions of
Marriage. 207 -- Parts with his Wife to Quintus Hortensius, takes her again
when a Widow. 207 -- Murders himself. 209 Cato the Censor punishes
Voluptuousness. 199 -- His own Amors. ibid. Centurion remarkably punished for
his Lust. 180 Cerinthus the Heretick's Uncleanness. Chastity of the Primitive
Christians testified by Tertullian, Origin, St. Jerome, Pliny, and Clem.
Alexandrinus. 312, 313, 314, 316 Chastity of a Christian Youth remarkable. 314
Children of weak Constitutions barbarously murdered by the Spartans. 191
Chrysargyrum, what, and how abolished. 309 Cicero's Incontinence, Luxury in his
Palaces. 291 -- His Death. 224 Cimon's Lust and Punishment. 202 Circumcision,
why only applied to Males. 13 Cities, when first built, by whom, and why. 5
Claudius Caesar's Lusts and Punishment. 240 -- His Incest with Agrippina. 241
-- His Agreement to the adulterous Contract betwixt his Wife Messalina and
Silius; his Death. ibid. Clemens Alexandrinus's Opinion concerning unclean
persons. 311 Cleonice slain by her Paramour. 202 Cleopatra, her Incest and
Punishment. 164 -- Her Drunkenness, drinks Pearls to the value of 300000
Sestertii. 271, 272 -- Her manner of coming to Antony, their riotous way of
living, poisons her-self, 220, 221 Cloaks, excessive number of 'em. 296
Clodius's Whoredom. 203, 223, 224 Comes Romanus, what. 290 Cooks excessive in
number and value. 277, 278 Cups, excess, expensiveness, and beastly forms of
'em. 275
D
Damocles leaps into scalding Oil to avoid Sodomy. 211 David's Amors with
Maacha, and the Opinions of the Rabbis concerning it. 68 David's Adultery and
Punishment, and Remarks on it. 64, 65 David's Concubines, their uncleanness and
punishment. 75 Darius's Incest and Punishment. 148, 225 Decemviri, their
Government overturned at Rome by the Lust of Appius Claudius. 172 Decius
Mundus. 113 Demetrius Poliorcetes's lust and punishment. 209, to 214. The
Honors done him by the Athenians, 213. They desert him at last, 213. His
prodigality to his Harlots, 211. His vile passion to Damocles. ibid. Demetrius
of Macedon's lust and punishm: 161 Dimacus betrayed by his Catamite. 153
Diocles K. of Athens his lust and punishm. 143 Dionysius's lust and punishment.
157, 197 Divorces of Jews, our Savior's opinion of 'em. 104 Domitian's lust
and punishment. 255 Drunkards promoted for their Drunkenness. 274 Drunkenness
of the Romans. 267, 268, 273* 274
E
Eastern Natio^^, their Uncleanness. 50, 51 Eating Excess as to quantity. 284
Ecclesiastical History, Instances from thence. 300 Egyptians, their uncleanness
and punishm. 49, 50 Elders of Israel attempt to debauch Susanna. 103 Eleusina
Sacra described, 119 Eli's Sons, their uncleanness and punishment. 61 Esau, why
he married three Wives, his sin and punishment. 20 Eurydice's ^ncest and
Cruelty. 147
F
Firmus drank two Buckets of Wine at once. 273 Fishes, the luxury and niceness
of the Romans in them, mourned for when dead, decked with Jewels; Octavius's
Expense about 'em. 282, 283. Foreskin, why circumcised. 13 Fornication, why so
called. 307 -- Schoolmen's Opinion of it. 315 Fowl, the niceness and luxury of
the Romans about 'em. 283 Furniture of Houses excessive. 292, 294
G
Galba's uncleanness and punishment. 249 Galerius the Emperor's Whoredom, eat
up alive by Worms. 260 Galerius Maximianus, his uncleanness and punishment. 305
Gallienus's uncleanness and death. 2^9 Games and Plays in the Theaters, the
expense and folly of them. 286 Giants, the first of them, how, and what. 6
Glaphyra, her uncleanness and punishment. 99 Gluttony of the Romans. 276, 279,
280, 281 Gnostics, their Impurities. 302 Great Cities occasions of lewdness
many times. 2 Grecian Queen, her Revenge upon a Centurion that debauched her.
181 Groves chosen by Idolaters to worship in, because of being accommodated to
their lustful designs. 82 Gryphus, Gryphina, Cyricaenus, and Cleopatra, their
lust and punishment. 164
H
Hagarens, their Original and Offspring, 12 Hair plaited and anointed. 296
Ham's seeing his Father's nakedness, what. 8 Hannibal's Army debauched at
Capua. 175 Heliogabalus a Catamite. 307 -- his lust, gluttony, and tragical
end. 258 Herod the Great. 100 Herod and Herodias, their lust and punishm: 106
Hispala a Curtesan discovers the Bacchanalian Rites, and more afraid of Men
than Gods. 184 Holofernes. 101 Houses of Domitian and Nero described. 293
Houses excessive large. 291
I
Jacob's Poligamy and Punishment. 21 Idols of the Moabites and Zidonians, what.
80 Idolatry and Uncleanness produce each other. 117 Jewels, Lollia Paulina's
excess in them. 297 -- and of other Roman Ladies. 298 Jews, 50,000 destroyed by
the lust of Anilaeus. 115 Jezebel her uncleanness and punishment. 83 Joseph's
Chastity, Remarks on it. 29 Israelites, their whoredom and punishment. 42 --
their Luxury the cause of the Plague that swept away 70,000. 83 Judah's
Incontinence and Punishment. 27 Julius Caesar his Uncleanness, Sodomy, and
Punishment* 226, to 231
K
Kingly Government abolished at Rome by Whoredom. 166 Kitchins excessive large.
29^
L
Lacedemonian Women impregnated by their youn^ Men, sent home on purpose from
the Camp. 14^ Laodice her Incest, Adultery, and Punishm: 16^ Latins defeated by
their Whoredom. 19^ Laws slavishly dispensed with, and the order o^ time
inverted to please a Prince. 21^ Levite's Concubine, her uncleanness and
punishm: 5^^ Locrians complain of Pleminius Debauches. 17^ Looking-glasses
excessive dear. 299 Lot's Wife, why turned into a Pillar of Salt, according to
the Rabbis. 1^^ Lot and his Daughters, their sin and punishment* 14, 15, 16,
1^ Lucretia ravished, her Speech to her Husband kills her self. 16^ Lucullus's
Luxury and Punishment. 20^ Ludi Florales, what. 26^ -- Salvianus's opinion of
'em. 26^ Luxury of the Romans. 265, 26^ Lycurgus's filthy Laws, and Reasons for
'em. 189 -- His Reasons confuted. 19^ Lydians ordered by Cyrus to be debauched,
why. 138
M
Manasses's Uncleanness occasioned the building o^ the Temple of Samaria, and
the Hatred betwixt the Jews and Samaritans. 85, 86 Mandrakes found by Reuben,
what. 2^^ Manichees, their Impurity. 51^ -- Their Opinion of the Poligamy of
the Patriarchs confuted by St. Austin. 22^ ^anilius turned out of the Senate,
because too sweet upon his Wife in presence of his Daughter. 199 ^anners, how
generally corrupted at first. 4, 5 ^arriage, why forbidden by Papists and other
Sects. 130 -- The Opinion of the Primitive Christians concerning it. 314 -- A
second time the Severity of some of the Ancient Christians and Councils against
it. 316 ^assmissa's Cruelty to his Paramour Sophonisba, 178 ^axentius's
Whoredom. 304 ^aximinus's Drunkenness. 273 ^aximus the Emperor's Adultery and
Death. 261 ^essalina. 240 ^essenians ruined by Uncleanness. 144 ^idianites,
their uncleanness and punishment. 42 ^inutia a Vestal Virgin put to death for
Whoredom. 172 Mithridates K. of Pontus, his Incest and Punishment. 162
N
Nero's lusts and punishment. from 242, to 249 Nexus, a barbarous Custom among
the Romans, what, and how abolished. 173 Nicolaitans, whence so called, their
uncleaness. 301 Ninus's effeminacy and lust. 135 Nivellius Torquatus knighted
for Drinking. 270 Nonae Capraticae, why so called. 193 -- the manner of that
Feast. ibid. Numa Pompilius allowed Men to lend their Wives. 191
O
Ochus's lust and punishment. 225 Oppian Law, made to restrain the Luxury of
the Roman Women, Speeches for and against it 17^ Orator sued for displacing a
Fold in another Shoulder. 29^ Origin, why he emasculated himself. 3^^ Oropastes
destroyed by his Concubine. 13^ Otho's uncleanness and punishment. 250, 25^
P
Parthenii, their Origin. 14^ Paulina. 11^ Paulus Samosatenus his Uncleanness.
30^ Pausanias murders his Paramour, slain. 202, 20^ Penitentiary Presbyter, why
abrogated at Constantinople. 30^ Pericles's Lust and Punishment. 19^
Persepolis, an unclean City, burnt at the persuasion of an Harlot. 15^ Persian
Ambassadors killed for their Lust. 14^ Persian Women's Idleness and Immodesty.
151, 13^ Persian Empire ruined by Luxury. 14^ Pharaoh's Plague for taking
Sarah, what. ^^^ Phea called Sow for her Lust, her punishment. 18^ Philip of
Macedon's uncleanness and punishm: 14^ Philistines, their uncleanness and
punishment. Pictures excessive dear. 29^ Platters excessive large and costly.
27^ Pleminius's lust and punishment. 176 Poligamy, our Savior's Opinion of it.
104 Pompey the Great's lusts and punishments. 203 -- His fondness of Julia
promotes his ruin. 205 -- His Revels with Cornelia and fondness of her
completed his ruin. 206 Priapus's beastly Worship, what. 218, 262 Priests of
Isis. 113 Primitive Christians' hatred of uncleanness. 304 ^izes of great value
given in the Theaters. 288 ^olomy Ceraunus's lust and punishment. 159 ^olomy's
Incest and Adultery. 162 ^olomy Phiscon's Incest and Cruelty. 163 ^rrhus's
uncleanness, slain by a Woman. 200
R
^veal'd Religion, why derided by the Beans. 123 ^euben' s Incest and
Punishment. 32 ^ngs, excess in them. 297 ^oman Women immodest in their Apparel.
ibid. ^ome its Church, why called in Scripture Whore, and Mother of Harlots.
132 ^ome founded by Whoredom, endangered at first by Rape. 165 ^oofs of Houses
movable, and changed at every course. 292
S
^mpson's Whoredom and Punishment. 53, etc. -- The Rabbis think the Philistines
debauched his Wife. 53 -- Objections against the number of Foxes taken by him
answered. 55 ^aracens, their original. 12 ^ardanapalus's uncleanness and
remarkable death, 135, 137 ^chechem's Whoredom and Punishment. 25 ^cythian
Women, their Message to their Husbands in Asia. 139 -- Married their Servants
in their Husbands' absence. 140 Scipio rebukes Massinissa for his lust. 176
Seed flux, of it in Man, and Menstrua in Women, why it rendered 'em unfit for
public Worship. 41 Seed passing through the Fire to Molech, what. 51 Seleucus
King of Assyria parts with his Wife his Son. 2^ Servants, excess in their
number. 3^ Sextus Tarquinius his Rape and Punishme^ 168, 1^ Ships sailing in
Wine. 2^ Simon Magus, the Uncleanness of himself a^ Followers. 3^ Sodomites,
why they lusted after Strangers, a^ particularly after the Angels. ^ Solomon's
uncleanness and punishment. ^ -- whether saved or not. ^ Solon's Uncleanness
and impure Laws. 1^ Sophonisba, Daughter to Asdrubal, her scan^lous Marriage to
Massinissa. 1^ -- her last Message to her Paramour Manissa. 1^ Spinctriae,
what. 2^ Spitamenes and his Wife, their punishment ^ Lust. 1^ Statues, the
Excess of the Romans in them. 2^ Suppers, excessive for cost, 279* 2^ Scylla's
lustfulness, eat up by Lice. 2^ Syphax's Marriage with Sophonisba caused War
with the Romans. 1^ Syria and Egypt remarkably punished for the Uncleanness. 1^
T
Tables, the Excess and Expensiveness of the^ 2^ Tarentum betrayed by an
Harlot. 1^ Theaters, Excess of the Romans therein. 2^ -- their Furniture
costly. 2^ Theater of Scaurus, of Titus. 284, 2^ Thebe, Daughter to Jason, how
she avenged her self of her Husband for his Adultery. 198 Theseus's Lust and
Punishment. 188, 189 Tiberius Caesar's unnatural Lust, filthy Inventions, and
Death. 235, to 237 Titus's Uncleanness. 254 Trajan's Sodomy, etc. 259 Troy
ruined by Lust. 145 Tutula her filthy stratagem to defeat the Latins. 193
U
Unclean Women made use of to ensnare the People of God, fatal to the
Contrivers. 57 Uncleanness the cause of the Jews' Captivity. 91 Uncleanness,
People judicially given up to it, and why. 117 Uncleanness, the sorts of it,
the Trial and Punishment of it under the Law. from 35, to 40 Unnatural Lust
discovered by heterogeneous Births 52 Valentinian the Emperor murdered for
Adultery. 260 Vespasian's uncleanness and reformation. 254, 255 Vestal Nuns,
their Whoredoms, how expiated. 175 Victualling houses at Rome under Ground,
what. 306 Virginia killed by her Father to save her Chastity, his Speech to the
Roman Army. 170, 171 Vitellius's Lust and Punishment, Luxury, Gluttony, etc.
252, etc.
W
War occasioned at Sparta by the Lust of Chelidonis. 200 Wenches naked wait at
Table. 277 Whores and Whoremongers, their Character by Solomon. 87 Whoredom the
cause of Apostasy, and of the Deluge. 6, ^ -- the Judgments denounced against
it in the New Testament. 122, and ^ -- its Original. 1, 2, ^ Wild Beasts, vast
numbers of 'em in the Theatre^ 28^ Women that killed themselves to avoid being
defil'^ 30^ Woman taken in Adultery, the reason of our Savior's acquitting
her; what he wrote upon the Ground at that time. 10^ World Peopled a first and
second time by lawfu^ Marriages. ^
Y
Young man ravished his Mother, and killed his Father and Sisters. 31^
Z
Zealots in Jerusalem, their lustfulness. 11^ Zeno the Emperor's lust and
punishment,-burie^ alive. 308, 30^
ERRATA.
PAGE 15, l. 14, read, touched; p. 16, l. 31, r. a necessity; p. 28. l. 8, r.
murder; p. 29, l. 19, r. Juvenile; p. 29, l. 33, r. greater; p. 30, l. 26, for
but r. that; p. 31, l. 18, dele he; p. 35, l. 10, r. a Virgin; p. 60, l. 3, r.
to propagate; p. 83, l. 8, r. as to; p. 84* l. 34, r. Canaanites; p. 112, l.
33, r. with her Hair; p. 130, l. 28, r. Marcionites; and l. 34, r. to ward; p.
132, l. 29, r. he repr^sents; p. 134, l. 4, r. Justin; p. 137, l. 4, r. which
with; and l. 6, r. my Desires; and l. 27, r. Effeminacy; p. 142, l. 2, r. of
Xerxes; p. 144, l. 3, r. as abovesaid; and l. 26, r. prevailed; p. 147, l. 31,
r. Justice; p. 165, l. 14, r. begot; p. 171, l. 1, r. upon which; p. 178, l.
33, r. Disloyalty; p. 192, l. 11, r. and another; p. 194, l. 14, r. Bawd; p.
252, l. ult. r. Day; p. 253, l. ult. r. Streets.

AN ESSAY TOWARD A General History OF WHORING, etc.
THE Original of the Crime which is the Subject of the following Sheets, must
necessarily be deduced from the Sin of our first Parents; for there is no doubt
that Lust, or the inordinate motions of the Flesh did invade their Souls at the
same time when their other Faculties were corrupted: And it appears plain that
Idleness, the lust of the Eye, and intemperance of Appetite, which ever since
have been the forerunners and ushers of bodily uncleanness, did precede the
Eating of the forbidden Fruit, and that as the Natural Consequence of such
Antecedents, the first thing taken notice of by our Parents after the Fall was
their Nakedness, whereof they were immediately ashamed, and endeavored to
cover it. This Nakeness say Commentators that they were so speedily made
sensible of, was not only that they felt their need of a Cover to their Bodies,
both for Ornament and Defense against the Injuries of the Air, etc. but that
they were also sensible of the Rebellion of the flesh, which does not only war
against the Soul, but has a natural tendency to the dissolution of the Body,
there being nothing which sooner extinguishes the flame of Life than an
immoderate consumption of that Oil, which nature has provided for its
nourishment. This impurity of the affections did no doubt exert it self quickly
in actions, which in our first Parents could not fall under the notion of
Whoredom, they being married by God himself, in the State of Innocence; yet
there is little doubt to be made of its having vented it self in an immoderate
use of the Marriage bed; and thus these impure desires were communicated to
their Posterity, who were thereby polluted; an^ conceived and brought forth in
Iniquity.

The first direct breach of the Divine Institution of Marriage betwixt one Man
and one Woman which we find Recorded, was in the person of Lamch, one of Cain's
Posterity, whose two Wives we find mentioned in the fourth of Genesis, by which
it appears plain, that Murder and Whoredom are near a kin, had both of 'em
their rise from one and the same Family: And according to the opinion of some
Interpreters did both of 'em center in this Lamech, who is thought to have been
a bloody cruel Man, as is gathered from this discourse to his Wives in that
Chapter, viz. I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt.

This bad example of Lamech's digamy, did quickly infect the Infant World; for
we find in the next Chapter, That when men began to multiply, and that
daughters were born unto them, the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men, that
they were fair and they took them Wives of all that they chose. Its still to be
observed that as Whoredom and Uncleanness began in Cain's Family, so there it
continued and increased; and by their Contagious Example, the Family of Seth,
which did then contain the Visible Church, became also infected; and the
Members of the Church having more regard to the Beauty and Comeliness of the
Women of Cain's Race, than to the virtue of those who were of their own
Religion, their Eyes betrayed their Hearts, they lusted after their Beauty, and
without any consideration of Religion or Laws, took them Wives of all that they
chose, by which Interpreters understand promiscuous Marriages, Polygamy, unjust
Divorces, Rapes and all manner of Lewd and Licentious practices, which brought
the Wrath of Go^ upon the old World, and occasioned hi^ saying, as in the 3 d
verse, That his spirit should not always contend with Man.

The occasion of this General Corruption of Manners is hinted to be the
multiplication of Men, and particularly o^ the Women of Cain's Posterity, who
being under no discipline, and wanting the benefit of pious Instruction and
good Example, became dissolute and wanton and no care being taken to dispose of
ther^ duly in Marriage, they took all occasion to satisfy their brutal
desires, for which their dwelling in Cities (whereof Cai^ was the first
Founder) amongst multitudes of people, gave them great opportunities, it being
always observed that i^ Great Cities, the numbers of dissolute persons makes
them to despise Laws, an^ follow such practices as they durst no^ venture upon
in Villages, and Countrie^ where they could be more easily restrained and
punished: not that I would be understood to be against the building an^
maintaining of Cities, which increase the Glory, Riches and Strength of
Nations, but would to God that the gre^ Cities of Christendom were not still to
justly chargeable with avowed Impuritie^ of the same nature, which a zealous
Magistracy might easily prevent. It is also the opinion of some of the learned,
that the Cainites did first build themselves a City that they might strengthen
one another hands in Cruelty and Uncleanness and follow such practices with
all manner of impunity, which gave their Women opportunity to pamper and deck
themselves that they might be the more agreeable objects of Lust; and this
might also render them more amiable in the Eyes of the Posterity of Seth, who
living as it is presumed a Rural Life for the most part; and their Women being
kept in order by Laws and Religion, and applying themselves to the Affairs of
their Families, that they might approve themselves meet helps to their
Husbands, according to the design of God at the first Creation of Woman, did
not mind the decking and adorning of their Bodies, nor the pampering of their
Flesh, and cherishing their Beauties as the Cainites did, and therefore were
not so pleasing to the Eye, as those lascivious Women, who behaved themselves
as if God and Nature had designed them for nothing else but a Man's bed,
whereas the Divine Goodness appointed that they should be meethelps in their
Religious Conversation, Industry, Care and Education of Children, to all of
which those loose practices of the Cainites were diametrically opposite.

From those unequal Marriages and promiscuous Copulations, proceeded a contempt
of Laws and Religion amongst the Cainites, and an Apostasy from God and
Religion amongst many of the Posterity of Seth; and it has been observed
amongst all Nations since, that when Religion decays uncleanness increases, and
that a love to Licentiousness has always been a great cause of Apostasy, as is
but too too observable in those that are called Deists and Socinians in this
present Age, most of their New Converts or rather Perverts, being people of a
loose life, especially as to the point of Chastity.

The next effect of those unclean an^ beastly Commixtions, was an offspring of
Giants, so called as some Interpreter^ think from the vastness of their bulk^
as being begot in raging Lust, or as others, because of their Barbarous and
Sa^vag^ Manners, and filling all the World wit^ Rapes, Cruelty and Devastation,
so that b^ the just Judgment of God the Children o^ those unlawful Marriages
and Promiscuous Copulations, became the plague o^ their Parents, and the
scourge of Man kind as well as the declared Enemies o^ Heaven and Religion:
Whence the ol^ doting Poets took occasion to amuse the World with the fabulous
War of the Gian^ against Jupiter, etc.

Noah, not being able by his preaching of Righteousness, to reform the World
from this horrid Debauchery, it provoked God to bring the Deluge, which drowned
that lascivious and wicked Generation of Men, who had drowned themselves in all
manner of sensual Impurities, with so much obstinacy, that when that fatal
Flood came it surpised them, as eating, drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage. Thus then it is apparent that Whoredom was one of the principal Causes
that brought the Wrath of God upon the old World. And it deserves our
observation, that God by his Command to Noah to take only his own Wife, and the
three Wives of his three Sons into the Ark with him, as he did thereby give
another Testimony of his honoring and approving of Marriage, he did also
plainly testify against Digamy, Polygamy and Concubines; and that as the World
was peopled at first by lawful Marriage, it should be also peopled in the same
manner a second time.

To come next, to the times after the Flood, the ^^^st instance of impurity
that occurs to us, is Ham's deriding his father Noah' s nakedness, by which
there are some Interpreters who understand that he not only told it his
Brethren, but also before Women and Children, in a lascivious and filthy
manner, and took occasion to fall into foolish Jesting and Sarcasms; Nay, if we
give credit to the opinion of Berosus and the Rabbis, he enchanted his Fathers
Virile parts, and unmanned him; but however that is, this is certain, that he
discovered a frothy, unclean, lascivious temper, for which he was severely
punished in his posterity The Canaanites, who wallowed also in those fleshly
impurities when God destroyed them by the Israelites, the posterity of Sem, as
shall be taken notice of in its proper place.

From Ham did also proceed Nimrod the Mighty Hunter and cruel oppressor, who
was the first that laid the foundation of a Tyrannical Government after the
Flood, so that the observation still holds that Uncleanness, Murder and those
other Crimes which lay Nations wasteare near a kin, and generally the
offspring and product of one and the same Family.

That Abraham seemed to have this Notion, appears from his advice given to his
beautiful Wife Sarah, when he traveled with her into Egypt, viz. to say she
was his Sister, because the Egyptians he supposed would have killed him that
they might enjoy her. Whence we may likewise observe that the Holy Patriarch
knew that lustful persons would rather commit Murder than be baulkt in the
satisfaction of their Lusts; and yet, tho the World was at that time so much
degenerated, it is plain from this passage, that the Egyptians looked upon
Marriage as Sacred and Inviolable, otherwise Sarah's calling her self Abraham's
Sister could have been no defense of her Husbands life: Nay, it is manifest
from the History that Pharaoh designed to have taken her to Wife, so that those
Heathen Egyptians will rise up in Judgment against our Christian Debauchees,
who think neither Fornication nor Adultery to be Crimes, for it is evident from
this passage, that both he and his Subjects tho abominably lustful had a great
regard to Marriage, which it is plain he thought necessary to render his
enjoyment of Sarah lawful.

There are several other things to be learned from this remarkable instance, as
that the vanity of matching with none but those of Royal Extract had not then
invaded the Thrones of Princes -- But at the same time it is as plain that it
has been an old and wicked Custom amongst Courtiers and Nobles to be Panders
to the lusts of their Monarchs, for here we find that Pharaoh's Princes
Commended Sarah's Beauty to him, which occasioned her being taken into his
House; and would to God that no such thing had ever been justly chargeable upon
the Court of England.

There are only two Remarks more which I have to make on this Story, and shall
then proceed to another, viz. that God by smiting Pharaoh and his Household,
all of sudden with Plagues, did both give a Testimony of his divine displeasure
against such lustful practices, and of his being a protector of Conjugal
Chastity.

What the nature of this Plague inflicted upon Pharaoh and his household was is
not agreed upon amongst Interpreters. The Hebrews say, that it was a Gonorrhoea
or Ulcer in his secret parts, which prevented his design: Josephus thinks it
was a Pestilence and sudden Sedition in the Palace; Philo Judaeus says it was a
Distemper both of Body and Mind, and Chrysostom, is of opinion that it was some
Bodily Plague inflicted upon him, just as Sarah was brought to his Bed; but
however those things be, this is certain, that Sarah's pollution was prevented,
and Pharaoh obliged to own that it was not lawful to take another Man's Wife.

The next instance is of Abraham himself, who is the first of the Posterity of
Seth after the Flood, that we find to have been guilty of Digamy; it is plain
that the occasion of his taking his Handmaid Hagar to Wife, was his Wife
Sarah's advice, and the Cause of her giving that advice, was her own
Barrenness, advanced age, and fear that she should not otherwise have the
promised Seed. The Causes of Abraham's consenting so easily were no doubt the
same, and Polygamy being then Common in the World, his Practice administered no
occasion of Scandal, so that his practice of marrying his Maid in those times
of Ignorance which God winked at, can not afford any argument for Polygamy now,
and seeing he had his Wife's consent, it will far less warrant those lascivious
Intrigues which many Masters have now a days with their Maidservants. But that
this practice of the Holy Patriarch was displeasing to God will easily appear
from the punishment inflicted upon his Family, the Peace of which was
immediately broke, by Hagar's despising her Mistress, as soon as she found her
self pregnant with the promised Seed as she vainly believed: Then Sarah
upbraids Abraham with the wrong whereof she her self was the occasion, and
forced him to a breach of that Marriage Bond, which by her own advice he had
contracted: Hagar was also punished for her unlawful Consent, first, by being
severely dealt with by Sarah, who gave her for a Wife to her Husband, and then
by being thrust out of the Family and exposed to the World, and though she was
brought back again for some, time till she was delivered of her Son, Ishmael,
yet her abode was of no long continuance, for she was thrust out again with
this additional affliction, that she had her Son to provide for, was exposed to
the cruel necessity of seeing him die of thirst as she apprehended, and instead
of his being the promised Seed, she and he were both Ignominiously thrust out
from partaking of the Inheritance with Isaac, and she was plainly told from
Heaven, that he should be a wild Man, having his hand against every Man, and
every Man's hand against him; which was speedily verified, for he became a
profane scoffer at Religion and the promise of God, which occasioned his
expulsion from his Father*s Family and the Church. His crime is by the Apostle
Paul called persecution, and his Posterity we find complained of by the
Psalmist in the 83. Psalm, amongst the other persecutors of the people of God,
and so they have continued under several denominations to this day, as
Ishmaelites, Hagarens, etc. of which latter name being ashamed, as denoting
their Spurious Original, they assumed to themselves the Title of Saracens, as
if they were Sarah's offspring, under which they were formidable to the
Christian World for some Ages, and continue irreconcilable Enemies to the
Christian Religion to this day, under the name of Arabians, Turks, etc. Such
unseparable Vices are Uncleanness, Cruelty and Persecution, and so easy and
natural is the Transition, from an unclean person to become an Apostate and
Enemy to true religion. Nor is it fit to let it pass unobserved, that a^ he
himself was unlawfully begot, his Posterity to this day have continued to be a
vile and lustful people, and it is known to the world, that it is now become an
Article of their horrid Religion, that they place their chief happiness both in
this Life and that to come in the enjoyment of those impure pleasures.

Nor is it fit we should pass over what is commonly observed by Divines, that
the very Ordinance of Circumcision, by which the foreskin was appointed to be
cut off, was a mark of God's displeasure at Incontinence upon the Instrument of
Generation; and likewise an evidence that those who expect his favor should
mortify that Corruption; and that it only took place upon Males, was because
the beginning of Generation and consequently of natural Corruption is from that
Sex.

The next dreadful Instance of God's hatred and indignation at Whoredom and
Uncleanness, is his raining of Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah
and Zeboim, etc. the cry of their lewdness being such, that it seemed to drown
the noise of all other Sins at that time. This is the first Instance we meet
with of Lusts arriving to such a prodigious height, as to seek after Unnatural
Objects, and it would seem their Incontinence was so fierce, that they
furioufly sought after every opportunity, to gratify their brutish desires,
especially upon Strangers; for they had so mutually polluted one another, that
it is probable their villainous pleasures that way, had lost much of their
relish: Nor is it unlikely that the Comely and Beautiful aspect of those Angels
added fuel to their flames, and it deserves particular observation, that the
whole City both old and young was infected with this lustful Contagion, in
which they were so hardened, that neither Lot's unadvised proposal of his own
Daughters (to them) who were more natural and fit Objects for their Lust; nor
the remarkable Judgment of God upon them in striking them with blindness were
able to divert them from their devilish purpose, of offering that unnatural
abuse to those Messengers of God, who at last after having set Lot and his
Family out of danger, became the executioners of Divine Justice upon those
Monsters of Impurity, and punished their lustful flames with storms of Fire and
Brimstone, which were only some precursory drops to those showers of
everlasting fire, which makes the smoke of their torments to ascend for ever
and ever.

Neither ought it to pass without observation, that God did not only punish
themselves, but would have their Country which they had polluted to remain a
Monument of their abominable Impurity, and his just Judgment, so long as the
world stands: nor would Divine Justice suffer Lot's Wife to pass unpunished
for looking back upon the place which she left with a reluctance, and could
have wished to have been spared, but turned her immediately into a Pillar of
Salt for her disobedience and inordinate affection to her Relations and Estate,
which God had ^ustly determined to destroy, and not for having withheld Salt
from the Angels her Guests the night before, as the Jews have fabulously
delivered. -- We shall conclude this passage with these few Reflections, viz.
That the places being converted into a dead Sea, near which no Creature can
live, and the Apples and Grapes that grow upon the banks of it, which are
grateful to the Eye, but when touch moulder into dust, and send forth stinking
sulphurous Exhalations, are sit Emblems to represent, not only the vanity, but
the deadly effects of those hurtful and foolish Lusts, the satisfaction of
which is so eagerly pusued by Corrupt Nature.

The next Instance we meet with, is that of Lot's Incest with his own
Daughters, or rather their Incest with him. This passage has many strange
Circumstances that deserve our observation. It is not improbable that the lewd
Conversation of the Sodomites had beforehand infected the minds of those
Damsels, for it is a hard matter to touch pitch and not to be defiled; Divines
are of different opinions concerning those Women, some believing that they had
actually been married, and others, that they were only betrothed, but which
soever of 'em it was, it is certain they had lost their Males; and perhaps their
Father's offe^ to prostitute them to save his Guests, an^ their having been ear
witnesses at lea^^ to those unnatural villainies practiced b^ the Sodomites,
might possess them wit^ extenuating thoughts of the wickedne^^ they had in
design: Yet it appears b^ their abominable Intrigue to Intoxicat^ their Father,
that they durst not pro^ pound any such thing to him when h^ was Sober, their
wickedness appear^ to be so much the greater, that they ha^ but just escaped
from that storm of divine Wrath which over took the Sodomites for their Vile
Lusts; That they had but ^ very little before seen their Mother turn'^ into a
Monument of God's displeasure, for having a hankering mind after that impur^
City, and her wicked Relations in it; Tha^ they had no doubt been often times
witnesses to the vexation of their Father's Righteous Soul at the lustful
practices of the Sodomites, and yet all this was not abl^ to restrain them from
pursuing their unclean design, and commiting one sin to obtain the Commission
of another. Their pretense that there was no Man left to come in unto them
after the manner of al^ the Earth, and that therefore they were under necessity
a of raising up Seed to their Father, appears to have been an ill founded
suggestion of the Devil, to hide their sin from their Eyes, for they could not
but know that they had left men behind them in Zoar, they might have seen from
the hill, that the whole Country was not ruined, and those divine Judgments had
only swallowed up the Cities of the Plain; or they might speedily have been
better informed by their Father. Their wickedness is also aggravated by this,
that as they were Sisters by Nature, they were Sisters in Iniquity, and they
had no regard to their own, nor their Father's good Name, nor the scandal which
by this lewd practice they gave to the Enemies of true Religion. The Scripture
is silent as to any Judgments inflicted either upon their Father or themselves,
but informs us plainly that the issue which they had by this Unlawful
Congress, were accursed, and their posterity like other spurious brood were
mortal Enemies to the people of God, and perpetually excommunicated from the
Church by Divine Command, Deuteronomy. 23. 3. And thus Lot had an eternal blemish sixth
upon his Chastity, which did formerly so much distinguish him from the other
Inhabitants of Sodom, and was punished by being the Author of Debanching his
Daughters himself, whom he so rashly offered to be Debaached by others; so that
we see raging Lust leaps over all the bounds of Law and Nature, and if not
curb*d in time may rise to a surprising and prodigious height, and bring do^n
stupendous Judgments upon People and Persons.

The 20 th. Chap. of Genesis gives us another Instance of Abraham's slavish
fear and distrust of God's Providence which had formerly delivered him, and by
which frailty he again endangered the Chastity of his Wife; but God took care
to preserve it by keeping Abimelech from touching her, though he was so much
taken with her Beauty, and doubted not but that he might Lawfully Marry her, he
not knowing any other, but that she was really Abraham's Sister. Yet God was so
much offended with Abimelech's rash attempt to which he was doubtlesly
influenced by his Lust, for it appears that he had a Wife already, that he
punished him and his Family with a grievous distemper, as Josephus thinks as
soo^ as he brought Sara into his House, and made all the Women belonging to hi^
barren, or because barrenness properly so called, could not be so soon
discovered, inflicted such distempers upon them as mus^ necessarily occasion
barrenness, so that b^ his Unlawful desire of issue by another Man Wife, he
was precluded of any Lawful Issue by his own, until such time as he wa^ made
sensible of his Crime, and willing t^ restore Sarah to Abraham.

In the 26th. of Genesis we have a ver^ Extraordinary Testimony against
Adulter^ from an Heathen Prince Abimelech King o^ Gerar upon the occasion of
Isaac's havin^ from that same principle of slavish fea^ with his Father, called
his Beautiful Wi^ his Sister, to avoid being killed for her sak^ but the King
perceiving him sporting mo^^ familiarly with her them 'twas decent for a S^ster
and Brother to do, he reproved hi^ sharply for his having dissembled her being
his Wife, whereby he not only endangered her Chastity, but might have brought
wrath upon the People for defiling another Man's Wife, and therefore to prevent
any such thing, he forbad any of the People to meddle with Isaac or his Wife on
pain of death. Certainly this Heathen Prince will rise in Judgment against
those pretended Christians who pollute themselves with promiscuous Lusts, and
neither Account Fornication nor Adultery a Crime.

The next Instance offered us is that of Esau, who married two Wives; and those
too the Daughters of Canaan, which were a Grief of Soul unto his Father and his
Mother; that he Married two Wives at once, considering his Grandfather
Abraham's Example and the Custom of those dark and ignorant times seems not so
Criminal, and yet his Father's practice, who had but one, ought to have had
more influence upon him; but his marrying Canaanites, Profane Women, and
Heathens, contrary to the Command of his Grandfather Abraham, and not only
without the Consent but against the Inclination of his Father and Mother, was
altogether unexcusable. -- The Impulsive cause which moved him to do so, we
have no reason to doubt, was his Vngovernable Lust, for that he was a Man of
intemperate Appetite, and by Consequence Libidinous, is plain from his having
profanely bartered away his Birthright for a Mess of Red Pottage when to be
sure he might have had other Food in his Fathers House, or if he had rejected
Jacob's proposal there is no great reason to think that Jacob would have been so
unnatural as to have insisted upon his demand, and denied necessary Refreshment
to his Brother, but he did so much idolize his own Palate and Appetite, that he
preferred the satisfaction of them to every thing else and we have the same
reason to think that his Concupiscence was as Ungovernable as his Stomach, and
therefore he married two Canaani^ish Women at once to satisfy his raging Lust,
the fulfilling of which he preferred to his Father and Mother's good will; and
this no doubt had no small influence in moving the latter to suborn Jacob to
deprive Esau of his Blessing as well as of his Birthright: and it is Remarkable
that as he made a Cursed choice of his Wives, he was also accursed in his
Posterity; who, as it appears by the Sacred History became irreconcilable
Enemies to the people of God, and were always their most Barbarous and Cruel
Persecutors.

Esau's Marrying a third Wise of Ishmael's race, while the other two were
alive, is another Argument of his Unbridled Lust and Enmity to true Religion.
It Is true that Interpreters disagree in this matter, some thinking that Esau
Married this Third Wife of his Father's own kindred to please him, because the
Daughters of Canaan were hateful to him, but others seem to have more Reason,
who, think that he did it out of Contempt with a design to provoke his Parents
more, by contracting a new Alliance with another wicked people, who were as
much Enemies to the Church, and as much or more irreconcilable to his Father as
the other; seeing, it is apparent that Ishmael mocked or as the Apostle
Interprets it persecuted, Isaac from his very Infancy. And thus far we see
raging incontinency and hatred at Religion go hand in h^nd

The next Instance that occurs to us is that of Jacob, who well may be charged
with Polygamy, as having four Wives at a time instead of one. The first
occasion of this good Patriarch's transgression in this matter, was the Wicked
Craft and Deceit of Laban his Father-in-Law, who instead of Rachel whom Jacob
Married, brought Leah to his Bed, and so was the cause of Jacob's Digamy and
Incest, and though it is true, that Jacob is no where Condemned in Scripture for
this, yet it is plain that he acted contrary to Divine institution, and he is
reproved for it by our Savior amongst others when he told the Pharisees, That
from the beginning it was not so. There were some, and particularly the
Manich^es of old who inveighed against this Polygamy of the Patriarchs, and in
very gross and foul Language accuse them as Whore-Masters and their Wives as
Whores, but their scurrilous Arguments are well answered by Augustine against
Faustus and others -- There are some who think that this Polygamy of the
Patriarchs was by a peculiar instruct, and particular Dispensation, and
therefore as in that case it could not be blamable, neither can it now be
ordinarily imitable, the chief Reasons they assign, for their opinions are,
that it was permitted for the Increasing of the Promised Seed, that Jacob*s
Wives, etc. were acted by more than a Natural principle, and much self-denial,
in recommending their Maids to their Husband's Bed, which in ordinary Cases
must be supposed to alienate his Affection from themselves. In the next place
they observe that they prayed for offspring by their Maids and brought up
their Children upon their own knees. It must be owned that those things were
Extraordinary and Contrary to the Practice and Principle of the generality of
Women; yet it is strongly presumable, that there was something of Custom as wel^
as of Instinct in this matter, and that the people of God were polluted with
the bad Example of those amongst whom they lived.

But however these things were, this is certain that all the Persons concerned
were one way or other punished for their Concurrence in this Affair. Laban had
not only the mortification to see his two Daughters Jarr and Disagree, and Envy
one another, but also to find his Riches and Substance decrease and to be
conveyed to another hand; Leah, she was severely punished by finding that she
had less of her Husband's Love than her Sister, whose Bed she had unjustly
defiled. Rachel was punished with barrenness for some time for consenting to
live with Jacob as his Wife, when she knew that her Father had given her eldest
Sister into his Bed. Jacob's life was very uneasy betwixt his Jarring Wives,
who did each of them Envy the others Enjoyment of him; Nay, he was perfectly
Subject to the Command of his Imperious and Beautiful Rachel, and obliged to
take a third Wife to beget Children for her, and this laid him under a
necessity of obliging Leah in the like manner, which as it must needs Consume
his Body he being now above 80 years of age, there was no doubt but it
increased his care how to provide for so many Wives and Children, at the same
time he was also plagued with a Covetous Oppressing Father-in-Law, and
discontented Brethren who envied his growing rich in the World.

Nor is it to be doubted but there was frequent Quarrels amongst the Children
of so many different Mothers, seeing it is Common to find Children by the same
Father and Mother often to disagree, and this without doubt begot mutual
Broils, Contentions, and Heats amongst the different Wives every one envying
the prosperity or good Fortune of another Children. An Instance of this we
have in Rachel who was so much taken with Reuben's Mandrakes that there is no
doubt but she could have wished they had been found by one of her own Sons.
Hence also we may observe, That as the Children did every one love their own
Mothers best, it must needs occasion Quarrels amongst them. It Is not agreed
among Interpreters what these Mandrakes were, some will have them to be
Beautiful Fragrant Flowers, and others, that they were Beautiful and Delicious
Apples which promoted Conception, and that therefore they were so much desired
by Rachel, which, if it were so, she was however disappointed for having agreed
that her Husband should be with Leah that night, it occasioned her Rival to
have two Sons Successively one after another, and also one Daughter. But as to
the Mandrakes themselves, St. Augustine against Faustus tells us, That he has
seen of 'em, Diligently Inquired into their Nature, and says, they were Apples
fine to the Eye, and of a sweet Scent, but insipid taste, but very rare to be
had, and on that Account alone he thought Rachel did Covet them.

The sin of Jacob and Leah, is also very legible in their punishment, by the
foul Crimes of their Children Reuben and Dinah. Jacob was guilty of Incest with
two Sisters, and to the great grief of his Soul, eternal Reproach of his
Family, and scandal to the Neighboring Heathen; his Son Reuben committed
Incest with his own Concubine Bilhah, which by the way, was another punishment
upon her for consenting to Marry one who had two Wives before, and whom she had
no reason to think could ever be able to perform Conjugal duty to so many, and
it is not improbable that this made her an easy prey to the Tentation. -- Then
as to Dinah, her being polluted by Schechem the Son of Hamor, was another
disgrace to Jacob's Family, and brought a fresh scandal upon the Church, as
well as ruin upon the Schechemites, whose destruction was occasioned by the
Lustful Passion of their Prince, in dealing with Jacob's Daughter as with an
Harlot, which so enraged her Brethren that by a fraudulent Covenant they
obliged the Schechemites to Circumcise themselves, came upon them while they
were Sore, and put all the Males to the Sword -- And thus Dinah was also
punished for her Conversing with the Daughters of the Land, who were Idolaters
and of corrupt manners; her Curiosity which is so common to young Maids was
fatal to her self and many others, neither is there any thing better to be
expected from those Profane Festivals, Revellings and Banquetings, which
Josephus thinks the Schechemites were now taken up with: -- And that Dinah
either having stole away from her Mother to see how the Daughters of the Land
were adorned, and behaved themselves in their public Dances, or being so far
indulged as to have Liberty to go, the Libidinous young Prince being taken with
her Beauty, and under no restraint, but dandled by an Indulgent Father,
violated her Chastity, for which himself, his Son, and all their Male Subjects
quickly after lost their Lives, having first been by the Just Judgment of God
punished in the very Instrument of their Lasciviousness. The wound as it is
usual putting them to great pain, and making them unable either to resist or
fly from Jacob's Armed Sons and Servants; and thus also the Good Old Man was
punished by the Rape of his only Daughter, and his bleeding wound ripped open
afresh by the Treachery and Cruelty of his Children. This is another Instance
of a People cut off and destroyed for Uncleanness

The next thing that occurrs, is another affliction to the Good Old Patriarch,
from the Evil Report of the Sons of his Concubines Zilpah and Bilhah, who being
the offspring of an Unlawful Marriage were also of a Lewd Conversation
themselves, and according to the opinion of some of the Hebrews, guilty of
Sodomitical Impurities; But however, that was, this is plain from the Sacred
Text, that they had an ill same, and with this Joseph acquainted his Father,
which occasioned their Conspiracy to kill Joseph, and at last to sell him, so
that here Jacob was remarkably punished for his Polygamy; The Children of those
Concubines being both wicked and haters of his Children by Lawful Wedlock; and
tho it be not directly to our purpose yet it may not be perhaps unpleasant to
the Reader to acquaint him that the Hebrews think Jacob was justly punished,
when made to believe that the blood of a Kid was that of his Son Joseph,
because he had formerly deceived his Father and made him to believe that he was
his eldest Son Esau, by putting a Kid's Skin about his Neck, etc.

Our next Instance is in Judah, who having left his Brethren and his Father's
House, and by Consequence the then Church, and Lodging with an Adulamite, fell
in Love with a Canaanitish Woman, and Married her (he not then exceeding 14
Years of Age himself as Chronologers think) not only without his Father's
Consent, but against it, according to the Example of Esau. -- How he was
punished for this fault the following History acquaints us, viz. That having
obliged his Son Er to an early and precipitant Marriage like his own, who being
a Wicked Man, and as the Hebrews think, guilty of Sodomy, or as others of
spilling his Seed upon the ground as his Brother Onan did, the Lord destroyed
him. Nor was Judah any happier in his Son Onan abovementioned, who being given
to his Brother's Widow for a Husband to raise up Seed to his Brother, did
maliciously spill it on the ground, that his Brother's Memory might not be
continued; Whereas to die Childless had not only a Tendency to the decay, and
ruin of the Family, but was also looked upon as Reproachful, and therefore it
is the opinion of Divines, that that temporary Law was constituted Deuteronomy. 25. 5.
The Rabbis according to their fabulous manner, allege, That Onan did this
because he would not have Thamar's Beauty spoiled by bearing Children, but
whatever truth there be in that, it is certain that God destroyed him for that
Impurity, and frustrating the End of Nature, which is next akin to Murder if
not a species of it, seeing it destroyed that which was potentially a Man or
Woman.

But Judah's punishment does not cease here, he is plagued with raging Lust in
his own advanced years, and being a Widower did incestuously pollute his own
Daughter-in Law Thoemar, whom he took to be a Common Harlot, by which he
incurred a perpetual disgrace, and brought an Indelible blot upon his Memory.
From that History we may plainly also perceive that Adultery was held a Capital
Crime even amongst those Canaanites, seeing Judah ordered his Daughter-in-Law
who was in a manner betrothed to his third Son Shelah to be burnt: Nay, and
that the Crime which is called simple Fornication was accounted shameful
amongst them, seeing, when he sent his Friend to redeem the pledges which he
had left with Thamar, but could neither find her nor them, he said, Let her
take them to her, lest we be ashmed. Thamar's fact some have endeavored to
excuse, because say they, It did not proceed from Incontinence, but to revenge
her-self upon her Father, for not giving her Shelah to Husband as he had
promised; and others allege that she had some knowledge that the Messiah
should descend from Judah, and therefore desired to be impregnated by him, but
neither of these Excuses are sufficient, and therefore we find that she was
punished with a perpetual Widowhood for her Incontinence; and also by a
dangerous and monstrous Birth of twins, who seemed to strive which of them
should be soonest rid of their Impure Mother, and by that means contributed to
render the Memory of their Father and Mother's Crime immortal.

The next Scripture Instance is of a mixed Nature, and contains a Glorious
Triumph of Chastity in the Person of Joseph, against the Tentations of his
Lascivious Mistress, by embracing of which, he might not only have satisfied
the juvenile heat of Concupiscence, but also have expected Riches, Preferment,
and what not by means of a Woman of her Quality, and opportunity to fulfill the
Lusts of the Flesh with Secrecy and Impunity, the Repeated attacks which she
made upon him, his absence and unjust Expulsion from his Father's Family, which
then contained the visible Church, the Impure Example of the Egyptians, and the
unavoidable danger which he must needs foresee he threw himself into, by
resisting her Unlawful desires, set his Victory off with the greater Luster,
and depaints her Crime in Blacker Colors; and that same History which rewards
his Chastity with immortal Fame, punishes her Uncleanness with eternal
disgrace, and Brands her with a sort of Rape contrary to the Common Course of
the Sex, and with abominable Gruelty in accusing the Innocent youth of her own
Crime, for which he was shut up in Prison and brought in danger of his Life;
such is the Rage of disappointed Lust. The Rabbis allege that she feigned her
self to be sick, or really might be so through her burning Lust as Amnon was for
Tamar, and finding that all her Solicitations by words could not do, ordered
it so as he should find her a Bed in a Room where he frequented, thinking
thereby to add Strength to the Tentation, and if that would not do, was
resolved to make use of Force, which she did also attempt, but in vain. And it
is also remarkable, that her Husband, though no doubt incensed upon her accusing
Joseph, yet was so far overruled as to abstain from violence toward him, and
it is not at all to be doubted, but when Joseph's extraordinary Favor in the
Court of Heaven, advanced him to the Court of Pharaoh, but this Unchaste Woman,
if then alive, became a Curse and a Reproach, or if dead that her memory became
Vile and Contemptible. This passage brings naturally to my mind that well known
Reflection upon the Reformation here in England, by some loose Persons, viz.
That it came from Henry VIII's Codpiece, which opprobrious saying, was probably
invented by Enemies to our Religion, and as there is no doubt but that Prince's
Incontinence gave him occasion to Enquire into the Pope's Power, and afterward
to break it when he opposed his divorce, so we see it is no new thing for God
to bring about his own holy and pure designs, by the Impure and Wicked designs
of Mortals, for here this Woman's Incontinence occasioned Joseph's
Imprisonment, where becoming acquainted with some of Pharaoh's Courtiers then
under disgrace, that gave occasion to his being sent for to Court, and laid the
Foundation of that Deliverance which the Church of God had from an Universal
Famine by his means.

I shall conclude this History of Joseph with one observation, that as he is
Recorded to posterity for a Mirror of Chastity, we don't find that he was so
much as betained with digamy or polygamy, as his Father and Great Grandfather
were, whose Examples herein, though they were Holy men, he never followed, and
this is the more Remarkable because his Dignity and Power in the Land of Egypt
furnished him with all things necessary for Pampering the Flesh, and afforded
him an opportunity of keeping as many Wives and Concubines as he pleased, and
yet we find he contented himself with one, by which also we may perceive that
though a Pattern of Chastity, yet he accounted Lawful Marriage and Procreation
of Children no violation of it, as the Mad Popish Monks would pretend to do.

The next Instance we have of Divine Judgment upon Uncleanness is in the
punishment inflicted upon Reuben, and prophetically foretold by his Father
Jacob in his last words unto his Children, or in his last Will and Testament as
some are pleased to call it. The Judgment pronounced against Reuben is this,
Unstable as Water thou shall not excel because thou wentest up to thy Father's
Bed, then defiled'st thou it, he went up to my Couch, etc. Chronologers Reckon,
that this was 40 years after Reuben's Incest with his Father's Concubine
Bilhah, and though Reuben had no doubt repented of his Crime and was thereupon
pardoned by God and his Father so as to be continued both in the Church and in
his Father's Family, yet now his iniquity is called to remembrance by his dying
Parent, who puts Reuben to shame afresh before all his Brethren, and declares
it to be the Will of God, that Reuben should be deprived of his Birthright
because of his Impurity, and that whereas being the Eldest Son he ought of
right to have expected the Priesthood, Royalty, and Preeminence over his
Brethren; he is now told that he should not excel, that is, he and his
Posterity should neither be considerable for Strength, Valor, nor Number, and
the cause is subjoyned because he was Unstable as Water and had defiled his
Father's Bed, or had been acted by his Impetuous and Raging Lust like an
inundation of Water which over-flows its Banks and drowns, the Country; and
thus as Esau lost his Birthright by one sort of Profanity, Reuben lost it by
another; and as he had resembled an Inundation of Water for Fury and
Instability, so God poured him out like Water, and made his state Unstable; and
this Judgment was pronounced in the hearing, of all his Brethren as the last
and irrevocable Will of God and his Father; which, there is no reason to doubt,
set it home with the greater pungency upon Reuben's Soul; and especially
because not only he himself, but his Posterity also was set up as a Monument of
God's Judgment against Incontinence. There are some who fabulously assert, that
Jacob being well versed in Astronomy, did read the destiny of his Sons in the
Stars, where they will have the prognostication of all humane Events to be writ
down as in a Book; but the Event has verified that he was acted by a more
infallible Author.

The next thing that offers it self to our Consideration is the Sentence
pronounced against Simeon and Levi, who were Brethren to Reuben by Leah, joined
to Jacob as has been formerly observed by Unlawful Wedlock. -- And that which
makes the Curse inflicted upon them fit for our Remark is this, viz. That it
was occasioned by their Cruelty against the Schechemites, of which the Rape
committed upon their Sister Dinah was the procuring Cause; so that it comes
naturally to be taken notice of as one of the Judgments which was the
Consequence of Lust. The purport of their Sentence was, That they should be
divided in Jacob and dispersed in Israel. A very proper punishment for those
who commit Crimes against the being of humane Society, to be scattered up and
down upon the face of the Earth: And if we may give Credit to the Conjectures
of the Learned, their Posterity inherited their Father's Cruelty; for the
Levites, that is to say, the order of Priesthood, and descendants of Levi,
condemned Jesus Christ; and Judas who betrayed him, being as they say, of the
Tribe of Simeon, both those Tribes had a hand in that Condemnation, which was
the most cruel and unjust Sentence that ever was pronounced in the World.

The next thing which we find in the Sacred Records relating to our Subject is,
That God to Testify his abhorrence of this sin of Uncleanness, gives it as the
7th. precept to his peculiar People, Israel, that they should not commit
Adultery; under which Term, Uncleanness of every sort is forbidden; and being
the 7th. in order it would seem that the Divine Lawgiver did thereby intimate
that they should be as frequent and particular in the Remembrance of this
precept as they were to be of sanctifying every Seventh Day, which tho it were
appointed for a rest, yet they were hereby given to understand that they were
not to spend this Day in Chambering and Wantonness, nor make it the principal
Day of their impure Assignations as our Modern Debauchees do; and though this
precept was promulgated from Mount Sinai with the same solemnity of Thunder and
Lightning as the rest of the Law was, yet God would have his people so punctual
in the observation of it, that he added a further sanction to it, by appointing
particular punishments for the various manners of breaking it: as he that
enticed and desil'd Virgin should certainly take her to Wife; but if her Father
would not consent to it, the Person that desiled her should pay her Doury; but
if the Virgin were betrothed and desiled in any place where she might have help
upon crying out, then both Parties were to be put to death; but if the
betrothed Virgin were surprised in the field, or where she could not have help
upon crying out, then the Man was only to suffer death, Exodus 22, 16. Deuteronomy. 22.
from 14 to the end, but in case any Man were found lying with another Man's
Wife, then both the offending Parties were to be stoned to Death; and if any
Husband could prove that his Wife had played the Whore with another Man before
his Marriage to her, she was likewise to be stoned to death. -- And as a
further Evidence of God's detestation of Whoredom, it was appointed Deuteronomy. 23.
2. That no Bastard should enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even to his
tenth Generation: Nay, so great was the care of the Divine Lawgiver to have
his select People strictly Chaste and Continent, that he orders them to provide
against all occasions of Lasciviousness, or Incontinence in their very Apparel,
and particularly in the 22. of Deuteronomy. and 12. he commands them to make Fringes
upon the four Corners of their Garments, which some Commentators understand to
be Points or Laces to fasten them so that their Nakedness might not be
discovered on any occasion, Breeches not being then in use. In that same
Chapter Men are forbid to wear Women's Apparel, or Women Men's, lest thereby
there should be an opportunity given to promiscuous Lusts. By this, Esseminate
^op^ and Masculine Virago's are also rebuked: Nay, Common Reason teaches us to
despise and abhor such Unnatural Monsters. A Poor Heathen Poet could say,

Quem praeseare petest mulier galeata pudorem
Quae fugit a sexit.
What Modisty can we expect to see
In Women Armed like Soldiers Cap-a pec.
The Almighty is very particular in Exodus, ^eviticus, and Deuteronomy, in
enumerating the different sorts of Uncleanness, which he would have his People
to avoid, and after having forbid under severe Penalties those more usual
methods of Transgressing the Seventh Commandment, he forbids Marriage within
such and such degrees of Consanguinity, lays restrictions upon the use of the
Marriage Bed it self; and because our nature is so depraved, that when Lust has
the Reins laid on its Neck, it puts Mankind upon the search of Unnatural
Methods to satisfy it, the Divine Goodness consults our Welfare so much as to
make those things plainly appear to be sinful to us by his prohibition, which
Nature it self at first Glance would have taught us to be so, if we did but
make use of Common Reason: And therefore the approaching to a Woman in her
Uncleanness; and Bestiality, or Unnatural Comixtion with Creatures of another
kind, Crimes which ought to have been Buried in perpetual Oblivion, whose very
Names strike Nature with fear and horror, are expressly forbid, and the very
Brutes as well as the Man or Woman were ordered to be cut off for having
suffered such a transgression of the Law of Nature; and that the People might
take the more care to observe both those positive and Negative precepts, he
tells them that for such Abominations the Canaanites were to be driven out
before them and cut off.

It is also worth our Notice, that the Explanation of this Seventh Commandment
is more at large set down in the Sacred Scriptures, than that of any other of
the Commandments, and that the Lawgiver knowing the Frailty of humane Nature,
has been particularly Careful and Indulgant in the methods appointed for
Preservation of Chas^ity, as well as Just in the methods for discovering and
punishing Incontinence.

The Liberty allowed the Israelites in their divorces and the privilege that a
new Married Man had of not being obliged to go to War the first year, are
sufficient proofs of the Lenity of the Lawgiver, and that no Person could
pretend any Justisiable reason for their Incontinence. A year's time for a Man
and a Woman to cohabit was sufficient to establish their mutual Love, and to
prevent that Lubricity of the flesh which is discoverable upon first Marriage,
and might endanger the Woman's Chastity if too soon deprived of her Husband,
and the Man's also if all of a sudden taken from his Wife, especially to follow
a Military Employment, which generally abounds with Tentations to Incontinence,
and many other Crimes -- And answerable to this is the Command of the Apostle,
That the Husband should pay all due benevolence to the Wife, and that they
should not defrand one another but with Consent for a time, lest Satan tempt
them for their Incontinence.

Chastity was so strictly enjoined unto this select people of God, that they
were not only forbid to suffer any of their Daughters to be Whores, or any of
their Sons to be Whore-Masters, as some think the word which in our Translation
Deuteronomy 23. 17. is Sodomites, ought to be rendered, but all manner of immodesty
was strictly forbid; and therefore if any Woman seeing her Husband and another
Man a Quarrelling, should be so impudent in her Fury or Passion as to take the
other Man by the Secret Parts to oblige him to forbear Quarrelling with her
Husband, her hand was to be cut off without any pity, though every Man knows that
a Pressure or Gripe in those parts would quickly Force her Husband's Antagonist
to quit the Fray. -- And by much more reason would those Judges have Condemned
Women who put their hands to those parts upon a Lustful Account.

The Trials appointed in the Levitical Law to find out whether the Jealousy of
the Husband was well founded, was likewise admirably Accommodated for the
Clearing of the Innocent, and condemning the Guilty. The Tokens of Virginity
which the Learned tell us never failed in that Climate, were a Convincing proof
of the Brides being a Maid or otherwise, and therefore the Linen in which the
Bridegroom and she lay the first night was carefully kept by the Parents of the
Bride, and taken from the Bed before proper Witnesses, as a security for their
Daughter's Honor. If the accusation were found false, the Husband was to be
Chastis'd and Fined in an Hundred Shekels of Silver to the Father of the
Damsel, and if it was found to be true, she was to be stoned to Death for
having wrought folly in Israel; so that there is no doubt but this Custom had a
mighty influence upon Parents to watch carefully over their Daughters, and on
the Virgius themselves to preserve their Chastity.

The Trial to find out whether a Woman had committed Adultery after Marriage,
was yet more solemn and terrible, as may be seen in the 5th. of Numbers, from
the 11th. to the 31st. Verse. And seeing the effect of the bitter Water which
the Woman was to drink on that occasion, was altogether Supernatural, viz. to
make her fruitful if Innocent, and her Belly to swell and Thigh to rot if
guilty, it plainly demonstrated that God himself was the Patron of Chastity,
and Revenger of Adultery, and the Person found guilty upon this occasion
becoming a curse among the people, it shows how odious and abominable that
Crime then was in the Eyes of Man as well as in the Eyes of God; and there is no
doubt but this had a very great influence upon Women to be Loyal to their
Husbands, and careful to avoid giving 'em any occasion of Jealousy. It Is
probable that the Trial of Adultery by the Fiery ordeal, or laying so many hot
Bars of Iron upon the ground, covering the Woman's Eyes, and making her go over
them with her bare Feet, which she burnt if Guilty, and came off without any
hurt if Innocent, was an Apish Imitation of this solemn and severe Jewish
Trial, as many other of the Popish Superstitions are foolish and unwarrantable
Imitations of the Jewish Ceremonies; but as they have not the Divine
Institution for their Warrant, they come always short of the desired effect,
and turn to the disgrace of the Inventers and Practitioners.

It also deserves our observation that the flux of the Natural Seed in Man, the
menstrua in Women, and their ordinary purgations after Childbearing, rendered
them unfit for public worship, and were accounted unclean. Nay even the very
Lawful Act betwixt Man and Wife went under that denomination; because; as it is
well observed by Divines, the Corruption of Nature is more apt to discover it
self in that Lawful act, than perhaps in any other, and because Original
Corruption is Conveyed unto us in our first Conception by that very substance
whereof we are made.

The next scriptural Instance that Occurs, is in the 25th. of Numbers, where we
have an account that the Moabites and Midianites being afraid of the Children
of Israel, the King of the Moabites sent for Balaam, a false Prophet and
Enchanter, to Curse them, that he might the more easily prevail over them; but
Balaam finding that it was not in his power to Curse those whom God had
Blessed, gave them advice to send out their Beautiful Women among the
Israelites to tempt them to Uncleanness; which if they could, he knew that it
would render them odious in the sight of their Holy God, and bring down
Judgments upon them from the Almighty hand of Jeh^vah, who had given them such
Laws for the preservation of their Chastity as distinguished them from the
polluted Nations of the Earth. We must take notice by the way, that the
Moabites were the Descendants of Lot's Incestuous Brood by one of his
Daughters, and it is very probable that they looked upon promiscuous Copulations
to be sufficiently Authorized by the unhappy slip of that Good man, which
together with their Zeal to save their Country, made them ready enough to
prostitute themselves to the Israelites -- And they notwithstanding the
prohibition and Laws of that God who had chosen them for his peculiar people,
called them his first born, destroyed the Egyptians and Amorites for their
sakes, and as he told them himself, because of such pollutions, yet they, whom
Balaam's Magic could not Enchant, were so much bewitched with Lust toward the
Daughters of Moab, that they first committed Whoredom with them, and then
committed Idolatry to please them; so easy and natural is the transition from
a wicked Life to a false Religion.

This Lewd and Ungrateful Practice did quickly kindle the Anger of the Lord
against them, which was no other way to be expiated but by the Death of those
who had been Ringleaders of this Uncleanness and Idolatry, and therefore God
Commanded the Judges and Magistrates by the Mouth of his Servant Moses, every
one to slay those Ringleaders and Heads of the people in their own
Jurisdiction, who had polluted themselves, and to hang them up against the Sun,
in the face of which they had committed these Abominations; so that a Thousand
of those profane Great men were hanged, as the Learned do compute, and Twenty
Three Thousand of the Common people were consumed by the Plague for their
Whoredom.

In this General Instance of Uncleanness there is one more particularly taken
notice of by the Scripture, viz. That of Zimri, a Prince of the Tribe of
Simeon, with Cozbi the Daughter of a Prince of Midian. By the reading it would
seem that this man was so far besotted with his Lustful Passion, as neither to
regard the Command of God for hanging up other Great men that were guilty of
the like Crime, nor the hand of God which was gone out against the Common
People, destroying those by a burning Plague who just before were burning in
their Lusts, but in the very heat of God's Anger, and while the Congregation
were all in Tears for their Sins and Judgments, as if he would out brave the
wrath of God and insult over the Calamities of the people, he brought his
Midiantish Whore in the sight of Moses and all the Congregation into his Tent,
and as he made himself thus a Remarkable Sinner, the Lord did pursue him with
as Remarkable a Judgment, by sturring up Phinehas to go beyond the ordinary
bounds of his Vocation and become Executioner of his Justice upon this Lustful
Gallant, whom together with his Whore, he thrust through with his Javelin; so
that instead of sending a Priest to give him absolution, God Commissioned a
Priest to be the Messenger of dispatching him to everlasting flame in the very
mids of his own Impure flames; and while not only the names of Common Sinners,
but even those of other Great me^ who were hanged for the same Crimes are
buried in oblivion, the Name of this Prince and his Tribe are conveyed dow^ to
Posterity to perpetuate the Memory of hi^ Infamy; and this Remarkable Zeal of
Phinehas was so well pleasing to God, that the Plague amongst the People did
immediately cease upon it.

It Is an observation naturally deducible from this passage, that the Chief
Magistrate ought to punish Great Men in a^ Exemplary manner for such Great and
Heinous Crimes as Whoredom and Idolatr^ Here the great ones are hung up before
the Sun, while Sinners of a lower rank are suffered to rot by a Common
Contagion From hence also we may observe, Th^^ then a Reformation may have
prospect o^ Success when Ministers and Magistrates concur in it, as here
Phinehas did with Moses.

The horrid advice of Balaam before mentioned puts me in mind of the Counsel
which Cardinal Mazarine is generally charged with as to England, viz. That the
best way to make us Papists, was, to debauch our Morals, particularly by
Whoredom. We find by the Instance just now related, that Uncleanness is a
strong attractive to Idolatry, and whether the Lewd Example of the Court which
overspread the Nation with Debauchery, did not very much promote the Popish
Interest in former Reigns, and likewise lay the Foundation for that Atheism,
Deism, and Socinianism which does so much abound in this (now that the
Debauchees cannot find their Account in Popery) let Experience testify.

If the Advocates of Lechery should object, that the punishments abovementioned
were inflicted upon the People because of their Idolatry, and not upon the
Account of their Infamous Commerce with the Daughters of Midian; it is easy to
answer them that they were punished for both in Conjunction; and the Apostle in
the first of Corinthians, 10. and 8. assigns their Fornication as the Cause of
their Judgments; it being indeed the Original Cause, and as has been said
already, Whoredom and Idolatry have a Natural Tendency to one another, and
therefore Cardinal Mazarine's Receipt abovementioned for perverting Protestants
to be Papists, may very well pass with a probatumest.

There Is one thing more to be taken notice of in this Instance, and that is,
the Judgments which this Whoredom brought upon the Midianites as well as upon
the Children of Israel. It is well enough known that Corrupt Nature is prone
enough to Revenge, and there is little reason to doubt but the Israelites were
incensed enough against those of Midian for this Great Injury they had done
them, yet the Almighty thought fit to whett their Revenge and Commanded them to
Vex the Midianites and Smite them, because they vexed them with their Wiles,
and beguiled them in the matter of Peor and Cozbi, that is by enticing them to
Idolatry and Whoredom, Peor being the Mountain where the Midianitish Baal was
worshipped, for Baal was an Appellative Name to Heathen Idols, as Mary is to
the Popish ones, but distinguished by the places where the most Famous Statues
or Pictures of 'em were worshipped, as our Lady of Loretto, Lady of Prague, etc.
now a days.

So that here is a War declared against Midian with as good Authority and for as
great and weighty Causes as ever any War was declared under Heaven.

The Execution of which we have an account of in the 31. Chap. where it is
recommended unto Moses as the last Military Exploit that ever he was to perform
to Avenge the Lord and the Children of Israel of the Midianites, which was
accordingly done by an Army Contemptible for Number, viz. 12000 Men, who
destroyed a Numerous People, Governed by 5 Kings, put all their Males to the
edge of the Sword, their Kings not excepted, and amongst the rest Balaam the
false Prophet was slain as a just reward for his pernicious Council, and so the
Riches which he acquired and was so covetous of, that for the Lucre of 'em he
would act contrary to God's Express Command, became a prey to the Israelites
against whom he had given such Hellish advice.

It is also observable that Phinehas who had formerly signalized his Zeal, is
sent along with the Troops, which was both a great Honor to him and an
Encouragement to them as fighting under the Auspices of Heaven, and had it been
otherwise they could never possibly have Conquered such a great People as the
Midianites appear to have been 3 by the Number of the Women saved that had
never known Man, viz. 32000, their Sheep which were 675,000, their Beeves
72,000, and Asses 61,000; so that God powered Contempt upon that Effeminate
Whoring Nation in destroying them by such an Inconsiderable Number of men.

It Is also to be observed that Moses was very Angry with the Captains for
having saved all the Women, and the reason given for it, is this, Because they
had enticed the Children of Israel, first to Whoredom and then to Idolatry; and
therefore he Commanded every Woman who had known a Man to be destroyed, and
thus those Women who thought to have saved their Country by Prostituting
themselves, did thereby accelerate the destruction of themselves and their
Country too, and the Midianitisls Men who consented to this Hellish Stratagem
of exposing their Wives to save themselves did thereby procure the ruin of
both, and their Virgins became a prey to the Conquerors.

The just hatred of God against this Impure Nation appears likewise in this,
that their Furniture, Gold, Silver, etc. was not to be made use of by the
Israelites, 'till purisied by Fire and Water according to the nature of the
thing; so abominable in the Eyes of God are all those things spo^ted with the
Flesh.

There are some who make an exception to the truth of this History of the Total
destruction of the Midianites, because they afterward invaded Israel in great
Multitudes in Gideon's time, but the solution is easy; by the Total
destruction may be meant that of the Generality; or some of them might escape
to the Neighboring Nations, and return again with Foreign Colonies to
re-inhabit their desolate Country, which the Israclites were not to slay in,
but pressed forward toward the Land of Canaan, and so the new Inhabitants
assuming the Name of the Country might invade the Israclites in the days of
Gideon.

We have seen the destruction of Midian, occasioned by their Uncleanness, but
that of the Moabites was respited for a while, because they were the offspring
of Lot: Of such advantage is it to be descended of Godly Parents, though in an
illegal manner.

We have already considered Incestuous and Unlawful Marriages, as they were
forbidden to the Israelites, whom God would have distinguished from other
Nations, not only in respect of the purity of their Morals, but even in their
Apparel, Hair, and laudable Customs: as Maimonides and others think: And we
come now to consider those Incestuous Marriages and Promiscuous Copulations, as
the Causes of the destruction of the Egyptians, amongst whom they had dwelt;
and of the Canaanites, in whose Land they were to dwell, as it is particularly
expressed in the 18th Chapter of Leviticus. It Is true that all along in the
Book of Exodus the Chief Crime of the Egyptians taken notice of, is, Oppression
and Persecution; but, as we have said before, Persecution and Uncleanness are
Generally Companions; and we find that the multiplication of the Hebrews was
one great Cause of the Envy and Hatred of the Egyptians toward them, which
b^ing the usual Blessing and Reward of Chastity was a severe Reproof to the
Lascivious Egyptians, which no doubt did heighten their Enmity to the Children
of Israel. -- And by the Prophet's Reproof in the 20. and 23. Chapters of
Ezekiel, That Israel had played the Harlot in the days of her Youth, when she
was in the Land of Egypt; there is reason to think, that too too many of the
Israelites were infected with the corrupt Example of the Egyptians, who ^or
their Promiscvous Venery are Compared to Asses and Horses, by the Prophet, in
these words, Whose Members are as the Members of Asses, and whose Issue is as
the Issue of Horses. Historians tell us, That it was usual amongst the
Egyptians for Brothers and Sisters to Marry together; and that they made a
Statute for the Lawfulness of it, because Isis their Goddess was Married to her
Brother Osiris. Then seeing the Israelites had conversed amongst them 200
Years, and had not only seen but learned their Corrupt manners, and been
witnesses to all the plagues inflicted upon them on that Account, there could
not be a more proper Caution given them, than to beware of their Practices. It
is also to be observed that the Arabians, amongst whom the Israelites wandered,
married none but their own Kindred; That the Persians held it Lawful for the
Fathers to marry with their Daughters; and the Parthians accounted it no Crime
for the Mothers to marry with their Sons; so much were those Eastern Countries
drowned in Uncleanness; whence it is plain that Whoredom was one of the
principal Causes of their destruction. It Is true, that in Abraham's time it
would seem that such Incestuous Marriages were not Common amongst the
Egyptians, otherwise his advice to Sara to (say that she was his Sister) would
have been no Argument to make the Egyptians conclude, that she was not his
Wife: But it is plain from Historians, that afterward they grew more
licentious. And thus Ptolemy Pihladelphus married his Sister Arsinoe, and Soter
and Philopater, Egyptian Kings, did also marry their own Sisters: And it is a
known Story of the Persians, that when Cambyses King of Persia had a mind to
his youngest Sister, and asked his Judges whether there were any Law against
it; they answered him, That they knew none, but that there was a Law, that the
King's of Persia might do what they would -- Then it is also known that the
Messagates, Troglodites, Brachmans, and other Eastern People, allowed a
Community of Wives, their Philosophers taught it, and Crates and Cabades Kings
of Persia, made Laws for it.

Another of the Crimes forbidden to the Israelites, and which the Canaanites,
and those Eastern People were guilty of, was, causing their Seed to pass
through the fire to Moloch, by which some understand that in a most filthy
manner they consecrated their Sperm or Seed to their Idol Priapus, as Baal's
Priest offered their Blood to their Idol, 1. Kings 18. and as the Manichees and
Gnostics mixed the Eucharist with humane Seed; though the Current of
Interpreters carry it for making their Children pass through betwixt two fires,
and sometimes offering them as a burnt-Sacrifice in Honor of their Idol.

They are also charged with Sodomy, or the Unnatural Lust of Men toward Men,
to which they were given up by the Just Judgment of God as a due punishment for
their Idolatry. And at the dissolution of the Monastcries here in England, our
Antichristian Idolaters were found to have polluted themselves in this manner;
which Crime as it brought Hell upon the Sodomites before their time, (that is,
brought Fire and Brimstone upon them before they went off the Earth,) so this
horrid Uncleanness of the Monks procured the dissolution of the Monasteries by
Henry VIII before their Religion was discharged out of the Nation.

The Egyptians and Canaanites are also charged with Bestiality, their Men and
Women having committed Confusion with Beasts, and thus Pasiphae is accused of
having accompanied with a Bull, Polyphantes with a Bear, Semiramis with an
Horse, and the Women of Mendis in Egypt with Goats. -- Nay if we may believe
the Fables of the Jews, the false Prophet Balaam, who was slain amongst the
Midianites, was guilty of Bestiality with his Ass, which they foolishly collect
from those Words of the Beast, viz. Am not I thine Ass which thou have ridden
upon? It is also observable, that those brutal Commixtious were punished by the
Infamy of the Criminals, as well as by their destruction, for we read, that the
Monstrous Births have many times discovered those Unnatural Crimes, and that
sometimes they have been betrayed by Heterogeneous tho perfect Births. And thus
Plutarch tells us of a Boy begotten betwixt a Man and a Mare, and of a Girl
betwixt a Man and an Ass -- And Olaus Magnus mentions a Man begotten of a Woman
by a Bear, who was thereupon called Vrsus, and of whom many Great Panish
Princes did afterward descend. -- It Is true that Galen denies that there can
be any such Generation of Mankind, but others maintain it upon this reason,
That the Partial Cause being more Noble prevails over the less Noble, as it is
many times seen that a fair Woman has brought forth a Black-amoor.

In fine the Land of Canaan being polluted by those abominations, Vomited out
her Inhabitants, the Posterity of Cham, who did so impudently behold and revile
his Father's Nakedness, and is thought to have revived the Vicious manners of
the old World in his Posterity, the Sodomites and Canaanites, and thus we have
an account of two more Great Nations destroyed by their Uncleanness, viz. the
Egyptians and Canaanites, whose Practices the Israelites were Commanded to
avoid, as they would not run the hazard of the same or greater Judgments.

The next Remarkable Instance we meet with in Scripture, is that of Sampson,
who having a mind to take one of the Daughters of the Philistines to Wife, for
which some Commentators are of opinion that he had a particular Revelation, or
at least a Divine Instinct, she proved unfaithful to him, and as Levi Ben
Gerson alleges, the Philistine youths Committed Adultery with her, and by that
means came to the knowledge of her Husbands Riddle: and this Interpretation he
thinks to be favored by Sampson's saying, That if they had not Plowed with his
Heifer they had not found out his Riddle, but whether it were so or not, this
is certain, that she was guilty of the breach of Conjugal Fidelity, which
issued in the destruction of her Family and People, that she thought to avoid
by this piece of Treachery. This is also certain, that she afterward defiled
the Marriage Bed, when Sampson went away from her in Anger, upon the Account of
discovering his Riddle which makes Levi Ben Gerson's Accusation so much the
more probable, especially if we consider that she was by her Father bestowed
upon Sampson's Companion, viz. one of those that had accompanied him at the
Marriage solemnity; which discovers the Loosnesses of the Philistines in a very
Emphatical manner, and made Sampson a very Just instrument of Revenge upon 'em
and perhaps the Fulsomeness and Cunning of their Crime was very aptly punished
by tying those stinking and Cunning Creatures the Foxes tail to tail with
Firebrarnds betwixt them, by which they burnt the Cornfields and Vineyards of
the Crafty and Impure Philistines. The objection which some make against this
Story, viz. That it was impossible to find so many Foxes, is frivolous; it is
plain that those Creatures were very Numerous in Syria and Palestine; and they
are mentioned in the Capticles as spoilers of the Vines, for these Creatures
are great admirers of Ripe Grapes; so that for such an Extraordinary Person as
Sampson to catch such a Number of Foxes where they did so much abound, was no
hard matter; It Is certain that they were the most proper of any Creature for
his purpose seeing they frequented the Cornfieldsd and Vineyards, and by
Consequence run straight thither; where as if he had made use of Dogs, they
would have run to the Houses where the People might easily have Quenched the
Brands.

The next thing observable in this passage, is, the Just punishment which was
inflicted upon Sampson's Treacherous wife, and her Father, viz. That the
Philistines burnt them with fire, a very proper punishment for such a Lustful
Family as this appears to have been, both by Sampson's Wife's proving false to
him, who was certainly able enough to perform his Conjugal duty, and also by
her Father's incestuous offer of the younger Sister to Sampson, which shows
that the fear of God was not in the Family: And this Villainous practice of
theirs did not only draw destruction upon themselves, but on their polluted
Country, and therefore this Revenge of destroying their Corn and Wine in the
first place was very proper, idleness and fullness of Bread being great
provocatives to Uncleanness, and the old saying is found to be true sine Baccho
and Cerere friget Venus. Take away Corn and Wine, and Lechery will cease. But
this was not all the punishment inflicted upon that Impure People, for he smote
them hip and thigh where ever he met them, and shortly after killed a thousand
of 'em with the Jaw bone of an Ass; and thus a Villainous People were cut off
in an Ignomimous manner, by the Jaw bone of one of the dullest and most
despicable Beasts.

The next Instance of Divine Wrath against Fornication is Sampson himself, who
though he had been the Executioner of God's Justice upon the Impure Philistines,
yet fell into the same Crime, and Repeated it to the eminent danger, and at
last to the loss of his Life: He was once Besieged by the Philistines in Gaza,
when he was with a Whore, and though God had not deserted him then, so that he
escaped them by his great strength and carrying away the Gates on his
Shoulders, yet he was so far from taking warning, that he becomes enamoured of
the Strumpet Delilah, and was so much besotted with his Lust, that though she had
given him many demonstrations of her Treacherous design to betray him into the
hands of the Philistines, yet he could not rescue himself from her snares, but
at last became a Prey and Scorn to his Enemies, a Scandal and a Reproach to the
People of God, and an occasion of Triumph to Idolaters, who ascribed their
Conquest over him to their Idols, and put him in Prison in that same City where
he first committed Uncleanness.

This is a second Scriptural Instance of snares laid against the Church of God
by Unclean Women, the first being by the Midianites, and the second by the
Philistines, which though they proved fatal to the People of God for a time, yet
both of 'em ended in the destruction of the Contrivers and Abettors; for the
Midianites, we have heard were Totaly destroyed; and now we find that Sampson
destroyed more Philistines at his Death than he did during his Life, and those
the Lords or Chief of 'em too.

Nor is it unworthy our observation that the Papists, who attacked the
Protestant Religion, and endeavored to undermine it in Charles Il's. time, by
Court-Whores, and others; though they had success for a while, yet their designs
have turned to their own disgrace, and come to nothing at last.

We proceed next to the Instance of the Levite's Concubine and the Men of
Gibeah. This Wom^n having played the Harlot left her Husband, whose Anger she
dreaded, and went to her Father's House in Bethlehem Judah. By the Levitical
Law it was more odious in a Priest's Wife or Daughter to be an Whore than in
another, and therefore it is probable that to avoid the shame and punishment due
to her for her Crime, she fled to her Father's House; whither the good Levite,
being willing to be reconciled goes to bring her home again, and being
benighted in his return, would not lodg^ amongst the Uncircumsised Canaanites
in any of their Cities, but turns in to Gibe^^ of Benjamin, where he promised
himself a^ Hospitable Reception and safe Asylum, b^ to his sorrow found it far
otherwise, a^^ instead of a Zoar met with a Sodom, t^^ Wicked Inhabitants took
no notice of the stranger, who was left destitute of a Lodgin^ in their
Streets, till a certain good o^^ Man, who came from his work in the Evening,
did Hospitably take him in a^^ entertain him: But immediately after, tho^^
Children of Belial beset the House, a^^ offered the Levite the same Unnatural
^^ dignity and Affront that the Sodomites o^fered to the Angels, who were L^^
Guests; and this old Man took much the same method to divert their wicked
purpose, that Lot did to divert that of the Sodomites. In sine, the poor Levite
escaped from having any violence done to his ow^ Person, but his Concubine,
whom he ^^ entirely loved as to be reconciled to he^ after her having desiled
his Bed, and for whose sake it is probable among other Re^sons he would not
lodge in any of the Heathen Towns in his way, was so unnat^rally abused by
those Villainous Inhabitant^ of Gibeah, that she died. The metho^ which was
hereupon followed by the L^vite does sufficiently discover his Resentment of
this affront, for taking her Corpse, up, though he knew that she was justly thus
punished by God for her former Uncleanness, so as her sin was easy to be read
in her Judgment, yet knowing also that the Inhabitants of Gibeah had committed
an horrid and tremendous piece of wickedness, he divided his Concubine into
twelve parts, and sending them to the respective Tribes of Israel appeals to
them whether any suchwickedness as the violation of a stranger's Chastity and
Life had been perpetrated amongst them since their coming out of Egypt, where
their Forefathers had been strangers, and therefore desires them to Consult
what was fit to be done for the Expiation of that unheard of Crime. Thus this
poor Woman's Limbs were sent about as so many Monument^ of her Infamy and God's
Just Judgments against her Adultery, and as so many Evidences of the profligate
manners of the Benjamites. But though here was an end of her punishment, so was
there not of theirs; for the whole Kingdom of Israel assembled against them,
and the Benjamites being so wicked as not to punish the offenders at their
Brethren's desire, but to stand in their defense, the matter issued in a Civil
War, which, though unfortunate at first to the Israelites* because of their not
having made due application unto God, and that they relied too much upon their
own strength, yet ended at last, almost in the utter destruction of the Tribe
of Benjamin, who together with their Cities were destroyed; and they who had
formerly been so Unhospitable to the poor Levite, are now forced to shelter
themselves in a Rock; and they who had been so inhumane as to Ravish another
Man's Wife, had never a Woman left amongst them to propagate, or continue their
Name to posterity; so bitter are the Fruits of Uncleanness in the result and
digestion, how pleasant soever they be to Corrupt nature in the Enjoyment and
thus we have done with another Instance of a Peoples being ruined by
Uncleanness, 25000 Benjamites being cut off for defending this horrid Villainy,
and the stain of their impurity indelibly six'd upon them to all Posterity. --
The Rabbis according to their manner, assert many fabulous things concerning
this passage, as that 1000 of the Benjamites fled into Europe after this
disaster, because they found that their Brethren had sworn their destruction,
that they had killed all their Women and vowed they would give them none of
their Daughtes, which was like to put an end to their propagation; but their
flying into Europe being contrary to the Text, it is not worth taking notice of,
only this we may observe, that their Lust and Uncleanness hurled them head long
from one Calamity to another; for after they had escaped the Fury of the Sword,
they were reduced to very pinching straits being not only deprived of the
Conversation of Women, which it is natural for all Men to desire, but likewise
deprived of their necessary assistance, without which Men cannot at all
subsist, or if they do, its but very uncomfortably, and as if Divine Justice
would have them read their sin in their punishment: After all the endeavors
that were used to supply them with Wives they were constrained because of their
want of a sufficient Number to take Wives per force for themselves, to answer
the Ends of Nature, who had by force taken away another Man's Wife to satisfy
their Unnatural Lust.

The horrid Debauchery of Eli's Sons who lay with the Women as they assembled
at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation is one of the next Iustances
we meet with in the Sacred Scriptures; a Practice so foul in the Eyes of all
mankind, that they can more easily bear with the House of God's being made a
Den of Thieves and Robbers than a Den of Harlots; nay such Practices have been
so much detested amongst the more resin'd Heathens, that though we read of
Eleusina Sacra, which most Authors think to have been profane and Lascivious
Rites, and though we read also of Temples and Groves dedicated to Venus, where
Women prostituted themselves to all comers, yet we read likewise that the
Temple of Isis was destroyed and his Priests dispersed for a Villainous
Intrigne of Seducing and Debauching a Matron under the Notion of the God Isis
having desired her Company.

The Rabbis, though the Jews be known to be a Lascivious Unclean People and much
addicted to Polygamy and Whoredom, are so much ashamed of this Villainous
practice of Eli's Sons, that they endeavor by their Comments to have it
thought tha^ they did not Debauch the Women, but only by delaying their
Sacrifice obliged the^ to sleep or stay whole nights before the Door of the
Tabernacle, or at furthest persuaded them to lie with their own Husbands, if
they were legally clean before they performed their Sacrifices. Thus Levi Ben
Gerson and others, but Josephus the Jewish Historian owns plainly that they
Debauched other Men's Wives, partly by Violence and partly by Bribery, and by
the means rendered the Worship of the Lord Contemptible and brought Judgments
up on themselves and upon the whole people, for not long after, we find that
the^ were slain in a Battle against the Philistines and the Ark of God which
they had the charge of, was taken, as if God would suffer the symbol of his
presence to be amongst the Impure and Uncircumcised Philistines and kept by
them, rather than it should stay amongst the Unclean Israelites who by their
Religion were obliged to Purity and Chastity.

It has been hinted before that the Lechery and Uncleanness of the popish
Clergy contributed to the dissolution of their Monasteries in England and
elsewhere which, we shall touch upon again in it is proper place, but it may not
be improper to take notice here, that Socrates gives us an Account, that
private Confession was abolisht at Constantinople because a certain Presbyter
to whom a Matron had Confessed her self guilty of an heinous Offense, enjoined
her to stay in the Church and apply her self to Fasting and Prayer, under
pretense of which she was found to be naughty with the Deacon; whereupon,
Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople abolished that method of Confession.

But to return again to Eli's Sons, their punishment did not terminate in their
own Persons, but reached their Father, who, as Josephus thinks wept continually
after God had revealed to him that both his Sons should be slain in one day,
and the Scripture tells us, that he fell backward and broke his Neek upon the
receipt of that fatal News. It reached also the Wife of one of 'em, who died
upon the News of her Husband's death, and the Arks being taken; and it reached
also their Posterity who were for ever excluded from the Priest's Office and
had a perpetual Poverty entailed upon them, as a Curse, and to make them the
more sensible of the dignity, from whence they had fallen, they were condemned
to be a sort of slaves to the High Priest of the succeeding Family, of whom
they were to beg a morsel of Bread and Employment, so naturally does the Curse
of Poverty or of bringing a Man to a piece of Bread follow upon Whoredom and
Uncleanness.

There are some other Instances of lesser note, as Readiness forcing his Daughter
Michal, after she had been married to David, to marry another Man, which was an
act of Unncleaness and Tyranny too, and had no doubt, its influence amongst
others of that Prince's Tyrannical and Impious Acts to hasten ruin upon him.

The Instance of Abner's going into Rispah, Readiness Concubine, which
Interpreters think he did in an Adulterous manner, and not by way of Lawful
Marriage, deserves our Remark; for hereby Saul suffered in his Fame after his
Death, and he who had compelled his Daughter to defile her Husband's Bed, had
this Ignominy and punishment inflicted upon his Son, that he saw his Fathers
Wife dishonourably defiled, and Abner, who was guilty of that Villainous Action,
took occasion, because of his Reproof, to Revolt from him and to transfer the
Kingdom to David, and as he went about to effect it, fell into the snare which
Joab had laid for him, and lost his Life.

We come, in the next place to David's Adultery with Bathsheba, a Crime, which
has many aggravations, to be committed by David a prophet who instructed
others in the Law of God, and did so grossly break it himself, to be committed
by David, ^ King who ought to have defended the Chastity of his Subject, and
not to have violated it himself; to be Committed by David a holy Man, who did
thereby expose Religion to be ridiculed, and laid a stumbling block before
others, to commit the like Crime because of his Example, then if we consider
the time, it was when his Generals and Army were exposed to the Fury of their
Enemy in a Siege, when he ought to have been more sollicitous for the honor
and dignity of his Crown and for the safety of his Subjects: Then if we
consider the Person, against whom this Crime was committed, we find it to be
against a Brave, Valiant and Faithful Friend and Subject, who would not
indulge himself in his Pleasures and Accommodations, while the Ark and People
of the Lord abode in Tents; though David, who was his Sovereign, allowed him, nay
Commanded and Enticed him to do it, which heightened and aggravated the Crime of
that Holy man, who acted herein Hypocritally and Scandalously to cover his
Iniquity and gave occasion to the Israelites to think that as for Personal
Conversation they had made but a sorry Exchange betwixt Saul and David, for we
don't find that Tyrant accused of Personal Uncleanness. But the bloody part of
the Scene is still to be acted, David finding that he could not effect his
design by Hypocrisy, has recourse to downright Violence and Murder, his
Intrigue to make Vriah drunk, which he thought might provoke him to a desire of
his Wife, having miscarried, he resolves to cut him off by the Sword of the
Ammonites, and that too, in a fraudulent manner by ordering him to be set in
the front of the Battle, and commanding the Men to retire from him that he
might be smitten: Nay, so eager was he to have this Poor Man's life, in order
to cover his own Uncleanness, that he was content to Sacrifice the Lives of
many more of his Subjects, so that this could be but effected; so natural is it
for Uncleanness to be the Parent and occasion of Murder.

The Crime is still further aggravated if we consider how deliberately it was
committed, how long he continued without Repentance, and what a severe Judgment
he gave against himself, when Nathan the Prophet propounded the Case to him by
way of Parable. So much for David's Crime; we must now consider that of
Bathsheba, she Washed and Bath*d her self in open view of the Palace, otherwise
David could never have seen her from the Roof of his House, which argues her to
have been very Immodest, nor do we find that she made any opposition to the
proposal when 'twas made to her, so little regard had she either to the Law of
God or her own and her Husband's Honor. It remains then that we come to the
punishment inflicted upon both.

The Judgment pronounced by Nathan against David, was, That the Sword should
never depart from his House, that the Lord would raise up evil against him out
of his own House, that he would take his Wives before his Eyes and give them
unto his Neighbor, who should lie with them in the sight of the Sun, and that
the Child which he had begot in Adultery, should surely die, all which was
exactly fullfilled, as we shall see in the following Instances.

The first part of the punishment inflicted, was the Death of the Child, and
how near that went to David, may easily be perceived by his afflicting himself
with fasting and bying all night upon the Earth while it was sick, and there is
no doubt but this part of the punishment reached Bathsheba as well as him,
seeing it is reasonable to suppose that the Death of a Child, for whom she had
broke through all ties, Divine and Humane, must go very near her.

The next part of the punishment displayed David's Sin in Legible Characters,
and brought an horrid Disgrace upon his Family, viz. The Incest of his Son
Amnon with his Daughter (...), she Story and Consequence of which i^ as follows.

Tamar, being a fair Woman, Amnon, her Brother fell in Love with her, but
knowing that she was within the forbidden degrees of Consanguinity; he found he
could not Lawfully enjoy her. Before we proceed any further in the History of
this affair, it is proper to consider, that this Damsel's Mother was (...)
Daughter to Talmai King of (...) says, That David (...) this ^ady Captive, and
being himself Captiva^ed with her Beauty, defiled her and begot this Tamar, and
that persevering in his Love to Maacha, though a Heathen, he made her a
Proselyte, and did according as it is prescribed by the Levitical Law, Deuteronomy.
21. viz. Shaved her Head and Eyebrows, cut her Nails, etc. and took her to
Wife. Lyranus and some of the later Rabbis say, That when Maacha was taken,
she was with Child of this Tamar by another Husband, and this they think,
favored by her saying to Amnon? Speak unto the King for he will not withold
me from thee: But Modern Interpreters do with more reason think that she only
said this to put him off, for if they could have been married by Law, Amnon
would not have pined for her, but have straightway demanded her of the King who
was so indulgent to his Children, that he would never have refused it, if it
could have been Lawfully Granted, and therefore Amnon knowing that this could
not be done, he burned and consumed away in his Unlawful Love, which prevented
his sleep, disordered his stomach, hindered his digestion and occasioned a
paleness in his Countenance, which made his Friend Jonadab to guess at his
Malady and put him upon that fatal Intrigue to satisfy his Lust, viz. To feign
himself sick, and to desire of his Indulgent Father when he came to see him,
that his Sister Tamar might come and make him some Cakes, by which means he
should have an opportunity of satisfying his passion, and this being
accordingly put in Execution, he ravished her, and then his hatred to her
became as excessive as ever his Love had been, so that tho it was his Interest
to have concealed his Villainy both upon the Account of his Reputation and
safety: His fury was so outrageous that as he had forced her into his Bed, he
forced her also out of his Chamber, which presently divulged his own shame. The
Rabbis according to their fabulous manner, allege, that this hatred proceeded
from the bitter Reproaches and Words which Tamar made use of against him during
the Rape, or from his having hurt himself while he struggled with her, but the
more probable reason is that it proceeded from those stings of Conscience and
that perturbation of mind which usually attends such Villainies-and thus Nero
hated his Mother Mortally, and at last ordered her to be murdered after he had
committed Incest with her, but in the Case of Amnon there was something of a
special Providence, God would have David's sin legible in his punishment, and
therefore that the shame of his Children and Family should be public? nay it is
plain, that God deprived him of his ordinary sagacity, when he so easily
consented to Amnon's desire of having his Sister Tamar to bake him some Cakes,
which was enough to Minister cause of suspicion, that some wicked design lay
concealed at bottom, and in like manner he was deprived of his sagacity when
about two years after he consented to Amnon's going to Absalom's Feast at the
sheering of his Sheep, for he might easily have conceived that his Daughter
Tamar who remained desolate in her Brother Absalom's House, kept the Memory of
the indignity which Amnon had done to her fresh in Absalom's mind, and that
Absalom being an Ambitious Man might also be prompted to cut off Amnon, who was
David's Eldest Son, that he might make way for himself to succeed, but so God
would have it, that his Judgments denounced upon David's House, because of his
Murder and Adultery, might be Executed; and therefore Amnon is not only
suffered to go, but the rest of the King's Sons so much deprived of their
Reason and Courage, as, that they could not prevent this horrid Fratricide; and
thus Amnon, whom David had spared out of a fond affection, though he ought to
have died by the Law, was Justly cut off for his Incestuous Rape, and as
David's Uncleanness was punished by Incest betwixt his own Children, so his
Murder is punished in that same manner by this Fratricide Committed by one of
his Sons, upon another, which was an early presage of Absalom's usurpation, by
taking the Sword of Justice out of his Father's hand. This must without all
doubt have been a very sensible affliction to David, to have one Son Murdered,
and another obnoxious to lose his Life by the Law for the said Murder. It must
needs also pierce him to the heart to hear the Reproaches of the wicked, who no
doubt upbraided him with the Ungodly Lives of his Children and the want of
Discipline in his Family.

But his affliction did not terminate here, being again reconciled to his Son
Absalom which his Unwarrantable indulgence made easy to be effected, this
Unnatural Monster by his Treachery and Flattery, stole away the hearts of the
People from his Father, and then broke out into a formal Rebellion. That the
People did so readily concur with him, is attributed to the persuasions of
Achitophel and others, who exposing David's personal faults, as his Adultery
with Bathsheba, his Murder of Vriah, sparing his Incestuous Son (...), and
dealing hardly with Absalom for Execu^ing Justice upon him; did mightily
Incense them against him, and besides these, we find, that Absalom himself
accused him of Maladministration, and a neglect of Justice, which, by the
Just Judgment of God, in order to the fullfilling of his threatening, That the
Sword should never depart from David's House, did so take, that he was in great
danger of losing his Crown, and it is worth our observation that the Person
which occasioned him so much trouble and disgrace was his own Son by a Heathen
Wife, with whom he had contracted Marriage out of a Lustful principle, as has
been formerly taken notice of.

Absalom, in the Course of his Rebellion, does also commit Incest with his
Father's Concubines, by the Counsel of Achitophel, contrary to the positive Law
of God, and thus was the threatening accomplished upon David, of having his own
Wives taken from him, and given to another, who should humble them in the sight
of the Sun, and of all the People; and it is remarkable, that this Villainy was
Acted upon the roof of the King's House, where he himself did first commit
Adultery with Bathsheba in his Heart -- The reason of Achitophel's giving this
pernicious advice; was, that he might do what in him lay to make the breach
between David and Absalom Irreconcilable, that so he might never be called to
an Account for aiding Absalom in this Rebellion: and there are others, who say,
that he had also a design of Revenge in it, for David's having Debauched
Bathsheba, who, it is probable, was this Achitophel's Granddaughter.

As to Absalom's own part in this Villainy, we have reason to think that he was
thereunto prompted by Revenge and Lust both. Revenge, because his Father had
not punished Amnon for his Rape upon Tamar, his Sister; and Lust, because we
find he was a Vain and Effeminate Person, and Excessively proud of his Beauty
and Hair, which he nourished so prodigiously, that at the end of the year, when
he poll'd it, he usually cut off about Two Hundred Shekells, which is computed
at above six Pound Averdupoize.

The next thing which in Course we are to take notice of, is the punishment
inflicted upon Achitophel, who gave this pernicious Counsel, and upon Absalom
who followed it: The former, though his Wicked advice as to the polluting of
David's Concubines was obeyed, yet finding his Counsel as to the Military part
despised, took it so much to heart, that he thereupon became a deliberate Felo
de se, and after having set his House in order, became the Executioner of a
punishment upon himself, which ought to have been inflicted by the hands of
others, as a Just reward for his having advised to the Commission of Capital
Crimes. And thus fell Achitophel as a true Type of Judas.

As to Absalom, his punishment was very remarkable. His Father David against
whom he had committed those Capital of fences, was so strangely indulgent that
he gave his Captains particular Charge to deal kindly with him for his sake;
but behold the Event, that Unnatural Monster, whom the Indulgence of a Father
would have spared, the Justice of Heaven would not suffer to go unpunished, but
armed the Trees of the Forest against him, so that his Hair being caught by the
branch of an Oak, that in which he so much Gloried, became the means of his
Ruin, and served instead of a Rope to hang him up betwixt Heaven and Earth, as
a Monument of Divine Justice, and to show that he was accursed; but that was
not all, Divine Justice did so much Incense Joab against him that taking three
Darts in his hand he soon dispatched him, so that he died more sorts of Deaths
than one, as a Just reward for his Complicated Crimes. R. Kimchi's Observations
upon Absalom's Tragical Exit, are neither improper nor Unpleasant, A^salom,
says he, was thrust through the Hear^ with 3 Darts, 1. Because he stole the Ki^^
his Father*s heart; 2. Because he stole the heart of the Sanhedrim, that is of
the ^^^ Senators who went with him out of the si^plicity of their hearts; and
3. Because he stole the Hearts of all Israel. He might have added a 4th. that
as his heart was struck th^^ with raging Lust when he went in to ^^ Father*s
Concubines in the sight of the S^^ so his Heart was now struck through w^^ Darts
while he hung upon the Tree ^^twixt Heaven and Earth. -- The Rabbi ^^ also
another Remark, which is p^rtin^ enough, viz. That as he incestuously p^^luted
his Father's ten Concubines, he ^^ encompassed and slain by 10 of Joab's
A^tendants, who threw him into a Pit, a^ raised a Great h^ap of Stones over
him, that as he lived he died, and was Bu^ i^ an Ignominious manner,
notwithsta^^ing his having erected a Pillar, which Inte^preters think was a
Funeral Monument, ^^sembling the ^gyptian Pyramids, that out his Ambition he
had prepared for hims^^ in the Kings' dale, or Valley where t^ Kings used to
solemnize public Plays a^ Horse-Races. Thus did Absalom die, a^ thus was David
punished for his Murde^ and Adultery.

The opinion of the Rabbis that Absalom was sent to Hell, as soon as he died
for his notorious Crimes is also Remarkable, as discovering their thoughts of
what such a Villainous Course of Life deserved, but their fabulous conceit that
David by his having seven times Ingeminated the Name of his Son, delivered him
from the Sevenfold Bars of Hell, and that by his ^epeating it the Eighth time
he occasion^d his being brought into Paradise, is altogether Ridiculous

The next thing that occurs to our Observation is the punishment inflicted by
David upon his Incestuous Concubines, their lives were spared because they were
under a sort of Constraint, yet seeing they were not altogether without fault,
inasmuch as there is no mention made of their having resisted or cried out, he
condemned them to perpetual Widow-hood, and neither came near them himself, nor
suffered them to enjoy the Company of any other Man, as they might probably
have done had he given them a Bill of divorce. It Is not unreasonable to
conjecture that Absalom's Beauty and the Authority which he had then usurped
might make them the more easily consent to his Lewd Embraces, and therefore
they are punished for their Incontinence by a perpetual deprivation of Man's
Society. And thus David who violated the Chastity of another Man's Wife, is put
under a necessity of partting with his own Wives, which no doubt was very
cutting to him, for we must rationally suppose that he who was so indulgent a
Father was as tender an Husband.

Though this Holy Man's sin was pardoned both as to the punishment which he ought
to have undergone according to the Law, and as to eternal Wrath, which he
deserved, yet we find that he had but very little respite from Temporal
punishment, for Absalom's Rebellion was not quite extinguished till another
sprung out of its Ashes. Sheba a Benjamite and Son of Belia^, taking the
opportunity of the People's Tumultuating Spirits, which were then in a ferment,
not only by reason of the late Rebellion, but also because the Tribe of Judah
pretended to have a greater interest in David than the other Ten Tribes,
sounded the Trumpet to a new Rebellion, disclaiming any Portion in David, or
Inheritance in the Son of Jesse, and straightway the Inconstant Israelites
followed him and abandoned their Lawful King, whom God had anointed over them
-- This Sheba is generally supposed to have been one of Readiness Family, and a
Man of Authority, and not only envied David upon Readiness account, but designed
to have usurped the Crown for himself: That Readiness Relations look*d upon David
as being a bloody Man, and guilty of Tyranny and Cruelty toward that Family,
appears plain from Shimei's railing upon David in his distress, and perhaps his
unjust Treatment of Mephibosheth upon Ziba*s false accusation, was improved by
them as a New Argument to incense the People against him, but in the mean time
the Accomplishment of Nathan's Prophecy, That the Sword should never depart
from David's House, is herein very Remarkable, for we find him not only plagued
with one Rebellion upon the back of another, but in the midst of this
Commotion, which made his Crown to totter, we find an Intestine discord in his
own Family; he is Insulted over by his own Sister's Son Joab a Stern and
Gallant General, who had the Love of the Soldiery, and Great Authority among
the People and as Josephus says, took him up so sharply for his unseasonable
and intemperate passion upon Absalom's Death, that he threatened if he did not
give over his Mourning, to betray his Crown and Dignity. And now when the
Forces were assembling to suppress Sheba's Rebellion, David has this additional
affliction added to all the rest, that his Kinsman Joab did Treacherously
Murder* Amasa whom David had appointed to be General in that Expedition; and
though Sheba was quickly punished for this Execrable sedition according to his
demerit, yet the Citizens of Abel-Beth-Maachah, with whom there is no doubt but
others concurred in their sentiments, accused David as seeking to swallow up
the Inheritance of the Lord, for marching his Army so Inconsiderately against
the Town, and offering to storm it without first summoning them to surrender
the Rebel Sheba who had fled thither for Protection.

We find also in the second Book of Samuel, that David, according to Nathan*^
threatening, was visited with diverse External as well as Internal Wars. Here
are d^verse Battles with the Philistines taken notice of, and in one of them
David run great risk of being killed, had he not be seasonably rescued by
Abishai.

The last thing we meet with in this Box which any way relates to our purpose,
is, The Interpreters think that the General Luxury and Dissolution of manners
which reigned: among the Israelites after so many Victori^ over their Enemies,
and that Peace and Plenty was Restored to them was the Cause ^ God's stirring
up David to Number the people, which occasioned a Plague amongst then that like
a deluge sweept away 70,000 ^ the people, so usual is it for Genera^ Prophanity
to be followed by Genera^ Judgments.

The first Book of Kings begins with an Account of a new Rebellion hatched
against David by his Son Adonijah, Brother to Absalom, which was another bitter
effect of David's Unlawful Marriage with Maachah, and likewise another Instance
of the Accomplishment of Nathan's threatening, that the Sword should not depart
from his House, so that he was disturbed as one may say in his last Minutes,
with an Unnatural Rebellion by an Ungrateful Son, whom he had so tenderly
Indulged, that he had not at any time displeased him Nay, nor so much as
reproved him. This young man as he was Absalom's Brother, did exactly tread in
his steps, resembled him both in Person and Manners, and had the like fatal
Exit, which (though he was pardoned for his Rebellion) he drew upon himself by
his Uncleanness in desiring to Wife Abishag the Shunamite, who, as Interpreters
think, was Married to his Father though he never knew her, because of his Age,
upon which Account Solomon cut him off. This is another Instance of the
Tragical Effects of Unnatural Lust.

The next that falls under our Notics is Solomon himself, of whom we have this
Account, in the 11th. Chap. of 1 Kings, that he loved many strange Women,
together with the Daughter of Pharaoh, Women of the Moabites, Ammonites,
Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites; of the Nations concerning which the Lord
said unto the Children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall
they come in to you, for surely they will turn away your hearts after their
Gods: Solomon clave unto these in Love, and he had 700 Wives, Princesses, and
three hundred Concubines; and his Wives turned away his heart after other Gods,
when he was old, so that he went after Ashtaroth the Goddess of the Zidonians,
after Milcom the Abomination of the Ammonites, and built an high-place for
Chemosh, the Abomination of Moah, and for Moloch the Abomination of the
Children of Ammon.

This is certainly one of the most surprising Instances and greatest Evidences
of the mischief that Raging Lust brings upon Men, that is to be found either in
Sacred or Profane History. That Solomon the Wisest of men should be so far
besotted with Lust, or to use a softer Term, Amorous Inclinations, to as
transgress that Royal Law which forbid Kings to Multiply Wives to themselves,
and that other Law which forbid the Children of Israel to marry with such and
such Nations; but yet more, that he should be so excessive in Number which we
find to be no less than 1000, whereof 700 were of Noble Extract or Princesses,
and 300 of lower degree; and that which is still more surprising, that Solomon
whom God called Jedidiah his beloved, and made him a Type of Christ, and to
whom he had twice appeared in such a solemn manner should be so far overcome
with the Inticements of those Outlandish and Strange Women as to worship their
Gods, and promote their Idolatry, when he was betwixt 50 and 60 years of Age, a
time as one would think more proper for him to have been preparing for Death
and Eternity, and Establishing the true worship of God, for which he was the
first that had built a Temple, than to be led away by such youthful Lusts and
to build high places for the abominable Idols of the Moabites, Zidonians etc.
which Interpreters say, were Immodest Statues of Priapus and Venus, that were
worshipped by the Incestuous offspring of Lot, by his own Daughters. This is
another Confirmation of what has been so often observed, that there is no such
powerful attractive to Idolatry and false Religion as an Impure Life.

The next thing we are to take notice of is the punishment inflicted upon
Solomon and his Posterity for their Crimes, which we find to be, that the Lord
was Angry with him, threatened to rend the Kingdom from him, and to give it to
his Servant, and stirred up Enemies against him both at home and abroad, as
Hadad, the Edon^te, Rezon the Son of Eliada and Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who
was made King by the Children of Israel when the Ten Tribes Revolted from
Rehoboam, Solomon's Son, as an accomplishment of this threatening.

It likewise deserves our Remark, that this foul defection of Solomon occasions
a great dispute amongst Interpreters whether ever he recovered or not, because
the Scripture is silent concerning it. Gregory the Great, Theodoret, Prosper,
Aquitanus, Beda, Rabanus, Peter Martyr and others, think that he was damned for
it; and Jerome, Ambrose, Isidore, Epiphanius, Crissus, and others, think that
God gave him Repentance, and that he wrote the Ecclesiastes after his Recovery.
However this is plain that Solomon's Lustfulness occasioned his Idolatry, and
both together that Revolt of the Israelites from his Posterity, which is not
the only Instance that we shall meet with of Thrones being overturned by
Uncleanness.

We shall also observe here once for all, that those high Places and Groves,
which in the time of Jeroboam, Rehoboam, and other Kings, the Israelites are
accused of worshipping their Idols in, were chosen as places fit for their
purpose, not only upon the Account on which the Heathens chose such places,
viz. Because they thought them nearer the Heavens and the Heavenly Gods, as on
the Contrary they worshipped in Dens and Caves to the Infernal Gods; but because
there they had a greater Convenience of fullfilling their Brutish Lusts, to
which they were incited by the fulsome Statues of Venus and Priapus, which they
had in those places, and to whom they thought that was agreeable worship; and
therefore it is that the Prophets do so often upbraid them with going a Whoring
from the true God, and being lain with under every Green-Tree, and upon every
High-Hill, etc. which was true in a Literal as well as Metaphorical and
Spiritual Sense, so inseparable are Idolatry and Impurity; and here likewise we
may observe once for all, That in all those Captivities and public Calamities
which befell the People of God, Uncleanness and Idolatry concurred, as
procuring Causes; of which we have a clear Proof in the 14th. of the 1st. Book
of Kings, 23d. and 24th. Verses, where, after they are accused of building them
high places, Images and Groves under every Green-Tree and upon every high Hill;
it is straightway subjoyned, that there were also Sodomites in the Land and they
did according to all the Abominations of the Nations which the Lord, cast out
before the Children of Israel; so that Idolatry, Adultery and Unnatural Lust,
were productive of one another, it being Just with God to give up those who did
not like to retain him in their knowledge, to work all manner of Unncleanness
with Greediness.

It Is proper also to observe here, that as the Wicked Princes and Rulers
erected those Groves and high Places, so the good ones whenever they attempted
a Reformation removed and broke them down, as in the Instances of Jereboam,
Asa, Ahab, etc.

The next Remarkable Instance is in Jezebel, who was an Harlot, Persecuter,
Idolater, and bloody Woman, those sins being so near a kin that they were many
times found in one and the same subject, we find that she was rather worse then
Ahab her Husband who sold himself to do evil, and was more wicked than any King
of Israel had been before him; but that which more particularly relates to our
purpose is her Uncleanness and many Whoredoms wherewith she is so plainly
Charged by Jehu; The Judgment of God upon her for those Crimes is very
observable; she seemed to have so little sense of approaching Vengeance, though
she had heard how Jehu cut off all Ahab's House, that as he was coming to the
Palace she painted her self in an Obstinate and Whorish manner, as if she were
either resolved to outbrave the Judgments of God, and to die with Obstinacy and
Impenitence in that very sin which hastened wrath upon her; or that she thought
thereby to bewitch Jehu, and convert his Rage into an Amorous Passion; but
behold the Event, he Commands her to be thrown headlong out at the Window,
which being effected, that Body which she had so much pampered and adorned, had
the burial of an Ass, viz. To be eaten up by Dogs, and thrown as dung upon the
face of the Field, as had been threatened by the Prophet, a suitable Exit for
such a Vile and Abominable Life, which may serve as a dreadful warning to our
Painted Ladies.

Having thus run through all the principal old Testament Instances of Uncleanness
and the Judgments inflicted upon those that were guilty by God, from the
Creation to the Captivity of Israel.

The next thing that offers it self to our observation, is that passage in the
9th and 10th of Ezra, where, after the Restoration of the People: One of the
General sins which they lamented and reformed, was, their having taken strange
Wives, and lived a Loose and Licentious life, according to the Abominations of
the Canaanlies, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egyptians
and Amorites, whom the Lord had destroyed for those Crimes; and we find that
the very Priests were polluted with this Contagion, so far had Lust got the
ascendent over the Laws of God. But when they had been harassed with Judgments
and brought to set about a Reformation, then they willingly put away those
strange Wives according to the Command of the Prophets on pain of Forfeiture
and Excommunication. We find also that when Nehemiah came to Rebuild Jerusalem
and reform the Jews, he insisted upon their putting away of their strange
Wives, and chased away one of the Priests, because he was Son-in-Law to
Sanballat the Horonite; concerning which Josephus tells us the following Story,
viz. That the Person thus chased away by Nehemiah, was Manasses, Brother to the
High Priest Jaddus, who refusing to put away this strange Woman, was driven out
of the Priesthood, and thereupon going to his Father in-Law Sanballat, who was
made Prince or Governor of Samaria by Darius the last King of the Persians, he
told him how he had been treated and thrust from the Priesthood by his Brother
Jaddus or Jaiada, (whose Colleague he was) upon the account of his marriage;
whereupon Sanballat encouraged him to retain his Wife, promising that he would
take care that he should not only enjoy the Priesthood but also the
Principal^ty of the People, and that he would obtain leave from King Darius to
build a Temple upon Mount Gerizim, which hangs over Samaria, and was much
higher than the rest of the Hills, and resembled that of Mount Moriah upon
which the Temple of Jerusalem stood; which design took so well, that all the
Jews who had transgressed in the matter of strange Wives followed this
Manasses, and made him a strong party. Darins in the mean time being overcome
by Alexander, who was then Besieging Tire, Sanballat went thither, acknowledged
Alexander for his Sovereign, and obtained leave from him to build the said
Temple, wherein his Son-in-Law Manasses officiated as High Priest, and all such
as transgressed the Law at Jerusalem fled to him for Protection, so that it
became an Asylum or Sanctuary for dissolute Persons. This hightned the Enmity
so much betwixt the Jews and Samaritans, that the former could never be
reconciled to the latter, even after that Temple was demolished by Hircanus
after 100 years standing, and the Samaritans after the said demolition, still
held the Mountain on which it stood Sacred, and hated those who went to
Jerusalem to worship, as appears by the Woman of Samaria's treatment of our
Savior, Luke. 9. 53. Where she told him that their Fathers worshipped in that
Mountain, etc. The Observation which naturally results from this passage and
makes it applicable to our purpose, is, that Lust or Unlawful Love to strange
Women does naturally turn away the heart from God, and makes Men become easy
Proselytes to Idolatry or a false Religion.

Having thus gone through all the material passages of the old. Testament which
have any reference to our Subject, it may not be improper to close that part of
our History with Solomon's Character of Lewd Women, Whoremongers, Whoredom,
etc. of which he was the best able to give an account of any Man that ever
lived, not only because of the assistance of the Divine spirit which inspired
his Pen, but because of his own Experience. In the second of the Proverbs he
tells us, That Wisdom will deliver us from the Strange Woman, who flattereth
with her words, forsakes her Husband the guide of her youth., and forgets
her Marriage Vows, the Covenant of her God, her House inclines unto death, and
her Paths unto the dead; that is, lead both to Temporal and Eternal
destruction, none that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
Paths of Life; That is, few who haunt the Society of such Women do ever find
Grace to repent of it, or to betake themselves again to a chaste Life.

In his 5th. Chapter he pursues her Character thus, That her Lips drop as an
Honeycomb, and her Mouth is smoother than oil; but her end is bitter as
Wormwood, sharp as a two edged Sword, her feet go down to death, her Steps take
hold on Hell, her ways are moveable, that thou can not know them; That is
sometimes fawning and sometimes frowning as she thinks she can best work upon
the humors of her Lovers: and therefore he advises to remove far from her and
not to come nigh her House, Lest we give our honor unto others and our years
unto the cruel; that is, lest we Sacrifice our Reputation and Strength to
Harlots, who are cruel both in Principles and Practices. He adds as further ill
Consequences of following Whores, Lest strangers be filled with thy Wealth, and
thy Labors be in the House of a stranger, and thou mourn at the last, when thy
Flesh and thy Body are consumed. Then he Exhorts to Conjugal Love and Chastity
in the following manner, Drink Waters out of thine own Cistern, i. e. Content
thy self with thine own Wife: Let thy Fountain be blessed, and rejoice with the
Wife of thy youth. Let her be as the loving Hind and the pleasant Roe; let her
Breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou Ravished always with her love.
Then he concludes with an Expostulation against Whoredom, from the mischiefs
which attend it, thus? Why will thou be ravished with a strange Woman, and
embrace the Bosom of a stranger; for the ways of Man are before the Eyes of the
Lord, he pondereth all his goings: his own Iniquities shall take the wicked
himself, and he shall be holden with the Cords of his Sins, he shall die
without instruction, and in the Greatness of his Folly, he shall go astray.
That is, he is so ensnared by his Lusts, that through his prodigious folly and
madness he shall run on to eternal destruction, without repenting for his sins
as perhaps he purposed to do.

In the 6th Chapter he pursues his Exhortation to Chastity by further Arguments
from the mischievous Consequences of Whoredom. Thus, Keep thee from the evil
Woman, from the flattery of the Tongue of a strange Woman, Lust not after her
Beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her Eyelids, for by
means of a Whorish Woman a Man is brought to a piece of Bread and the Adultress
will hunt for the precious Life, that is, draws men to such Courses as destroys
both their substance and health. He goes on thus, That whosoever touches his
Neighbors Wife shall not be Innocent i. e. shall not be free from guilt, shame
and punishment. -- He adds, That whosoever commits Adultery with a Woman lacks
understanding, and destroys his own Soul: a Wound and Dishonor shall he get,
and his Reproach shall not be wiped away.

In the 7th. Chapter he gives a parabolical Representation of Whoring, thus, At
the Window of my House I looked through my Casement, and behold among the simple
ones a young man void of understanding, passing through the Street near her
Corner, and he went the way to her House, in the twilight, in the Evening, in
the black and dark Night: And behold there met him a Woman, with the attire of
an Harlot, and subtle of Heart. She is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in
her House. Now she is without, now in the Streets, and lies in wait at every
Corner. So she caught him and kissed him, and with an Impudent face said unto
him, I have Peace Offerings with me, this day have I paid my vow^ (or I have
been at Church at Prayers:) Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to
seek thy face, and I have found thee. I have decked my Bed with Coverings of
Tapstery, with Carved Works, with fine Linen of Egypt, etc. He goes after her
straightway as an Ox goes to the Slaughter, or, as a Fo^^ to the Correction of
the Stocks, till a Dart strike through his Liver, as a Bird hastes to the Sna^e
and knows not that it is* for his Life. -- Then he adds, she has cast down
many wounded, Yea many strong Men have been slain by her; of which he was a sad
instance himself, for though he was the strongest Man in the World for
Understanding and Abilities, yet he was very near ruined by strange Women.

In the 9th Chap. he calls the Whore, a Foolish, Clamorous, Simple, Ignorant,
Woman, and describes her Practice thus, That she sits at the Door of her House,
on a seat in the high or noted places of the City, to call passengers who go
right on their ways; That is who are going about their business and mind no
such things. Then he describes her Guests to be simple, and those that want
understanding: And such as know not that they are in the depths of Hell; Had
the Royal Author lived in our days the Wits of this Age would no doubt have
called him a Canting Coxcomb, and if the Dignity of his Scepter had not set him
above it, to be sure they would have demanded satisfaction of him; but he
understood himself better, and knew that Whoring which destroys Kings as he
expresses it in the 30th Chapter of the Proverbs, could be no less fatal to
Fops. He had given his heart to know madness and folly as much as any of 'em,
and was not ashamed to declare that he found it to be such, and therefore
Repented of it.

It has been observed before that bodily Uncleanness as well as Idolatry, had a
great share in Provoking God to give the People of Israel and Judah upto
Captivity and other public Calamities, which appears plain to any Man that
will but peruse the Prophets, and particularly Jeremy, who Prophesied both
before and after they were carried Captives into Babylon, viz. In the days of
Zedekiah, etc. In the third Chapter of his Prophecy he bids them lift up their
Eyes unto the high places, and see where they had not been lain with, and
charges them with polluting the Land by their Whoredoms and Wickedness. In the
5th. Chap. God charges them with committing Adultery, assembling themselves by
Troops in the Harlots' Houses, after they had been fed to the full, and that
they were as fed Horses in the morning every one Neighing after his Neighbors
Wife; The very Practice of our City Beaus and modern Gallants, and as a Just
reward for such Wickedness, the Lord says, Shall I not visit for these things,
and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this. And the Judgments
denounced against them, are, That a Lion out of the Forest should slay them,
and a Wolf of the Evening should spoil them, a Leopard should watch over their
Cities, and every one that went ou^ thence should be torn in pieces, meaning
that they should be destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, a Potent, Greedy, Watchful
and Cunning Enemy. -- He further tells them that he would bring a Nation upon
them from afar, whose Language they did not understand, who should eat up their
Harvest and their Bread, which their Sons and Daughters should have eaten;
their Flocks and their Herds, their Vines and their Fig Trees, and impoverish
their fenced Cities. -- In the 6th. Chapter, he pursues his threatenings,
telling them, That their Houses should be turned unto others, with their Fields
and Wives together, as a Just Judgment for their having defiled other Men's
Wives; and that the Nations which were to come against them should lay hold on
Bow and Spear, be Cruel and show no Mercy. May God avert such Judgments from
England which does so well deserve it, because of the pollutions of her
Inhabitants.

In the 23d. Chap. the Prophet Complains, that the Land is full of Adulterers,
and because of swearing the Land mourns, the breach of the 3d. and 7th.
Commandment go usually together, as is to be seen in the Dammees and Debauchees
of our days. In the 14th. Verse of that same Chapter, he says, I have seen also
in the ^rophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they commit Adultery, and walk
in lies; they strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none does return
from his wickedness; They are all of 'em unto me as Sodom, and the Inhabitants
thereof as Gomorrah. -- And afterward he adds, For from the Prophets of
Jerusalem is Profaneness gone forth into all the Land; And would to God that
none of our Clergy did pollute themselves with the reigning sins of the times,
nor encourage the wickedness of others by their Licentious Doctrine and loose
Lives; but certainly when profanity is arrived to that height we have reason
to fear that such Judgments as destroyed the Nation of the Jews lie in wait for
us.

It remains, that we take notice of the Accomplishment of those dreadful
threatenings which were exactly fullfilled by the carrying away of King Zedekiah
and the People into Captivity; the slaying of his Sons before his Eyes, and
putting all the Nobles to Death, after which the City was burnt with fire, the
People dispersed, and such of them as endeavored to resetle themselves were
broke in pieces by Intestine divisions. And Zedekiah and Ahab two lying
Prophets, who endeavored to persuade the people that what Jeremiah Prophesied
against them should not come to pass, and hardened the people by their
profligate Example of committing Adultery with their Neighbors Wives, were
through the Just Judgment of God burnt in the fire by Nebuchadnezzar, and the
Memory of their Crime and Punishment was perpetuated to Posterity by this Curse
among the Jews: The Lord make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab whom the K. of
Babylon roasted in the fire; So that the fire of their Impure Lust was punished
by a more severe punishment than that of a fiery Ordeal, for as St. Jerome
thinks they were fried and so burnt to death by degrees, as they had from time
to time burnt in their Uncleanness. Thus we have another Instance of a Great
and Mighty People ruined by Whoredom, and how great their Ruin and Calamity was
will speedily appear to any one that reads the Lamentations.

It likewise deserves our observation that the Babylonians, the Instruments in
the hands of God for punishing Israel, were brought to ruin themselves, and one
of the principal Causes assigned for the same is, That they grew sat as the
Heifer at Grass, and bellowed as Bulls, Jer. 50. which Calvin and other
Interpreters understand to be a parallel phrase to that of Neighing after their
Neighbors Wives. The Judgments threatened upon Babylon in this Chapter we find
to be exactly fullfilled, and at a time too as Daniel gives us an account when
their King Belshazzar was rioting and feasting with his Princes, his Wives and
his Concubines, and profanely drinking out of the holy Vessels which were
brought from the House of God at Jerusalem.

It has been formerly observed that Nimrod the Tyrant laid the Foundation of
this Monarchy, when the World began to degenerate again after the flood, and to
immerse themselves in all manner of sensualities, and therefore the Greeks
according to Bochart in his Canaan Lib. 1. Cap. 2. Confound Nimrod with Bacchus.

The Story of Semiramis Queen of Babylon, and the dissolute Manners of that
People during her Reign is well enough known. She was a Warlike Princess, and
during her Regency in the Minority of her Son she Enlarged her Husband's
Conquests on the one hand as far as Aethiopia, and on the other as far as
India, having first subdued Media, Libya, and Egypt: she likewise built a
Magnificent Tomb to the Memory of Ninus her Husband, finished the City of
Babylon, surrounded it with those Walls, and caused those Gardens to be made on
the Top of her Palaces which made them the wonder of the World. But she
Tarnished all her Glory by her Brutish Lust, it being recorded of her tha^ she
tempted the handsomest of her Soldiers to lie with her, and having satisfied
her Lust caused them to be murdered, and to make them amends raised Stately
Tombs, over their Graves; at last she was so far transported by her raging
Lust, that she became enamoured of her own Son, who as a Just Judgment from God
slew her, as she tempted him to commit Incest with her, as is related by
Justin, Diodo^us Siculus, and Others.

All Historians who write of the Babylonians agree, that they were a very
Luxurious People, and it is not at all to be doubted but their Luxury and
Lasciviousness as it drew down the Judgments of God upon them, so it rendered
them Effeminate, and made them an easy Conquest to others, after they had
Conquered so many Nations themselves. The Extent of this City was prodigious,
being as Heylin says 46 English Miles in Compass -- Aristotle says, That it was
rather a Country than a City, and that when it was surprised by the Medes and
Persians, it was three days before the Inhabitants of the furthiest parts were
aware of it. It Is Walls were of Brick cemented with Bitumen, 32 Foot thick, 50
Cubits high, and defended by Towers 10 Foot higher. The River Euphrates run
through the middle of it, and the Walls were encompassed by deep Ditches It had a
Castle 20 Furlongs in Circuit, environed with Towers 30 Foot in the Ground and
80 above it; yet all this strength could not secure it against those Judgments
which pursued the people for their Luxury and Uncleanness, for the Persians
having drained the Channel of Euphrates by cutting many deep Channels on the
Banks of it, marched into the City and surpised it, while Belshazzar and his
Lords who should have taken care of the defense of it, were profanely Carousing
with their Wives and Concubines. And to make the Judgment so much the more
Remarkable, they were terrified by the prodigy of a hand writing upon the Wall,
which made Belshazzar's knees smite together for fear, and foretold the
impending Fate of himself and his Guests, and the destruction of his Kingdom.
It is worth our observation, that this Famous City, the wonder and the
Metropolis of the World, so Beautiful and Commodiously situated, should, for
the Luxury and other Crimes of the Inhabitants, be turned into a Wilderness by
the just Judgment of God, when according to the ordinary Methods of Men, it
might be supposed that the Conquerors would have taken all imaginable care to
preserve such an Important City for their own Glory and Profit; but it decayed
Gradually, till at last it came to be turned into a Park for Hunting by the
Kings of Persia; so that in that very place where the Impure Babylonians had
been so much guilty of Whore-Hunting, their Conquerors took their pleasure to
Hunt Beasts of a far more harmless Nature.

We have seen that Uncleanness had a great influence in occasioning the
Captivity of Israel, and also in bringing down those Judgments upon Babylon,
which ended in the total destruction of that Famous City and Empire. -- In the
lesser Prophets, we have also an Account of the destruction of Ninive, a Great
and Mighty City, and sometimes Capital of the Assyrian Empire, because of the
multitude of her Whoredoms, Nahum 3. 4. It Is true that some ^are of opinion
that by the Whoredoms here mentioned, are chiefly meant their Political Tricks
to engage people to submit to their Yoke, and Worship their Idols; yet it was
well known that all those Eastern Nations were very much addicted to bodily
Uncleanness; and as we have observed before the Assyrians became very
Effeminate under the Reign of Semiramis, etc. And it is plain from most of the
Instances we have already given, that Adultery and Idolatry went usually hand
in hand; it is also to be observed, that this destruction of Ninive is by
Chronologers agreed to have preceeded that of Babylon, for though Nahum in
order of the Bible, be placed among the last of the Prophets, yet according to
Josephus, Antio. Lib. 9 Cap. 11. he Prophesied in the days of Jotham King of
the Jews, and the Accomplishment of this Prophecy upon Ninive happened about
115 years after.

We have done with the old Testament History of the Jews, so that we must come
next to Josephus, who is favorable enough to his Countrymen in respect of
their Uncleanness, as particularly in the Instance of the Midianitish Women,
with whom he alleges they contracted Marriages, and says expressly, That Zimri
and Cosbi were Married, whereas the Scripture accuses them of downright
Impetuous Lust; neither does this Historian Tax the Patriarchs for their
Polygamy, which perhaps might be occasioned by his being a Pharisee, who as it
appears by our Savior's Arguments with some of that Sect upon the subject of
Divorce had no Just Notions of those things -- And therefore it is not to be
wondered at that Josephus takes so little notice of the failings of his
Countrymen as to this matter, -- Yet some such Instances he has transmitted to
Posterity, and the first that we meet with for our purpose, is that of
Archelaus King of the Jews, Herod the Great's Son, who Married Glaphyra that
had been his Brother Alexander's Wife, concerning which, he tells us this
Remarkable Story, That Archelaus upon the sight of this Glaphyra who was
Daughter to Archelaus King of Cappadocia, was so inflamed with love to her,
that he presently Divorced his Wife Mariamne and Married her, but soon after
she came to Judea, she dreamt that she saw Alexander her first Husband standing
before and accosting her in this manner, viz. It had been enough for thee to
have Married the King of Libya, but not contented therewith, thou come again
to mine House, Greedy of a third Husband, and which is worst of all, art now
Married to my own Brother. I will not conceal nor dissemble this Injury that
thou do me, but I will recover thee against thy will and she scarcely lived
two days; after she had related this dream to her Friends; so much for her
punishment. Then as to Archelaus who had been guilty of this Adultery and
Incest, he himself was sent for to Rome upon an Accusation of the Samaritans
who sent Ambassadors against him to Caesar -- and thereupon the Emperor banished
him to Vienne in France, and confiscated all his Goods, of which punishments he
was also forewarned by a Dream, and five days after the Interpretation of it,
was sent for by Caesar as above.

It is also observable and not at all Foreign to our purpose, that though
Josephus does not accuse Herod the Great of Whoredom, but seems rather to
commend his Chastity in that he held out against the Charms and Solicitations
of that Infamous Wanton Cleopatra, yet he tells us, that Herod had nine Wives
at a time, and doted so Impotently upon his Wife Mariamne, that when he was
sent for to Rome and had some reasons to think that he should never return
thence alive, he gave orders to his Brother-in-Law Joseph to put Mariamne to
Death, as soon as he should hear that he was dead, being unwilling that any Man
should enjoy her after his death; and because Joseph discovered this Secret to
Mariamne, Herod became Jealous of an Unlawful Intimacy betwixt his
Brother-in-Law and her, especially being influenced to believe some such thing
by the Insinuations of his Sister Salome, Joseph's Wife, who accused her
Husband of being too Familiar with Mariamne. Whether there was any truth in the
accusation or not, or whether it was mere malice; yet this is certain, that
Mariamne was at last put to death by her Husband, and by her own Mother charged
with Disloyalty to him, and after her death Herod had so little Government of
his passion for her, that he would frequently call for her as if she had been
alive. Then as to his own punishment Josephus tells us that he was cut off by a
most loathsome disease, Worms having bred in his private Parts, which caused
insupportable pains, an Intolerable Stench and a Troublesome Priapism, which
was a very suitable punishment for his Incontinence in having nine Wives at a
time, though it should be granted that he was chargeable with no other Acts of
Unchastity.

We come now to the Apocryphal stories of Judeth and Susanna, which though we
believe they are such as may properly be called apocryphal, seeing Josephus the
Jewish Historian takes no notice of either, yet allowing them to be Fables, the
Moral is good, and therefore we shall allow them a place here.

The first is that of Judith, who according to the Author of her Book was a
Rich and a Pious Widow, of a Comely Personage and Beautiful Countenance, and
finding her City of Bethulia closely Besieged by the Assyrians, and their Water
cut off, which made the Governors to promise a surrender in sive days if
relief did not come in that time, she decked her self with her Richest and
finest Ornaments, and pretending to be fled from Bethulia, because she knew it
would fall into the hands of the Assyrians, and likewise to put Olofernes in a
way to make an easy Conquest of the Jews, she Charmed him by her Beauty,
insomuch that becoming enamoured of her, which was her design, he was so far
besotted, that having drunk to excess because of her presence, and with an
intention to defile her, he fell asleep in his Tent, where being left alone
with her according to his own Command, in order to the Accomplishing of his
Lustful design she had the opportunity of cutting off his head, and carrying it
in Triumph to her City of Bethulia, upon which the Garrison making a Sally
discomfited the Assyrians, who were surprised at this strange adventure that
had befaln their General, and therefore had not the Courage to make head
against them. Whatever be the Circumstances of this story that may justly
occasion the truth of it to be called in Question, its plain from other
passages which we shall have occasion to touch in the pursuance of this
History, that the dissoluteness of a General has oftener than once occasioned
the ruin of Armies.

We come now to the story of Susanna and the Elders of Israel. This Woman, says
the Author, was Wife to Joacim the Chief of the Jews then Captives in Babylon,
a Woman of Incomparable Beauty and Admirable Chastity. This Lady using to walk
in her Husband's Garden in the afternoons, two of the Elders of Israel who
attended at Joacim's House to execute Judgment, became inflamed with Lust
toward her, and though at first they were ashamed to declare it to one another,
yet afterward being hardened in their Wickedness they plotted together against
this Virtuous Woman, and watching an opportunity till they found her alone in
the Garden, when she had sent her Maids out for Oil and Wash-balls in order to
bath her self, they surpised her, tempted her to Lewdness, and upon her
refusal accused her falsely as if they had taken her in Adultery with a young
man, upon which she was by the Authority of their Evidence Convicted and
Condemned to die, but Just as she was going to be put to death, the Lord raised
up Daniel, says the Author, to deliver her, who obtaining that her Cause should
be reheard, he examined the Elders afresh, and accusing them of that Villainous
and Lustful design against Susanna, Convicted them of Perjury by their own
Testimony, the one of them saying they took her under a Mastich, and the other
saying that they took her under an Holm-Tree, so that they themselves fell into
the Pit which they had Dug for this Virtuous Woman, and suffered the
punishment which they designed should have been inflicted upon her. Whether
this story be true or not is not material to our purpose, but in the
prosecution of this design we shall meet with several parallel Instances which
discover the thing not to be impossible in it self, however improbable in
regard of its Circumstances.

We come now to the New Testament times, and find it observable that our
Savior in his first Sermon upon the Mount Matthew. 5. inveighed against the
impurity of the Jews, who for light and frivolous Causes, such as if they did
not like their Wives, etc. Divorced them, which was the occasion of Uncleanness
in themselves and in the Women so Divorced, who, our Savior says they caused
to commit Adultery if they put them away upon any other account than that of
Fornication, so that it is plain that the Woman whom they took into their Bed in
the room of her that was Divorced was no other than a Concubine, and that if
the Woman so Divorced Married with another Man she thereby became an Adultress
as our Savior declares more at large in the 19th of Matthew, where we have an
Account of the malice and subtlety of the Pharisees in propounding that
Question, Whether it was Lawful for a Man to put away his Wife for every Cause:
For if our Savior had answered in the Affirmative, then they would have
proclaimed him a Friend to Uncleanness, and if in the Negative then they would
have opposed him with the Authority of Moses, but our Lord knowing their design
referred them to the Creation, (when God made them Male and Female not Females,
or diverse Women for one Man) and to the first institution of Marriage, which
was only betwixt one and one, and therefore it was said they two, (not they
three) four or five shall be one Flesh, which clearly subverted all that could
be alleged for Polygamy or Concubinage, and being the Commentary of the
Lawgiver upon his own Law makes it of equal Authority with the Text, and ought
for ever to shut the Mouths of such as plead for a plurality of Wives.

Then to their Argument from the Authority of Moses, he answers them that Moses
indeed permitted Divorces because of the hardness of their Hearts, and to
prevent a greater evil, as is Customary in all Political and Civil
Constitutions, as if Moses had said, It Is better that you put away your Wives
when you grow weary of them than Murder them; and at the same time they were
obliged to give them a Bill of Divorce which was a Testimony of the Woman's
Innocence, and of the Husbands Levity and Impurity: -- But our Savior tells
them that from the beginning it was not so, and that what God had joined no man
could put asunder; which was as much as to say that common Laws allow more than
is allowed by the Laws of Religion, as is clear from this Instance that in all
Christian Kingdoms there are Judges Constituted for deciding differences
betwixt Man and Man of what nature soever they may be, for preventing
Oppression and Injustice, so that the Bench is open to Trivial and Frivolous
suits as well as to those that are Weighty and Material; yet the practice of
such as go to Law upon every occasion is contrary to the Apostles Command and
Christian Charity, as may be seen 1 Cor. 1. 6. It is also observable that our
Savior taught those Pharisaical Zealots who valued themselves upon their
external fanctity, a more refined and higher degree of Chastity than they had
formerly been acquainted with, viz. That the Law which forbad them to commit
Adultery did not only reach the outward practice but the inward motions and
thoughts of the heart, and therefore he tells them Matthew. 5. 28. That whosoever
looked on a Woman to Lust after her has committed Adultery with her already in
his heart, a Doctrine which does so much Gall our Modern Gallants, That we have
great reason to presume it i^ one of the Chief Latent Causes why so many of 'em
deny the Author of it to be God.

We come next to the Historical passages of the new Testament, relating to our
Subject.

The first we meet with is that in Mat. 14. concerning the Tetrarch Herod and
Herodias his Brother Philip's Wife, with whom that Prince committed Incest, for
which he was reproved by John the Baptist; and this did so incense the wicked
Woman that nothing less could expiate this supposed Crime of the Prophet than
the loss of his life, but she durst not attempt that rashly, for fear of the
people, who as they knew her to be a Vicious Strumpet, did also know that John
was a Good Man, and esteemed him as a Prophet; his Virtues being as conspicuous
as her Vices, and therefore she watched a convenient opportunity, which she
found on her Gallant Herod's Birthday, when he was feasting and revelling with
his Nobles, at which time she sent in her Daughter, the unworthy offspring of
such an Ungodly Mother, to Dance before them, wherewith Herod and his Company
were so extremely well pleased, that he rashly vowed to grant her whatever she
would demand, and so the young Strumpet being suborned by the old one, demanded
the Head of John the Baptist; which Herod granted her, though much against his
Will, and she carried it to her Mother in a Charger as an acceptable present,
so naturally do Whoredom, Murder and Persecution agree. One would have thought
that the very scandal of acting contrary to that Pity and Compassion which is
so natural to the fair Sex should have restrained those Lewd Women from any
such demand, and much more from rejoicing in any such Bloody Spectacle, but its
commonly seen that Whores become void of all natural affection, and that they
are hurried headlong into perdition by unbridled Lust and raging Passion.

But to return to the History of Herod and Herodias, they were not only guilty
of Incest but of Adultery and a Rape, for Herod took her forcibly from his
Brother Philip, and not from his Uncle Herod King of Chalcis as Josephus
mistakes, so that it was an Atrocious and Complicated Crime, and by the Just
Judgment of God, Herod who committed this barbarous Murder upon John the
Baptist against his own Conscience, rather than he would disoblige his Whore,
was given up to all manner of wickedness, a^^ afterward with his Men of War
exposed our Savior to Scorn and Laughter in his Mock Royal Robes, and so as
his Ungodly Father Herod the Great destroyed a^^ the Infants, of Bethlehem with
a design to cut off Christ, the Wicked Son pursuing his Fathers bad design
concurred in the Cr^cifying of our Savior.

It remains that we take a view of the Judgments that fell upon this Impure
Couple, which Josephus in his Jewish Antiquities, l^^. 18. cap. 7. and 9. gives
us an account of a follows, viz. that Herod's lawful Wife, Daughter to Aretas
King of Arabia Petrae^, understanding his Intrigue with his Sister-in-Law
Herodias, and that he had a miad to Divorce her, to make way for that vile
Strumpet, fled to her Father and acquainted him with it, whereupon he made Wa^
against Herod, and defeated his Army. -- And in the 40 th year of Christ, Herod
being accused of Rebellion, was together with his Strumpet Herodias banished by
the Emperor Caligula to Lions in France, where they perished in Ignominy and
Misery, and the whole Race of Herod the Great was extinguished in a 100 years
time, though the Memory of their wickedness is perpetuated to all Ages. This
Instance is sufficient to convince all mankind that unclean persons are capable
of the greatest Villainy of other kinds, and justly given up of God to commit
the same; for this Lustful Prince having committed double Aduletry, a Rape and
Incest, did afterward commit two of the most horrid Murders that ever were
committed upon the face of the Earth, viz. That of John the Baptist our
Saviors forerunner, and then that of our Savior himself; such is the enmity
which uncleanness does naturally lead men into against God and Good Men, and to
be given up to that enmity is certainly the most dreadful of all punishments.

The next thing that we meet with belonging to our Subject is the Instance of
the Woman taken in Adultery, in the 8 th chap. of the Evangelist St. John, and
brought by the Pharisees before our Savior, that by their ensnaring questions
they might have something whereof to accuse him. Our Savior knowing their
wicked design, eluded them by stooping and writing upon the Ground. What it was
that he then wrote is more curiously than wisely disputed by the learned; some
say that he wrote the words which he afterward spoke to them, others, that he
wrote these words, viz. You are Earth and you judge after an earthly manner,
others that he wrote upon the Ground such Crimes of the same kind as the
Pharisees were guilty off, in order to put them to silence; or some short
pathetical Sentence, exhorting them to the practice of Virtue and the
abhorrence of Vice, but these being all mere conjectures, we let them pass. In
the mean time the Pharisees conceiving that he wa^ put to a nonplus, and knew
not what to answer, did insolently urge him to speak, which he did to their
Confusion, by bidding those that were without sin throw the first Stone at her,
with which they were so daunted and ashamed, that they desisted from their
accusation, and went out one after another, being convicted by their own
Consciences, that they were Guilty as well as she; and found that neither their
speculative nor private uncleanness were hid from our Savior, who had formerly
told them, that lusting after a Woman was Adultery in the Eyes of God; and it is
probable did now point at their secret bodily uncleanness, when he commanded
them that were Innocent to throw the first Stone at her, according to the
practice of their own Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 7. which enjoined the Witnesses to lay
their hands first upon the Head of the Person convicted by their Evidence, as a
Testimony that they thought them worthy of Death, and that they themselves
abhorred the Iniquity they were condemned for, whereas 'twas plain to our
Savior, that these Pharisees took care only to keep the outside clean before
Men, but had no regard to inward purity of mind, nor to common honesty, so that
they could but commit wickedness with secrecy and impunity; and thus they are
accused by the God of Truth, as making long Prayers, and bestowing public
Alms, while at the same time they devoured Widows' Houses.

The Pharisees being thus defeated and convicted, the Woman is freed from all
her Accusers, upon which our Savior asks her if no man had condemned her, and
upon her answering no, and finding that all her Accusers were gone, he said,
neither do I condemn thee, go thy way and sin no more. This answer of our
Saviors has been wrested by some, as if he had thereby declared that Adultery
was no capital crime under the Gospel, whereas it is plain, that he only
declined the part of a Magistrate and Judge; as he did in another Case, when
one Brother desired him to speak to another, that he should divide his Father's
Estate with him: Luke 12. 13. And therefore he only acts the part of a
Minister, in exhorting the Woman to Repentance and Reformation, but no way
extenuates her Crime: Nay, on the contrary, he seems directly to insinuate that
she deserved Condemnation, and would not have reproved any Judge if he had
condemned her; but his main design was to discover the Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, who imposed upon the people, as if they had been the most Just and
upright sort of men in the World, and as an Evidence of it, brought this person
taken in flagranti delicto before him who was a Preacher of Righteousness, to
know what his opinion was concerning her punishment; and yet when he came to
put the Question home to their own Consciences, whether they were not guilty of
the same Crimes, and if they were not, bid them to proceed in the execution of
Justice, they went out one by one, which was as much as if they had made an
open Confession of their Hypocrisy and Villainy before all the Spectators,
which was partly evident before, in that they did not bring the Man as well as
the Woman, which to be sure they might have done, seeing the Criminals were
taken in the Act, and they ought to have done it; seeing by the Law of God he
was equally guilty, and therefore upon the whole, to form such an Argument from
this saying and practice of our Savior, as that Adultery is not punishable
under the New Testament, is every whit as absurd, as to say that because he
declined being a Judge betwixt two Brethren, about the division of their
Father's Inheritance, therefore there ought to be no such thing as a division
of Parents' Estates amongst their Children under the New Testament. Besides
it is apparent that the design of our Savior's coming into the World was to
save peoples' Souls, and not to destroy their Bodies; as is evident from his
mercy to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he cast Seven unclean Devils; his Converse
with the Woman of Samaria, whom he convinced of the Evil of her Way; and his
permitting a Woman who was a sinner, which in the New Testament Phrase, is as
much as a Common Prostitute, to wipe his Feet whither Hair, and to wash them
with her Tears of Repentance.

These are all the Historical passages which we find relating to our Subject in
the New Testament during Christ's abode upon Earth, and therefore we come next
to a passage or two in Josephus, suited to our purpose. The first is in his
Antiquities, lib. 18. Chap. 4. concerning Paulina a Roman Lady, Wife to
Saturninus a Nobleman of Rome, upon whom Decius Mundus another Roman of Quality
became so enamoured, that he tempted her by Bribes and all other methods
imaginable to comply with his lustful design, offering her no less than 100000
Drams, which is computed at 6000 l. Sterlin, but she would by no means
consent to him, whereupon he was so burnt up by his Lust, that he pined and
withered away daily, which being observed by Ida his Father's Servant Maid, she
learned his distemper, and undertook his Cure for 25000 Drams, which she
effected thus, she understood that the Lady was particularly addicted to the
worship of the Heathen God Isis, who had a Temple at Rome, and thereupon
applying her self to the Priests, she promised them 25000 Drams if they
could so contrive it that Decius should enjoy the Lady in the Temple; the one
half in hand and the other upon the performance of the Bargain, the Priests
undertook it, and laid the Plot in the following manner. The Eldest of them
when the Lady came to the Temple accosted her, and pretended that the God
Anubis who frequented that Temple had conceived a mighty passion for her, and
earnestly desired her Company there one night, the Lady being charmed with this
extraordinary sort of Amor, being no less than a Divine Courtship as she
thought, acquainted her Husband with it, who was as fond of being a Cukcold by
an imaginary Deity, as some of the Indians are at present by their Brachmans:
And the rest of the Roman Ladys began to grudge at Paulina's good Luck, and to
long for the like. The appointed time being come, Paulina makes haste to the
Temple, where the Roguish Priests had Decius ready, who as soon as the Lamps
were removed approached to his beloved Paulina; and under the notion of the God
Anubis debauched her without any resistance. The deluded Lady, returned in the
Morning highly honored as she thought; but Decius meeting her a little after,
renewed his former suit, which she rejected as usual, whereupon he told her in
an upbraiding manner, that she was not so coy the other night in the Temple of
Isis, where he enjoyed her for one fourth of the Sum that he had formerly
proffered her: The poor Lady being surprised to find that she had entertained a
lewd Adulterer instead of a supposed Divinity, tore her hair, rent her clothes,
and discovered the Cheat to her Husband, who complaining thereof to the Emperor
Tiberius, he condemned the Priests and Ida to be hanged, ordered the Temple to
be pulled down, the Statue of Anubis to be thrown into the Tiber, and Decius
Mundus to be banished, -- and thus this Famous Temple was demolished, and the
Convent of Priests destroyed, for being Pimps to the insatiable Lust of a Noble
Roman, he himself banished from his Country, which he had polluted, and Ida his
Bawd punished as all others of the Trade ought to be.

That same Author in the 18 th Book in his Antiquities and the 12 th Chapter,
gives us another account of a Tragedy brought upon a great number of his
Countrymen, by an unlawful Amor, as follows. Anilaeus and Asinaeus two Jews of
mean Condition, upon a disgust retired into an Island of the Euphrates, where
joining with other dissolute persons and vagabond Jews, they became formidable
to the adjacent Countries, which they ravaged at their pleasure, and so
increasing in number, were a Terror to the Princes of those Countries, and
obliged them to court their friendship; but having once relaxed the discipline
that they observed when they first formed themselves into a Society, they lost
ground, and Anilaus lusting after a Parthian Lady, made War against her
Husband, upon her account, and was so bewitched with her Amors, that he
countenanced Idolatry for her sake, which bred discontent amongst his
Followers, most of which were Jews, who complaining thereof to Asinaeus his
Brother, he reproved him for it, upon which the Parthian Lady poisoned
Asinaeus; but the judgment of God soon overtook them, for Mithridates taking
Arms against Anilaeus and his dissolute Companions, he defeated them in Battle,
and afterward the Greeks and Syrians, who lived in Seleucia killed 50,000 of
the Jews, such was the fatal Consequence of Whoredom and Idolatry, which did
first mutually produce one another, and then both together issued in the
destruction of their followers.

The last instance that we meet with in Josephus, for our purpose is that in
the 5th Book of his Wars and 9th. Chapter, where he gives us an account that
during the Siege of Jerusalem by Titus the Son of Vespasian, the Faction called
the Zealots became Lustful, Effeminate, Lascivious, Curled their Hair, wore
Women's Apparel, anointed themselves that their Beautymight be pleasing,
thirsted after Unnatural pleasures, and made Jerusalem a Stews and not long
after followed the utter destruction of their City, Temple and Commonwealth,
with the slaughter of 1,100,000 of their people, since which they have been
Vagabonds, a Curse and a Reproach upon the face of Earth, and are noted for a
Lustful and Unclean People where ever they are, God having in his Just
Judgment given them up to work all manner of Uncleanness with greediness,
seeing their Love to their Lusts made them first reject the Pure and Holy
Doctrine of our Savior, and afterward Crucify him, which is another Instance
to confirm what has been so often observed before, that such Persons or people
as wallow in their Lusts want only an Opportunity and Tentation to declare open
War against God and Religion, which always issues in their own Confusion if
their Conversion don't prevent it.

We have often had occasion to observe that Whoredom has been productive of
Idolatry, and in the first Chapter of the Romans, we have the Authority of the
Apostle for it, that Idolatry has been the parent of Uncleanness, Vice Versa,
where speaking of those that when they knew God by the light of nature and the
works of Creation Yet because they Glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful but became vain in their Imaginations, their foolish heart was
darkened, and professing themselves to be Wise they became Fools, and changing
the Glory of the Incorruptible God into an Image, etc. Wherefore God also gave
them up to Vile Affections and Uncleanness, through the Lusts of their own hearts
to dishonor their own Bodies, between themselves. For even their Women changed
the natural use into that which is against Nature, and likewise also the men
leaving the natural use of the Women, burned in their Lust one toward another,
Men with Men working that which is unseemly, receiving in themselves that
recompense of their error which was meet; and as they did not like to retain
God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a Reprobate mind to do those
things which are not convenient, being filled with all Unrighteousness,
Fornication, etc.

What the Apostle says of men*s arriving to a great height of the knowledge of
God by the light of nature, and the observation of the Works of Creation and
Providence is evident by many Instances, but by none more than that of Seneca,
who, though a Heathen, has writ more true Divinity than almost all those
Christian writers have done, who are known by the name of Schoolmen. Aristotle,
Plato, Socrates and others are also strong proofs of this, but notwithstanding
all their knowledge they were vain in their Imaginations, and thinking
themselves Wise became Fools, and so not only they themselves but the Heathens
who had the benefit of their Lectures conceiving false notions of the Deity
which every one of 'em would adapt to their own Fancies, they were given up of
God to all manner of Uncleanness, and thence it came to pass that the Ancients
talked so many obscene things concerning the Yard of Priapus, one of their
Heathen Divinities, and Son to Bacchus and Venus; in reality a Vile Drunken
Debaucht Stallion, whose virile parts being of an Extroardinary Size, a Company
of Debaucht Women did continually haunt him, so that the Magistrates of the
Town where he lived were forced to banish him, whereupon say the Poets Venus
plagued them, so that they were forced to build him a Temple and in their
solemnities they carried about a stick in resemblance of his Yard -- Of the
same nature was the Eleusina Sacra solemnized at Eleusis, a City of Greece, the
procession being from thence to Athens, and of so great account was that
profane Worship, that they called it Mystery by way of Eminence; the King with
four Assistants presided at those solemnities; the Ephori were not admitted to
the greatest Mysteries till after a year's initiation, and it was reckoned a
great favor that King Demetrius was admitted to them per saltum. The Athenians
had so great a passion and Veneration for those Mysteries that they thought
they contributed to their leading a peaceable Life, and coming to an happy end
and a blessed State afterward; the Senate was always called to see that every
thing belonging to them was performed in order, some defects about them being
reckoned Capital, and when they were reduced to the greatest straits by their
Enemies, the Freedom and Enjoyment of those Mysteries was the last thing they
Capitulated for, and yet the thing that they kept all this pother about was
according to Tertullian a very shameful object, and therefore we shall keep
the Latin vail over it, viz. Naturae Muliebris Imago, which though all that were
admitted to them were sworn to conceal, yet the sagacity of the primitive
Christians found it out. At these Ceremonies the Women used to ride in Carts
and abuse one another with profane and scurrilous Language, fit indeed for
Carted Whores, whence came the Proverb De plaustro loqui. This Ceremony was
instituted in remembrance of Ceres seeking for her Daughter Proserpina whom the
Poets fancy Pluto ravished and carried to Hell. And such was the Hypocrisy of
those who had the Conduct and Management of those solemnities, that though they
knew the thing to be profane in the highest degree, yet one of the four
presidents that assisted the King during the solemnity had the Impudence to run
about and cry procul hinc, procul ite profani, i. e. stand off and begone all
profane Persons as is related by Marcrobius, Tertullian, Hesychius, Athenaeus
and others. Such was the madness and wickedness of the Graecians, at that time
the most polite and learned people in the world; and who valued themselves so
much upon their Learning and Philosophy, that they called all the rest of the
World Barbarians, accounted the Gospel foolishness, and looked upon the Apostle
Paul to be a Babbler. Of the same nature were the Feasts and Solemnities of
Bacchus, Cybele and others, so ridiculous in themselves that the very
Scythians, who were reckoned the most Rude and Barbarous of all Nations, laughed
at and exploded the Fancy of Worshipping Bacchus for a God, who made men drunk
and mad. Yet to such Ridiculous Fopperies and Abominable Impurities were the
wise Graecians given up by the Just Judgment of God, because they were vain in
their Imaginations and would Accommodate the Deity to their own Luxuriant
Fancies, so that thinking themselves wise they became fools.

Parallel to this is the horrid impurity of the Popish Church and Clergy,
which was much more open and notorious before the Reformation: the Rabbi's of
that Church affecting to be wise above what is Written, and Introducing not
only superstitions of an ordinary size, but also downright Idolatry, as the
Invocation and Adoration of Saints and Angels, God did Justly give them up to
all manner of Uncleanness, notwithstanding their monastical vows and pretended
Celibacy, that they became the scandal of Christianity, their Monasteries
Bawdy-Houses, and at last a Butcher's Shambles by murdering those Infants which
they had spuriously begot, as was evident to the World by the great quantities
of Childrens Skulls and other Bones which were found in their Monasteries, upon
their dissolution in those Countries where the Reformation obtained.

It were also to be wished that those a among Protestants, who have been
violent Asserters and Imposers of humane Inventions in the Worship of God,
would consider whether that Impurity of Life and Conversation, which is but too
too Remarkable amongst those who value themselves as being Members of their
Society, have not something of a Judgment of the like nature in it.

And it is also plain beyond all Contradiction that those who embrace the Old
Arian Heresy, now revived under the name of Socinianism, Deism, etc. Have
reason to look upon the dissolute lives of most of their Fraternity in this
Nation as a Just Judgment upon them from God for growing vain in their
Imaginations, and rejecting all those principles of Religion which they cannot
Fathom with their shallow and Corrupted reason.

We have seen under what severe Penalties Chastity was enjoined unto the Jews,
who under the Old Testament were the peculiar people and Church of God; and
with what tremendous Judgments those who violated that Law were from time to
time pursued. We have also heard out Savior's Exposition of the 7th.
Commandment, and how it reaches the Motions and Affections of the Soul as well
as the external act, and it has been Proved by Divine Authority that the
giving of a Person or People up to Uncleanness is a Just Judgment of God for
having forsaken him. So that now it remains that we take notice in what manner,
and under what Penalties Chastity is enjoined to Christians under the new
Testament. We find then in the 15 of the Acts, v. 20. That Fornications was one
of the things which the first Synodical Meeting or General Council of the
Christian Church forbid, by the Authority of the Holy Ghost, by which
Interpreters understand that not only Marriage within prohibited degrees, but
Adultery single Fornication and keeping of Concubines, or to use the term now
in fashion keeping of Misses was forbid, and the reason why that manifest
violation of the Laws of Nature, Creation, and Revelation is mixed with those
things which were Temporary, as the abstaining from Blood, etc. was because the
Gentiles, especially the people of the East were very much addicted to
Uncleanness, and Custom had prevailed so much amongst 'em, that they scarcely
thought Fornication or the keeping of a Concubine any sin: And that it is plain,
that this first Ecumenical Council if we may so venture to call it, did not
design this of Fornication as a Temporary prohibition only, will appear by the
repeated injunctions and prohibitions of the Apostles throughout their
Epistles, and the Sentence of exclusion from the Kingdom of Heaven, which from
time to time they pronounce against Whoredom. Thus in the 6th. of Romans v. 19.
He tells them that as they had yielded their Members Servants to Uncleanness,
so now they were to yield their Members Servants unto Holiness. Chap. 8. 7. He
tells them, That if they live after the Flesh they shall die. Chap. 13. 13, 14.
We are forbid to walk in Chambering and Wantonness, or to make provision for
the flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof; the Reading of which latter Verse, St.
Austin was directed to by a Voice when walking in his Garden, which bid him
take up the Bible and read, and falling upon that Text he was thereby
converted, he having been formerly much given to Uncleanness.

Then in 1 Cor. Chap. 5. he severely reproves the Church of Corinth, for not
having censured the incestuous Person who was one of their Members, though guilty
of such a sort of Fornication as was not so much as named amongst the Gentiles,
viz That one should have his Father's Wife, not that never any such thing was
committed amongst the Gentiles, for History teaches us the contrary; but when
it did happen it was never spoken of nor mentioned without horror, and was
always looked upon as Monstrous and Ominous: And therefore to take away the
scandal from the Christian Church, the Apostle Orders him to be delivered up to
Satan, i. e. Excommunicated, and cast out of the Society of the Church, by
which Censure he was thrown out of the Kingdom of Christ as an Exile, and by
Consequence deprived of his protection, by which he became; Subject or rather a
Slave to Satan, the God of this World, there being no Medium betwixt those two,
of being either a Subject of Christ or a Subject of Satan, and therefore he who
is cast out of the Church clave non errante, may very we^l be said to be
delivered up to Satan. It Is true there are some, who think that by these words
was meant a delivering of him up to Satan to be tormented by some bodily
distemper, but that Exposition is too much forced to be relied on. In the 9th.
and 11th. Verses of that Chapter the Apostle forbids them so much as to eat
with a Brother who is a Fornicator, such was the purity of Life that the Holy
Ghost enjoined to all Christians.

In the 6th. Chap. the Apostle informs us That neither Fornicators nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; and by Consequence we may Judge that they were
neither fit to be Members of Churches, nor indeed of Politic and Civil
Societes with Christians. In the 11 Verse, he tells them such were some of you,
but now ye are Sanctified. v. 13. He says that the body is not for Fornication,
but for the Lord, and the Lord for the Body. And in the 15, and 16. v. argues
against Fornication from the absurdity of it in Christians, who thereby made
their bodies that are Members of Christ Members of an Harlot, which was as much
as to say that you cannot make Christ a partaker of Fornication with you, and
therefore when you are guilty of those abominable sins you disunite your self
from Christ, and offer violence to your own bodies by pulling your self away
from Christ, and joining your self to an Harlot.

In the 18th. Verse he enjoins them to flee Fornication, because He that
commits Fornication sins against his own Body, that is, in a special
manner, he dishonors his Body by making it a Member of an Harlot and
disuniting it from Christ; he makes that Body which the Holy Ghost disdaineth
not to choose for a Temple a Cage of Unclean spirits, and so provokes the Holy
spirit to abandon it, who will not dwell in an Impure place, and as Whoredom
brings a more direct blemish upon the body than any other sin does, so it tends
to the dissolution and destruction of the frame of the Body.

In the 7th. Chapter, the Apostle treats of Marriage as a proper Remedy against
Fornication, and therefore necessary and commendable, not that it was
Originally instituted as a Remedy against Fornicatition, for it was appointed
in Paradise, during the State of Innocence, when there was no such thing as
Fornication; but it became necessary for that end since the fall, and therefore
as propagation was the primary end of Marriage, the avoiding of Fornication
became a Secondary end -- The reason of the Apostles insisting upon this, is in
the opinion of Commentators, because there were some among the Corinthians, to
whom he wrote, who Counterfeiting Chastity despised Marriage, and fell into
hurtful and filthy Lusts; and others again under pretense of Chastity
pretended to dissolve their Marraige Contract, and put away their Wives, that
they might attend with more diligence and assiduity upon the Service of God,
and therefore to obviate both those absurd opinions he shows the necessity and
sanctity of a marriage state, though he owns that in consideration of the then
troublesome times, and the persecutions which attended the Church, it was
better for those Christians who had the Gift of Continency not to marry than to
encumber themselves with Families, and the necessary cares of providing for a
Family, which do always follow upon Marriage; but at the same time he tells
them that it is better to Marry than to Burn, and recalls Marriage to its
Primitive institution in the 2d. Verse, thus, Let every Man have his own Wife,
and let every Woman have her own Husband: By which he expressly Condemns Digamy
and Polygamy. -- And then he tells them the duty of Married Persons that though
they might for a time abstain from the Marriage Bed by mutual consent, in order
to give themselves to fasting and prayer, yet they were not to defrand one
another, but to come together again, lest Satan, the Author of all Uncleanness,
should tempt them for their Incontinence, so that by this Chapter it is plain,
that that Celibacy which the Romish Clergy pretend to observe is none of God's
appointment, and therefore it is not to be wondered at, that they who have so
contemptuously rejected the Sacred ordinance of Marriage should be given up to
those Brutish Lusts which have made them the scandal of the Christian World.
The Holy Paphnutius when it was moved in the Council of Nice that the Clergy
should abstain from their Wives, opposed it by his Authority, or rather by the
Apostles' Authority, telling 'em that Marriage was honorable, and that a Man's
lying with his own Wife was no breach of Chastity, upon which the Council
commended his opinion, and ordained nothing in that affair as we are told by
Sozomen Hist. Tripartit. Lib. 2. C. 14. So that the Canon which is now numbered
amongst those of that Council, forbidding the Marriage of the Clergy, is with
good reason looked upon as supposititious.

In the 5th. of the Galatians, v. 19. the Apostle tells us, That the Works of
the fles^ are Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness; and in the
24th. Verse, he tells us that they that are Christ's have Crucified the flesh
with the Affections and Lusts, so that those who wallow in such Impurities let
'em call themselves or be called by others what they please, 'its plain that
they have forfeited their Title to the name of Christians.

In the 2d. of the Ephesians, he reckons those who walk in the Lusts of the
flesh, and fulfill the desires thereof amongst the Children of wrath and
disobedience who walk according to the Prince of the power of the Air. Our
Lustful Gallants and Beaus would be ready to run any man through the Lungs who
should call them Children of the Devil, and yet they are called such in express
terms by the Holy Ghost; so that it is not to be wondered at that they do so much
spurn at all revealed Religion.

In the 4th. Chapter, the Apostle calls them off from the Impurities of the
Gentiles, who had given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all
Uncleanness with Greediness, telling them they had not so learned Christ. In
the 5th. Chapter he commands that Fornication and Uncleanness should not once
be named amongst them, neither Filthiness nor Foolish talking nor Jesting which
are not conconvenient, and the reason he subjoins, is this, That no
Whoremongers nor Unclean person has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ
and of God -- Then whether they deserve the name of Christians whose chief
delight is in Play Houses, where Foolish Jesting and Talking is their principal
Entertainment; or whether they are to be accounted such who wallow in
Fornication and Adultery, and who make their keeping of Misses and Debauching
of Women the Grand subject of their Conversation, in all public Companies, let
any reasonable man Judge,

In the 3d Chapter of the Colossians he commands Christians to mortify their
Member^ which are upon the Earth, viz, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
Affection, etc. For which things' sake the wrath of God comes on Children of
disobedience.

In the 11th. of the Hebrews and 16th. verse he warns them to take heed that
there be no Fornicator nor Profane Person amongst them like Esau, who sold his
Birthright for one Morsel, Persons who are addicted to their Lusts being ready
at any time to sell their share of Heaven and Religion so they may but enjoy
their Vile desires: and in the 13th. Chapter and 4th. Verse he tells them that
Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled, but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will Judge, by which the Apostle obviates the false Doctrine of
those Seducers foretold in the 1st. of Timothy and 4. who should forbid
Marriage, and tells them that Whoredom is so grievous a sin in the sight of
God, that in a peculiar manner he will punish such persons himself.

It is fit also to be observed here, that the Papists and other Sects who
forbid or restrain the use of Marriage were thereunto prompted at first by a
false show of Purity and Sanctity, which demonstrates how abominable they
reckoned the sin of Uncleanness, when they thought that Conjugal Society
rendered men unfit for their Devotions, but their unhappy mistake was attended
with mischievous Consequences, for instead of that purity which they aimed at
by dispising Marriage which is of Divine institution, they fell into all manner
of Uncleanness as is known to those who have read the Histories of the
Encratites, Marcionites, Fatians, Manichees, etc. whose Errors and Vicious
Practices as to that matter, the Popish Monks have served themselves heirs to,
and therefore cannot avoid falling under the reach of that Prophecy, 1st. of
Timothy and 4th. though they have strained their Wits toward it off from
themselves.

The Apostle Peter in his 1st. Epistle 1. Cap. and 14. Verse forbids Christians
to fashion themselves according to their former Lusts, and in his 2d Cap. 11.
v. he commands them to abstain from fleshly Lusts which War against the Soul.
In the 2d. Chapter of his 2d. Epistle he tells us, That God turned the Cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, making them an ensample unto those that after
should live Ungodly. -- In the 9th. verse he subjoins that the Lord knows how
to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, but chiefly them
that walk after the flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness, and in the 14th. Verse he
says, They shall receive the reward of Unrighteousness, having eyes full of
Adultery and that cannot cease from sin.

The Apostle Jude in his General Epistle tells us, That Sodom and Gomorrah
giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh are set
forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, he describes
also those who walk after their Ungodly Lusts to be mockers, which is as
Visible in our modern Beans and Gallants as ever it was in any, there being
none who do more mock and despise Religion then such, and now it is become
Familiar to them to run down Revelation and the Divine Authority of the Holy
Scriptures.

In the 14th of the Revelations and 4th. The 144000 who are there said to be
singing a new song in Heaven, in the Company of the Lamb, are described to be
such as had not defiled themselves with Women; That is, such as had not
polluted themselves with Unlawful Lusts, but had possessed their Vessels in
Sanctification and Honor, as Christians are advised to do. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. Not
that they had abstained from Marriage, for that is Honorable and such a state
as tends to the preservation of Chastity, but they had escaped the pollution
which was in the World, through Lust; its true that the Sense of the place is not
wholly restricted to a bodily Chastity, but includes also a Spiritual Purity,
Freedom from Idolatry, and Communication with false Religions, but that it does
also relate to bodily Chastistity, is unanimously agreed upon by Interpreters.

It is also observable that the Holy Ghost, to testify his hatred of
Uncleanness has represented Antichrist the Antichristian Church, and the
Idolatry of that Society, under the name of a Whore, the Mother of Harlots and
Abominations of the Earth; those that are poisoned with her Idolatrous
Doctrine, here presents as having committed Fornication with her, and drunk of
her Golden Cup full of Abominations and Filthiness of her Fornication, Rev. 17.
And indeed to any that have read the wicked Lives of many of the Popes, and
consider the impurity of their Monks and Nuns, their contempt of Marriage,
their Unlawful Divorces, and Dispensations for Unlawful Marriages. It will
appear that there is great reason to call the Church of Rome a Whore in a
Literal Sense.

In the 21st. of the Revelations, we are told that Whoremongers shall have
their part in the Lake which Burns with Fire and Brimstone: and in the 23d.
we are told, That Whoremongers are excluded from the new Jerusalem in Company
of Murders, Idolaters and Sorcerers. So much for the History of Whoredom, as
far as it is touched in the Old and New Testament, either as to the Instances
thereof, the Judgments inflicted upon the practioners of it, the Laws
concerning it, and the punishments threatened against the Breakers of those
Laws, both in this World and that which is to come.

Having finished that part of our History for which the Scripture has
furnished us with materials, -- We come in the next place to profane History,
for Instances relating to our Subject. We have already made use of some
Instances from Josephus and other Historians, Obiter as they had a Relation to
the Scripture passages that we were upon, but come now to make use of them
entirely for our Collections, and think it fit to acquaint the Reader that we
must look back again in order of time, because 'twas thought best to have the
Scripture Instances altogether.

We have formerly made mention of Semiramis, in the Account which we gave of
the destruction of Babylon, all that we have now to add, is, that Justin. Lib.
1. gives this Account of her, that after her Husband Ninus's Death, she puts on
Man's apparel, and feigned her self to be Ninus her own Son, who was but a
Youth, and therefore she was afraid that he would not be able to manage the
Scepter, Semiramis being a Woman of low Stature, and small Voice, was easily
mistaken for her Son, and the better to conceal the fraud, she covered her Arms
and Legs, put a Tiara or round Ornament resembling a Bonnet, upon her head, and
the better to prevent suspicion of a disguise, Ordered her Subjects to apparel
themselves in that same manner, under the Notion of a new fashion, so that she
passed for her Son without any doubt or hesitation, and having under this
disguise enlarged her Husband's Conquests as was formerly said, she conceived
that the Greatness of her Actions had put her beyond the reach of Envy, and
therefore discovered her self, which was so far from lessening her, that it
mightily advanced her Reputation, but giving her self up afterward to Brutish
Lusts, as was formerly mentioned, she became enamoured on her own Son, who
thereupon killed her, and thus she tarnish'd all her former Glory and brought
her self to an untimely death by her unnatural Lust after she Reigned 42 years
in Great Honor.

Her Son Ninus, though he abhorred his Mothers Incestuous Amors, yet being Heir
to her Vices as well as her Throne, as if he had really changed Sexes as well
as Habit with his Mother, he became Effeminate and Lustful, and spending his
time Ingloriously among Women, was rarely seen of any men, and so concluded his
days with Ignominy, leaving that unmanly pattern to his successors that they
seldom were seen of any of their Subjects, and thus the Assyrian Empire which
continued near 1300 years, was extinguished by the Effeminacy and Lusts of
their Princes and People, and came to a Conclusion in the Inglorious Reign of
Sardanapalus, who Reigned as some Authors think when Jonah was sent to Preach
Repentance to Ninive, but this cannot be relied upon, the Learned do so much
differ as to the point of Chronology: However, this is agreed upon by all
hands, that he was a Lustful and Effeminate Prince, and gave himself so much
up to Voluptuousness that he would sit and Spin in a Woman's Habit amongst his
Concubines. And seeing it is commonly found by Experience that people imitate
the bad example of their Princes; there is no great reason to doubt but that the
Ninivites, amongst whom he resided, were tainted with his Vices and became
dissolute, so that they very well deserved those Judgments denounced against
them by Jonah, and Historians, as Justin, P^ta^, and Scaliger acquaint us, That
the wiser part of his Subjects loathing to be Governed by such an unmanly
Debauchee, Rebelled against him, under the Conduct of Arsaces Governor of
Media, who coming to see him and being admitted to his presence with Great
difficulty, found him in Woman's Habit Spinning purple upon a Distaff, amongst
a Company of his Whores, to whom he divided their several Tasks of Wool, etc.
And perceiving him to be more Effeminate, and Lascivious in his looks than any
of the Women, he conceived great Indignation that so many Warlike Men should be
Governed by a Person who disowned his Sex and handled a Distaff instead of a
Sword, so that having acquainted his Companions with what he had seen, they
Conspired against him, Besieged him in Ninive for two years, and reduced him to
such straits that in a desperate humor he retired into his Palace, where having
Erected a Funeral Pile, and laid all his most precious Movables upon it, he
burnt himself with his Wives, Children and Palace; (which was the only thing
wherein he discovered a Manly temper) Ordering the following distich to be
engraven on his Tomb --

Haec habeo quae edi, quaeque Exsaturata Libido
Hausit at illa Jacent multa ac praeclara relicta.
Which says Aristotle was a fitter Epitaph for a Bull then a King; It may be
Paraphrased in English thus,

Those things I have which delight I ate,
And also those which did my Lust assuage;
Yet may desires are still insatiate,
And that ought's left behind, enflames my rage.
The Medes having held the Empire 350 years, it then fell into hands of the
Persians under the Conduct of Cyrus; and that the Persian Women were not over
modest appears by the method they took to encourage their Men, when they had
the worst in the Battle at first, with Astyages, viz. When the Persians began
to run, their Women uncovered their Secret parts, upbraidded them with
Cowardice, and asked whither they would hide themselves in the Bellies of their
Mothers and Wives, which did so animate them, that from a principal of shame
they returned to the Battle, came off Victorious, and by that means laid the
Foundation of the Persian Monarchy, which was afterward overturned by
Effeminacy and Lasciviousness, as we shall see in its place, and that the
Persians should have immersed themselves in Lasciviousness is so much the more
remarkable and inexcusable, because their Emperor Cyrus to break the Warlike
Temper of the Lydians, whom he had overcome, thought it not enough to deprive
them of their Horses and Arms, but commanded them to exercise themselves in
Publick-Houses, Plays, and Bawdy-Houses; and thus says Justin Lib. 1. this
people who before Cyrus were invincible in War, mighty by their industry and
redoubtable by their Valor, lost their Ancient Gallantry by their Effeminate
Delicacy and Luxury. And that this Wantonness had invaded their Throne is
evident from the Instance of Candaules their King, who doting upon his Wife,
because of her Incomparable Beauty, commended her in all Companies, and not
satifised with that, he was so mad as to expose her Naked to the view of Gyges
his Favorite, by appointing him a Secret place in her Bedchamber, which the
Q. perceiving, though unknown to her Husband she was so much incensed at it, that
she proposed it to Gyges, either to kill the King and enjoy her and the
Kingdom, or to prepare for death himself, the former of which conditions he
accepted, and performed, and thus was Candaules punished for his Voluptuousness
by losing his Life and Crown* and having his Race extinguished.

Justin in his 1. Book acquaints us also that one of the Magi called Comaris,
being employed by Cambyses to kill his Brother Mergides, performed it Secretly,
and Cambyses dying in the mean time of a Wound he received by his own Sword,
Comaris set up his own Brother Oropastes for King, instead of Mergides, to whom
the Succession belonged after Cambyses, Oropastes being as very like Mergides;
but the matter ^eing afterward suspected -- Orthanus a No^le man found it out
by his own Daugh^er that was one of the King's Concu^ines, she by her Father's
persuasion felt ^ropastes his head when he was asleep, and finding that he had
no Ears, acquainted ^er Father with it, who thereby knew that it was Oropastes,
whose Ears Cambyses had ordered to be cut off, and impart^ing it to the rest of
the Nobility, from whom it was easy to conceal it because the Kings of Persia
under a show of Majesty were kept from the view of their Subjects, they
conspired against him and slew both the Brothers, thus was Oropastes deprived
of his Life and Crown by the Treachery of one of his Concubines.

The next passage we meet with in Justin for our purpose, is that of the
Scythian Women, whose Husbands being long absent, he says, 15 years in subduing
Asia, they sent Messengers to them, telling them, that if they did not return,
they would take care to have offspring by their Neighbors, and that the Women
should not be to blame if the Race of the Scythians failed, whereupon they
returned having imposed a small Tribute upon the Asiaticks, rather as an
acknowledgment of there Conquests then as a Reward of their Victory. --

That same Author, Book 2d. tells us that the Scythians having staid 7 Years
from their Wives in their 3d. Expedition into Asia, the Women reckoning they
had been all cut off, Married their Serva^^ who were left at home to look after
the Catttle, so that when their Husbands returned Victorious, they were looked
upon as Foreign Invaders, and therefore the^ Servants kept them out by force of
Arms so that after diverse Skirmishes with various fortune, the Scythians
considering th^^ those who opposed them were their Servants, they agreed to
make use of Whip^ against them instead of Arms, which had so good success that
their Servants, as it their Servile Spirits had returned to the^, upon the
sight of the Whips, fled before them.

Its also fit to take notice here, that the Women so much famed in the World by
the Name of Amazons, were Wives to ^ Colony or rather an Inundation of
Scythians, who settling themselves in Cappa^^cia about the River Thermodoon,
and having subdued their Neighbors, were at last wholly cut off by a
Conspiracy of the people whom they had Conquered, upon which their Women took
Arms, and not only defended their own Territories, but enlarged their
Dominions, and being accustomed to Govern men, looked upon Marriage as a
servitude, cut off all the Me^ that were remaining among them, th^^ none of
them might seem more happy tha^ the rest, by enjoyment of their Husbands, and
then having obtained, Peace, once a year they conversed with the Men of
Neighboring Nations, and if they brought ^^rth Males they, either killed them
or ^t them home to their Fathers, but the ^males they bred up to the use of
Arms, ^d all manly Exercises, burning one of ^eir Dugs that it might not hinder
them ^ bend their Bows, and preserving the ^ther to suckle their Girls. Amongst
those Amazons are said to have Reigned the Famous Queens, Marthesia, Lampeto,
Otrera, Pen^hesilea, Thalestris, etc. and their Monar^hy is said to have
continued till the time of Alexander the Great.

Some will have all that is writ of the Amazons to be a mere Fable, and others,
that all the stories of them was occasioned by their Women's bearing Arms, and
Fighting in Battle as well as the Men; and it may be, being more numerous in
diverse of those Battles, than the Men who were either absent or consumed in
those Expeditions, they had the Chief Command, as is observed by Juan Orelhan
the Spaniard, who discovered that great River, called by the Name of the River
of the Amazons in the West Indies, upon the Banks of which he perceived the
Women in Arms to exceed the men in number, and to Command them, and upon that
Account he gave the Name aforesaid to that River.

But however the matter be, it affords us this Observation, that all Kingdoms
and States ought to take care of encouraging Marriage; and to avoid as much as
may be the Exhausting of their Men by Wars, Colonies or Conquests, which do
naturally occasion the want o^ a sufficient number of Males to supply the
Females, whence proceeds Whoredom, Uncleanness, and Luxury, which infallibly
issues in Contempt of Marriage, an Obstruction of Propagation, and the ruin of
a people.

Before we come to give an Account how the Persian Monarchy was overturned by
Luxury and Lasciviousness, we shall have occasion to touch upon some Remarkable
Revolutions, occasioned amongst the Greeks by Uncleanness. The first that we
meet with in Justin is that of Diocles King or Governor of Athens, who having
forced a young Woman, he was in Revenge thereof killed by her Brother,
whereupon Hippias Brother to Diocles ordered the youngman to be apprehended,
and putting him upon the Rack, examined him concerning those that were privy to
his design, the young man in further Revenge for this new Injury, Named all the
Tyrant's Friends, who being put to Death upon his Accusation, Hippias asked if
he knew of any more that were Conscious to his Crime. To this the young man
answered, That there were no more at whose Death he could gladly rejoice but
the Tyrant himself, which the Citizens took as a Signal to recover their lost
Liberty, and drove Hippi^s into Exile, who thereupon joining with the P^rsi^ns
against his own Country was slain in Battle. And here it is proper to add that
the effeminacy and Luxury of the Persians under the Reign Xerxes, was the chief
cause of the shameful overthrows which they received by the Grecians.

The next Remarkable instance which we find for our purpose in Justin, is that
in his 3d. Book of the War betwixt the Messenians and Lacedemoonians,
occasioned by the former's having Ravished the Virgins belonging to the latter,
whilst they were at Sacrifice, upon which the Lacedomineans bound themselves by
a solemn Oath never to return into their Country till they had taken in
Messenia, which laid the Foundation of Intestine Discord, and Civil War in
Grecia -- The Siege of this Town continued 10 years, during which time the
Lacedemonian Women being not able to brook the want of their Husbands Company,
they sent heavy complaints to them upon that head, but the Lacedaemonians being
unwilling to violate their Oaths, and at the same time sensible that their
people must needs decrease, they fell upon this Medium, to send home all the
young men who had come as Recruits to their Camp after the taking of the said
Oath, and allowing them the Liberty to Accompany with the Women, the Children
begot by this promiscuous Copulation, were as a Brand of their Mothers' Infamy
called Parthenii, and arriving at the Age of 30, they were so much afraid of
coming to Want, because they knew not whom to call Father, nor which way to
have any Patrimony, that under the Conduct of Phalantus Son to Aratus, who was
the Author of the Advice to send the young men from the Camp above said, they
resolved to seek new Habitations for themselves, and so without so much as
saluting or taking leave of their Mothers, from whom they derived the Infamy of
being Bastards, they arrived at last in Italy, subdued the Tarentines, and
settled in their Country. But to return to the Messenians, they were at last
overcome by the Lacedaemonians, in two Wars, the 1st. of 20 and the 2. of 14
years continuance, and reduced to a miserable slavery, which was originally
occasioned as we have just now heard by their Uncleanness.

Our next Instance is in Justin Lib. 5: concerning Timea Queen to Agis King of
Lacedemon, who being guilty of Adultery with Alcibiades the Athenian, while an
Exile from his Country at her Husband's Court, she discovered to him the design
which the Lacedaemonians had against his Life, because they envied his Conduct
and Glory, upon which Alcibiades fled to the Persians, and having by his
cunning prevailed with the Athenians to recall him, he afterward defeated the
Lacedaemonians by Sea and Land, and brought them to sue for Peace, so
destructive to her Country was the Unlawful Amors of this Whorish Queen, and
so ruinous to the whole East, and particularly to Athens was the Vicious
Lustful Temper of Alcibiades; the occasion of whose Exile as above mentioned
was his discovery of something of the Mystery of Ceres's Worship, or the
Profane Eleusina Sacra, which we have already described at large. The fatal
Exit of this Great Man is also Remarkable, viz. That he was by the order of the
30 Tyrants burnt in his Chamber when asleep; a suitable punishment from the
hand of Divine Justice for one that had burnt in impure Lust, however he
deserved better Treatment at the hands of his Country.

That same Author in his sixth Book, acquaints us that after the death of
Epaminondas the great Theban General, the Athenians having no Enemy to whet
their Emulation or Exercise their Martial Courage, grew Luxurious and
Debauched, spent their Time and Revenues in public Festivals and Plays,
frequented the Stage and Play Houses more than the Camp, and did more extol
their Poets and Orators than their Captains and Generals; by which means they
lost their Glory, and rendered themselves and all Greece and Asia a prey to the
Macedonians, formerly an obscure people.

Before we go any further in the History of the Unlawful Amors of Greece it
may not be improper to take notice of the ruin of Troy by the Graecians, after
ten years War upon the account of the Rape of fair Helena from Menelaus a
Grecian Prince, by Paris Son to Priamus King of Troy. This story being known
to every Schoolboy, its needless to insist upon it, but we shall only observe
that the Lust of Paris occasioned the ruin of that Kingdom and City about the
year of the World 2870. after it had stood near 296 years. The ruins of that
Famous Town are still to be seen near the Mountain Ida about 32 German Miles
South of Constantinople, upon the Asian side of the Hellespont or strait of the
Dardanelles as a Monument of Divine Justice against Whoredom.

Justin in his 7th. Book gives us this Remarkable instance of punishment
inflicted upon the Persian Ambassadors for their Lechery, viz. That being sent
by Magabazus the Persian General to demand Hostages from Amyntas King of
Macedonia, that Prince received them kindly, and the Ambassadors having drank
largely in the time of the Feast, so as their Lust was inflamed, they demanded
that they might have the Company of the Kings Wives and Daughters at their
entertainment, which they said was a Pledge of Hospitality among the Persians.
The King thinking sit to grant it, the Persians began to handle the Women
immodestly, upon which Alexander Son to King Amyntas desired his Father to
withdraw from the Banquet because of his Age and Gravity, the Prince having
done so, Alexander a little while after called out the Women, pretending that
he would bring them back in a better dress, that so they might be the more
acceptable to the Persians, and in their place brought in as many young Men in
Women's Habit with orders to punish the Ambassadors for their lasciviousness,
and accordingly when they begun to handle them as they had done the Women, the
young men killed every one of the Ambassadors with Swords which they had
concealed under their Garments.

In that same Book we have an instance of an abominable Incestuous Intrigue of
Eurydice Wife to another Amyntas King of Macedonia, and Nephew to the former,
who falling in Love with her Son-in-Law, upon promise of Marriage undertook to
murder her Husband and advance her Gallant to the Throne, but was prevented by
her Daughter who discovered her Mother's Incest and bloody design, yet Amyntas
for the Love which he bare to the Children that he had by this wicked Woman
spared her, and the Unnatural Beast after his Death murdered her own Sons
Alexander and Perdiccas by him, though for their sakes he had spared her Life;
and all this mischief she committed, that she might wallow without Interruption
in her Impure Lusts.

In his 9th Book he gives us an account of the death of Philip of Macedon
^ather to Alexander the Great, which was occasioned partly by his having
Divorced Olympias, on suspicion of Adultery, or with an Adulterous design to
marry Cleopatra, and partly because he had not executed Judstice upon Attalus
for having Committed Sodomy upon Pausanias, who frequently complained of it,
but was always dismissed with scorn, and therefore watching his Opportunity he
stabbed Philip on the day that he was married to Cleopatra as walking betwixt
his own Sons, afterward Alexander the Great and Alexander his Son-in-Law. Thus
this Great Prince who had Conquered many Nations and Countries, became a
Conquest and Victim to his own Lusts and the Lusts of others, and occasioned
likewise the death of his Paramour Cleopatra, Olympias having first murdered
her Daughter, and then forced Cleopatra to hang her self.

His 10th. Book furnishes us with a very remarkable instance of Artaxerxes King
of Persia, who had 115 some say 160 Sons by Concubines, and three only by
Lawful Marriage, for which Incontinence he was punished in the following
manner; his Son Darius being by the Indulgence of Artaxerxes admitted to the
Throne while he himself was alive, contrary to the Custom of the Persians, he
ungratefully Conspired against his Father's Life, and engaged 49 of his
Brethren in the Conspiracy. The occasion of this Unnatural Plot was yet more
vile than the Plot it self, which Justin relates thus, Artaxerxes having
defeated and killed his Brother Cyrus in the War betwixt them, he married
Aspasia Cyrus his Concubine, and her Darius would have his Father to resign to
him as well as his Throne, which the Indulgent Father promised to do at first,
but repenting of it afterward, he made her priestess to the Sun that he might
have a fair pretense of denying her to Darius, because according to the Persian
superstition, those of that Office must observe perpetual Chastity. Darius
taking this as a great affront, entered into the Conspiracy as abovementioned,
which being discovered, the Incestuous and Unnatural Traitor with all his
Associates, their Wives and Children was cut off, that there might be no
memorial left of such a horrid piece of Villainy. Thus was Uncleanness justly
punished both in Father and Children, and this Instance is so much the more
remarkable that it fell out but a few years before the overthrow of the Persian
Monarchy by Alexander the Great, which the Lasciviousness and Effeminacy of the
Persians made easy to be effected.

Our next instance is Alexander the Great, who though in the height of his Youth
and Conquests, he obtained so much Glory by abstaining from Darius his
Beautiful Queen and Daughters who were his Captives, yet giving himself
afterward up to Impure Pleasures, he has thereby rendered his Infamy as
Immortal as his Fame. It Is observed of him by his Historian Curtius, that he
was always more Famous in War than after Victory, and that having broke the
Power of the Persian Empire he degenerated into those very Manners or rather
Vices, which made the Persians such an easy Conquest to him. That same Author
in his 5th. Book gives us an Account, that Alexander having staid much longer
at Babylon than he did at any other place, the Corrupt Manners of the Citizens
did more prejudice to the Discipline of his Army than any thing they had met
with before that time; and indeed the Description that Curtius gives us of the
abominable Luxury and Impurity which reigned in that City, is sufficient to
convince us that the Empire of which that was the Metropolis, or at least the
most Renowned and Greatest City, was ripe for ruin. The words of the Historian
are as follow, There was nothing more corrupt than the manners of that City,
and nothing more Accommodated to incite and provoke Voluptuousness and Lust.
The Parents and Husbands permitted their Wives and Daughters to lie with their
Guests, provided they gave them a Reward. Banquets, Revells and Plays were the
Chief delights of the King^ and Princes of Persia. The Babylonians ^ere wholly
given up to Wine, Drunkenness, and the Consequences of it. Their Women when
they first came in to their Feasts and Banquets were apparelied modestly
enough, but in a little time after they threw off their upper Garments, and in
the last place, with modesty be it spoken, uncovered their Nakedness; nor was
this only the practice of the Common prostitutes, but of (...) Matrons and
married Women, who esteemed such promiscuous dalliance a Great piece of
Complaisance and Good breeding; with which Debauches, says our Author, that
Army which Conquered Asia being glutted for 34 days, they had doubtless been
rendered very unfit for what they under took afterward, if they had not been
Reinforced by fresh supplies of uncorrupted men from Macedonia, etc.

Our Author gives us another Instance of the Idleness and Luxury of the Persian
Women, viz. That when Alexander the Great had received Purple and Macedonian
Apparel made by his own Sisters in a Present from home, be ordered the same to
be Presented to Sysigambis the Mother of Darius, with this Complement, that if
she liked them he would surnish her with those who should teach her Grand
Daughters to make such, which presently drew Tears from the Persian Princess,
there being nothing reckoned more dishonorable amongst the Persian Women than
to Card and Spin, which I take to be the meaning of our Author's words to touch
Wool. How much this differs from Solomon's Character of a good Houswife, and
whether the handling of Wool had not been more commendable than such Dissolute
Revels as we just now mentioned, let the World judge. But to return to
Alexander the Great.

After he had with great difficulty and danger past the straits of Susis, and
taken Persepolis the Royal Residence of the Kings of Persia, the Lascivious
Inhabitants became Executioners of Divine Justice upon themselves and their
Impure City, for putting on their chief Ornaments of which their Luxury had
made them provide a great Number, they threw themselves their Wives and
Children headlong from the Walls and precipices, and set fire to their own
Houses: But that which is particularly remarkable as to Alexander, is that in a
Drunken fit at the persuasion of Thais a Drunken Whore, says Curtius, he
ordered the Famous Royal Palace of the Persian Kings to be burnt, which he had
hitherto saved; and he himself threw the first firebrand into it to his
perpetual Ignominy and Disgrace, However, we may plainly see by this passage,
that the sin of the Persians was legible in their punishment, when this Famous
Palace that had been polluted with such Herds of Strumpets, as the Persian
Kings did usually Entertain, was burnt to Ashes at the instigation of an
Infamous Strumpet, and not long after Darius himself fell by the hands of his
Treacherous Subjects, which put an end to the Persian Empire.

Curtius in his 6th. Book gives us an Account how Alexander became hate full to
the Graver sort of his Captains and Generals by his degenerating into the Vices
of the Persians, as, Immoderate drinking, and spending his time in Plays, and
amongst Herds of Strumpets, which occasioned frequent Conspiracies against him,
Mutinies amongst his Soldiers; and other Commotions. He became likewise guilty
of Sodomy with Bagoas, Darius's Ennueh, affected the Persian Habit and Customs,
and entertained 360 Concubines as Darius had done before him, which occasioned
the Macedonians to grumble, and say, That he was more like to those that he had
Conquered than a Conqueror, so that he was forced, to prevent their sedition,
to engage them in a fresh War, after he had for thirteen days satiated his Lust
with Thalestris Queen of the Amazons at her own desire. While he was preparing
for his Expedition against Bessus, Philotas and others of his Great Officers
conspired against his Life, but Nicomachus a Catamite having discovered it by
means of Dimachus, who was his Companion in that Unnatural Amor, revealed it
so as 'twas prevented, but it cost his Villainous Paramour Dimachus and others
their Lives; such was the fatal Consequence of Dimachus's unnatural Lust to
himself and others.

The next Instance which Curtius affords fit for our purpose, is that of
Spitamenes, who being Prince or Governor of the People called Dahee, he
revolted from Alexander, and doting upon his Beautiful Wife, carried her with
him wherever he went, she being weary of that kind of Life, advised him to
submit himself to Alexander; which he took so ill, that he upbraided her with a
lustful design, thinking that her Beauty would make her acceptable to
Alexander, and therefore would have killed her if he had not been hindered by
those about him; whereupon he forbad her to come any more into his presence,
and that he might wean him-self from her, he passed his time amongst his
Concubines; but finding that he could not Conquer his passion toward her, he
sent for her again, and she pretending to have forgot her former Injury,
watched her opportunity when he was fast asleep and cutting off his Head, took
one Servant along with her, and carried it to Alexander, which proves that her
Husband's suspicion of her was not ill founded; but Alexander though he was glad
to be rid of such a troublesome Enemy as Spitamenes, did so much abhor the
Barbarous and Treacherous Woman, that he Commanded her to depart the Camp, lest
the Grecian Women should be infected by her cursed Example. Thus was
Spitamenes and she both justly punished for their Uncleanness.

Curtius in his 8th. Book gives us another Instance of Alexander's being
Conquered by his Lusts, which was thus. Cohortanes the Governor of a certain
Country, having submitted himself to Alexander, he did likewise entertain him
with a Feast, and for his better diversion ordered 30 Noble Virgins to be
brought in, amongst whom was his own Daughter Roxane, a Lady of Incomparable
Beauty; with whom Alexander (who had abstained from Darius's fair Wife, and two
Daughters, all Ladies of much Greater Beauty and Quality) was so much taken,
that in the heat of his Lust he Contracted a Marriage with this Comparatively
Ignoble Lady, to the Great disgust of his Friends.

In the same Book he gives us a lively Description of the Effeminacy and Luxury
of the Indians, who Inhabited about the Ganges and Dyardenes, that were some of
the last of Alexander's Conquests, and indeed Ripe for such Judgments as a
Conquest Generally brings upon a Nation. Curtius Expresses himself Elegantly
concerning them, thus, viz. That the Luxury of their Kings which they call
Magnificence exceeds the Vices of all other Nations, they never come abroad but
their Servants carry Silver Censers and Perfume all the way that the Prince is
to go. He is carried in a Golden Couch hung about with Jewels -- This Chair or
Couch is followed by his Guards, who carry Branches of Trees with Singing-Birds
and Parrots upon them; his Palace is supported by Gilded Columns, and they
adorned with Vines inlaid with Gold, and the Effigies of such Birds upon them
in Silver as they do most delight in. When the King Combs and Dresses his Hair,
then he gives Audience to Ambassadors and does Justice to his people, and his
Shoes or Sandals being taken off, his Feet are Anointed and Perfumed with
precious Ointments and Perfumes; his greatest Labor is Hunting, and that is to
shoot Darts at Birds and Beasts penned up in a Park or Cage; his Concubines in
the mean time Singing about him, and making vows for his success, his short
Journies he performs on Horseback and the longer on Elephants covered over
with Gold, and a long Train of Concubines follow him in Golden Couches or
Chairs. And equal to this is the Luxury of the Queen and her Attendants, so
that we may readily conclude that Alexander found no great difficulty in
subduing such Debaucht and Effeminate Nations, who were full Ripe for Divine
Vengeance.

We come now to the winding up of the Story of Alexander the Great, who did so
far degenerate into the Manners and Vices of those People he had Conquered,
that he gave Crowns to some and took away Lives from others at the will and
pleasure of his Whores, and particularly of Bagoas the Eunuch, who was his
Catamite. Curtius gives us an Instance of this in his 10th. Book, where he
Relates how Orsines a Great Persian Prince of Cyrus's offspring, was falsely
Accused and Executed, because he despised that Villainous Eunuch, and said that
it was not Whores and Catamites that he had any regard for, but only to the
King's Friends, and when this Revengefull Catamite had got Alexander to Condemn
this great Man, who had at all times been very Friendly and Bountiful to the
King and his Retinue, he could not forbear to assist at the Execution himself,
upon which Orsines told him Satyrically, That he had heard that Women had
sometimes Governed Asia, but it was never Governed by a Guelding before. Thus
Alexander being Governed by those Vile Persons, did upon their Accusation cut
off his best Friends, and became so hateful to his own Greeks, that they
talked diverse times of Revolting, and at last Poisoned him in Babylon amidst
his Feasts and Revels, which was very Remarkable that he should be Poisoned
there where he had suffered himself and his Army to be first Poisoned by the
Vicious Manners of the Persians; and thus by his Luxury and Uncleanness he
occasioned the Division of that vast Empire, which he had raised; his Great
Captains after his Death having each of them erected Monarchies for themselves
in those Places where they Governed, which occasioned the speedier dissolution
of the Grecian Monarchy, and that it was less taken notice of as not being
cemented together under one head. so true is it which the Wiseman tells us in
the Proverbs, That many strong men have been slain and cast down by strange
Women; nay, we may add that Empires and Monarchies have been over-turned by
Uncleanness.

The next remarkable instance we meet with in Justin is that of Dionysius,
junior the Tyrant of Sicily, who was as infamous for Uncleanness as for
Cruelty, and being expelled by the Inhabitants of Syracusa, he was received by
those of Locris, where having surprizd the Castle he Tyrannized also over them,
Ravished the Wives of the Great Men, and the young Women before Marriage, and
would then send them back to their Sweet-hearts. The Locrenses being at that
time in War with Leophron, they vowed if they came off Conquerers to prostitute
their Virgins on the Festival of Venus, which having neglected to do, Dionysius
Circumvented the Citizens thus, he advised them in order to perform their Vow,
to send all their Women with their Richest Apparel to the Temple of Venus, and
choose out a hundred of their handsomest Virgins and send them Richly adorned to
stay a Month in a Brothell-House, but beforehand to oblige all their Men by
Oath not to touch one of them, and likewise to take an Oath that none should be
Married 'till all those Virgins were first disposed in Marriage. The Citizens
thinking this a good Contrivance both to absolve themselves from their Oaths
and to preserve the Chastity of their Virgins, did accordingly. Where. upon
Dionysius sent his Soldiers who dispoiled the Women both of their Honor and
Ornaments, which so incensed the Locrenses against him that they likewise drove
him out of their City, and being received again by the Syracusans he Tyrannized
over them in his usual Manner, so that they Besieged him and forcing him to lay
down the Government, he lived in Exile at Corinth, where he spent his time in
Taverns and Bawdy-Houses, went in a fordid Habit, kept the Meanest and most
Rascally Company. Jangl'd with Scoundrels and Bawds, became a laughing stock to
every Body, and would walk about in the Shambles to gaze upon the Meat that he
was not able to buy, and was reduced so low that partly to maintain himself,
and partly to satisfy his Tyrannical humor, he taught a Trivial School, and so
concluded his Life as Ingloriously as he led it.

In his 22d. book, he gives us an Instance of Agathocles another Tyrant of
Sicily, Son to a Potter, who during his youth was a Catamite, and as soon as he
was of Age became a Common Stallion and a Highwayman, but being Valiant and
Eloquent, he was advanced to Great Commands in the Army, and having Committed
Adultery with Damasco the General's Lady, he succeeded in his Post after his
death, and twice attempted the Sovereignty of the Island, which at last he
obtained; yet though he was prosperous for a long time and rendered himself
Famous by his Victories over the Carthaginians, Judgment pursued him at last,
that he was forced to flee from Africa, where his two Sons were put to death by
the fury of his Enemies, and being himself taken with a grievous Disease, his
Son and Grandson made War upon one another for the Crown, wherein the latter
succeeded, so that Agathocles was forced on his Deathbed to send his Wife and
two young Children to Egypt, lest they should be cut off by his Grandson, and
in this Afflicted and Disconsolate Condition he ended his days: so true has it
always been found that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge.

In his 24th. Book, he gives us the History of the Incestuous Amor of Ptolemy
Ceraunus King of Macedonia, with his Sister, and the fatal Consequence of it to
them both. Ptolemy having a mind to Usurp the Kingdom from her two Sons, and to
possess himself of her fine City of Cassandria pretended Love to her, and that
he had no other design in desiring her to Wife but to make her a Queen, and
that her Children should succeed him, and because she her self and her Son
Ptolemy suspected him, he swore to the Sincerity of his Intentions upon the
Altar in Jupiter's Temple, whereupon that Incestuous Marriage was contracted,
and his Sister, now his Wife Arsinoe being overjoyed at her new Title of Queen,
invited the King her Husband to her City of Cassandria, where all things were
prepared to receive him with the utmost Magnificence, and she ordered her Sons
to meet him with Crowns on their Heads. He Received and Embraced them with much
seeming Affection, but as soon as he came to the Gate of the City, he ordered
them both to be killed, and the Castle to be seized, their Mother endeavoring
in vain to cover them in her Arms and preserve them. After this Tragedy as a
Just punishment for her consenting to such an Incestuous Marriage, she went in
Exile to Samothraeia, and Ptolemy in a little time after fell by the Sword of
the Gauls, who cut off his Head and fixed it upon a Lance.

In his 26th. Book, we have the Story of Aristotimus, Tyrant of Epirus, who
having killed and banished many of the Nobility. The Aetolians, who entertained
the Exiles, sent Ambassadors to demand the Wives and Children of the banished,
which Aristotimus pretended to grant, and as the Matrons had assembled together
to go to their Husbands, he sent and spoiled them of their Apparel, threw them
in Prison killed the Infants in the Arms of their Mothers, and Ravished the
Virgins, which so incensed the people against him, that under the Conduct of
Helematus an old man, they Conspired against him and cut him off.

In the Close of that Book, he gives us an Account of the Incest of Demetrius
King of Macedonia, with his Mother-in-Law Arsinoe, Queen of Cyrene, who had
sent for him on purpose to Marry her Daughter and enjoy that Crown, but being
her self taken with his Beauty, she entertained an Incestuous Commerce with
him, which did so much provoke her Daughter, and the people, that by her
Daughters order he was slain in her Mother*s Bed, the Incestuous and Impudent
Woman endeavoring to preserve him by covering him with her own Body.

In the 28th. Book he likewise gives an Account of a War betwixt Antiochus King
of Syria and Demetrius King of Macedonia, because the latter Married Pythia
Daughter to the Queen of Epirus, whilst his Wife who was Sister to Antiochus
was yet alive, so fatal has the Adultery of Princes always been to Kings and
Kingdoms.

In his 30 th Book, we have the Instance of Ptolemy King of Egypt, who having
murdered his own Wife Eurydice, that was also his Sister, he became so
enamored on Agathocla the Strumpet, that he minded nothing but Revelling and
Dancing; and thus says Justin, the King became not only a Spectator, but a
Master of Villainy, and committing Sodomy also with Agathocles a handsome
fellow, and Brother to the Strumpet above mentioned, they and their Mother
Evanthe governed the King and Kingdom, and disposed of all offices. In the
mean-time Ptolemy died, which those vile Women concealed a long time, and so
shared the Royal, Treasure, and Government with Villains: But the matter coming
at last to be known, the multitude assembled, cut off Agathocles, and hanged
his Mother and Sister, such was the Tragical Exit they brought upon themselves
by their uncleanness.

In his 37th. Book we have the instance of Mithridates the great King of
Pontus, who married his own Sister Laodice, in which match he was Justly
unhappy, for during his long absence a viewing the chief places of Asia, she
had admitted strangers to his Bad, and though she feigned a mighty Joy at his
return, yet she endeavored to poison him, in order to cover her Unchastity,
whereof Mithridates being advertised by a Maid, he punished his Wife by death
for her Treachery, and though he himself became Great and Glorious afterward by
his Victories over the Asiaticks, and his Wars with the Romans; yet Divine
Justice pursued him, so that he killed himself in his old Age, when he heard
that his Son, by that Unnatural Marriage had usurped the Kingdom.

In his 38th. Book we have the horrid instance of Ptolemy Physcon, who after
the death of Ptolemy King of Egypt, Married his Widow, Cleopatra, who was his
own Sister, killed her Son by her first Husband the very day of his Marriage,
and afterward Divorced her self and Ravished her Daughter, whom he afterward
Married: This made him so hateful to the people that they deserted the City
where he dwelt, so that finding himself a King without Subjects, he was forced
to invite strangers to reside there. -- And at last became so odious that he
fled with the Son that he had begot on his Sister, taking her Daughter along
with him, and with a Mercenary Army made War upon his Sister and his Country,
and sent for his eldest Son and killed him to prevent the peoples choosing him
in his stead. The Subjects were so much enraged with these proceedings, that
they threw down his Statues and Pictures every where, which he conceiving to be
done by his Sister's advice, he cut the Son that he had by her in pieces, put
them up in a Box, and sent them to his Mother, on his Birthday -- Thus were
they mutually plagued and punished for their Incest, and a destructive War was
kindled betwixt them, which took its first rise from their enflamed Lusts, and
proved fatal to their Subjects as well as to themselves. Ptolemy Physcon, or
the Debauched, dying a little time after, and having been some time before
reconciled to his Wife and Sister Cleopatra, he left her the Kingdom of Egypt,
she being compelled by the people to choose her eldest Son to Govern that
Kingdom, before she would resign the same, she compelled him to Divorce his
Beloved Wife and Sister Cleopatra, and she being afterward married to
Cyricaenus in Syria, those Incestuous matches were punished by a mutual War
betwixt the Brethren Gryphus and Cyricaenus, and the latter being overcome,
Gryphina Wife to Gryphus, would not be content till his Sister and Wife
Cleopatra, whom his Mother had made him to Divorce was murdered; and
Cyricaenus, obtaining a Victory over Gryphus in his Turn, put Gryphina to death
in Revenge. Cleopatra the Mother being weary of her Son Ptolemy's Reigning with
her jointly in Egypt, she stirred up the people against him, took his Wife
Selence from him, after she had born him two Sons, sent him into Exile, called
his younger Brother Alexander to Reign in his stead, but he being afraid of her
cruelty, abandoned her; then the Wicked Woman being afraid that her eldest Son
would make War upon her to recover the Kingdom, she sent great assistance to
Gryphus, and likewise gave him Seleuce to Wife -- Having at the same time
recalled her Son Alexander, he understood that she laid snares for his Life,
and therefore seized and cut her off, and he himself was banished by the people
for this parricide. Thus were their raging Lusts punished by a mutual War and
Raging cruelty against one another. -- And as if Heaven would have Syria and
Egypt to read their sin in their punishment, they were invaded and plagued by
Hierotimus King of Arabia and his Six hundred Sons, whom he had begot on
Concubines, and who attacked the Syrians and Egyptians with separate Armies and
parties.

We come next to the Roman History, where in the very threshold we are
presented with an Account, that that City and Monarchy was founded by Whoredom.
The story of R^mus and Romulus being born of a Vestal Virgin, for whom it was
not Lawful to Marry, and that they were the Founders of that City,
demonstrates the truth of Rome's being Derived from a spurious Original, and
the City being once Founded, Romulus made it a Sanctuary for Vagabonds and a
disorderly Rabble, who were so much contemned by their Neighbors, that they
scorned to give them their Daughters in Marriage, which occasioned their
Ravishing the Sabine Virgins, and that brought forth a War, which endangered
the overthrow of this new Government in its Infancy, as Livy gives an Account
at large in his first Book Dec. 1. so fatal has Whordom and Uncleanness always
proved to Societies.

Livy in that same Book and Decad gives us an Account that Kingly Government
was overturned at Rome because of a Rape, in the manner following: The Kings
Sons and Kinsmen did often spend their time in Feasting and Treating one
another, and in their Cups at supper there happened a Discourse, concerning
their Wives, upon which, each man launched out in the praises of his own, and
thence a Quarrel arising, Collatinus said, it was in vain to talk, since it
might easily and speedily be known how much his Wife Lucretia excelled the
rest, adding (for they were then in the Camp before Ardea) Let us mount our
Horses and go see with our own Eyes what kind of Women our Wives are, and that
shall be the Test, which occurs to each man upon this unexpected Visit; so that
Galloping to Rome, they went thence to Collatia, where they found Lucretia not
employed like the rest of the Kings Daughters-in-Law, viz. spending their time
in Banqueting and Luxury, but sitting amongst her Maids a Spinning: Whereupon
it was agreed that her Husband Collatinus came off Conqueror in that dispute,
and he being pleased with it, did Courteously invite the Royal Youths to
Supper, at which time Sextus Ta^quinius was seized with a Lust full passion for
Lucretia, a Lady of extraordinary Beauty and Chastity, but for that night they
returned again to the Camp.

Some days after Sextus Tarquinius, in order to accomplish his Lustful design,
went privily from the Camp to Collatia, attended only with one Companion, where
he was kindly ^ntertained by Collatinus's Family who knew nothing of his
Villainous intent, and Conducted to his Chamber after Supper, but being
enflamed with Lust, when he thought every body was asleep, he came with his
Sword drawn to Lucretia's Bedside, and laying his left hand upon her Breast,
told her who he was, and threatened her with present death if she spoke one
word. The poor Lady being surpised and afrighted, he began to mix entreaties
with his threats and to express himself in such Terms, as his passion
suggested, but finding that neither his soft expressions, nor Barbarous threats
could prevail with her, he told her that he would stab a Slave, lay him naked
by her when she was dead, and raise a report, that they were killed in the very
Act of Adultery, by this means Tarquinius overcame her, and having satisfied
his Lust, went to Rome; Lucretia being thus dishonored, sent immediately for
her Husband and Father, desiring them to come to her speedily, with each of
them a trusty Friend, for a Grievous Accident had befallen her; and coming
accordingly, they found her very Pensive, her Husband having asked her the
Cause, and whether she was not well: She burst out into Tears, and answered,
No, how can a Woman be well that has lost her Chastity, there are yet the signs
of another Man, Collatinus, in thy Bed; but my Body only is violated and my
mind Guiltless, of which my death shall be a Witness, but give me your hands
and promises that the Adulterer shall not escape unpunished. Sextus Tarquinius
is the Man who, like an Enemy rather than a Guest, came Armed to my Bed last
night, and thence forced pleasures, which if you are Men, will prove fatal to
him as well as to me. They endeavored to comfort her, telling her that where
there was no consent there could be no fault. Upon which, she answered: Do you
consider what he deserves, though I absolve my self from the Crime, I will not be
free from the punishment: Nor shall any Unchaste Woman live, to say Lucretia
was her Example, and with that, she stab^d her self to the heart with a Knife
which she had hid under her Garment; upon which, her Father and Husband set up
a loud cry.

Whilst they were overwhelmed with Grief, Brutus, who came along with them,
pulling the Knife out of her Wound, said, I swear, by this Blood, which was so
Chaste, before the King Stained it, and I take the Gods to Witness it, that I
will cut off Sextus Tarquinius Superbus his wicked Wise and Children, with
Sword, Fire, or any other violent means, I can, nor will I suffer them, or any
other from this time forward, to be King of Rome. The afflicted Father and
Husband joined with him in this Oath, and carrying Lucretia's Body into the
Marketplace, stirred up the people, and marching in Arms to Rome, did the like
there, and inveighing against the Lust and Violence of Sextus Tarquinius, he
also provoked the Army to join with him against the King, who had the Gates of
Rome shut against him, was Proclaimed an Exile, and he and his Children
expelled the Government and the Country. The Adulterer Sextus Tarquinius, was
murdered by the Gabii. -- The King's Family was Plundered, and Kingly
Government Abolished after it had continued 244 years. And thus the Government
was over-turned by the Lustfulness of a Prince, who thereby brought ruin and
disgrace upon his Family, a fatal Exit upon himself, and entailed a War upon
his Country, who joind in the Oath with Brutus to suffer none of the Tarquins
to Reign at Rome.

The next passage we find for our purpose, is that in Livy Decad. 1. Lib. 3.
concerning the Lustful design of Appius Claudius one of the Decemvirs upon the
Daughter of Virginius, a Beautiful Virgin, whom he endeavored to win with
Money and fair Promises, but finding her Chastity inviolable he suborned a
Client of his, to Challenge her for his slave, and adjudg'd her to be such in
order to have brought her into his own Lustful Embraces. All the entreaties
and Arguments of her Father Virginius and her Lover Icilius joined with the
Complaints and Murmurs of the People, could not influence Appius to abandon his
Lustful Design, so that Virginius finding he had no Force to stand by him,
sufficient to grapple with the Decemvirs, he snatched a Knife from a Butcher's
Stall, and cried out thus, Daughter, seeing I can do it no other way, do I
vindicate thy Liberty, and immediately stabbed her, after which looking back to
the Tribunal, he said, to the Lustful Tyrant, Appius, with this Blood I destine
thee to death The Decemvirs ordered him to be laid hold on, but making way
through the Crowd with his Sword, he went straight to the Camp, whither a great
number of Citizens followed him while in the mean time her Lover Icilius and
Numitorius took up Virginia's Corpse, bewailing the Injustice of Appius, the
unhappy Beauty of the young Woman, and the necessity of her Father's doing what
he did; and the Matrous at the same time cried out, was that the Consequence of
bringing forth Children; was that the reward of Chastity; and other
expostulations of the like nature. Virginius being arrived in the Camp, all
over besprinkled with his Daughters blood, and the fatal Instrument of her
Death in his hand, the whole Army was amazed, especially seeing him followed by
so many Roman Citizens in their Gowns, and having commanded Silence, they asked
him what was the matter, to which as soon as Grief would permit him, he held up
his hands and begged of his fellow Soldiers, that they would not impute that to
him which was Appius Claudius' s Crime, nor hate him as a murderer of his own
Children; that his Daughter was more dear to him than his Life, if she could
have lived to enjoy her Liberty and preserve her Chastity: But when he saw her
dragged like a Slave to be made a Whore on, he thought it better for him to
lose his Child by Death than Disgrace that he through his Mercy to her was
fallen into a show of Cruelty, nor would he have survived his Daughter, unless
he had been in hopes, by the help of his fellow Soldiers to revenge her Death.
They also he knew had Daughters and Wives, nor was the Lust of Appius Claudius
extinguished by his Daughters Death; but that the more he escaped punishment,
the more extravagant, he would be. That by another Man's Calamity, they were
taught to provide against the like injury. As for his part, his Wife was Dead,
his Daughter, because she could live no longer in Chastity, died a miserable
but an honest death. Wherefore Appius' s Lust had now no temptation in his
House; That he would vindicate his own body from any other violence which he
could offer with the same courage that he did that of his Daughter. Let other
men look to themselves and their Children. As Virginius spoke thus, the
multitude answered with shouts, That they would neither be wanting to revenge
his Grief, nor to vindicate their own Liberty. Upon which being encouraged by
the Citizens that accompanied Virginius, they marched in Arms to the City, sat
down upon the Aventine, exhorted the people to retrieve their Liberty, and to
make new Tribunes of the people. Icilius, Virginia's Sweetheart had the same
influence upon the Army that was in the Sabines' Country, so that they came and
joined those on the Aventine, and at last overturned the Government of the
Decemviri, whom they threatened to burn alive, and Appius Claudius the Lustful
Tyrant, being degraded, killed himself before the day of his Trial, and his
Colleague Coppius did the like; such was the Issue of his unclean design upon
the Government and himself. This is the second time that Whoredom overturned
the form of the Roman Government.

Livy in the 8 th Book of his first D^cad gives us a Remarkable Instance of the
punishment of Minutia a Vestal Virgin, for breaking her Vow of Chastity, by
commiting Incest: She became first suspected of wantonness because of her Garb
and Dress, which was thought too fine and curious for one of her profession;
and at last she was positively accused before the Highpriests, by one of her
Bondmen, that turned Informer against her, whereupon she was first enjoined to
abstain from her Office, and then being brought to her Trial, was after
Conviction sentenced to be buried alive, which was executed accordingly at the
Gate Collina, on the paved Canseway, which for her Crime was called Campus
Scel^ratus. By this and the Instance immediately preceding, we may
sufficiently see how hateful Whoredom was amongst the Romans at that time, when
a Father chus'd rather to murder his only Child, than to have her made a Whore;
and that they conceived the breach of a Vow of Chastity could not be expiated
any otherwise than by burying the Criminal alive.

In the 28 th Chapter of that same Book, he gives us a Relation of the Ignominy
and shame that L. Papirius an Usurer brought upon himself by his unnatural
Lust, and of the benefit which accrewed to the people by a Villainous Outrage
that he committed upon the Body of C. Publius, a Comely Youth, the occasion of
which was thus. There was a barbarous Custom then in use amongst the Romans,
called Nexus, being a kind of obligation whereby persons that owed Money were
bound to their Creditors, to be their Slaves, and to work wholly for them till
their Debts were paid. By virtue of which Custom C. Publius was forced to bind
himself for a Debt of his Father's to Papirius: Who being a lustful Wretch,
endeavored first to debanch the Youth by filthy Speeches and flatteries, but
sinding him proof against those tentations, he endeavored to terrify him with
threats, and ever and anon put him in mind of his Fortune, viz. that he was a
Slave; but the Honest Youth not being to be prevailed upon this way neither,
the Savage Usurer converting his Lust into Rage, caused the poor youth to be
stripped naked and cruelly whipped, by which his body was desperately torn and
mangled, the oppressed youth being not able to endure that Disgrace and
Torment, ran out into the Street in that condition, and cried out upon the
Usurer for his Cruelty and Lust. This occasioned a Great Concourse of people,
who being moved with Compassion toward the young man, and with abhorrence at
the Indignity of the thing, as that which might perhaps befall themselves or
their Children, they crowded into the Forum, and from thence went in a full
Body to the Council Chamber, which obliged the Consuls to call a Senate; and as
the Fathers entered the House, the people falling at their feet showed them the
young man's mangled and Bloody Back, whereupon a Law was passed that from
thence forward the Estate and Goods and not the Body of any Debtor should be
Chargeable for Debts. Thus was Papirius justly punished, for his Lust and
Savage Cruelty, in losing his Money, being deprived of the Object of his Lust,
and branded with perpetual Infamy.

That same Author, Decad 3. lib. 2. Chap 57. tells us that Opimia and Floronia
two Vestal Nuns being convicted of Whoredom were buried alive, and Lucius
Cantilius Secretary to the Pontisss, that committed Incest with Floronia was
whipped to death by the Arch-Pontiss in the Common Hall. That this villainy of the
Nuns was looked upon as a Public and Ominous disaster, whereupon they sent to
the Oracle of Delphos to enquire how it might be expiated and had this Answer
returned, that they must bury two Couples alive in the Beast Market, viz. a
Frenchman and a French-woman and a Greekman and a Greekwoman, which was
accordingly performed.

In the third Book of that Decad, we have an account that Hannibal's Army which
had not long before obtained a Glorious Victory over the Romans at Cannae,
became so debaucht by wintering in Capua a Lascivious City, that they spent
their time in Sleep, Drunkenness, delicate Fare, Stews, Hot-houses, etc. which
so weakened their Bodies and debauched their Minds, that his wintering at Capua
was reckoned no less an oversight in Hannibal, than was his not marching
straight way to Rome upon a defeat which he gave the Romans at Cannae, for when
he marched out of Capua his Army was entangled with Harlots, and his Men were
rendered so effeminate with their Luxury, that they could not endure fatigues as
formerly, but fled from their Colors in great numbers, and from that very time
the decay of the Carthaginian Glory and Reputation, and the fall of their
Government may take its date, such have always been the fatal consequences of
Luxury or Uncleanness to people and Nations.

It may not be improper here to take notice of the fatal disaster of that
Luxurious City of Capu^, which being taken by Q. Fulvius and Appius Claudius,
the Chief men of the City hastened their own deaths by Poison, and the Senators
were put to death by Q. Fulvius, tho the Senate of Rome had granted them pardon
for their Lives, and then Capua was reduced to a Village, tho the Buildings
were spared, but they were not allowed the privileges of a Corporation, nor the
benefit of Magistrates.

In the 3 d. Decad, Lib. 9. Chap. 17. We have an account of the brutish Lust of
Pl^minius the Roman Lieutenant at Locri, against whom the Locrians sent
Ambassadors to the Senate at Rome, where they charged him and his Officers with
Ravishing their Matrons, Virgins and Ingenuous Youths, That there was not one
House nor one Person in Locri, but what had been injured and that all parts of
their City sounded with Cries of Women and Children that were ravished, which
the Senate resented so much, that Pleminius and above thirty of his Associates
were sent in Chains to Rome, where Pleminius made his Exit in a Dungeon, a just
and suitable punishment for one that had been guilty of so many works of
Darkness.

Our next Instance is, that of Sophonisba, Decad 3. Book 10 Chap. 15. She was
daughter to Asdrubal the Famous Carthaginian General, and Married to Syphax
King of Numidia, who being routed by Massinissa King of Massilia, and an Allie
of the Romans, whom he had dispoiled of his Kingdom, Massinissa was so
enchanted with Love to Sophonisba, that he married her within a few hours of
his having taken her Captive, such was his impetuous Lust and her accursed
Inconstancy, for when he came into the Palace where she was, her adress to him
savoured more of a Courtesan than either of a Constant Wife or a Generous
Queen, so that she seemed rather to Court him than avoid his Embraces, for
which Divine Justice soon found her out. Her Husband Syphax being taken and
carried before Scipio, who asked him, why he made War upon the Romans,
answered, That his Palace was set on fire by Nuptial Torches, when he married
Sophonisba, who never rested till she had armed his Hands against himself, as
well as his Guest and good Friend: yet, That amidst all his Miseries he had
this Comfort still, that he saw the same Pest and Fury was got into the House
and Family of his greatest Enemy, and that Massinissa was not more prudent or
constant than Syphax. This obliged Scipio to rebuke and expostulate with
Massinissa privately, thus: Massinissa, I believe that you saw some good things
in me, not only when you came first into Spain to contract Friendship with me,
but afterward also, when I came into Africa, you committed both your self and
all your Hopes to my protection: But there is no Virtue, for which I seem to be
a fit Object of your Affections, wherein I glory so much as in the government
and mastery I have over my Lusts; and this I would have you also, Massinissa,
add to your other extraordinary Qualifications, for there is not, believe me,
so much Danger to be feared, in our Age, from armed Foes, as from Pleasures
that surrounds us on every side. After a great deal more to this purpose, he
concluded thus; Subdue your passion, and have a care you do not deform many
Virtues with one Vice, etc. Massinissa was so much struck with this Mercurial
Speech, that after a sharp Conflict with his Passion and impetuous Amor, he
sent a trusty Servant with a Cup of Poison to Sophonisba, and to tell her, That
Massinissa would willingly have performed his first Promise to her, as an
Husband ought to his Wife, but since they that were able to do it had taken
that Power out of his Hands, he was resolved to make good his second Promise,
That she should not be, whilst alive, in the Hands of any Roman, as being
mindful of her Father, who was a General, her Country, and the two Kings to
whom she had been married; and that she therefore should consult her own Good.
To which Sophonisba, with a Constancy much more commendable than she was
endowed with when Massinissa accosted her with his Amors, answered, I accept
this Nuptial Present; nor is it unwelcome to me, if my Husband could do no more
for me; yet tell him this from me, That I should have died much better, if I
had not been married at my Funeral: And so drank it off, without any more ado.
Thus was she punished for her Disloyalty to her Husband Syphax; for it had been
an easy matter for a Woman of such vast Courage as she appears to have been,
to have delivered her self by Death from Massinissa's Embraces, as well before
as after she had polluted her self with such an Unlawful Marriage.

The next thing suitable to our Subject, which occurs to us in this Historian,
is the Controversy which happened among the Romans, about abrogating the
Oppian Law for restraining the Luxury of Women's Apparel. Marcus Portius Cato
was for continuing the Law, and in his grave Oration on that Head had these
remarkable Sayings concerning it, viz. That if every one of the Romans had
resolved to maintain the majesty and prerogative of an Husband over his own
Wife, we should not have had all this Trouble with the Women in general; but
now our Liberty being restrained at home, by the Tyranny of our own Women, it is
entrenched and trampled upon here in the Forum. -- Our Ancestors would not
suffer Women to do any private Business, without the Advice of a Man, but to be
at the disposal of their Parents, Brethren, or Husband; but We, forsooth,
now-adays, let them manage even the Commonwealth it self. You have often heard
me complain not only of the Prodigality of Women, but of Men too, and those as
well Magistrates as private Persons; and, that the City labors under two
different Vices of Avarice and Luxury, which have been the Bane of all great
Empires. -- But, says a great Lady, I cannot endure this levelling and
equality; why should not I appear all glittering with Gold, and clothed in
Purple? Why should the Poverty of others lie hid under the Vmbrage of this Law,
so as what they cannot have, they, if it were lawful, should seem able to buy?
Will you Romans give your Wives occasion to contend in this manner, that the
Rich Women shall desire to have what no Woman else can purchase, and the poorer
sort, lest for this very Reason they should be contemned, to stretch beyond
their Abilities? She that can, out of her own Stock, will purchase the thing
she lacks; and she that cannot, will ask her Husband; and woe be to that man
who either does or does not grant their Requests, when he shall see that which
he himself would not give her, given her by another man. And abundance more to
this purpose; which is the Opinion that the Wisest of the Romans had of
Temperance, and the Abhorrence they had of Luxury, as being always the
Forerunner of the Ruin of any State or People.

In the 8th Book, cap. 24, Decade 11, he gives us an Account of a memorable
Judgment upon a Roman Centurion, for violating the Chastity of a petty Grecian
Queen, who was committed to his Custody among other Captives. The Centurion
being taken with her Beauty, did first sound her Inclinations, but finding her
averse to Voluntary Adultery, he offered Violence to her Body, which Fortune
had made a Slave; after which, he put her in Hopes of returning into her own
Country, but at the same time bargained with her for so much Gold; and lest any
of his own People should know it, he permitted her to send one of the other
Captives, whom she pleased, to bring the Money, and two of her Friends, to
receive her at the side of a River, whither he went the next Night, with his
Captive, to meet them. As soon as they had showed him the Gold, the Lady
commanded her Friends to draw their Swords, and kill the Centurion; which being
done, she ordered them to cut off his Head, and wrapping it up in her Gown,
carried it to her Husband Ortiagon, whom before she embraced, she threw the
Centurion's Head at his Feet, acquainting him what Injury she had received, and
how she had revenged it; and spent the remaining part of her Life without any
Stain upon her Conjugal Chastity.

The next thing belonging to our Subject which occurrs in this Historian, is,
his Account of the Bacchanalian Rites, Decad. 4, Lib. 9, Cap. 8, etc. as
follows, viz.

There came a petty Priest, or Prophet, of those Times, out of Greece into
Etruria, now Tuscany, who was the chief Manager of certain Rites called Initia,
to which Religious Performance there were added the Pleasures of Feasting and
Wine, and when Wine and the Night, the Men and Women being mixed together, had
extinguished all Sense of Shame, first there were Debaucheries of all sorts
committed, ingenuous Men and Women lay promiscuously with oneanother, and false
Witnesses, false Tokens and Judgments, came out of that same Office of Roguery;
and many times People were killed or poisoned in their own Houses, and
frequently 'twas so ordered, that their Bodies could not be found to be buried.
Many Crimes were carried on by Treachery, and more by Force, and those Outrages
were concealed, by reason of their Houlings and the noise of their Drums and
Cymbals, so that nobody could hear the Cries of those that had Violence
offered to them when they were killed, or had Violence offered to their
Chastity. This Mischief came from Etruria to Rome, where the bigness of the
City concealed their Villainies.

Those Wicked Practices came at length to be discovered by Postumius the
Consul, in the following manner. P. Aebutius being left an Orphan, was educated
under the tutelage of his Mother Duronia, and his Father-in-law T. Sempronius
Rutilus, of whom his Mother was mighty fond. His Father-in-law having managed
the Guardianship at that rate, that he could give no good Account of it, had a
mind either to destroy the Young Man, or to have him obliged to him by some
Bond; and the best Way he could contrive to effect his Design was, by the
Bacchanalian Rites: -- Whereupon Duronia called her Son, and told him, that she
had vowed when he was sick, that as soon as he recovered she would initiate him
in the Bacchanalia, which she was now resolved to perform; telling him, that he
must live Chaste for ten days; that on the tenth day she would carry him to
Supper, and afterward, when he was clean washed, into the Sacrary. Aebutius
happening to impart this to Hispala Fecenia, a Curtesan, with whom he kept
company, and who loved him entirely, she dissuaded him from it, telling him, it
was a snare laid for his Life, and prayed, that a thousand Curses might light
on their Heads who persuaded him to it. The Youth admiring at the Disorder she
was in, desired her to spare her Curses, for his Mother, by the Consent of his
Father in-law, had commanded him so to do; to which she replied, Your Father
in-law makes haste to destroy your Credit, Hopes, and Life. -- This put him
into a Surprise, and made him the more eager to know what the matter was;
whereupon she (begging Pardon of the Gods and Goddesses, if, forced by the Love
she bore him, she revealed things that ought to have been concealed) told him,
that when she was a Waiting-maid, she went along with her Mistress into that
Sacrary, but since she was free, never came within it: That she knew it to be
the Shop of all Corruption; that as soon as any Person was introduced, he was
delivered, like a Sacrifice, to the Priests, who carried him into a place that
rung round with Howlings, Singing, Cymbals, and Drums, that the Voice of any
one that complained, when Lustful Violence was offered to them, might not be
heard: Wherefore she desired and beseech'd him, that he would disengage himself
from that Design, by any means whatsoever, and not throw himself headlong into
that place, where he must both do and suffer all the most abominable things
imaginable. Nor would she let him stir from her, before the Young Man had
promised that he would keep away from those Mysteries.

When he came home, his Mother began to tell him what he must do in order to
his initiation; to which he answered, That he would not be initiated at all:
Whereupon she cried out, That he was so intoxicated with that Serpent Hispala,
that he had lost all respect for his Father-in-law, his Mother, and the Gods
themselves. His Father-in-law laying hold of the Opportunity, turned him out of
doors, with four Servants; whereupon the Young Man went to his Aunt Aebutia, a
grave Matron, and acquainted her with the Cause of his being turned out; she
advised him to make Complaint to the Consul Postumius the next day, which he
did privately; the Consul did thereupon send for Aebutia, and being informed by
her concerning her Nephew Abutius, he sent likewise for Hispala, who being
amazed that she should be sent for by a person of that Dignity, went to his
House full of Fear. -- The Consul taking her aside, examined her before his
Mother-in-law Sulpicia, a noble and grave Lady, concerning what was done in the
Grove of Simele, at the Bacchanals: She was so much surpised, that for some
time she stood speechless, and at last confessed, That when she was a very
little Girl, and a Servant, she was initiated with her Mistress, but, for some
Years, she knew nothing of what they did there, and would fain have evaded any
further Questions, being afraid of the Gods (she said) whose Secrets she had
discovered, but of Men much more, who would tear her in pieces for being such
an Informer; and therefore prayed they would send her to some place out of
Italy, where she might be in Safety. The Consul promised, that she should live
secure at Rome; and then she declared, that there was no manner of Villainy
omitted at those Rites; that there were more Lustful Enormities committed by
the Men, among themselves, than by the Women; that if any one were unwilling to
endure such Shameless Actions, and slow to Wickedness, they were sacrificed for
Victims, for they thought nothing unlawful, which was the greatest Tenet of
their Religion, that such Men as would not conspire, associate in Villainy, or
endure their Lustful Uncleanness, they carried away into secret Dens and Caves,
and gave out, that they were snatched away by the Gods; and that for two Years
past they had ordered, that no body should be initiated, who was above Twenty
Years of age, because the younger they were, they thought they would be the
more ready to endure their Folly and Leudness. The Consul being thus thoroughly
informed of the matter, acquainted the Senate with it, and amongst other
things, in his Speech to them, had these remarkable Sayings: Do you think,
Romans, that Young Men, who are initiated into this Order, are fit to be made
Soldiers of? Shall we put them in Arms, that come out of such an obscene
Brothelhouse? Will such Fellows as these, that are covered all over with
Buggeries of their own and other men, fight for the Chastity of their Wives and
Children? And setting forth at large the Danger that might accrue to the State
by those Nightly Meetings, the Bacchanalian Rites were prohibited by Order of
the Senate, all the Priests of the Order were commanded to be shut up, and the
Frequenters of those Nightly Meetings inquired after; such of them as they
found to have been only initiated, and had said Prayers according to the Sacred
Form, which the Priests repeated before them, in which was contained a cursed
Obligation to commit all Acts of Villainy and Lechery, but had not committed
them, them they imprisoned; but those whom they found to have been defiled by
Lust or Murder, false Testimonies, false Tokens, forging of Wills, or other
Frauds, they put to Death; after which the Bacchanalia were pulled down at
Rome, and all over Italy.

We shall conclude our Instances from Livy, with this Passage, which is the
last that famed Historian affords us, that any way relates to our Subject. --
It is proper however to observe here, that the Bacchanalia, which we have now
described, may justly be reckoned Akin to, if not the Offspring of, the
Eleusina Sacra formerly mentioned; both of them had their Original from Greece,
and were solemnized with much the like Secrecy and Outrage; and both of them
serve to let us see how far Humane Nature may be depraved by raging Lust, when
a Person or People are justly given up to it of God.

We think it proper, before we come to the Instances of the Roman Emperors,
etc. which are but too too numerous, to take a view of those persons whom
Plutarch has honored to be their Biographer, and to excerpt from thence what
suits with our purpose.

We have taken notice, that Rome was founded by a spurious Brood, and in the
Life of Thescus, which is the first in Plutarch: We shall find that Athens had
much the same sort of Original; which is the more observable, because from
those two Cities the Christian Religion met with the greatest Opposition, viz.
from the vain Philosophy of the former, and the more bloody and cruel
Persecution of the latter.

Our Author tells us, That Theseus seems to resemble Romulus in many
particulars, and in his Birth especially, both of them being born out of Wedlock,
and of uncertain Parentage. Ageus however is reckoned to be Father to Theseus,
by Athia Daughter to Plitheus, whom having got with Child, he left a Sword and
a pair of Shoes* hiding them under a great Stone, and making her only privy to
it, commanding her, that if she brought forth a Son, who when he came to Man's
estate should be able to lift up the Stone, and take away what he had left
there, she should send him away to him with those things with all Secrecy:
Which she having accordingly observed, her Son Theseus, after he had slain
Sinnis, who from his way of murdering Men was called The Bender of Pines,
committed Fornication with his Daughter Perigune, begot Menalippus upon her,
and afterward married her to another. The next Feat Theseus did, was the
killing of Phea, a Beast of great fierceness, according to some, or a cruel and
lustful Woman, according to others, who had the Name of a Sow given her, from
the beastliness of her Life; which, if true, she was remarkably enough
punished, by one that was as guilty of Incontinence as her self. -- The next
thing we have of his Amors is, that with Ariadne, by whose Advice and
Assistance he overcame the Minotaur; but having served his Ends, he deserted
her for another, viz. Aegle, with whom he fell in Love, and thereupon Ariadue
died of Grief, as some say, though others contradict it, and allege, She died in
Childbed. -- Our Author gives us also an Account of his Rape of Antiope,
Princess of the Amazons, -- and, in short, sums up his unlawful Amors, and the
fatal Consequence of them, in a few words, thus: That the Marriages of Theseus
were neither honorable in their beginning, nor fortunate in their Events; --
and recounts them thus, viz. that he forced Anaxo the Traxenian; ravished the
Daughters of Sinnis and Cercyon; married Peribaea the Mother of Ajax, and then
Pheribaea, and then Iope the Daughter of Iphicles: Further he is accused for
deserting Ariadne, as is before related, being in love with Aegle, the Daughter
of Panopeus, an Action neither just nor honorable; and lastly, for the Rape of
Helen, when he was fifty Years old, which filled all Attica with War and Blood,
and occasioned his Banishment and Death, Lycomedes having thrown him headlong
from a Rock, as he had hurried himself headlong into Lustful Passion. Such was
the fatal Exit of this Ethnic Hero, occasioned by his Uncleanness.

In the Life of Lycurgus, that great Lacedemonian Philosopher and Lawgiver, we
have an eminent Instance of the truth of that of the Apostle concerning the
Heathens, that because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, he
gave them up to work all Uncleanness with greediness; for what less than a
Judicial Blindness could so much infatuate such a wise man as Lycurgus, to
allow a Community of Wives, and the promiscuous Dancings of young Men and Women
together naked, that must necessarily inflame their Lusts? Which is owned by
Plutarch himself, though covered under the handsome Expressions of alluring them
to Marriage, not upon Interest and Equality of Fortune and Birth, but from the
sweet Constraint and unsophisticated Dictates of Nature. -- The Reasons of this
Community of Women he enforced by these Arguments following, viz. That Children
are not so much the Propriety of their Parents, as of the Commonwealth, and
therefore he would not have 'em begot by the first Comers, but by the best Men
that could be found: That the Laws of other Nations seemed to him very
defective and incongruous, who were very sollicitous for the Bread of their
Dogs and Horses, and sent a great way to get the best Stallions, and yet kept
their Wives under Lock and Key, for fear of other Men; whereas themselves were
crazed, old, or infirm, and more fit to propagate Diseases than their Species.
Certainly any man, at first sight, must needs see that those Dictates of our
Philosopher are contrary to the Dictates of Nature, and naturally Introductive
of all manner of Villainy and Disorders. -- Reason, as well as Revelation,
teaches us, that Jealousy is the Rage of a Man, and that there is nothing more
unsupportable to Humane Nature. All Histories are full of Tragical Instances of
it; and Experience teaches us, that those Nations where such promiscuous
Copulations are allowed, differ but very little from Brutes, whose Example
Lycurgus proposes, and they follow. If it be objected, What we find in the Life
of our Author, that so long as these Ordinances were observed, the Women were
so far from that Scandalous Liberty which has since been objected to them,
that they knew not what the Name of Adultery meant; it may be answer*d, That it
implies a downright Contradiction; for if those Ordinances were observed, the
Commonwealth of Sparta must necessarily have abounded with Adultery, whether
they knew the Name of it or not: But it is probable, that seeing such a Choice
of Paramours was allowed them by Lycurgus's Laws, they did not reckon lying
with their Neighbors Wives Adultery: And therefore Geradas might well say,
That it was as impossible to find an Adulterer in Sparta, as to find a Bull
with a Neck so long, that he could stand at one side of the Mountain Taygetus,
and drink of the River that run on the other side of it.

It is also observable, that this Practice did not answer the End taken from
his Brutish Reason, viz. to have strong and healthful Children; for we have an
Account by this same Author, that if they found the Child upon its Birth to be
deformed, and of an ill Complexion, they ordered it to be cast into a deep
Cavern of the Earth, near the Mountain Taygetus; and that the Women did also
bath the newborn Children in Wine, thinking it would immediately kill those of
a weak Constitution: And yet, notwithstanding all those Precautions, we find
that they had weakly Children bred up, and those, our Author says, they
employed in gathering Sallads and Herbs.

To conclude this point; It is not at all to be wondered at, that a People who
allowed such Unfaithfulness as to the Marriage Bed, should grow so unfaithful
in all their other Transactions as the Lacedaemonians did, which occasioned
their being utterly ruined by the Athenians.

In the Life of Numa Pompilius, so much reverenced by the Romans for his Piety,
and accounted the first Instituter of their Religion, we find, that when a
Roman was sufficiently stocked with Children, in case his Neighbor, who had
none, should desire him to accommodate him with his Wife; that he also might
have the Benefit of Issue from such a fruitful Woman: Numa allowed the Husband
either to lend his Wife for a time, or to loose the Bonds of Marriage, and
consign her into the Hands of her Paramour for ever. -- An early Presage that
Rome was at last to become the Mother of Harlots, and of the Abominations of
the Earth; another Instance of those wise Heathens being judicially given up of
God to their Uncleanness, because they did not improve the Knowledge they had
to the Glory of God, of whose Being and Attributes they had such clear Ideas.

In the Life of Solon we have an Account That that great Philosopher and
Lawgiver was guilty of Unlawful Love toward Boys, and that designing to
appropriate that Brutish pleasure to such as he called Gentlemen, he forbad the
use of it to Slaves. In one of his Laws he permits an Heiress, if her Lawful
Husband prove impotent, to lie with his nearest Kinsman; and yet he was so
inconsistent with himself, that he permitted any one to kill an Adulterer, that
found him in the Act. -- We shall conclude this passage with his Account of
himself in this Distick:

I mind a Song, a Miss, and Glass of Wine;
These are most men's Delights, and these are mine.
In the Life of Camillus we have an Account, how the Latins were defeated by
their Lasciviousness and Whoredom, when they had reduced the Romans to a very
great strait, the passage is thus: The Latins demanded a certain number of free
Maids from the Romans in Marriage; the latter looking upon this as a Trick only
to gain Hostages, and yet being both afraid and unable to carry on the War,
they durst not positively refuse them; whereupon Tutula, or Philotis as some
call her, advised the Magistrates to send her, and some other beautiful
Damsels, who were Bond-maids, habited like Free-Virgins, and while the Latins
were in their Dalliances with them, they would give them a Signal to fall out
upon them: Which being agreed on accordingly, Tutula in the Nightime set up a
lighted Torch upon a wild Figtree, hanging up some Clothes on the Tree that hid
the Torch from the Latin Camp, while it was perceptible to the Romans, and
accordingly they sallied, surpised and destroyed the Latins, in remembrance of
which a Festival was appointed, called the Nonae Capraticae, wherein the People
run out of the City in a confused manner, calling aloud the most familiar and
usual Names, as Caius, Marcus, Lucius, and the like, as they did at the Sally;
and the Maidservants, richly adorned, ran about, playing and jesting upon all
they met, and amongst themselves use a kind of skirmishing, to show they help*d
in the Conflict against the Latins; and in the time of ^^ei^ Feasting they sit
shaded over with Boughs of wild Figtree.

Our next Instance is that bold Athenian Gentleman Pericles, whose Weak Side
was Lasciviousness, and therefore he became the Subject of the Railery of the
Comic Poets of his time; who upbraided him, as being the errant'st Whoremonger
that ever lived, charged him with dishonest Converse with the Wife of Menippus,
and of committing Incest with his own Son's Wife: His Intrigue with Asparia
before Marriage is also much taken Notice of, and She is accu^'d of being no
better than a Bawd, or as the Translator expresses it, Keeper of a
Vaulting-school. They did also upbraid him with the Volaries or Birdcages of
Pyrilampes, who being Pericles's Friend, they pretended that he used to present
Peacocks and fine Birds to Pericles's Misses. The Punishments inflicted upon
Pericles we find to be, that he was not only envied and disturbed by Tumults
and Seditions, but disquieted with the Disobedience and Scurrilous Reflections
of his own eldest Son, deprived of him and his youngest Son, whom he loved
entirely, by Death, and constrained at last to repeal his own Law against
Bastards enjoying any Inheritance, that his Bastard Son should keep up the Name
of his Family; and he was cut off too at last, by Order of the Senate: And
Pericles himself, who had bornt so much in Lust, was consumed t^ death by a
burning Plague, his Uncle^nnes^ having fixed such a Stain upon his Memory, as
all his great Actions have not been able to wipe off.

In the Life of Fabius Maximus we have an Account how Tarentum was betrayed to
him by means of an Unchaste Woman, who with her Amors and Flatteries prevailed
upon her Lover, a Noble Brutica, to betray the Town to the Romans: Fabius
having sent her Brother, who was in his Army, into the Town on purpose to
manage the Intrigue; or, according to others, she had formerly been Fabius's
own Mistress, and he permitted her to go and corrupt the Tarentine Governor by
her lewd Embraces, which occasioned the taking and cruel destruction of the
Town: So fatal are Harlots to all Commonwealths where they are suffered to
remain unpunished.

We have already had occasion to observe how fatal the Impure Amors of
Alcibiades was to all Greece, and particularly to Athens; but there are diverse
more observable Particulars as to that matter, in his Life written by Plutarch,
though he was continually attended by that excellent person Socrates, whose
wholesome Instructions had much Influence upon him, yet all his Philosophy was
not able to reform him. We find him accused, when a Boy, of a Suspicion of
being a Catamite; his Wife Hipparete, a virtuous Lady, and one that loved him
entirely, abandoned him at last, because of his multitude of Whores, and su'd
for a Divorce from him; but when she presented her self before the Magistrate
for that end, Alcibiades retook her again by Force. -- He is accused of being
Luxurious in his Eating, Drinking, and Amors, and was much despised by the
Athenians, because, instead of their usual Ensigns upon his Shield, he had a
Cupid painted upon it with a Thunderbolt in his Hand. Aristophon the Painter
drew him sitting in the Curtesan Nemea's Arms, which much displeased the graver
Athenians. While he was an Exile at Sparta, he debauched the Wife of Agis King
of Lacedemon, and had a Son by her: And it is observable, that the cause of his
being banished from his own Country and condemned to Death, was his having
performed the debauched Mysteries of the Eleusina Sacra by way of Mockery. The
Injury he did to Agis King of Lacedemon made him unsafe there, so that he fled
for Security to Tisaphernes the Persian General. In a word, his whole Life was
a continued Series of remarkable Ups and Downs: And his Death was no less
remarkable, the Historian giving us an Account of it in this manner, viz. That
having retired to a small Village in Phrygia, with one Timandra a Mistress of
his, he was, at the instance of the Lacedaemonians, attacked in his House by
some Barbarians, who setting it on fire, he with much ado escaped through the
Flames, and was at last slain by their Darts, his Mistress Timandra having
buried him with as much Decency as her Circumstances would allow. Thus did
Alcibiades fall ingloriously by his Lusts, who had done so many Great and
Glorious Actions in the World.

We have already touched upon the Judgments which pursued Dionysius, the
Lustful Tyrant of Sicily, for his Uncleanness, but meeting with a further
Instance of it in the Life of Timoleon, it is thought proper to take notice of
it here in the words of Plutarch, viz. That all the Mischiefs and Vexations of
his former Reign were abundantly repaid and outdone by those Evils and
Calamities which he then suffered, for he lived to see the Funerals of his Sons
in the prime of their Age, the Rapes of his Daughters in the Flower of their
Virginity, and the Prostitution of his own Sister, that became his Wife, who
being first villanously treated, and her Person exposed to all the Lust and
Lewdness of the common Soldiery, she was afterward murdered, together with
her Children, and their Bodies cast into the Sea. Thus was Dionysius punished,
as we may say, in Specie, for his Lust and Cruelty.

In the Life of Pelopidas we find this remarkable Passage concerning Archias,
the Tyrant of Thebes, who having rendered himself odious to the People by his
Oppression, and sent many of them into Exile, some of the Chief of those Exiles
contrived his Ruin, under the Conduct of Pelopidas, thus: Philidas, who was
Secretary to Archias, having invited him and some others to an Entertainment to
drink freely and accompany some married Whores, he was so much taken up with
his Cups and the Expectation of his Female Guests, that though he had a Letter
sent him discovering the Plot against his Life, and delivered with this
Message, That it contained Matters of Concern, and therefore 'twas necessary he
should read it; he answered, Matters of Concern to morrow. And as he was
carrousing thus, Charon and Molon, two of the Conspirators, having put on
Women's Apparel over their Armor, and thick Garlands of Firr and Pine to shade
their Faces, in this manner came to the Door, upon which Archion and his Guests
gave an Huzza, thinking they had been the lewd Women that they expected, but
were quickly undeceived, and had their Hearts pierced by the Conspirators
Swords, at the same time when they were pierced with the Darts of raging Lust.
And thus Thebes was delivered from Tyranny.

In that same Life we have an Account how Divine Justice pursued Alexander the
Tyrannical King of Pherea, for his Brutish Lust. His Wife Thebe, Daughter to
Jason, being enraged at him for his Debaucheries, and particularly for abusing
her younger Brother to his Lust, she contrived his Death thus; -- She hid her
three Brothers in a Room near to his Bedchamber, all the other Apartments being
f^ll of the Tyrant's Night-guards; before his Chamber there lay a fierce Dog
cham'd, which would fly at all but the Tyrant*^ W^fe and a Servant that fed
him: W^^n Night came Thebe went in alone to his Chamber, according to the usual
Custom, and finding him asleep, came out again, commanded the Servant to lead
away the Dog, for the King would take some Rest, and then covering the Stairs
with Wool, brought up her Brothers into his Chamber, where they killed him, and
throwing out his Carcass, it was trod under foot in great Contempt by the
Phereans.

In the Life of Marcus Ca^o the Censor we find that the grave Romans thought
that not so much as a Marriage, or a Night's Lodging for the Procreation of
Children, nay, not a Feast or Drinking-bout, ought to be permitted according to
every one's Fancy, without being censur*d and inquired into; and therefore they
chose two Persons, one out of the Patricians, the other out of the Commons, who
were to watch, correct, and punish, if any one ran too much after
Voluptuousness; and therefore Cato, though he met with much Opposition, because
of his Severity, was preferred to that Employment; and the first remarkable
thing which we find performed by him in that Office was, the Expulsion of
Lucius Quintus from the Senate, because he had, to please a Boy whom he kept as
a Catamite, ordered a condemned Person to be executed before him at a Feast. He
did also throw Manitius out of the Senate, because in the presence of his
Daughter, and in open Day, he was a little too sweet upon his own Wife. -- The
People were so well pleased with his Behavior in his Employment, that they
erected, a Statue for him in the Temple of the Goddess of Health with the
following Inscription; That this was Cato the Censor, who by his good
Discipline and Ordinances reclaimed the Roman Commonwealth, when 'twas
declining and supinely tumbling into Vice. Yet we find that this very Man, so
fa^ous for the Severity and Uprightness of his Manners, not improving that
Knowledge which God had given him, was overcome by his Lusts even in his
Old Age; for Plutarch says, that in his old days, when he was past a Lover's
Years, he made use of Women, and particularly of a young Wench who came
privately to him, which being discover*d by his Son, who took Offense thereat,
the old Man, in revenge, married a young Woman, Daughter to Salonius his own
Clark; and when his Son asked him the reason of it, he answered him soft and
fair, Good Son, I desire to have many Children, and to leave the Commonwealth
more such Citizens as thou art.

In the Life of Pyrrhus we have an Account that his multiplying of Wives with a
design to enlarge his Interest, had not the happy Effect which he proposed to
himself by it, for Lanassa, one of his Wives, took so great Offense at his
Inclination to the rest, that she deserted him, and married Demetrius King of
Macedonia, and by that means kindled a War betwixt him and Pyrrhus. In that
same Life we do also find, that Pyrrhus was invited against Sparta by
Cleonymus, one of the Chief Men there, because his Wife Chelidonis falling
desperately in Love with Aerotatus, that Youngster dishonored his Bed; and
therefore, to revenge himself for the Injury, he brought Pyrrhus with a great
Army against Sparta, which occasioned a great deal of Bloodshed, and endangered
the City; however, Pyrrhus did not succeed in his Design against it, as if
Providence would let him see, that he was no fit Person to revenge an Injury
done to the Marriage Bed, who was so very guilty of that same Crime himself;
and, at last, he fell by the Hands of a Woman, who seeing him engaged with her
Son in the Streets of Argos, threw a Tile upon him from the top of an House,
which made him fall from his Horse, and a common Soldier did afterward cut
off his Head.

In the Life of Sylla we have this Account of him; That he used to sit on a
Chair of State amongst beautiful Women, Mimicks, Fiddlers, and suchlike
Rascally People, on whom he squandered away the Revenues of whole Countries and
Cities, bestowing on some of them Ladies in Marriage against their Will, so as
his Gratuities were much more intolerable than his Usurpations. He kept company
with Actors, Actresses, and Minstrels, drinking with 'em Night and Day: He also
indulged himself in Unnatural Lust with Men, particularly Metrobius the
Woman-actor: But behold the just Judgment of God upon him; -- These lascivious
Courses brought him into a Disease which made his Bowels to fester, so that at
last the corrupted Flesh broke forth into Lice in such prodigious quantities,
that all the Hands he could employ were not able to destroy 'em, so that his
Clothes, Beds, Basins, and Meat was polluted with that Contagion: He went often
into the Baths by day, to scour and cleanse his Body, but all in vain, the
course returned so quick, and with such numerous Supplys, as overcame all
manner of Riddance; so that, in fine, he who had led an unclean Life died of an
abominable and unclean Disease.

In the Life of C^^non, Plutarch tells us, that he was lewd and vicious,
accuses him of Incest with his own Sister, and other unclean Practices, and at
last he died of a Wound, as some Authors say, which he received from the
Barbarians in a Skirmish, his Impurity having fix*d a ^^^petual stain upon him,
which all his great Actions could never wipe off. In that same Life we meet
with a remarkable Passage concerning Pausanias the Lacedemonian, who having
solicited a young Lady of Constantinople, called Cleonice, to debauch her, her
Friends dreading the Power of the Tyrant, were forced to abandon her to him:
Cleonice commanded the Servants to put out all the Lights, and approaching his
Bed silently in the dark, she stumbled upon the Lamp, which she overturned and
spilt: Pausanias being awaked by the noise, and thinking it had been some
Assassin to attack him, snatched up his Poinard and wounded her mortally, after
which he never enj^y'd himself, but was disturbed in his Thoughts, and haunted
by her Ghost, so that he never had Success in any thing afterward, and was at
last slain by order of the Senate in Mi^^^va's Temple, whither he had sled for
Refuge.

In the Life of Lucullus we find, that there was a stop put to the Careir of
his good Fortune and Glory, chiefly by means of Clodius, his Wife's Brother,
who was so unnatural a Villain as to commit Adultery and Incest with his own
Sister Clodia, Lucullus's Wife, and stirring up the Fimbrian Army against
Lucullus, prevented his further Conquests: Lucullus himself returning to Rome,
gave himself up to all manner of Luxury, and was at last deprived of his Senses
by a Philtre or Amorous Potion, given him by Callisthenes his Freeman, to
endear him to himself; so that this Great Man was not only ruined by the
Lasciviousness of himself and others, but a stop was thereby put to the Roman
Conquests, which had otherwise, says our Author, not been bounded by the
Euphrates, but by the uttermost parts of the Earth, and the Hyrcanian Sea.

In the Life of Pompey the Great we find that famous General accused of
unchaste Amors with Flora the Courtesan, whom he afterward resigned to his
Friend Geminius, upon which she languish'd and died. We find likewise, that
Sylla, to gain over this Great Man to his Party, persuaded him to put away his
Wife Antistia, and to marry Aemilia Daughter-in-law to Sylla, who was at that
time Wife to another Man, by whom she was big with Child. This unlawful
Marriage was soon after punished in part, for Antistius, Father to Antistia,
was murdered in the Senate, as a Favourer of Sylla for Pompey's sake, and her
Mother upon this account made away with her self. -- These were the Tragedies
that attended that unhappy Marriage, says Plutarch; and that there might be
nothing wanting to complete the last Act by Heavens, even Aemilia her self not
long after died at Pompey's in Childbed.

These things were the more inexcusable in Pompey, because we find that he
delighted much in the discovery of Weaknesses of the same Nature in
Mithridates, when he seized his secret Writings, wherein, amongst other things,
he found abundance of wanton Love Letters betwixt Mithridates and his Concubine
Monune. -- He might have taken Warning, one would think, of the Judgments that
pursued Mithridates for his Intemperance, seeing when all his Concubines were
brought before Pompey, he could not but perceive the abominable Crimes into
which his lustful Temper had hurried him headlong, for most of his Concubines
were either the Daughters or Wives of Princes and great Commanders, except it
was one whom they called Stratonice, who was Daughter to a Musician; and having
pleased Mithridates, by singing before him at a Banquet, his lustful Passion
was so much raised that he immediately took her to Bed with him, and in the
Morning presented her Father (who grumbl'd that he had taken his Daughter
without speaking one kind Word to himself) with many rich and costly Presents,
and the Estate of a Nobleman lately deceased, whereupon the old Fellow was so
much transported, that putting on his Purple Robes, and mounting his Horse, he
rode through the City, crying out, All this is mine, and so became the Herald
of his own, as well as of Mithridates's Folly; and to those that laughed at him
for the same he said, There was no such Wonder in this, but rather, that he did
not throw Stones at all he met, he was so much beside himself with Joy.

Another Piece of Vengeance that pursued Pompey, and wherein he might read his
Crime in his Punishment, was, That his Wife Mutia, during his absence, had
dishonored his Bed; at which he was so nettl'd, that he sent her a Bill of
Divorce.

Pompey, in pursuit of his Amorous Inclination, did likewise commit a piece of
notorious Injustice, in marrying Julia, Daughter to Caesar, who had been
affianced before, and was to be married within a few days to Caepio, and, to
appease Caepio's Anger, married his own Daughter to him, who had formerly been
espoused to Faustus, the Son of Sylla. Pompey was so much besotted with his
Love to Julia, that he created abundance of Envy to himself, by committing the
Government of his Provinces and Legions into the Hands of his Friends, as his
Lieutenants, whilst he himself wantonly rambl'd up and down, caressing his
Wife, throughout all the Delicacies of Italy; but he was soon deprived of her,
for she died in Childbed, her Daughter not outliving her many days.

He afterward married Cornelia Daughter to Metellius Scipio, and Relict of
Publius the Son of Crassus, a young Lady of great Quality, Beauty, and
Education; but this Marriage was very unpleasing to some People, who thought
that she was a Match more agreeable to his Son, and were angry that the Affairs
of the City lay neglected, while he, from whom they expected a Cure to their
Distractions, went crowned with Garlands, and was revelling in his Nuptial
Feasts.

It Is observable, that at the very last his Fondness toward this young Lady,
and his Fear that her Beauty might expose her to some Dishonor amongst the
Parthians, was the chief Argument that prevailed with him not to have recourse
thither, where, in all probability, he might have been able to renew the War,
and recover his Glory, after his Defeat in the Pharsalian Plains; so that
resolving to sail for Egypt, and entrust himself with Ptolomy, he was, by
Advice of that young King's Council, barbarously and inhumanly murdered, as
going ashore in a Boat in order, as he thought, to a favorable Reception; the
distressed Cornelia and his Friends beholding this lamentable Tragedy from on
board the Vessels where they were. Thus fell this Great Man, to which, it
cannot be denied, that his Amorous and Sensual Temper did highly contribute:
Not that I would be understood positively to assert, that Uncleanness was the
sole procuring Cause of those Tragical Disasters that befell the great Man and
others, whom I have mentioned or shall mention in the course of this History,
it being enough for my Design to prove, that it was always one of the visible
Causes, and that it makes good the Assertion of the Wise Man in the Proverbs,
where speaking of the Harlot or strange Woman in general, he says, That many
strong Men have been slain by her; of which there is not a more speaking and
demonstrable Instance than this of Pompey, who had triumphed over Asia, Africa,
and Europe, and yet was himself a Captive and Subject of Triumph to his own
Lusts.

In the Life of Cato the younger, who was not only a great Pretender to Virtue,
but, compared with his Contemporaries, a glorious Mirror of it. We find that he
had no true Notions of the Honor of the Marriage Bed, nor any just Idea of
Chastity; as is apparent from the following Instance. Quintus Hortensius, whom
Plutarch calls a Man of singular Worth and approved Virtue, proposed to Cato,
That his Daughter Porcia, who was already married to Bibulus, and had already
born him two Children, might be given to him as a fruitful Field, from which he
might raise an Offspring; For, said he, though this in the Opinion of Men may
seem strange, yet in Nature it would be honest and profitable for the Public,
that a Woman, in the prime of her Youth, should not lie useless, and lose the
Fruit of her Womb: Nor, on the other side, would it be convenient she should
burden and impoverish one Man, by bringing him too many Children. Also by this
Communication of Families among worthy Men, Virtue would increase and be
diffused through their Posterity, and the Commonwealth would be united and
cemented by their Alliances* Yet, if Bibulus would not part with his Wife
altogether, he would restore her as soon as she had brought him a Child,
whereby he might be united to both their Families. Cato answered, That he loved
Hortensius very well, and did much approve of uniting their Houses, but he
thought it very strange to speak of marrying his Daughter, who was already
given to another. Then Hortensius turning the Discourse, acknowledged, that '
it was Cato' s own Wife which he desired, for she was young and fruitful, and he
had already Children enough. To which Cato agreed, with the Consent of his Wife
Martia and her Father Philip, and after the Death of Hortensius took her again,
for which Caesar reproached him, as having a mercenary design in his Marriage,
saying, If Cato had need of a Wife, why did he part with her? And if he had
not, why did he take her again, unless he gave her only as a Bait to
Hortensius, and lent her when she was young, to have her again when she was
rich? -- It Is plain from this Instance, that Cato was guilty of countenancing
Impurity in others, if he was not actually guilty of it himself; and seeing he
was unwilling to take his Daughter from Bibulus, and yet as willing to gratify
Hortensius by parting with his own Wife, it would argue, that he was weary of
her, and that he would make no Scruple to use other Women, seeing he allowed
her to give up her self into the Embraces of another Man. But now it remains
that we should take notice of the Judgments which pursued this great Man, of
which, without breach of Charity, we may look upon this Crime, amongst others,
to have been one of the procuring Causes. It Is known to every one, that he
followed Pomp^y, and adhered to him against Caesar, and that after Pompey's
Defeat he retired to Vtica, where, having no hopes of retrieving his desperate
Affairs, he deliberately murdered himself, from which Design all the Endeavors
of his Friends were not able to divert him: And thus the Divine Vengeance made
him the Executioner of Justice upon himself, which he ought to have suffered by
the hands of others, for that brutish and unnatural Carriage to his Wife.

In the Life of Demetrius Poliorcetes we have an account, that when this great
Prince laid Siege to Megara, he was so far transported with a Lustful Passion
for Cratesipoli^ the Widow of Poliperchon, a Lady of greater Beauty than
Virtue, that leaving his Army, he went to make her a Visit with two or three of
his Intimates; but when he came near the City of Patras, where she lived, he
fell into an Ambush of Cassander's Men, when^e with great difficulty he
escaped, by the swiftness of his Horse. -- And thus he had well nigh made a
surrender of his Liberty and Design to the Charms of a lascivious Woman. It is
also observed of this Demetrius, that he had many Wives at the same time, and
notwithstanding his multiplicity of Wives, became so enamored upon Lamia, a
beautiful Lady, but infamous for her looseness of Conversation, that 'twas said
all other Ladies were amorous of Demetrius, but Demetrius was only amorous of
Lamia.

This Lustful Prince was not however satisfied with his variety of Women, but
did also pollute himself with the unnatural Crime of Sodomy; and it is storied
of him, that having been lost several days in a Debauch among his Companions,
and pretending to keep his Chamber afterward, by reason of Indisposition, his
Father Antigonus came to see him, upon his approach to Demetrius's Chamber, out
bolts a sprightly young Fellow; and Antigonus going to his Bedside, and
feeling his Pulse, Demetrius not knowing well how to excuse himself, pretended
that he had been ill of a Fever, but that he hoped it had now left him. Yes,
replied the King, I believe it, for I just now met it at your Chamber Door;
alluding to the young Catamite that sprung out of his Chamber.

His Victories, and the Benefits which he bestowed upon the Athenians, put
their Invention upon the rack, to conferr new-devised Honors and Flatteries
upon him, and therefore they ordered him a Lodging behind Minerva*s Temple, in
the Apartment of the Virgins, the vowed Votaries of that Goddess, which
occasioned the Wits of the Time to say, That Minerva had got a dangerous
Inmate; and, That it was not much to the Reputation of her Virgins Chastity, to
keep company with Demetrius. And as for Demetrius himself, he was so far from
showing any Reverence to the Goddess with whom he had taken up his Quarters,
that he gave himself up to the most infamous Liberties; and debauched the young
Women and Matrons of Athens to that degree, as it is a shame for a modest Pen to
relate.

This brutish Youth was so much enraged with unnatural Lust, that he tempted a
beautiful young Man, called Damocles, to that degree, as made him to decline
all manner of public Conversation, on purpose to avoid his designed Passion;
but Damocles going to a private Bath, the villainous Demetrius having
Information of it, surpised him there, so that the poor Youth seeing no other
way to avoid him, leaped into a boiling Vessel, and so became a Martyr to his
Virtue.

Demetrius was not only lustful, but profuse and prodigal in his Expenses, as
all lustful Persons are; so that having commanded the Athenians to raise 250
Talents for his Service, and when they, to satisfy his demands, had levied it
upon the People by distress, he gave it as a trifling Sum to Lamia, and the
rest of his lewd Women, to buy them perfumed Washballs for their Baths: And
thus were the Athenians punished for giving way to the lustful Excesses of this
young Prince, to whom they were so slavishly obsequious, that, contrary to
their Laws, when he desired to be enrolled in the Fraternity of the Priests of
Ceres, without attending the time commonly allotted, which injoyns, that the
lesser Mysteries should be celebrated in November, and the great Solemnity in
August following, they made an Edict, that the Month of March then current
should be accounted November, that Demetrius might be then admitted to the
lesser Ceremonies; and as soon as that was done, by another Edict they turned
that same Month into August; which occasioned Philipedes the Comedian to
exercise his Wit upon Stratocles, the Inventer of this Trick, in the following
Couplet, thus:

Prodigious Skill! how strangely flattering Fear
Into one Month has crowded all the Year!
And upon the same Stratocles's proposing that Demetrius should lodge in the
Temple of Minerva, within the Castle he made the following Lines:

Stratocles thinks it is no Sin
To turn a Temple to an Inn;
Or with lewd wanton Company
To bless Minerva' s Chastity.
We come now to treat of the Punishments which Divine Justice inflicted upon
this Lecher, which were very sharp and severe, his Father and he both being
dispoil'd of that large Empire which they had erected for themselves, out of
the Ruins of that of Alexander the Great. His Mother and Children, and diverse
of his Wives, were made Prisoners, and he himself forsaken by the Athenians,
who had formerly so much adored him, but now made it a capital Crime for any
body so much as to propose a Treaty or Accommodation with him; and Alexander
King of Macedon missed little of having cut him off treacherously.

It is also remarkable, that this lustful Prince was punished observably in his
Daughter Stratonice, who followed her Father's pernicious Example. The Story is
well known to be as follows. Demetrius having married this his beautiful
Daughter to Seleucus King of Syria, to whom she brought forth a little Son,
Antiochus Son to Seleuchus by a former Marriage, fell so passionately in love
with his Step mother Stratonice, that he sicken'd upon it, and was in danger,
and not daring to discover the Cause of his Distemper, he saw no other Remedy
for his hopeless Misfortune but what was to be expected from Despair and Death,
which he therefore resolved upon, by abstaining from Diet. Erasistratus the
King's Physician quickly discovered that Love was his Distemper, but could not
at first discover the Object; he therefore diligently waited in his Chamber,
and when any of the Beauties of the Court came to visit the sick Prince, he
curiously observed the Emotions and Alterations in the Countenance of
Antiochus, and by that means discovered Stratonice to be the Object of his
Flames; for when she came in, either with the King, or alone, Antiochus became
mute, his Passion smothering his Words, a fiery Blush would mount into his
Face, he would fix his Eyes upon Stratonice, and then presently withdraw his
stolen guilty Looks, his Pulse would be disordered, a cold Sweat would seize
upon him, and unable to support the violent Passion, he would become senseless
and pale. Erasistratus having made this Discovery, acquainted Seleucus, that
his Son's Distemper was Love, but incurable, because it is impossible for him
to enjoy the Object of his Passion, and as impossible for him to live without
it. The King demanding why he could not enjoy the Object, Erasistratus
answered, Sir, because he is in love with my Wife. Upon this the King
expostulated with the Physician, saying, How, my dear Erasistratus! will you
not do me the Kindness as to bestow your Wife upon my Son and Successor, when
there is no other way to save his Life? Nay then, Sir, replied the Physician,
the Object of the Prince's Love is your own Stratonice. Ah, my dear Friend,
answered Seleucus, may some kind God or Man put the Safety of the Prince upon
that Issue, I would part not only with Stratonice, but my Empire, upon
condition that I might pres^^^e Antiochus. And thereupon instantly summoned a
Council, wherein the Marriage of Antiochus with Stratonice was agreed upon: And
thus Demetrius's Daughter pursuing her Father's Example, entertained an
unlawful Amor.

Justice continued to pursue Demetrius, so that he fell sick at Pella of a
desperate Malady, the true Daughter of Intemperance and Luxury; and during this
Indisposition Pyrrhus took most part of the Kingdom of Macedonia from him; and
though he recovered a great part of it afterward, yet his Army deserting him, he
was quickly despoiled of it again; which threw Philla, one of his Wives, into
such Despair, that she poisoned her self. After this he married Ptolemaida,
Daughter to Euridice, his Wife Philla's Sister, so that though Judgment followed
him now very close, yet he would not be diverted from his impure Amors. His
Army, with which he fought against Agathocles, grew not only mutinous, but was
grievously afflicted with the Plague; and he being hard pressed upon by his
Enemies, had recourse to Seleucus his Son-in-law, who at first was willing to
have entertained him kindly, but being otherwise advised by his Council, he
took Arms against him, and put him so to it, that he endeavored to have killed
himself* but being prevented, surrendered himself up to Seleucus, who made him
a Prisoner, but gave him honorable Entertainment. Demetrius, during this
Restraint, gave himself wholly up to Intemperance, which brought Distempers
upon him that killed him, and so he became his own Executioner.

The next Instance which Plutarch affords us is, that famous one of Mark Antony
and Cleopatra. He tells us, That Antony in his Youth was debauched by Curio,
who plunged him into all the Inconveniences of Whoring and Drinking, and a Debt
of 250 Talents, which was very shameful in one of his years. Antony did also
incurr the Displeasure of the better sort of People, by his Midnight Revels,
his wild Expenses, his rouling from one little Whore to another, his Nups in
the Day, and his Walks to digest his Debauches, and then at Night again his
Entertainments and Balls for the solemnizing the Nuptials of some Comedian or
Buffoon. Cytheries the She-Comedian he doted on mightily, so that she was with
him wherever he went, and her Equipage was as splendid as his Mother's. He
lodged his little Whores and singing Wenches, wheresoever he passed, in the
Houses of serious Men and Women, which gave great offense. But that which
completed his Ruin was, his falling in love with Cleopatra, upon her coming to
him at his Summons, for having assisted Cassius in the Wars. Dalleus, who
carried the Message to her, had no sooner seen her admirable Beauty, but he
told her, It was impossible that so beautiful a Creature ^^^ld receive any ill
treatment at the Hands of Antony, and therefore advised her to make t^^^^ds him
in splendid Equipage. Accordingly she embarks in the River Cydnus, the Head of
her Barge did shine with inlaid Gold, the Sails were of Purple Silk, the Oars
of Silver, which beat Time to the Flutes and Haut^ois, she her self lay
all-along under a C^nopy of Cloth of Gold curiously embroider*d, d^ess*d as
Venus is ordinarily represented, and beautiful young Boys stood on each side
like ^^pids, to fann her; her Maids were dressed like Sea-Nymphs and Graces,
some steerin^ the Rudder, some working at the Ropes; the Perfumes diffused
themselves from the Vessel to the Shore, which was ^ll cover*^ with Multitudes,
the People running (...) the City to see this strange Sight, left Antony alone
upon the Tribunal, and a Rumor was spread abroad, That Venus was come to feast
with Bacchus, for the common Good of Asia. As soon as she arrived, Antony sent
to invite her to Supper, but she thought it more decent that Antony should come
to her, who made no great Difficulty to do it; he found the Preparations very
magnificent, but nothing was so admirable as the great number of Lights, which
were all of a sudden let down in such a multitude of Branches, and so
ingeniously disposed, some in Squares and some in Circles, that Fame cannot
speak of a greater piece of Curiosity. Antony was so strangely taken with this
Woman, that notwithstanding Fulvia his Wife maintained his Quarrels in Rome,
against Caesar, with great difficulty, yet he suffered himself to be carried
away by Cleopatra to Alexandria, there to lead an easy childish Life in
Divertisements too youthful for his age, and in all manner of Luxury: But they
were so well pleased with it, that they called it an inimitable Life. Cleopatra
humored him in every thing, never left him Day nor Night, played at Dice,
drank with him, hunted with him, went a rambling with him at Nights, to disturb
and torment People under their Windows, dressed like an ordinary Woman, for
Antony went to those Frolicks in Servants' disguise, and sometimes would return
soundly beaten.

While Antony spent his time thus in Egypt, Vengeance was pursuing him apace,
for News was brought him, that his Wife Fulvia and her Brother Lucius, who had
for some time maintained his Quarrel against Caesar, were driven out of Italy,
and that the Carthians had overrun a great part of Asia. This roused him out
of his Sleep, so that he set sail for Italy with Two hundred Ships, and meeting
some of his Friends by the way, they told him, That his Wife Fulvia being a
Woman of an ambitious Spirit, had occasioned the War, being in hopes that the
Commotions in Italy would force Antony from Cleopatra. It happened that Fulvia
died at Sicyon, on her way to meet Antony, which made the Accommodation between
him and Caesar so much the easier to be effected; and, to cement this
Friendship the more strongly, Antony marries Octavia, Sister to Caesar; but
this Amity was not long Lived, new Jealousies betwixt those two Captains began
suddenly to appear, though for some time indeed they were hindered by Octavia
from breaking out into a Flame.

But as soon as Antony returned into Syria, his unlawful Amors with Cleopatra
took fire afresh, and he presented her with whole Kingdoms and Provinces at a
time, to the great disgust of the Romans; and though he had assembled a vast
Army, which made India tremble, and put all Asia in a Consternation, yet all
those Preparations were of no use to him, he was so much charmed and bewitched
with the Thoughts of his Mistress Cleopatra, and longed so much to be with her,
that not being able to endure the tediousness of a Meal, he would start from
Table, and run to see if she were coming. In the mean time Octavia, whom he had
left with her Brother Caesar, having obtained Leave from him to take a Journey
to see Antony, she was commanded by him to stay at Athens, though she brought
along with her Clothes and Money for his Army, and a reinforcement of
Soldiers. Octavia was much displeased at this, as she had reason, but so it
must be, for Cleopatra dreading that Octavia, who was a prudent Woman, and
powerfully allied, might interrupt the course of her Amors, she betook her
self to dye for Love of Antony, which did so much prevail upon him, that he
abandoned his Design against Media, and returned to Alexandria. This injurious
Treatment of Octavia did highly incense her Brother Caesar, so that he
commanded her from her Husband's House into his own, which she refused to obey,
but, like a dutiful Wife, took care not only of Antony's Children by her self,
but of those also that he had by Fulvia; which honorable Deportment of hers
did very much heighten the Resentments of the Romans against Antony, who spent
his time at Alexandria, in the height of Luxury and Insolence, assembling the
People in the public place, where Thrones of Gold placed in a State of Silver
were erected for him and Cleopatra; their Children were styled Kings of Kings,
and she was dressed in the Habit of the Goddess Isis, and gave Audience to the
People under that Name. These things being related to the Senate at Rome, by
Caesar, did mightily alienate the Hearts of the People from Antony, and so
matters came to an open Rupture betwixt him and Caesar, by means of his
unlawful Amors with Cleopatra.

Great Military Preparations being made on both sides, Cleopatra was resolved
to accompany her Paramour, dreading otherwise that a Peace might be contrived
by the Mediation of Octavia; and the better to prevail with him, she furnished
near a Million of Money toward carrying on the War: And so far was Antony
transported with Rage against his Lawful Wife Octavia, that he sent Orders to
Rome, that she should remove out of his House, with all her Children: And he
behaved himself so insolently to many Noble Romans, by Cleopatra's means, that
they deserted him daily, and went over to Caesar, who did so much despise
Antony, because of his Effeminacy, that he would talk publicly, That Antony
had drank Potions that bereft him of his Senses; and, that his chief
Counselors were an Eunuch and Cleopatra' s Waiting-women. The Event verified,
that Caesar made a true Judgment of Things; for though Antony had a prodigious
Force, viz. no less than Five hundred Galleys, most of them of eight and ten
Banks of Oars, so very rich, that they seemed designed for a Triumph; and
besides these, he had One hundred thousand Foot, and Twelve thousand Horse, and
six Vassal- Kings attending him; yet he had no Conduct to manage this mighty
Force, but, contrary to the Mind of his best Generals, he would venture all on
a Sea-battel, because Cleopatra desired it. And this Luxurious Woman, when
Fortune had not as yet determined it against him, did perfectly lose him the
Battle, by running away with sixty Sail in the heat of the Fight; and he was so
far besotted with Love to her, that he immediately followed her, leaving his
Fleet engaged, and his Army without a Commander, that as Cleopatra had begun
his Ruin, she might be sure to accomplish it. In a little time Antony was
deserted by all his Forces and Friends, and Cleopatra and he both forced to sue
to Caesar for his Favor, who would not grant her any, except she put Antony to
death. And thus being reduced to Despair, and pursued to Alexandria it self,
the Naval and Land-Force that was left deserted to Caesar, which made Antony
think that Cleopatra had betrayed him; and she being afraid that he might do
her a Mischief in his Rage, retired to a Monument which she had prepared for
her self, and sent him word, that she was dead, upon which he ran himself into
the Belly; but, before he died, Cleopatra had sent to have him brought to her
in the Monument, wherein she had enclosed her self with two Women only. When he
was brought thither, she durst not open the Door, for fear of being taken alive
and carried to Caesar, but let down Cords, to which Antony was fastened, and
she and her two Women dragged up her dying Paramour, than which, a more sad and
tragical Spectacle could not be seen. When she got him up, she laid him on her
Bed, tore her Hair and her Clothes, and the sense of her own Misfortunes was
wholly swallowed up in the thoughts of his. She expressed the greatest Passion
and Tenderness for him imaginable, calling him her Lord, her Husband, and her
Emperor, but in a little time he died. Caesar being informed of this, sent
Proculaeius to endeavor to take Cleopatra alive, if possible, being afraid
that she would otherwise destroy all her vast Treasures: Proculaeius having
sent one to treat with her at the Door, did in the mean time get in at the
Window where she drew up Antony, by the help of a Scaling-ladder, and surpriz*d
her, upon which she drew a Dagger to have stabbed her self, but being prevented
at that time, her Life was prolonged for some days; and having obtained Leave
of Caesar to pay her last Oblations at the Tomb of the deceased Antony, she
lamented him in most pathetical and passionate Expressions, and retiring again
to her Monument, writ a Letter to Caesar, desiring that she might be buried in
the same Tomb with Antony, and straitway poisoned her self by the bite of an
Asp, which she had ordered to be brought her in a Basket of Figs, and so
disappointed Caesar's design of leading her in Triumph. Thus did Justice pursue
Antony and Cleopatra; and thus, by their unlawful Amors, they occasioned the
death of many thousands of Men, and at last brought themselves to that Tragical
Exit; as signal an Instance as any we shall meet with, of the truth of that
Threatening, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will punish.

In the Life of Marcus Tullius Cicero, Plutarch informs us, That Catiline the
Conspirator, amongst other heinous Crimes, was accused of having deflower'd his
own Daughter, and furnishing his wicked fellow-Conspirators with Women and
Drink; which shows how dangerous such fellows are in any Government, and how
easily they may be engaged in Conspiracies against those who would curb them in
their Excesses.

In that same Life we have an Account, that Clodius a noble Roman being in the
vigor of his Youth, and in love with Pompeia, Caesar's Wife, he gets privately
into Caesar's House, in the Habit of a Minstrel, the Women being then offering
Sacrifice there, which it was not lawful for Men either to hear or see. Clodius
being a Youth, and Beardless, hoped to get to Pompeia among the Women unknown,
but losing himself in the Passage of that large House by Night, Aurelia, one of
Caesar's Mother's Women, 'spying him wandering up and down, inquired his Name,
and thus, being necessitated to speak, he was known by his Voice; which being
noised abroad, Caesar put away his Wife Pompeia, and Clodius was prosecuted for
profaning the Holy Rites. Cicero, though his Friend, yet to preserve his Quiet
with Terentia his Wife, was forced to accuse him.

The cause of Terentia's Spite against Clodius was upon the account of his
Sister Clodia, who had a mind to marry Cicero, by whom she was frequently
visited, and this gave Terentia Ground of Jealousy. Clodius was also accused
of Incest with his own Sisters, and of deflowring several other Women, but the
Judges being bribed, he was acquitted. It appears also plainly enough, by
Plutarch, that Cicero himself was not altogether without Blame, as to his
Chastity, for he put away his Wife Terentia to marry a young Virgin, as she
alleged, for the sake of her Beauty, or as his own emancipated Slave said, for
her Riches, to satisfy his Debts. Not long after this Marriage, his Daughter
Tullia died, for which he proved unconsolable, and put away his new-married
Wife for seeming to rejoice at her Death; but a further Judgment pursued him,
for Antony bearing him an irreconcilable Hatred, sent Assassins after him, when
he fled from Rome, and murdered him in the 64th Year of his age, his Hands and
Head being cut off, and publicly affixed to the Rostra at Rome.

In the Life of Artaxerxes King of Persia our Author informs us, That that
Prince being desperately in love with Atossa, one or his own Daughters, but
concealing his Criminal Passion, for fear of his Mother Parysatis, the wicked
Woman, to further some of her own mischievous Designs, persuaded him to marry
her, contrary to the Determinations of the Grecian Sages, alleging, That he
was determined by Providence to be a Law to the Persians; and he is also
accused by Heraclides the Cumean, and other Historians, of having likewise
married his second Daughter Amestris. The Judgments which pursued this
lascivious Prince were, that he was defeated in his War with the Egyptians, and
became contemptible in the Eyes of his Subjects, upon the account of his
unsuccessful Expedition against the Cadusians. He was also punished by the
Controversies amongst his Sons about the Succession, and by the unnatural and
villainous Amors of his Son Ochus, with his Wife Atossa; therefore, to dash
the Hopes of his Son Ochus, he proclaimed Darius the elder Brother his
Successor, who soon after begged of the King, that he would give him Aspasia,
who was formerly Cyrus's beloved Miss, but then Concubine to Artaxerxes, who
though he had Three hundred and Sixty most exquisite Beauties in his Seraglio,
could not endure to part with Aspasia to Darius; but being constrained to it by
the Law, he afterward took her from him, and created her Priestess to Diana,
which bound her to perpetual Chastity; upon which account the unnatural Son
conspired against his Father, at the Instance of Tiribazus, who bore a mortal
Grudge to Artaxerxes, for having married his own Daughter Amestris, whom he had
promised him to Wife; but the Plot being discovered, Darius was put to death,
as a just Recompense for his unnatural Lust and Treason. After this, Ochus, by
his Interest with Atossa, was strengthened in his Hopes of Succession, found
Means to cut off his other two Brothers, Ariaspes and Arsames, the Grief of
which killed Artaxerxes. And thus was he justly punished by and in his own
Children, because of his horrid Uncleanness, leaving his Son Ochus behind, who
being the wicked Son of a wicked Parent, proved a Monster of Cruelty.

Thus we have finished Plutarch's select Lives, and dare referr it to the
Judgment of the Ingenuous Reader, whether many of his Heroes have not been
foully culpable, as to the point of Chastity, and as remarkably punished for
the same. We come, in the next place, to search among the Roman Emperors, where
we find many remarkable Instances for our purpose, and as remarkable Judgments
pursuing 'em.

The first is Julius Caesar, who though he triumphed over most part of the then
known World, yet was himself triumphed over by his Lusts. When he was
High Priest of Jupiter, he divorced Cossutia, a Lady of an Equestrian Family,
and of a very great Fortune, to whom he had been contracted during his
Minority, and married Cornelia the Daughter of Cinna: Nor could all the
Arguments of Sylla the Dictator prevail upon him to part with her: Whereupon he
was suspended his Sacerdotal Dignity, and had his Estate sequestered, which
forced him to abscond and shift his Quarters almost every Night, though sick of a
Quartan Ague, and with much ado obtained his Pardon at last. Being thus
unfaithful to the Marriage Bed, he was punished in the same Coin; for, having
afterward married Pompeia, she was accused of Uncleanness with Clodius, as has
been already mentioned, who had access to her during public Worship; whereupon
he divorced her. The Lasciviousness of his Mind may be also guessed at by his
Dream, that he had ravished his own Mother, which though those who pretended to
interpret such things told him, That it was a Presage that he should arrive at
the Universal Monarchy, yet is a plain Indication of the predominancy of his
Lust.

Suetonius also acquaints us, That he divorced his Daughter Julia from
Servilius Coepio her former Husband, (one who had stuck the fastest to him of
all Men living, in his Dispute with Bibulus, his Fellow-Consul) and married her
to Pompey, which made him guilty of his Daughter's Adultery, and was a horrid
piece of Ingratitude at the same time. And though, it is true, he had great
Success in his War against the Gauls, Germans, and Britains, yet he was not
without Checks from Divine Justice, having lost a whole Legion by the Gauls,
had two of his Lieutenants defeated on the Frontiers of Germany, and lost the
greatest part of his Fleet upon the Coasts of Britain. And in his own Family he
was punished, by the Death of his Mother, his Daughter Julia, and his
Granddaughter: Nor was he without danger of being indicted and t^y'd for his
Life, for his Maladministration during his Consulship, and of being utterly
ruined by Pompey, though he had the good Fortune to overcome him at last in that
decisive Battle on the Pharsalian Plains.

Suetonius gives us a particular Enumeration of his Amors, which have spread
his Infamy as far as ever his Fame reached: His being a Catamite, and guilty of
Sodomy with Nicomedes King of Bythinia, occasioned many Railleries upon him,
and exposed him to the Contempt of his Enemies; as, when he swagger'd one day
in the Senate, and said, He would run down his Adversaries; they replied, that
He would find that an hard Task for a Woman; alluding to his being prostituted
by Nicomedes. They called him also The Queen of Bythinia' s Cuckoldmaker, the
Bawdyhouse of Bythinia, and Nicomedes' s Stable: His Adversary Bibulus said of
him, when he proscribed him, That formerly he affected a King, but now a
Kingdom. Octavius, a prating Fellow, whose Tongue usually got the start of his
Wit, did one day, before a great company, when he saluted Pompey by the Name of
King, give Caesar the Title of Queen. Cicero upbraided him with those things in
his Epistles; and when Caesar, in his Plea before the Senate for Nisa Daughter
to the said Nicomedes, insisted upon the good Offices that King had done him,
Cicero cut him short, saying, No more of that, let me beg you, Sir; we all know
very well what has passed betwixt you two. Nay, the very Soldiers who attended
his Chariot in his Gallic Triumph, amongst other Lampoons used upon such
occasions, had this noted Lampoon:

Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem:
Ecce Caesar nunc Triumphat qui subegit Gallias,
Nicomedes non triumphat qui subegit Caesarem.
Which may be Englished thus:

For conquering Gaul, Caesar does Laurels wear,
But Nicomedes does no Trophies bear,
Though he made Conquest of the Conqueror.
He is generally said to have been much inclined also to lust after Women, and
to have been very prodigal in his Amors. He debauched several Ladies of good
Quality, as Posthumia the Wife of Servius Sulpitius, Lollta the Wife of
Gabinius, Tertulla the Wife of Crassus, and Mucia, Pompey's Lady, insomuch that
the Curio's upbraided Pompey, that the Extravagancy of his Ambition should ever
induce him to marry the Daughter of that Man, for whose Intimacy with his Wife
he was obliged to divorce her, after he had three Children by her, and
frequently to own himself a Cuckold.

Caesar had a mighty Passion for Servilia, the Mother of Brutus, whom he
presented with a Jewel that cost him ^,000000 Sesterces, besides other
considerable Boons, and the cheap Purchase of many noble Farms exposed to
public sale; and People being surpised at her good Bargain, Cicero quibbl'd
upon it, saying, They would reckon it a better Bargain if they knew that Tertia
was deducta; meaning, that she had prostituted her Daughter Tertia as well as
her self, to Caesar.

He likewise debauched several Provincial Ladies, for which his Soldiers, in
his Galli^^ Triumph, lampoon'd him in this man^er:

Cits, now be sure to keep your Wives at home,
For here is a bald triumphant Stallion come*
In Gaul they made thee pay for Whoring dear,
But thou of Cits make Cuckolds gratis here.
He is also accused of Unlawful Amors with several Queens, as Eunoe, Wife to
Bogud King of Morocco, to whom he gave many magnificent Presents; but his
Darling Mistress was Cleopatra, whom he often treated all Night long, and had
certainly accompanied her in her Pleasure-boat as far as Aethiopia, had not his
Army refused to comply with the Frolic; and upon her he begat a Son, who was
called Caesario. Nay, he was so infamous both for Active and Passive
Uncleanness, that Curio the Father, in an Oration, called him, Every Woman's
Man, and every Man's Woman. He was so insatiable in his Lust, that Helvius
Cinna, Tribune of the People, acknowledged, that he had a Bill ready prepared
by him, which Caesar commanded him to get passed into a Law, whereby he might
be authorized to marry what Wives, and in what Number he pleased, to secure him
Issue: Yet Infinite Justice ordered it so, that he left no Lawful Issue behind
him.

We come now to take notice of the Judgments that pursued him; some of 'em did
represent his Crime in legible Characters as that of his Wife Pompeia's
Intrigue with Clodius, which was so public, that Clodius was prosecuted for
the same; as has been already mentioned. It is also very well known to what
Dangers his Contests and Wars with Pompey exposed him, and how at last he was
murdered in the Senate, notwithstanding all the Warnings he had given him of
the Design. And it deserves a particular Remark, that Brutus, whom many
suspected to be his own Son, his infamous Familiarity with his Mother being
notorious, was one of those that stabbed him; whereupon he cried out, What, and
are you one of them also, you my Son Brutus? This is certainly one of the most
remarkable Instances of God's punishing Whoremongers and Adulterers that is to
be found in History; when he who thought himself secure from all Attempts, as
being above them, and was so much doted on and adored by the People, that of
their own accord they ran in quest of the Murderers up and down the City, and
burnt their Houses, and afterward worshipped him as a God, when this Man could
not avoid the just Hand of God, which did so remarkably find him out at last,
and punish him for his Uncleanness and other Crimes.

The next is Augustus Caesar, of whom Suetonius gives us this following
Account, That having divorced his Wife Scribonia, because of her froward and
peevish Humor, he fell in love with Livia Drusilla, the Wife of Tiberius Nero,
from whom he took her by force, though at the same time she was big with Child;
and though he loved her passionately, yet he never had any Children by her, for
she miscarried of the only Child that ever she conceived by him, which was a
very just and remarkable Judgment. He married his Daughter Julia to M. Agrippa,
who was at that very time married to Marcella, and had several Children by her;
and after his death he married her to Tiberius, whom he forced to put away his
Wife, then big with Child, and who had born him diverse Children. Judgment
pursued him for those Unjust and Tyrannical Proceedings, for both the Julia's,
his Daughter and Granddaughter, were notoriously infamous; his Grandsons,
Caius and Lucius, he lost in Two and twenty months one after another; his third
Grandson, Agrippa, proved so unruly and brutish, that he transported him into
an Island, under a Guard, and obtained a Decree of the Senate, to have him kept
in the same place as long as he lived; and every time mention was made of the
two Julia's, with Tears in his Eyes, and fetching a deep Sigh, he would utter a
Verse of Homer to this purpose;

O that I never the Name of Wife had known,
And without Children to my Grave had gone.
Nor did he use to call them by any other Name, but those of his three
Excrescencies or Imposthumes.

It is further observed, that he was effeminate in his Youth; Marc. Antony
upbraided him with being his Uncle Julius Caesar's Catamite; that he had also
been guilty of prostituting himself to the unnatural brutish Lust of A.
Hortius, in Spain, for 300,000 pieces of Money. The whole Body of the People
being also assembled one day to behold a certain Interlude, they unanimously
expounded and applauded a Verse pronounced upon the Stage to his dishonor, viz.

Videsne ut Cinaedus Orbem digito temperet.
In English thus:

Behold that Catamite, how he the Orb
Of spacious Earth can with his Finger curb.
His Friends owned that he was addicted to the Crime of Adultery, but allege
in excuse of it, That it was by the familiarity with the Wives to discover the
Secrets of their Husbands. Marc. Antony charges him with taking a Lady out of
the Room in her Husband*s presence, and bringing her back again with her Ears
glowing and her Locks in disorder: He accuses him of putting away Scribonia,
because she complained too freely of the Pride and Imperiousness of one of his
Concubines; and that moreover he used to employ Thora^ius to find out Women for
him, who, after the Bargain was made, were to be stripped and exposed to their
View, as if they had been to be sold in open Market.

There was also a Story flew about of him, of a private Supper which he made,
vulgarly called, The Supper of the twelve Gods, at what time the Guests sat
down in the Habits of Gods and Goddesses, he himself representing Apollo, upon
which the following Verses were made, viz.

Cum primum istorum conduxit mensa Choragum
Sexque Deos vidit Mallia, sexque Deas.
Impia dum Phoebi Caesar mendacia ludit,
Dum nova divorum caenat Adulteria.
Omnia se a Terris tunc Numina declinarunt,
Fugit and Auratos Jupiter ipse Thronos.
In English thus:

Soon as the Vestments for the Feasts were hired,
Six Gods, six Goddesses themselves attired
In Mallia' s view;

And impious Caesar nothing would suffice
But Phoebus Shape, and under that disguise
The Adu^teries of the Gods to act anew,
But then the Gods withdrew;
From Sights on Earth they could not brook,
And Jove himself their gilded Thrones forsook.
Thus, we see, this great and excellent Emperor, who was in a manner adored and
admired by all Men, could not, with all his Magnificence and Bounty, and the
Fame of his other Actions, wipe off that indelible Stain which those Impurities
had fixed upon his Memory; so infallibly true is it what Solomon has said of
the Adulterer, That a Wound and a Dishonor he shall get, and his Reproach
shall not be wiped away.

The next Instance is that of Tiberius Caesar, who, to comply with the Emperor
Augustus, divorced his Wife Agrippina, who had born him a Son, and was then big
with Child, to marry Julia Daughter to the said Emperor, much against his
Inclination. This Marriage as it was unlawful, did justly prove uncomfortable,
so that some time after the Death of his Son by Julia, there arose such a
Difference betwixt them, that from that minute he forbore the use of her Bed;
and she being convicted of Adulteries, a Divorce was drawn up against her in
his Name, and sent him by Augustus. After this Tiberius retired to Capraea,
where he gave himself up to Drink and Lust, insomuch that he was called
Biberius, instead of Tiberius, and Mero instead of Nero, and was waited on at
Meals by Wenches. There he invented Alcoves, which he furnished with Whores,
and Catamites, and lewd Discoverers of unnatural and beastly Postures and
Motions, and those he called Spinctriae, the Incendiaries of his Lust: He
entertained himself by seeing them in three several rows abusing each other,
thereby to excite his decayed Appetite. He provided likewise several Chambers
hung about with filthy Pictures and infamous Statues, and furnished them with
the abominable Books of Elephantis, that if any one had a mind to be
prodigiously wicked, he might not want a Pattern to sin by. He invented also in
the Woods, Walks and Grottoes proper for the business of Debauchery, where
young People of both Sex prostituted themselves in the Masquerades o^ Nymphs
and Satyrs; so that, in allusion to the Island and his beastly Lustfulness, he
was publicly derided by the Name Caprinaeus One incredible piece of Debauchery
he was guilty of, viz. that he debauched young Children yet in ignorance,
calling them his little Fry, teaching them to play between his Thighs while he
swam, to lick, and tongue, and suck him like Infants not yet weaned. It is also
storied of him, that when a piece of Parrhasius's Work, representing Atalanta
offering her Mouth in that manner to M^lcager, was left him for a Legacy, with
condition, that if he fancied not the Design, he should receive in lieu thereof
a Million of Sesterces, he not only chose the Picture, but placed it in his
very Bedchamber. And one time, when he was performing Sacrifice, he was so
seized with a Fit of this unnatural Passion toward the Boy, that carried the
Censor, that he could scarce restrain himself till the Sacrifice was over, and
as soon as that was done, he debauched both that Boy and his Brother; and
hearing that they upbraided one another with that Ignominy afterward, he
ordered both their Legs to be broken.

He was wont to abuse Women, and those of Quality too, very unnaturally; as was
evident in the Case of Mallonia, who being brought him by his Panders, and
resolutely withstanding his Brutish Desires, was cited before him upon the
Depositions of suborned Witnesses, where he asked her openly, if she did not
yet repent of her coy Refusal, and rex'd her so, that she at last went out of
Court and stabbed her self, having beforehand sufficiently reproached the old
Goatish Lecher, with his nasty and obscene Mouth, upon which, in the next
Farce, a severe Reflection was made upon him which took mightily, and was in
every-body's Mouth; the Expression was thus: The old He-goat ^icks the Pudenda
of the She-goats.

Such Practices must necessarily be thought to render him odious, and therefore
he kept in his Retirement, as not daring to venture himself among the People,
yet Justice found him out; our Author gives us an Account, that Caius was
supposed to have given him Poison, which wrought upon him by degrees; others
say, that they starved him; and some, that he was stifled with a Pillow in the
78th year of his age.

The next that falls under our Consideration is Caligula, of whom Suetonius
gives us this following Account, viz. That during his Youth he spent Nights in
haunting Brothel-houses, and meeting upon Adulterous Assignations, disguised in
a Perruque and a long Gown, and was most passionately addicted to Dancing,
Singing, and all the Alurements of the Stage; with every one of his Sisters he
was incestuously familiar, and at all his Entertainments they were placed next
below him by turns, while his Wife sat at the upper end of the Table. Among
the rest, he is reported to have debauched Drusilla, while he was yet but a
Youth, and was once taken a-Bed with her by his Grandmother Antonia; soon after
being married to Lucius Cassius Longinus, he took her away from him by force,
and lived with her as if she had been his Wife; and, after her Death, it was
his usual Oath to swear by Drusilla's Deity. As for his other Sisters, he did
not love them so passionately, but did frequently prostitute them to his
Ganimedes, which afforded him a more easy Opportunity to condemn them in the
Case of Aemilius Lepidus, of whom he was afraid, for Adultery.

As to his Marriages, he contracted and dissolved 'em with equal Ignominy. Upon
the very day that Livia Orestilla was married to C. Piso, he being present at
the Wedding, commanded her to be brought home to his Palace as his own Wife,
but within a few days turned her off again, and two years after banished her,
pretending that she had conversed privately with her Husband in the mean time.
Others report, That being invited to the Nuptial Supper, as he sat over
against Piso, he sent one to whisper in his Ear these words, Forbear to lie
with my Wife; and presently after rising from the Table, led her home along
with him, and next day set forth a Decree, declaring, That he was married
according to the Example of Romulus and Augustus Lollia Paulina being married
to a Person of Consular Degree, and General of the Army, upon hearing that her
Grandmother was one of the most beautiful Ladies of her Time, he became so
enamored of the Grandchild, that he sent for her out of the Province where she
was, forced her from her Husband, took her to himself, and in a short time
likewise turned her off, forbidding her for ever after the knowledge of any
other Man. Cesonia, though neither handsome nor young, and the Mother of three
Daughters by another Man, he loved so passionately, that he would often show
her to his Soldiers riding by his side, with her Horseman's Coat embroidered,
and frequently stark naked to his Familiars.

Being brought to want Money by those his extravagant Courses, he invented new
and unheard of Imposts; one was, that he exacted from common Prostitutes the
Gratuity for one Nights Familiarity, and obliged married People also to pay a
certain Rate for the use of the Marriage Bed. He built also a Brothel-house in
his own Palace, with Apartments suited to the Dignity of the place for Ladies
and Gentlemen to enjoy their clandestine Amors; and, to force a Trade, he sent
his Officers about to invite both young and old to bring their Mistresses to
his Conveniences, of whom, when they came, he received his ignominious Toll,
which there were Persons ready to receive, and set down the Names of every Man
in a Book, as Benefactors to Caesar's Revenue.

We come now to take notice of the Punishments which befell him: It is natural
to conceive, that those Debauches impaired his Health, so that he never had any
either in Body or Mind. It was believed that his Wife Cesonia had drenched him
with a Philter or Love-potion, which deprived him of his Senses, and almost
made him mad, so that he never slept above three hours in a Night, and then
also was disturbed with troublesome Dreams and Visions; at last becoming
hateful and intolerable by his Lusts and Cruelty, he was cut off by Cassius
Cheraea and Cornelius Sabinus, Tribunes, and other Conspirators, as he was
going to see the Pyrrhick Dances, the one giving him a mortal Wound in the Neck
with his Hanger, and the other running him quite through the Body. This vicious
Monster had rendered the Name of the Caesar's so odious, that the Romans had a
mind after his Death to have abolished their Memory, and lay their Temples in
Ashes.

The next Instance is Claudius Drusus Caesar, whose Father Drusus being
unlawfully begot, the lustful Contagion was, it seems, by that same means
conveyed to the Grandson, who in his Youth kept company with none but loose
debauched Fellows, and followed their bad Example. Livia Medullina died on the
very day appointed for her being married to him. His Wife Vrgulanilla he
divorced for notorious Prostitution, and everybody knows how unfaithful the
infamous Messalina his Cousin-German was to him; upon which he solemnly
declared, that he would for the future keep himself a Widower, and that he
would freely forgive them, though they should kill him, if not. Yet soon after he
fell in Treaty with Pelina, whom he had put away before, and then with Lollia
Paulina; at length he engaged in an incestuous Amor with Agrippina, Daughter
to his Brother Germannicus, and suborned certain persons to move, that he might
be constrained to marry Agrippina, as being the only means conducible to
perpetuate the Public Tranquillity, and that there might be a Toleration also
for others to contract Marriages in the same degree, which till that time had
always been accounted incestuous: He was so impatient, that he could not stay
till the next day to prepare for his Wedding. There was none however that
followed his incestuous Example, but a certain Libertine, and a chief Centurion
of a Legion, to both which Weddings he invited himself and his Wife Agrippina,
for the encouragement of others. His Uncleanness was punished, amongst other
things, by the loss of his Son Drusus, who having tossed a Pear up into the
Air, and gaping to catch it again, it fell so exactly into his Throat, that it
choked him. He was so much besotted, he signed Writings for the settlement of
a Dowry upon the Contract of Marriage between his Wife Messalina and her
Adulterer Silius, being made believe that 'twas only a Contrivance found out to
delude the Fates themselves, and to transfer upon the Head of another Man those
Disasters which the Predictions of the Soothsayers and several Prodigies had
six'd upon his Person; and at last he was poisoned by a Mushroom which
Agrippina gave him.

The next Instance is Nero, the Son of Domitius and the wicked Agrippina above
mentioned, whose future Mischievous Temper his Father predicted, when the
Nobility came to compliment him upon Nero's Birth, viz. That there could
nothing proceed from him and Agrippina but what was detestable, and would prove
pernicious to the Commonwealth: Which every man who is acquainted with History
knows to have been exactly fulfilled.

Suetonius gives this following Account of him, viz. That his Petulancy, Lust,
Luxury, Avarice, and Cruelty he practiced by degrees, and at first concealed
'em under the Excuses of Indiscretion and Heat of Youth; but yet he could not
carry it so, but that everybody saw they were rather the Vices of Nature than
Age. So soon as it grew duskish, away he flew in disguise to Tippling-houses,
Cooks-shops, etc. frolicking and scouring about the Streets, beating such as
were going home late from Supper; some little Shops he would also break open
and risle, and afterward sell the Spoils. In those Quarrels he several times
ran the hazard of his Life, being once almost bruised to death by a Senator,
whose Wife he would have taken from him in the Street.

Besides a great number of Pages, whom he made use of in his unlawful
Pleasures, and his Contaminations of married Women, he deflower'd Rubria, one
of the Vestal Virgins, and would very fain have married Act a Slave, suborning
several Persons of Consular degree, to swear that she was of Royal Extraction.
Sporus, a young Boy, after he had caused him to be gelt, he endeavored to have
altogether transformed into a Woman, and after he had veiled him, married him,
and settled a Dowry upon him with all the Ceremonies of a sumptuous Wedding, he
kept him at home as his Wife; upon which the Wits of those times said, It had
been well for the World if Domitius his Father had had such a Wife. This Sporus
he carried about with him, in a pompous and costly Habit, as if he had been the
Empress her-self, under the Title of Augusta, to all the trading Towns of
Greece, and soon after showed him openly at Rome, in the Sigillarian Street,
and would frequently kiss him as they sat together in the same Litter. He sent
for a Harlot, who was very like his Mother Agrippina, and entertained her among
the rest of his Concubines; and he was accused of abominable Incest with his
own Mother as often as he rode in the same Litter with her, which was
discovered by the Pollutions that besmeared his Clothes.

His own Chastity he prostituted in such a manner, that there was hardly a
Member of his Body undesil'd, insomuch that at length he invented a new sort of
Lechery, which was, to cover himself all over with the Skin of some wild Beast,
and so to be let out of a Cage, that he might fly upon the Secrets of Men and
Women that were tied to a Stake; and after he had that way gratified his
monstrous Lust, he prostrated his own Body to his enfranchised Bondsman
Doryphorus, who had married him as he himself had wedded Sporus, and in that
passive posture counterfeited the soft Cries and Complaints of a new-bedded
Virgin. He was so very vile himself, that he believed everybody to be so, only
that they dissembled their Vices, and were private in their Debauches; and if
any Man would but confess their Obscenities to him, he pardoned all the rest of
their Crimes.

His impious Mother was remarkably pursued by the Divine Vengeance, which gave
her up to the unnatural Fury of the Monster her Son, to whom she had so
unnaturally prostituted her Body; for after he had diverse ways attempted to rid
himself of her, but in vain, he at last commanded her to be killed, as having
conspired against his Life; which being effected, he ran with eager Curiosity
to view the naked Body of his Mother, as she lay weltring in her Blood, and
handled all her Limbs, of which he commended some for their Beauty and Shape,
and disprais'd others; and happening to be thirsty in the midst of his
unnatural Survey, he was so little concerned, that he quenched his Thirst over
his murdered Parent, who left the World with that severe Reproof to him, when
his Murderers approached her, viz. That they should strike her Belly first,
which had brought forth such a Monster into the World as Nero. After this
barbarous and unnatural Murder, the wicked Monster never enjoyed Quiet, but
was constantly pursued with Horror of Conscience, and cried out, That he was
haunted by his Mother's Ghost.

Nero had also a plurality of Wives, viz. Octavia, Poppaea Sabina, and Statilia
Messalina, having killed Atticus Vestinus, the Husband of the latter, that he
might enjoy her. His Wife Octavia he endeavored several times to have
strangled, and divorced her under pretense of Barrenness; but perceiving the
People took her Part, he put her to death, upon a false Accusation of
Adulteries. He had an entire Love to his Wife Poppaea, yet killed her with a
kick upon the Guts when she was big with Child, because she reproved him for
staying too late at his Chariot driving Exercises. He put Antonia, the Daughter
of Claudius, to death, for refusing to marry him after the death of Poppaea. He
also murdered Aulus Plantius, a young Gentleman, whose Body he had forcibly
defiled beforehand, and after he had killed him, used this tannting Expression,
Now let my Mother go and kiss my Successor, giving it out, That he was his
Mother's Gallant, and by her spurred on to lay Claim to the Empire.

This villainous Monster having wallow'd a long time in unnatural Lusts and
cruel Murders, became hateful to every one. He set Rome on fire with his own
Hands, which was a just Judgment of God upon that City, for suffering it self
to be set on fire by his raging Lusts: After that, they were visited with a
Pestilence, which cut off many thousands of 'em. His Soldiers in two of the
chief British Garrisons were massacred, and many of the Romans and their
Allies were slaughtered in other places of that Island. His Legions in the East
had the Ignominy of being put under the Yoke; and all Syria was like to be
lost, so closely did Vengeance pursue him. Then France and Spain revolted,
under the Conduct of Galba and Vindex, which so struck him, though he seemed
little concerned at his former Disasters, that he sank down, and for a long
time lay Speechless, like one that had neither Life nor Soul, and when he came
to himself, he fell a tearing his Clothes, thump'd himself about the Head, and
at length cried out, that he was undone: But being at last convinced of the
necessity of making head against his Enemies, his first Care was, to provide
Wagons to carry his Scenical M^chines and Musical Instruments, and to have his
Concubines, which he designed to carry with him, trimmed with their Hair cut
like Men, and armed with Battel-axes and small round Targets, after the manner
of Amazons, so far was he judicially given up to his Lusts.

In the mean time he was terrified with frightful Dreams and dreadful Omens,
such as that he was dragged into hideous Darkness by his Wife Octavia, and that
his Body was covered with a multitude of winged Emmets; the Doors of the
Mausolenm flew open of their own accord, and a Voice was heard from thence,
summoning him distinctly by his Name. It was also observed, that the last
Tragedy which he acted in public was Oedipus exiled, which concluded in these
Words, that were very applicable to him, viz.

Thus Wife, thus Mother, and thus Father call
For merited Revenge, and I must fall.
Then, upon fresh Intelligence that the Armies were revolted, he tore the
Letters as he sat at Dinner, overturned the Table, called for a Dose of
Poison, and retired into the Servilian Gardens, where he tormented himself with
perplexing Thoughts what to do in this Distress; sometimes he thought of
throwing himself at the Feet of Galba, or to implore the Assistance of the
Parthians; and sometimes he thought of putting himself in Mourning, humbling
himself to the People, and begging their Pardon before the Rostra, but from
that was deterred, fearing he should be torn in pieces before he got to the
Forum; so waving the matter till next day, he waked about Midnight, and then
finding his Guards drawn off, he leaped out of his Bed, and sent up and down
for his Friends, but none of them coming to him, he went himself, with some few
Attendants, to their Houses, where meeting with no admittance, he returned to
his Chamber, from whence by that time the few of his Guards that remained had
also marched off, having first rifled his Apartments, and carried off, amongst
other things, his Gold Box with the Dose of Poison in it; which put him into
that Despair, that he sent for any of the public Executioners to dispatch him,
and none of them being to be found, he cried out, What, have I neither Friends
nor Enemies? and ran away, as if he would have thrown himself into the Tiber;
but, upon second Thoughts, he began to think of some private lurking place,
where he might consider what to do, and for that end mounted on Horseback
barefoot, and in sordid Apparel, with a thin Handkerchief before his Face, to
have retired to a Country House belonging to one of his enfranchised Bondmen,
having only four Persons with him, of whom his Catamite Sporus was one; but
being terrified with a violent Earthquake and the Lightning that flashed on his
Face, as an additional Affliction, he heard the Soul diers in the Praetorian
Camp cursing him, and wishing all Prosperity to Galba. He ar^iv*d however at
the House, into which he ^rept privately through a hole, lay on a ^lock-bed,
and had no better Dainties than brown Bread and Ditch-water. He could not be
pre^ail*d on to make any further Attempts for s^ving his Life, but ordered a
Grave to be made in his presence, and wept every time he cast his Eye upon
those Funeral Preparation^, crying out, What an Artist will the World use! In
the mean time he received Advice, that the Senate had declar*d him an Enemy t^
the Public, and that he should be sought after and punished after the manner
of the Ancients, viz. to be stripped naked, have his Neck fastened in a forked
Stick and be whipped to death; with which he was so terrified, that he match*d
up two Daggers, and having felt the edges of them, sheathed them again,
pretending that his fatal End was not yet come: And thus dallying with his End,
sometimes he desired Sporus to begin his Moans and Lamentations; and at other
times he would desire some one of the Company to show him the way to die by his
Example; and by and by he would chastize his own Pusillanimity, saying, that he
lived basely and wretchedly, and endeavored to argue himself into Courage to
take away his own Life; but hearing that the Horsemen were at hand, with Orders
to bring him back to Rome alive, if possible, he uttered a Verse in Greek to
the sense following, viz.

I hear the swift-heel'd Coursers beat the Ground,
And with their deadly Noise my Ears confound.
And then clapping the Dagger to his Throat, was assisted by Epaphroditus, the
Master of his Requests, to thrust it home; and thus he expired, his Eyes being
suddenly fixed and staring in his Head, to the terror of all those that beheld
him. Thus was that Monster of all Villainy and Uncleanness made the Executioner
of Divine Wrath upon himself, it being impossible that he could fall by a more
villainous Hand than his own.

The next Instance is the Emperor Galba, of whom Suetonius gives us this
following Account: That in the satisfaction of his Lust he was more prone to
the Male Sex; nor did he care for any of that Sex neither, but such as were
overgrown and exsolete. It is reported the^^^ore in Spain, that when Icelus,
one of the stalest of his He concubines, brought him the News of Nero's Death,
he not only received him in public with home-press'd Kisses, but courted and
sent him away to be smoothed without delay. The Tragical Exit of this Emperor
we have from the same Author, thus; That those who conspired against him having
drawn him out into the Streets, by false Rumors of Otho's being killed, the
Horsemen who were entrusted with the Assassination galloping through the Throng
of common People sell upon him and stabbed him, deserted and ab^ndon'd by all
his Followers, near the Curtian Lake, where he was left weltring in his Blood,
until a Common Soldier returning from a public distribution of Corn, laid
down his Burden, and cut off his Head; and because he could not take hold of
the Hair, Galba being bald, he carried it in the Lapper of his Coat, and
thrusting his Thumb between his Teeth, presented it to Otho, who gave it to the
Sulters and Horseboys, and they carried it round the Camp, as the Object of
the^ Scorn and Contempt: So infallibly does Uncleanness bring down Vengeance
upon the Heads of those who wallow in Impurities.

The Emperor Otho follows next in cours^, of whom Suetonius gives us this
following Account: That from his early Youth he was so p^odigal, and given to
Women, that his Father was often constrained to chastise him: He was also wont
to run about the ^treets in the Night with his Companions, and where he met
with any that were unable to make Resistance, or in Drink, he would cause them
^o be tossed in a Blanket. After his Father's ^ecease, he addressed himself to
a Court-^ady in great Favor, as being one of the Emperor's Freed-women for
whom he pre^ended a most passionate Affection, though she was very old and
decrepit: By her means he ^^sinuated himself into Nero's Favor, and easily
kept the highest place in his Friendship, through the conformity of their
Humors, or, as others report, being familiarly engaged in mutual Prostitution.
Moreover, Nero having a great Affection for Poppaea Sa^ina, then his Mistress,
took her from her Husband, and sent her to Otho, who received her into his
House under color of Marriage. And not content to have alienated her Kindness
from Nero, he grew so fond of her, that he could hardly brook the Emperor to be
his Rival; and therefore not only refused those that were sent to bring her to
the Emperor, but shut his Doors against the Emperor, himself standing in the
Street, and with Prayers and Threatenings intermixed redemanding the Trust
committed to his Care; whereupon Nero dissolved the Marriage, and dispatched
him Legate into Portugal. Nero and Galba being both cut off, as we have heard
already, Otho succeeded in the Empire; but Vitellius having raised himself up
against him, Otho at last became also his own Executioner, and stabbed himself
with a Dagger.

The next is Vitellius, concerning whom that same Author relates, That during
his Youth he resided at Capreae, amongst Tiberius's Catamites, insomuch that he
was brande^ with the Surname of Male Prostitute; and the Beauty of his Body was
thought to have been the first Occasion of his Father's Advancement. In the
succeeding Years of his Age he was contaminated with all manner of Vice; after
he came to the Empire, he surrendered the greatest Share of the Government to
be managed by the Council, or rather at the Will and Pleasure of every infamous
Stage Player and Chariot-driver, more especially of Asiaticus his enfranchised
Slave. This Male Prostitute, when but very young, after his Master and he had
mutually for some time defiled each other, being wearied with his Patron's
Importunity, he ran away from him, afterward Vitellius retaking him at
Puteolae, where he was selling sour Wine and Water mixed together, to the poor
People, to get a Penny, he cast him into Irons, but soon enlarged him, and
favored him again with his Caresses. He afterward sold him to a Fencer, for
his churlish ill Nature, from whom he not long after stole him again, and the
first day that Vitellius appeared as Emperor, he suffered him to wear Gold
Rings, like a Roman Knight.

Suetonius adds, That this Emperor Vi^ellius was addicted to all sorts of Vice,
but chiefly to Luxury and Cruelty; he always made three Meals a day, sometimes
four, not contenting himself with Breakfast, Dinner, and Supper, unless he had
his Collation afterward, he would also appoint where to ^up, where to debauch
the same Day, and happy he that entertained him who could could come off for
Ten thousand Crowns at one sitting: But, above all the rest, the most famous
Supper was that which was made him by his Brother, to welcome him to the City,
at which time, as 'twas reported, no less than Two thousand Dishes of Fish, and
Seven thousand of Fowl, all Rarities in season, were brought to the Table: Only
he himself exceeded this Festival, at the Dedication of his great Platter,
which, by reason of its extraordinary size, he called The Buck^^r of Minerva.
This Platter he filled with an Oglio consisting of the Livers of Thorn-backs,
the Brains of Phesants and Peacocks, the Tongues of Phaenicopters, and the
milky Guts of Mullets, for which the Bowels of the Ocean were ransacked, from
the Carpa^hian Sea to the Streights of Spain, by the Masters of the Roman Ships
and Galleys. His Appetite was so insatiable and bottomless, and withal so
unseasonable and sordid, that whether he were upon a Journey or offering
Sacrifice, he could not forbear from snatching the Flesh of the Victim, and the
parched Barley from the Altars, nor from tearing the Victuals from the Cooks
Stalls in the Streets, whether steaming hot or of yesterdays dressing, and the
Leavings of others. But this lustful and luxurious Emperor becoming hateful to
every body, he was every where either vanquished or betrayed, and at last
seized in the Porter's Lodge of his own Palace, whence he was dragged
ignominiously through the S^reets by the Hair, with his Garments all torn, and
at last brought to the Scalae Gemoniae, or common place of Execution, where, by
gently stabbing him with small pricks at a time, they tortured him to death by
degrees, and thence dragged along with an Hook, they flung his mortified
Carcass into the Tiber.

As for the Emperor Titus, and his Son Vespatian, they were not without Blame
as to the Point of Chastity, and though their Exits were not tragical, like those
of the preceding Monsters, yet they were not without their Troubles and
Reproaches, as just Punishments for their inordinate Passions. Suetonius says
of Vespatian, That he had a great number of Concubines after the death of
Coenis, one of which lay by him all the while of his Repose. And, that being
persecuted by a certain Curtesan, who pretended to be ready to die for Love of
him, he at length yielded to her Embraces, and gave her Four hundred Sesterces
out of his own private Purse, which he ordered his Steward to place to his
Account thus, viz. To Vespasian, for being beloved. That same Historian
observes of him, that he was much given to Drolling, and that sometimes so
broad and scurrilously, that he could hardly refrain from Obscenity. He died of
a sudden Looseness, as a just Punishment for his loose Life, of which the
indelible Stain is conveyed to Posterity by Suetonius and other Historians.

His Son Vespatian is accused of sitting up till midnight revelling with the
lewdest of his Companions, and that his Lechery was notorious, by his Gangs of
Catamites and Eunuchs, and the excessive Love he bore to the Queen Berenice:
Upon the whole, he was generally esteemed and talked of as another Nero; but
after he came to the Empire, he reformed himself, turned off his Paramour
Berenice, and all his Catamites, and became one of the most excellent Princes
that ever swayed the Roman Scepter: Yet so far has the Divine Justice punished
his Incontinence, that the Infamy of it is transmitted to Posterity upon
Record, and he was cut off in a manner in the Vigor of his Age, being but in
his 41st Year when he died: And of this Misfortune he was very sensible, the
Historian telling us, that he looked up toward Heaven, bitterly complaining,
that his Life was wrongfully taken from him, for he had been guilty of no
Action of which he need repent, excepting one only, which what it was he
neither then declared himself, nor could it be easily guessed by any one else,
though some were of Opinion, that 'twas his Familiarity with his Brother's Wife
Domitia, but she swore positively there was no such thing, and she would not
have denied it had it been true, but rather have gloried in it; which it was
usual for her to do of any kind of Lewdness. But thus his Memory and Fame
justly suffers, because of his former Intemperance.

The following Instance is that of Domitian, who was infamous from his very
Youth; Nero produced a Note under his Hand when he was a young Man, wherein he
had promised him a Nights Lodging at any time: and he is also accused of having
prostituted his Body to Nerva He divorced his Wife Domitia, on pretense that
she was in Love with one Paris, a Stage Player, and afterward took her again.
Being greatly addicted to Venery, he called frequent Coition his Bed-wrestling,
as if it had been a kind of Exercise; and it is reported of him, that he would
often smooth and depilate his Concubines, and swim amongst the most notorious
Harlots. When his Brother's Daughter was offered him in Marriage, he would by
no means accept of her, as being engaged in Wedlock with Domitilla; but not
long after, when she was married to another, he debauched her of his own
accord, though Titus was then alive; but when her Father and Husband were dead,
he loved her with a most passionate Affection, which he owned before all the
World, insomuch that after he had got her with Child, he forced her to
miscarry, which was the occasion of her death. This vile Prince being justly
hated for his Cruelty and Debauchery, was killed in his own Chamber, by those
that conspired against him, Stephanus, Domitilla's Steward, having stabbed him
with a Dagger in the Groin, as he was reading a Paper which he had given him,
pretending it was a Discovery of a new Plot. And the Memory of this Emperor was
so execrable to the Senate, that they ordered all his Decrees and Titles to be
every where rased out, and the very Memory of him utterly abolished; so
infallibly true has it always been found, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will punish.

Thus we have gone through such Instances as Livy and Suetonius afford us, and
must now have recourse to other Authors for the remainder of the Roman Emperors.

The next we shall instance is the Emperor L. Aurelius Commodus Antoninus, who
was elevated to the Imperial Dignity about the Year of Christ 180. From his
very Infancy he was bent to all sorts of Vice, notwithstanding the Care of the
wise Philosophers, who had the conduct of his Manners, so that Rome found in
him a second Nero. He would needs pass for Herc^les, Son to Jupiter, appeared
as he did, with the Lions Skin and Club, and would have Altars and Sacrifices,
which the Senate consented to, rather than they would irritate his furious
nature: He murdered most of the Senators; was a severe Persecuter of the
Christians, debauched his own Sisters, and entertained three hundred
Concubines, and as many Boys, for his detestable Pleasures, and gave the
Government of his Provinces to Men noted for Vice or Infamy: But, at last,
having designed to cut off Martia, one of his Strumpets, she, together with the
Captain of his Guards and his Lord Chamberlain, against whom he had the like
Design, mixed Poison with his Wine, which not being quick enough in its
operation, they had him strangled by a Wrestler, (with whom he used to exercise
himself sometimes at that Sport) about the 31st year of his age; says
Lampridius, Eutropius, and Onuphrius.

We come next to Heliogabalus the Emperor, who succeeded Macrinus, and was
called the Roman Sardanapalus. His Luxury was so boundless, that when he was on
the Seacoasts he would eat nothing but Fowl from the remotest Mountains, and
when farthest from the Sea, would eat nothing but Seafish; he fed his Lamps
with Balsam, and filled his Fish Ponds with seented Water; he married Aquila
Severa, a Vestal Virgin, (though by the Roman Law accounted Incest) saying, That
he being a Priest, their Offspring must be altogether Heavenly. His two
Coachmen were his chief Companions and fellow-Debauchees. He cut off abundance
of the Senators, because they would not allow of a Senate of Women, whereof his
Mother was to be President, and to determine all Female Controversies. Though he
was but Twenty two Years old at most, he was guilty of all manner of Villainies*
enough to make those who read his History to blush: He became at last so
hateful even to his own Guards, that he and his Mother were both slain in the
Camp, and their Corpse exposed to all manner of Indignities from the Populance,
who first threw them into a Privy, and then into the Tiber, so vile had their
Lusts rendered them in the Eyes of the People. This happened about the Year
222, according to Eutropius, Lampridius, and Aurelius Victor.

The Emperor Trajan falls next under consideration, who though a Prince excellent
for Virtue and Valor, compared with some that went before him, yet Dion and
others charge him with Cruelty and Incontinence in the unnatural Love of Boys,
as also with persecuting the Christians, and Excess in Wine. As to his
punishment, the same Authors take notice, that he had well nigh perished by a
dreadful Earthquake, and escaped so narrowly, that he was forced to be drawn
out of a Window; and his great Virtue and Valor have not been able to preserve
his Memory from the Ignominy of those Sodomitical Impurities he was guilty of.

The Emperor Caracalla was a Monster of Cruelty and Incontinence, being so
impudent as to marry Julia his Father's Widow; he also conspired the Death of
his Father and Brother, so inseparable are Cruelty and Incontinence, and was at
last cut off himself by a Conspiracy of his Officers.

The Emperor Gallienus, says Treb^^^ius Pollio, was a person altogether given
to Sloth and Ease, his Pleasures and Lusts, which drew upon him the Hatred of
all Men. When they brought him News that Egypt was lost, and that Gaul had
revolted, he was so unconcerned, because of his sluggish Temper, that he made
no other Answer but, What, cannot we live without the Flax of Egypt, or the
Jippoes of Arras? And at last was slain by some of his Captains.

Aurelius Victor gives us this Account of the Emperor Carinus, That he gave
himself over to all manner of Vice, married nine Wives, and put several to
death upon bare Suspicion; which, says Vopiscus, made his Father afterward
disown him; and he was killed in 285, by one of his Captains, whose Wife he had
debauched.

Eutropius and Craesus say of the Emperor Galerius, That he divorced his first
Wife, and married Valeria, the Emperor's Daughter, persecuted the Christians in
a most cruel and barbarous manner, and died of an Ulcer in his Genitals, that
began to swarm with Worms; a just and suitable Punishment for his Incontinence.

Valentinian the Third became so enamonred on a Roman Lady, Wife to Maximus, a
Senator, and afterward Emperor, that he solicited her continually to debauch
her, but without effect: But having won all Maximus's Money, and his Ring
likewise, at Dice, he sent the Ring as a Token from her Husband, to come to the
Palace, and when she came thither, violated her Chastity; the injured Lady
complained of it to her Husband, who in revenge contrived the Murder of
Maximus, about the Year 455.

Procopius and Baronius have left it on Record concerning the Emperor Maximus,
That having caused the Emperor Valentinian the third to be killed for having
ravished his Wife, he married the Empress Eudoxa by force, created his own Son
Caesar, and married him to the young Eudoxa, the Emperor's Daughter. One Night,
in his Amors with the Empress Eudoxa, he told her, That he killed the Emperor
her Husband for love of her; which so incensed her, that she sent for Genseric,
King of the African Vandals, to deliver her from the Tyrant, who abandoning
Rome when Genseric entered into it, he was killed by a Soldier, and afterward
pulled in pieces by the Empress and her Servants, and thrown into the Tiber,
about seventy seven days after he began his Reign.

Thus we have gone through the several Governments and Governors of Rome, from
its foundation to the Reign of Augustulus, the last of those properly called
Roman Emperors, which have afforded us many remarkable Instances of the
Tragical Effects of Lust, not only upon particular Persons and Families, but
upon Kingdoms, Empires, and other Governments, and shall shut up this part of
our History with an Account of the abominable Worship of Priapus and
Berecynthia, and the Ludi Florales celebrated among the Romans with so much
Solemnity and Impudence, that it afforded Subject Matter of Reflection to their
Satyrists, and Flistorians, who ascribed the Fall of the Roman Empire chiefly
to that Cause.

Tostatus, in his 50th Question upon the 20th of Exodus, says concerning the
Heath^^ish Worship of Priapus, That it was so obscene, that the very mention of
it could not but offend chaste Ears. They professed in the holding of those
Sacrifices that beastly Crime which the most vicious Men will hardly confess
upon the Rack. The shape, says he, in which that God was represented was such
as Nature has taught us to hide; and the gestures of the Pri^sts in serving
him such, as I wonder their Matrons and Virgins, in whom were any spark of
Modesty, could behold it with patience; and for the People who came to worship,
the Sacrifice being ended, they all stepped aside into a Thicket, which was
always planted near the Altar of this God, and there, like Brute Beasts,
promiscuously satisfied their Lust, thereby, as they conceived, best pleasing
their God; which was the cause, as it seems, that the true GOD commanded that
no Groves should be planted near the place of his Worship; and, if any were,
that they should be cut down.

Of the same nature was the Worship of Berecynthia, the Mother of the Gods; as
we find described by St. Augusti^e, De Civit. Dei, lib. 2, cap. 4, in the
following words, Ante ejus Lecticam, i. e. Such filthy Stuff was by loose
profane Varlets sung before her Chariot on the solemn day of her Lavation, as
was utterly unfit, I will not say for the Mother of the Gods, but of any
Senator, nay, of any honest Man, nay, of the Singers themselves to hear; And
perchance, says he, they would have blushed to have spoken that before their
own Mothers, at home, which in the sight of the Mother of the Gods, in the
sight and hearing of innumerable multitudes of both Sexes, they boldly sang;
and thereupon breaks out into this Exclamation: What should we call Sacrilege,
if this were Sacrificing, what Pollution if this Purification? And if this be
Sacrilege, then surely the Worshipping, of God by Blasphemies and Cursings, as
did the ^yndians, is a degree beyond Sacrilege; who notwithstanding proceeded
so far in this devilish mad Custom, that, as La^^antius says, they held it a
violation of their Sacrifice, if during their solemn Ceremonies but a good Word
chanced to slip from any Man, though unawares.

To these may be added the abominable Games called by the Romans (...)
Florales, in honor of Flora, a notorious Strumper, concerning which St.
Augustine, in his third Book, De Civitate Dei, cap. 27, says, Which Games of
theirs, the more dishonestly, the more devoutly they were celebrated. In these
the common Prostitutes, who got their maintenance by that Trade, ran up and
down the Streets by Day, and in the Night, with burning Torches, having their
whole Bodies stark naked, and expressing the most beastly Motions and Gestures,
and uttering the most filthy Speeches and Songs that could possibly be
imagined. To these Ovid alludes Fastorum 5, when he says,

Turba quidem cur hos celebret Meretricialudos,
Non ex difficili cognita causa fuit.
Yet to those shameful Pastimes were their Youth admitted, thereby adding as it
were Fire to the Tinder; nay, the sagest Senators, gravest Matrons, and
severest Magistrates were well content to grace them with their presence, as if
it had been some commendable Exercise. These Floral Plays were acted but once a
Year, but their Interludes upon the open Stage were acted almost every Day, and
so abominable, that the devout Fathers of the Primitive Church could hardly
write of them with Patience. Salvianus, de Gubernatione Dei, lb. 6, writes
smartly concerning them, thus: Talia sunt quae illic fiunt, etc. i. e. The
things acted there are of such a nature, that a Man can scarcely speak of them,
or remember them, without some touch of Pollution. Other Offenses challenge to
themselves but a part of us, as impure Thoughts, the Mind; unchaste Sights, the
Eye; wicked Speeches, the Ear; so that when one of these is tainted, yet the
rest may be clear from Pollution, but in the Theater none of them is free from
the guilt of Infection, inasmuch as the Mind is there defiled with corrupt
Thoughts, the Affections with naughty Desires, the Eyes by seeing, the Ears by
hearing; all which are so lewd, that no Man, without blushing, can so much as
name them, much less fully describe them. For what modest Man is there, who can
recount those Representations of beastly Actions, those filthy Speeches, and
Motions, and Gestures, which how sinful they are we may from hence conjecture,
that they cannot well be related? which being so, behold what manner of things
all, or at leastwise the greatest part, of the Romans practiced. And would to
God that all that is here said were not too too applicable to our English
Playhouses.

That the Roman Luxury was incredible, appears by their own Writers, both Poets
and Historians; and to that purpose Juvenal, in his 6th Satyr, has these
remarkable Expressions:

Nunc patimur Long a pacis mala, savior armis Luxuria incumbit, victumque
ulsciscitur orbem Nullum crimen abest, fac^nusque libidinis ex quo Paupertas
Romana perit.
Pariterque and Luxuria nata est and Carthago sublata, says Pliny, i. e.
Luxury was born and Carthage demolished at the same time; meaning, that when
the Romans had no Enemies to keep 'em in the exercise of their Arms, they
became luxurious. And Causabon, in his Preface to Polybius, says, It is evident
that those Times are by Tacitus described in his Annals, than which there were
never any Times more fruitful in most shameful and abominable Vices, or more
opposite to Virtue. And by that means, as Juvenal expresses it well, their
Luxury became more destructive to them than their Arms, and by making a
Conquest of them, revenged their Conquest of the World. And thus fell the great
Roman Empire.

We have already taken notice of the Lasciviousness of the Romans, and their
Incontinence as to the Lusts of the Flesh; we come now to take a short view of
their Luxury in other respects, which being equally a breach of the Seventh
Commandment, were either naturally introductive of their Bodily Uncleanness, or
the unavoidable Consequences of it, and contributed to the Ruin of their
Empire.

To begin with their Excess in Drinking, Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 22, says,
That their Cups were heavier than their Swords; and those Cups were made of the
Leaves of the Egyptian Bean, which Pliny, lib. 21, c. 15, says, were as broad
as a Thessalian Hat. They had a Master of Misrule in their Carrouses, who was
called Modiperator, or Magister, whose Office was to prescribe Rules, and see
them executed; and the principal Chance or Lot they cast for Drinking was
called Venus. Those Rules of Drinking they borrowed for the most part from the
^recians, the most drunken Nation that ever was; and of these Rules one was to
drink down the Evening-Star, and up the Morning Star: Says Plautus, Ad diurnam
Stellam matutinam potantes. Another Rule commonly practiced among 'em was, to
drink as many Healths as there were Letters in their Mistresses Names; as
appears by Martial's Epigram:

Naevia sex Cyathis, septem Justina bibatur,
Quinque Lyeas, Lyde quatuor, Idatribus.
These drunken Matches were in a manner the daily Trade of their Poets, as
appears to any that peruse Horace and Martial. The former, Lib. 1, Ode 37, says,

Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus.
And the latter, Book 11, Epigr. 7, say^*

Possum ego nil sobrius, bibenti
Succurrunt mihi quindecim Poetae.
Nay, Seneca assures us, Not. qu. 4. 13, that their Women exceeded the Men in
these Debauches; Non minus pervigilant, non minus potant: i. e. They sit up as
late, they drink no less, nay, they challenge Men to the anointing of their
Bodies, and the swilling down of Wine, disgorging what they eat and drink as
well as they; neither do they forbear to chew upon Snow, as Men do, for
refreshing their boiling Stomachs.

Those Debauches are yet more graphically described by Pliny, lib. 14, c. 12,
where he says, To the end that we may take the more Cups, and pour it down the
Throat the more lustily, we let it run through a Strainer* to abate the force
thereof: Some take Hemlock before they sit down, because they must drink
perforce then, or else die; and others the Powder of the Pumice-stone, and
suchlike Stuff, which I am ashamed to rehearse, and teach those that be
ignorant of such Lewdness; and yet we see those that be the stoutest Drinkers
lie sweating so long in the Baths and Brothel-houses to digest their Surfeit of
Wine, that ever now and then they are carried forth dead for their labor. You
shall have some again, when they are in the Hot-house, that will not stay so long
as they may go to their Beds, nay, nor as they may put on their Shirts, but
immediately, naked as they are, and panting and puffing for Breath, catch up
great Tankards of Wine, to show what valiant Champions of Bacchus they are, and
pour them down one after another, till they vomit twice or thrice what they
have drank. Then describing their Pots out of which they used to quaff; They
were engraven, says he, with fair portraitures of Adulteries, as if Drunkenness
it self were not sufficient to kindle the heat of Lust, and to teach them
Wantonness. Then, continues he, when they come to be fuddled they cast their
wanton Eyes upon Men's Wives; then fall they to court fair Dames and Ladies,
and openly bewray their Folly even before their jealous and stern Husbands: And
thus many a Man, by his lavish Tongue in his Wine, has come by his Death, and
had his Throat cut. But if they escape these Dangers, they never live to be old
Men, but dye in the strength of their Youth: Hence comes it that some of them
look pale, with flaggy Cheeks, others have bleared and sore Eyes; and there be
of 'em that shake so with their Hands, that they cannot hold a full Cup, but
pour it on the Floor. They are generally disturbed with fearful Dreams, which
is the very beginning of their Hell in this Life; or else have restless Nights;
and finally, if they chance to sleep, for a due reward of their Drunkenness,
they are deluded with the imaginary Conceits of the Delights of Venus, defiled
with filthy abominable Pollutions; and thus sleeping or waking they sin with
pleasure.

Then he proceeds to particular Instances, and names Nivellius Torquatus a
Milanois, who won the Victory from all the Italians in Drinking, adding, That
he had gone through all the Degrees of Dignity at Rome, had been Praetor and
Proconsul, and in all these Offices of State he won no great Name, but for
drinking in the presence of Tiberius three Gallons of Wine at one draught, for
which he was dubbed Knight, by the Surname of Tricongius, or the Three Gallon
Knight. This Torquatus had the Art of Drinking, never was known to falter in
his Tongue, never eased himself by vomiting, always drank without drawing his
Breath, and never left a drop behind in the Cup.

His next Instance is in Mark Antony, who strove to win the Victory in
Drinking, and made a Profession thereof; as appear*d by a Book which he
published under the title of his own Drunkenness, whereby he was not ashamed to
justify his Excesses that way, and thereby approved, under pretense of his
Drunkenness, all the Outrages he committed, and all those Miseries and
Calamities that he brought upon the World. This Treatise, says Pliny he vomited
out a little before his Defeat at Actium.

That same Author gives us two other memorable Instances of Antony's
Drunkenness, the first as follows.

Cleopatra, his Paramour, perceiving his Jealousy of her, insomuch that he
would neither eat nor drink without his Taster, she designed to make Sport of
his needless Fear; and therefore causing a Chappelet or Garland of Flowers to
be made for Antony, she dipped all the edges of the Flowers in strong Poison;
and having thus prepared it, set it upon Antony's Head; and having sat at Meat
a good while, and drank themselves merry, she challenged Antony for each of
them to drink their Chappelets; and having first drank off her own, Antony
minced his, and putting it into his Cup, prepared to drink it off; but just as
he was setting it to his Head, she put her Hand between and staid him, and then
uttered these Expressions: My dear and best-beloved Antony, now see what she is
whom thou do so much dread and stand in fear of, that for thy security thou
must have extraordinary Tasters, a Curiosity more nice than needful: Lo, how I
am not to seek of Means and Opportunities to compass thy Death, if I could find
in my Heart to live without thee. And then she sent for a Prisoner out of the
Jayl, whom she caus*d to drink off the Cup that Antony had prepared for
himself, and the poor Wretch died by that time he had well taken the Cup from
his Lips.

The next Instance is this: Cleopatra being possessed of two Pearls, the
richest and fairest that were ever known in the World, being left to her by
descent, and accounted Nature's Wonder, she began to undervalue the Expense
that Antony had been at in treating her from day to day, to the utmost of his
might; and when he demanded of her how it was possible to go beyond the
magnificence and cost of his Treat, she answered, That she would spend upon him
One hundred thousand Sestertii at one Supper. Antony thought that impossible,
and therefore wager'd with her, that she could not do it. Next night she made
him a Supper, royal enough, but much short of those that he had before prepared
for her; whereupon he began to laugh her to Scorn, and demanded a Bill of the
Particulars, to which she answered, That what had been brought in already was
mere Overplus, and that she would yet in that Supper eat Six hundred thousand
Sestertii for her own part: Upon which she took one of those Pearls from her
Ears, and dissolving it in Vinegar, drank it off: And as she was about to do
the like with the other, L. Placentius, the Judge of that Wager, laid fast hold
upon it, and pronounced, That Antony had lost; upon which he fell into a mighty
Passion. There was an end of one Pearl; and the fellow thereof being taken from
this Queen when she was a Prisoner, it was divided in two, in memory of that
half Supper of theirs, and hung in the Ears of Venus at Rome, in the Temple of
Pantheon. And yet, says Pliny, as prodigal as they were, they shall not go
away with the Prize; for long before their time Clodius, the Son of Aesop the
Tragedian practiced the like in Pearls of great price; so that Antony has, to
match him in all his Magnificence, one little better than a Stageplayer.

Lest Drunkenness should be thought to be only the Vice of some particular
persons among the Romans, Lipsius in his Epistles tells us, That it was a
common Crime among them, because the Emperors themselves were deeply infected
with it, and highly rewarded it in others. He names one Firmus, who was Deputy
of Egypt under Aurelian, and drank off two Buckets full of Wine at a time.
Bonosus the Emperor was wont to say, That he was not born to live, but to
drink; and when he was hanged for some Misdemeanour, he was called an hanging
Tankard, and not a Man. The Emperor Maximinus is charged with drinking nine
Gallons of Wine in one day. And one Phagon, in Aurelian's time, is accused of
drinking more; insomuch that Lipsius says, He should tremble to write those
things, but that he had them from good Authors. Nero promoted Piso to be
Provost of Rome, for his Drunkenness; and Flaccus Pomponius to be Governor of
Syria for that same Quality. He likewise preferred an ignoble and obscure Fellow
before the Chief of the Nobility, to be a Questor or Treasurer, because he
drank off nine Gallons of Wine at a Feast which Nero himself had made. And how
far that beastly Vice of Drunkenness had infected the common People of Rome,
appears by the Fannian Law, says Macrobius, Saturnal, lib. 3, c. 17, which was
made against Drunkenness, because, says he, matters were come to that pass,
that the greatest part of the common People of Rome came ordinarily drunk into
the Council-house, to consult of the Safety of the State.

The more to excite them to Drunkenness, the Vessels out of which they drank
were very costly and curious in their Workmanship, being chased, embossed, or
wrought in Imagery and Flowerwork, as if the Painter had drawn them. These
Celatures were so framed, that they might put them on or take them off at
pleasure, and were therefore called Emblemata: Such was that whereof Javenal
the Satyrist speaks, Sat. 1, Stantem extra pocula Caprum; a Goat standing out
from the Cup; two of this kind cost Lucius Crassus the Orator One hundred
thousand Sesterces, that is about Five hundred thirty three Pounds Sterlin.
Sometimes they were made of Onix-stones, dug from the Mountains of Arabia,
sometimes of Mother of Pearl, and other curious Shells; and all those kinds
they richly enameled with Pearls and precious Stones. We drink, says Pliny,
lib. 33. 11, in rows of Pearl, and garnish our Pots with Emeralds; it delights
us to hold the Indies in our Hands, as a provocation to Drunkenness. And
because of the richness of their Cups, they set some at their Feasts to watch
their Drinking-vessel. They thought not themselves dainty enough, says
Pacatus, unless Luxury had changed the Season of the Year, unless Winter-roses
swam upon the top of their Pots, and unless their pleasant Wines dissolved the
Summer-ice in a large Gemm. They had also Cups of Murrin and Crystal of
wonderful great prizes, and one of those bought for Three hundred thousand
Sesterces, or above Five and twenty hundred Pounds Sterlin, by Nero, Petronius,
who had been Consul, broke in pieces a little before his death, on a spite to
Nero, that he might disinherit his Table thereof.

We shall conclude this point of their Drunkenness with the beastly Forms of
many of their Cups; Vi^reo bibit ille Priapo, says Juvenal, He drinks out of a
Priapus made of Glass. And Pliny to the same purpose says, In poculis
libidines caelare Juvat, and per obscaenitates bibere: They delight to engrave
their Lustful Dalliances upon their Cups, and to drink in Obscenity.

The next thing that falls under our Consideration is their Gluttony, which
being also a Sin of the Flesh, and an Incentive of Lust and Uncleanness, does
properly belong to our Subject.

Their Luxury in this respect appeared in their Tables, Platters, Number and
Order of their Servants, as well as in their Courts. They had Tables of Silver
and Gold, as appears by that of Martial, Epig. 31: Sustentatque tuas Aurea
mensa dapes; i. e. Thy Dishes are set upon Tables of Gold: But the Tables which
they valued most were of Citron, which they brought from Africa. Tully had one
which cost him Ten thousand Sesterces, though he was both severe in his Morals,
and poor, compared with others. Afinius Pollio had one which was sold for
Eleven thousand Sesterces; and the more knotty those Tables were, the more they
were valued. And those Tables stood also upon Ivory Frames and Feet. Dion
reports of Seneca, That notwithstanding his severe and Stoical Profession, he
was stored with Four hundred such Tables; and Annius had three hundred of them,
and as many Servants to attend them.

Then as to their Platters or Chargers, Pliny says, That Drusillanus, one of
the Emperor Claudius's Slaves, and his Treasurer in High Spain, had a Silver
Charger of Five hundred pound weight; and Vitellius had one which cost him a
Million of Sesterces, or about Eight thousand Three hundred and Thirty three
pounds Sterlin; so that Mucianus upbraided the Memorial of him, calling his
Excess that way Palinarum Paludes, Platters as broad as Ponds.

Then as to their Waiters at Table, they sometimes made use of naked Wenches:
And thus Tiberius the Emperor sent a Message to Sextus Cla^dius, that he would
come and sup with him, on condition that he would change nothing of his wonted
fashion, which was, that he should have naked Wenches waiting on him at Supper.
Seneca, in his 95th Epistle, says, they had whole Troops of unfortunate
Ganimedes, and Troops of exsolete or stale Catamites grown to Man's estate,
waiting on them at Table, and those they ranked into several Bands, according
to their Nations and Complexions. He further tells us of the infinite number of
their Cooks, Bakers, etc. and then cries out, Dii boni quantum hominum unius
Venture exercet! Good God, what a number of Men does one Belly set at work! They
had also Schools, and Masters to teach the Art of Carving to their Scholars, by
Dishes fashioned in Wood after what manner and with what gesture of the Body
they should cut them up.

Seneca, in his 97th Epistle, says, Do you wonder that our Diseases are
innumerable? Number our Cooks if you can. The Schools of Philosophers are
empty, but how are our Kitchins frequented?

Pliny, lib. 9. 17, says, That scarce any Man was in greater request than those
Cooks that could most artificially waste their Master's Substance. The infinite
waste they made this way, the only Story of Apicius, an infamous Belly-God, may
suffice to show, who having laid up Ninety Millions of Sesterces for his
Kitchen, besides many great Gifts of Princes, and a mighty Revenue of the
Capitol, being deep in Debt, he began at last, though sore against his Will, to
look into his Reckonings, and sound that, all being cast up, he had still
remaining clear Ten Millions of Sesterces, or Eightythree thousand Three
hundred and thirty pounds Sterlin; and yet, for fear that he should live in an
Hunger-starved fashion, he poisoned himself: Upon which Seneca exclaims, How
great was that Luxury to which ten Millions of Sesterces seemed Poverty?

And that this Gluttony was common among the Romans, appears from Juvenal and
Seneca; the former, Sat. 1, says, Vna comedunt patrimonia mensa; They devour
whole Estates at one sitting: And the latter, Ep. 95, says, What is more lewd
than a sumptuous Supper, that wastes a Knight's Revenues, of which the most
frugal, if it be but any way solemn, costs Three hundred thousand Sesterces, or
Two thousand Five hundred and Fifty five pounds Sterling? Nor did they only
exceed as to the Quantity and Quality, but as to the Frequency of their
Banquets. Tiberius spent a Night and two days in continual eating and drinking.
It was usual with Nero to eat from Noon till Midnight; and Vitellius feasted
usually three or four times a Day, every sitting being valued at Four hundred
thousand Sesterces, or Thirty-three thousand Three hundred and thirty-three
pounds Sterling; which was One million Thirty-three thousand Three hundred and
thirty-two pounds Sterling per Day; being easily able to go through them all by
a continual Custom of Vomiting, which was common among them: Says Seneca, De
Consolatione ad Albinam, c. 9. They vomit that they may eat, and eat again that
they may vomit; and those Delicates which they hunt for through the World, they
vouchsafe not so much as to digest: Nay, the very Women practice it as well as
Men; they eat against their Stomachs that which they soon return by their
Mouths. The number of their Courses were usually seven; and at one Feast that
Monster Heliogabalus had two and twenty Courses of the choicest Fare served in.
Nay, Suetonius tells us, That at a casual Supper made to the Emperor Vitellius,
by his Brother, there were Two thousand of the choicest Fish, and Seven
thousand Fowl, served in.

Seneca, in the above cited place, says, They fetch that from the furthest part
of the Ocean which their Stomachs, weakened with Delicacies, will hardly admit.
And then a little after he adds; O wretched Men, says he, whose Pallates are
not stirred but with precious Meats, especially when that which makes them be
accounted precious is not their singular Relish or excellent Savor, but only
their Searcity, and the Difficulty of procuring them.

Latinus Pacatus, in his Panegyric says much the same, viz. That this our
World was too narrow for their Throats; for, not valuing their Cates by their
Taste, but by their Cost, they were only content with that Provision which they
had from the uttermost parts of the East, or Colchus, seated beyond the Roman
Empire.

Many think it (says Plutarch, in his Book concerning the Precepts of Health)
an absurd thing not to feed liberally on things which are rare, and can hardly
be got, such as the Paps of a Sow when she is newly farrow'd, Italian
Mushromes, Samian Cakes, or Snow out of Egypt.

Among these Excesses, Vitellius's Platter deserves our notice, which, for the
bigness of it, he called Minerva's Buckler; and this he crammed with the Livers
of Guiltheads, the Brains of Phesants and Peacocks, the Tongues of
Phaenicopters, and the Melts of Lampreys, brought from the Spanish and
Carpathian Seas. And the like, that of Aesop the Tragedian, which he furnished
out with the rarest Singing-birds, or such as imitated Man's Voice, which cost
him Six thousand Sesterces, or Fifty pounds Sterling, a piece; and the whole
Dish Six hundred thousand Sesterces, or Five thousand pounds Sterling; as is
mentioned by Valerius and Seneca. The latter says, concerning Caligula, That
Nature seemed to have brought him forth to show what Effects the greatest Vices
joined with the greatest Fortune could produce: And Suetonius says of him, That
in thriftless Expenses he exceeded the Wits of all the Prodigals that ever
were, inventing most monstrous kinds of Meats and Suppers; the most Orient
Pearls that were to be gotten, he dissolved in Vinegar, and swallowed down, and
set before his Guests Bread of Victuals and Gold. And Lampridius says of
Heliogabalus, That at one Supper he caused to be served in, the Heads o^ Six
hundred Ostriches, only for the eatin^ of their Brains.

The same Authors give surprising Accounts of the wonderful niceness of the
Romans, in the strangeness, weight, and newness of their Fishes; as also of the
vastnes^ of their Fishponds, and numbers of Fishe^ in them. They were so nice
in their Fishes, that they would not eat them except they saw them killed; and
for tha^ end they were brought into their Dining-rooms swimming in
Glass-bottles, that the Guests might feed their Eyes with the change of Colors
that appeared in the dying Fishes. Severus the Emperor had the Fishes brought
to his Table by Men wearing Garlands and Chappelets, as if they had been to
sacrifice to the Gods. Licinius Crassus, counted a grave staid Citizen, mourned
in black for a Lamprey that died in one of his Fish Ponds, and was thereupon
afterward called Licinius Murena, as is related by Cicero. Octavius, Admiral
of the Roman Navy, finding that the Fish called Scarus was not to be had in the
Italian Seas, brought vast quantities of 'em from other parts, sowed them in
those Seas, as Men do Corn upon Lands, and for five Years together employed his
utmost Endeavors, if any of 'em happened to be taken by the Fishermen, that
they should be thrown back again into the Sea. Domitian the Emperor delighted
so much in his Lampreys, that he gave each of 'em a Name, and they would come
to him one by one upon his Call. Antonia, the Wife of Drusus, hung Jewels in
the Gilds of a Lamprey which she loved; and Hortensius the Orator wept for the
death of one of his Lampreys.

Their Luxury as to their Fowl was no less remarkable; those they chiefly
delighted in were Phoenicopters, Peacocks, Thrushes, and Pigeons, which though
they had in great abundance, yet their Riot and Luxury made very dear, so that
in Colu^ella's time fair Pigeons were sold at Four thousand Sesterces a pair;
and they had whole bands of Hunters, marching under several Colors, in the
Provinces, the end of whose Wars was, to make provision for their Feasts, says
Latinus Pacatus. And they were so curious as to their Bakers, that they would
give Five hundred pounds Sterling for a good one. Then they had a thousand
kinds of sawces for stirring up the Appetite. They made use of Bathings and
Anointings before their Feasts, Perfumes and sweet Odours of diverse kinds at
their Feasts; they strewn their Rooms with Saffron, changed their Apparel,
nay, and the very Roofs of their Rooms where they sat, at the bringing in of
every new Dish; and, last of all, used such damnable lustful practices after
their Feasts, as are not fit to be named amongst Christians; as may appear to
any that will consult the Author^ abovementioned.

The Quantities which some of them devoured at Meals is also worth our Notice
Maximinus the Emperor, says Codrus, devoured many times in one day sixty pound
of Flesh. Clodius Albinus, in a Morning fasting, would eat Five hundred dried
Figs One hundred Peaches of Campania, ten Melons of Ostia, twenty pound weight
o^ Grapes of Lavica, One hundred Gnatknappers, and forty Oysters. Phago, in
who^ Aurelian the Emperor took so much delight would, says Vopiscus, at one
Meal eat up ^ whole Boar, One hundred Loaves, a Weather, and a young Pigeon.
And Athenaeu^ used to set before every Guest a Boar in ^ several Dish.

Their prodigious superfluity in their temporary Buildings, and such as were
only designed for pleasure, was no less abominable, fetching Marble from the
remotest parts of the Earth, hewing down the top^ of Mountains, and
transporting them by Sea, at the expense of many Men's Lives.

Of this nature was the Theater of Scaurus, which was capable of receiving
Eighty thousand persons to sit at their case; the Stage of it had three
Stories, wherein were Three hundred and sixty Columns of Marble; the nethermost
part of the Stage was of Marble, the middle of Glass, and the uppermost of
gilded Boards; the Columns beneath were thirty-eight foot high, and between
them there stood three thousand Statues and Images of Brass. The Hangings of
this Theater were of Cloth of Gold; and they had painted Tables, the most
exquisite that could be found: And yet, says Pliny, this Theater was not to
continue above a Month.

Of the same nature was Caligula's Bridge, mentioned by Suetonius, built from
Puteoli to Bauly, over a Bay of the Sea, for no other use but Ostentation, and
that he might imitate Xerxes; and upon this he marched with the Senate and
Soldiery, in a triumphant manner, feasted and passed the Night in Dalliance
and Gaming.

Then, as to their permanent Amphitheatres, Ammianus gives us this Account of
that built by Titus, viz. the height thereof was such, that the Eye of Man
could hardly reach it. It was reared, says Cassiodorus, with Rivers of
Treasure poured out: It contained upon the very Steps of it easy Seats for
Eighty-seven thousand Men; and, in other places, room for Twenty thousand more.

And as the mass of Treasure was insinite which they cast away in the raising
of these Buildings, only to make People sport, it was incredible what they
spent in furnishing them, and setting forth their Games therein. They spent in
exhibiting Sword-fights, says Lactantius, Treasure enough to maintain great
Cities. And the Magistrate, upon Theatrical Games, says Ambrose, in his 81st
Sermon, lavishes out his whole Patrimony to purchase one hour's Applause.

The whole Furniture of those Theaters was sometimes all of Silver, as that of
Julius Caesar and Caius Antonius, and sometimes of Gold. And thus Nero, for the
Ostentation of his Greatness to Teredates King of Armenia, covered over not the
Stage only, but the whole Theater, with Gold. The Curtains which kept them from
the heat of the Sun was all of Purple, embroidered with Stars of Gold, and the
place below, called Arena, because strow'd with Sand, Nero caused to be strow'd
over with Dust of Gold, he himself being to try a Match of Chariot-driving
therein.

Their incredible Expense and Luxury in abusing the Creature at those Shows,
merely out of a Principle of Pride and Ostentation, will yet further appear by
the Instances following.

They were at a vast Expense in the multitude of Fencers, whom they hired for
great prices, because they were to expose their Lives, besides the Charge of
their Arms and Diet before they entered: And when they exhibited Beasts, the
Relations made by Historians concerning their number are incredible.

Thus Vopiscus tells us, That the Emperor Probus commanded to be let loose at
once a thousand Ostriches, a thousand Staggs, a thousand wild Boars, and a
thousand fallow Deer, besides wild Goats, wild Sheep, and other Beasts, all
which he gave over to the Mercy, or rather to the Rage, of the People, every
one to catch what he could, the Circus at the same time being set all over with
tall and mighty Trees, which the Soldiers took up by the Roots in the Wood,
brought them thither, and fastened them with green Turf, and Bars, and Irons.
The next day he let into the same place an hundred crested Lions, an hundred
Leopards of Lybia, an hundred of Syria, an hundred Lionesses, and three hundred
Bears; which filled the Air with Roaring, as if it had been with Thunder.

Nay, the Madness of Heliogabalus was yet greater, who exhibited Ships in the
Circus failing and fighting in Wine.

And, during those Shows, it was usual to refresh the Spectators with pleasant
Perfumes, sweet Water, Ointments, Saffron mixed with Wine, or somewhat of that
kind, which they conveyed in close Pipes through the whole Amphitheatre. And
the Fight being ended, they commonly cast a Largess among the People, wrapping
up the Names of those things in little pellets, which they intended to give,
and every one, as he could catch them, brought them to the Master of the Games,
who delivered them the things themselves specified in the Pellet; and those
Gifts consisted not only in Meat, Drink, and Apparel, but in Vessels of Silver
and Gold, Horses, Cattle, Slaves, and the like. And Nero added curious
Pictures, precious Stones, yea, Ships, Horses, Farms, Islands; A thing hardly
to be credited, says Lypsius, though delivered by Suetonius, a most faithful
Historian.

Their Luxury did likewise extend it self to their Baths, which some of them
had so accustomed themselves unto, that they could neither eat nor drink
without bathing first, or being sweated in a Stove. Pliny says, That the number
of them at Rome, in his time, was infinite; that Agrippa, during his
Aedileship, built for public use One hundred and seventy; And some of them,
says Ammianus, were so large, that they were built in the manner of Provinces.
Dioclesian's Baths alone were so capacious, that they contained, for the use of
Washing, Sixteen hundred several Seats, and those all of polished Marble.

Seneca, in his 86th Epistle, has most elegantly expressed, and bitterly
censured the Ornament and Beauty of those bathing places, those of the Common
People having their Walls shining with great and precious Circles, and the
Shavings of Numidian Marble, inlaid with that of Alexandria, their Borders
painted or inlaid with diverse Colors, their Arched Roofs covered over with
Glass, and the whole adorned with Thasian Stone, formerly a rare Sight but in
Temples; and the Water was conveyed into them by Silver Cocks. But how much
beyond all this, says he, are the Baths of their Freed-men? how many Statues
and Pillars have you there, for no other use, but only for Ornament and Expense?

Pliny goes farther, and tells us, That not only the sides of the Cisterns in
which they bathed were of Silver, but the Seats and Footing for the Bottom, so
as they could hardly stand for sliding upon it. Nay, Rosinus, in his Roman
Antiquities, says, They used to anoint the very Walls of their Baths with rich
Ointments, even such as were but for the use of Servants.

Another piece of their Vanity and Pride of Life was the infinite numbers of
chargeable Statues that the People of Rome erected to themselves, and those for
the most part overlaid with Gold. This itching Humor of theirs to eternize
themselves, as they thought they would do by this means, did in time beget
almost as many Inhabitants to the City as Nature brought forth; says
Cassiodorus, They were so numerous, that they filled every Corner, pestered
their Streets, and streighten'd their Ways; insomuch that an Edict was
published in the time of Claudius, forbiddimg any private Men to erect Statues
to themselves, but by Leave first obtained from the Senate. The basest of those
Statues were made of Marble, the rest of Ivory, and Silver and Gold, and those
also solid and massy. Domitian would suffer no Statues to be erected for
himself in the Capitol, but of massy Gold, and weighing no less than an hundred
pound. And Commodus had one of a thousand pound weight.

They were also at great charge in guarding those Statues, and to this purpose
maintained an Officer of great Honor, who had the Title of Comes Romanus; his
province was to walk through the Streets of the City in the Nightime, with
his Soldiers, chiefly to take care that no Wrong should be offered to the
Statues; so prodigally careful were the Romans of their own Shadows, and at the
same time prodigally careless of the Lives of others.

We come next to take notice of their prodigality and sumptuousness in their
private Buildings. The elegant Poet Claudian speaking of them in general, says,

Qua nil in terris complectitur altius Ether, etc.
Blondus, in his Book de Roma Triumphante, says, That Cic^ro alone had eighteen
great Houses in the Country fit to be Palaces for Kings: Their Houses were so
excessive large, that a Man would wonder what use they could be of; and
therefore Valerius upbraids one of them, who thought he was straightened in his
Dwelling, thus, whose House is no larger than were all Cincinnatus' s Grounds.
Some of Nero's Slaves had Kitchins which took up above two Acres of Ground; and
the Lands of those who laid the Foundation of the Empire were of less extent
than the Cellars of some that came after. Salust says, Their Houses and Farms
were built in the manner of Cities. Nay, Seneca, de Benef. 7. 10, says, that
private Men's Houses exceeded the largeness of great Cities. And Juvenal, Sat.
14, says, some of them exceeded their chiefest Temples, and the Capitol it
self, in height; and upon the tops of those high Houses they planted Gardens,
Orchards, and Groves.

Their Riches and Ornament were suitable to their Greatness, for they brought
the most skilful Architects from all the known parts of the World, whose Wit
and Boldness was such, that they attempted to effect what Nature seemed to
deny. Lucullus caused Mountains to be cut, to let the Sea into a Pleasure-house
of his near Naples, for the convenience of keeping his Fish, and for that same
purpose built Rooms in the Sea.

Amongst other Ornaments for their Houses, they delighted chiefly in Pillars or
Columns of great height, and sometimes two hundred in number in one Gallery or
Entry. They gilded the very Beams, Roofs, and Walls of their Chambers with
Pictures and precious Stones intermingled; and they so framed the movable Roofs
of their Dining-rooms, that they could change them upon the bringing in of
every new Course to the Table: And sometimes they represented Groves, with
Birds singing in them. And answerable to these Roofs were their Pavements;
whereupon Martial reprehends them for treading upon Onyx-stones.

We shall conclude this point with a short Account of the Houses of Domitian,
Nero, and Heliogabalus.

As to Domitian's, Plutarch says thus of it; If any Man wonder at the
Magnificence of the Capitol, were he in Domitian's Palace, and saw but one
Gallery, Hall, Bath, or Parlour for his Concubines, he would presently cry out
with Epicharmus, That all the Glory of the Capitol is but a Trifle, in
comparison of Domitian's own House.

As to Nero's, Suetonius describes it thus: In the Porch there was a Colossus,
shaped like himself, One hundred and twenty foot high; the House had three
Galleries in it, each of them a Mile long; a standing Pool, like a Sea,
surrounded with Buildings in manner of a City; Fields, in which were Arable
Grounds, Pastures, Vineyards, and Woods, with a multitude of tame and wild
Beasts of all kinds. In the other parts thereof all was covered with Gold, and
shining with precious Stones, or Mother of Pearl. The Dining-rooms were Roofed
with Ivory Planks, that were movable for the casting down of Flowers, and had
Pipes in them for the sprinkling of Ointments. The Roof of the principal
Dining Room was round, and wheeled about Day and Night, according to the Motion
of the Heavens. And when he had thus finished this House, he said, He began to
dwell like a Man.

Then as to Heliogabalus, the same Author gives an Account, That he built of
Cedar many Barges, whose Sterns were set with Pearls and precious Stones; they
carried Sails of diverse colors, and had in them Baths, Galleries, and
Parlours of great largeness, with variety of Vines, and Trees bearing Fruit;
and lying along in those, in the midst of his Music, he was carried up and
down the Coast of Campania. In the building of his Country-houses he set aside
all Reason, and desired nothing so much, as that which was told him could not
be done; so that he would order huge Piles to be laid in the Sea, to stop the
course of it, cut through Rocks of the hardest Flint, raise the Plains as high
as the Mountains, and level the Mountains with the Plains.

The next thing we take notice of is their Excess in Household Stuff. Their
Bedsteads by degrees came to be of Silver, then gilded, and at last of massy
Gold, Nay, Heliogabalus had his Closestools and Chamberpots of the same; and
'twas ordinary for them to have their Beds perfumed with rich and precious
Odours Then for the Ornament of their Houses, they bought them Pictures at
excessive rates: Lucius Lucullus gave for the Copy of Glycera with a Chappelet
of Flowers in her Hand, two Talents or Three hundred and eighty Pounds
Sterling. Hortensius the Orator gave for a Picture of the Argonauts One hundred
forty four thousand Sesterces, or Twelve hundred pounds Sterling; of which
Seneca says wittily thus: What difference is there herein betwixt us and
Children, who value counterseit Rings, and Jewels, and Bracelets at high
prices, save that we dote about Statues and Pictures, playing the fool at a
dearer rate? Then the Workmanship of those Pictures was many times lascivious
and beastly, and full of obscene postures, enough to corrupt the chaste Minds
of the beholders.

Their Luxury in Apparel, Dressing, etc. was equal to their Luxury in all other
things. Concerning their Effeminacy in general, Seneca says, What is yet left
of Good manners or Fashions we extinguish by trimming and decking our Bodies;
We have exceeded the Niceness of the Women, and wear light and whorish Colors,
not becoming Matrons; We fashion our Gate to a wanton and mincing pace, and do
not walk, but creep: It is now held the accomplished Gallantry of our Youth to
frizzle their Hair like Women, to speak with an affected smallness of Voice, in
tenderness of Body to match them, and to bedeck themselves with most undecent
Trimming. In his Book De brevitate Vitae, he says, How do they chafe if the
Barber be never so little negligent! How do they take on if any thing be lopped
off of their Foretops, if any thing lie out of order, if every thing fall not
even into their Rings and Curls, which of these would not choose, that the State
whereof he is a Member should be in Combustion, rather than his Hair should be
displaited. It was common for them to have their Hair plaited behind, and
besmeared with Ointments and Perfumes; and for their Faces they used so much
Slibber-sauce, such daubing and painting, that they looked like Ulcers. Their
Garments were artificially pressed, to make them shine brighter, and so
curiously plaited, that Hortensius the Orator commenced a Suit against his
fellow in Office, for that meeting him by chance in a narrow way, he had
disordered the Plaits of his Robe; he held it a capital matter, that a Fold
upon his Shoulder was displaced: And so excessive they were in the multitude of
their Apparel, that when any of them went to the public Baths, they had as
much Apparel carried after them as might well suffice a dozen of Men. Lucullus,
says Horace, Ep. 6 had Five thousand short Cloaks; and at their public Feasts
they changed Suits at the coming in of every Course, merely for Ostentation; as
we have showed already.

It was also usual with them to have Rings on every Finger, and sometimes one
for every Joint. Nay, it is recorded of Charinus, that he wore six upon every
Finger; and they arrived to that height of Luxury in this point, that they had
Summer-rings and Winter-rings.

Then as to their Women: If the Men were so nice, we may well suppose that
their Women exceeded, concerning whom Seneca, de Benef. 7. 9, says, 'I see
their Silken Apparel, if it may be called Apparel, wherewith they can neither
cover their Bodies nor their Shame, which when a Woman wears, she cannot safely
swear that she is not naked. Yet these things are brought from Nations with
whom we have no Traffic, that our Women may expose no less to the public view
when they come abroad, than they do to their Paramours in Bed.

Lollia Paulina, a Wife, and afterward Widow to Caligula the Emperor, when she
went to any ordinary Feast, used to have so many Jewels about her, that she
shone again as she went, and offered to prove, that those Ornaments alone stood
her in Four hundred thousand Sesterces.

St. Jerome, in Vita Pauli Eremitae, and Tertullian, de habit^ Muliebri,
complain of the Prodigality of their Times, saying, That upon one Necklace hung
the price of diverse Lopps; and, that upon one Twine there were threaded up Ten
hundred thousand Sesterces. Nay, one Pearl bought by Julius Caesar for his
Paramour Servilia, the Mother of Brutus, cost him Sixty hundred thousand
Sesterces, or near Forty-five thousand pounds Sterling. Nay, says Seneca, the
Women had not sufficiently brought the Men into subjection, if they did not
hang two or three Patrimonies at each Ear. Propertius accuses the Roman Matrons
of jetting it about with the Estates of their Heirs upon them: Yet all this had
been more tolerable, had they not worn them upon their Feet, of which Pliny can
hardly speak with Patience. Lib. 33. 3, Let our Women, says he, wear their
Pearl and precious Stones upon every Finger, about their Necks, in their Ears,
upon their Chappelets and Tresses, but must they also wear them upon their
Feet? And Book 9. 35, he says, Nay, they garnish their Feet with them, and not
only the higher, but the lower part of their Slippers, so that it is not held
sufficient to wear Pearl, unless we tread and walk upon it.

Lampridius tells us of Heliogabalus, that he wore Jewels curiously engraven on
his Feet, as if the Gravings of famous Workmen could be discerned there.

Their Women did not blush to own, that they painted their Eyebrows and Faces,
and died their Hair, and had such insinite numbers of little Boxes full of
Trash for hiding their Deformities, that Ovid, as great an Admirer of the fair
Sex as he was, says, Non semel hic stomacho nausea facta meo; i. e. They had
oftentimes turned his Stomach.

Their Looking-glasses were in height and breadth answerable to their Bodies,
engraven in their Borders with Gold and Silver, and embossed with precious
Stone; Some of those, says Seneca, Not. Quaest. lib. 1. 17, cost more than the
Ancients gave in Dowry with their Daughters; nay, than that which by public
allowance was given the Daughters of the poorer Emperors. And a little further
he says, Now a days, says he, that Dowry which the People of Rome gave with
Scipio's Daughter, will not suffice to buy a Glass for a Manumited Slave's
Daughter, and that was Eleven thousand Asses, which was upwards of Forty pound
Sterling; so that by this we may guess what Luxury reigned among Persons of
Quality.

Then as to the number of their Servants, they were so numerous, that Athenaeus
says, some of them had above Twenty thousand.

Marcellinus describes their Order of ranging their Servants when they went
abroad, as if it had been an Army, insomuch that they were under a necessity of
having Comptrollers, or Nomenclators, to tell them the Names of their Servants.
And, that their Women did also exceed in this kind, may be gathered from St.
Jerome's Epistle to Furia, wherein he forbids her to go abroad with an Army of
Eunuchs marching before her, after the manner of licentious Widows.

Thus we have finished our Collections from the Roman History, which are
sufficient to demonstrate, that that great Empire was ruined by Luxury and
Uncleanness, and will serve to convince any judicious Reader what Monsters
particular Men, and whole Nations, become when judicially given up of God to
work all manner of Uncleanness with Greediness.

We come in the next place to search into Ecclesiastical History, to see what
we can find for our purpose there. In the 2d Book of Eusebius* we find, that
Simon Magus, that great Enemy to the Christian Religion, is accused of keeping
company with one Helena, who had formerly been a common Prostitute in the Stews
of Tire, a City of Phoenicia, whom his Followers called the prime Notion or
first Conception from him, and used to prostrate themselves before the Images
and Pictures of this Simon and his Strumpet Helena. And suitable to this was
their Practice, viz. so impure, that 'twas impossible for Men of Modesty to
utter them, by reason of their excessive Obscenity, there being nothing to be
invented so impure, which their lewd Sect did not far surpass, deluding silly
Women laden with all manner of Iniquity; a pregnant and strong Instance that
Impurity of Life and Principle leads Men naturally to a hatred of true Religion.

The next Instance is in Book 3, Cap. 28, of the Heretic Cerinthus, of whom he
says, That being a Lover of his Body, and altogether carnally minded, he
earnestly lusted after those things wherein he dreamt the Kingdom of Christ
consisted, viz. in the satiety of the Belly, and of those parts beneath the
Belly, that is, Meats, Drinks, and Marriages. And Nicephorus, lib. 3, cap. 14,
says, That under the name of Sacrifices Cerinthus hid his Lusts, that he might
make a show of Honesty and Decency.

Cap. 29, he gives us an account of the Nicolaitans, who took their
denomination from Nicholas, one of the Deacons concerning whom they say, That
having a beautiful Wife, and being accused of Jealousy by the Apostles, he
brought his Wife forth, and permitted her to marry whom she had a mind to, and
that his Followers pretending to imitate him, gave themselves up to all manner
of Fornication, but that those Heretics were on a sudden wholly extinct.

Book 14, Cap. 7, he gives us an account of the Gnostics, who boasted of their
amorous Potions, and of certain Spirits and Familiars, maintained, that they
who would arrive to Perfection in their Mysteries, must act all things that
were most filthy and unclean, being no other ways able to avoid the Rulers of
the World, as they call them, unless they distributed to all of them their Dues
by most filthy and detestable Acts of Obscenity, which brought a Scandal on the
Christians of those Times, as if they had indulged themselves in promiscuous
Uncleanness with their Mothers and Sisters; but the Truth and Purity of their
Doctrine and Practice did quickly vindicate it self from those Calumnies.

Book 6, Cap. 8, he gives us an account of Origen's emasculating himself upon
his understanding those words of our Savior in a literal sense, viz. Some
there are who have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake.
This shows how much Fornication and Uncleanness was condemned by the Christians
in his time, and how careful he was to avoid giving any occasion of Slander to
the Enemies of the Christian Religion, though this Act in it self was no way
justifiable.

Book 7, Cap. 30, he gives us an Account, that Paulus Samosatenus, who spoke
against the Godhead of Jesus Christ, and became a Founder of that Heresy, was
a sensual Man, countenanced those called Subintroduc'd Women, who were neither
Wives nor Concubines, but a third sort, whom they kept, as they pretended, not
to gratify their Lusts, but out of a pious design: And they take particular
notice, that this Paul glutted himself with all Sensual Delights, as Feasting,
Drinking, and the like, which are the common Incentives of Lust, and that he
carried two beautiful Women constantly along with him. And thus he is accused
by an Assembly of Bishops, in their Letter to the Bishop of Rome and
Alexandria, which confirms the Observation we have had sometimes occasion to
make, that a Love to Sensual Pleasures seems to be a great Motive to the Deists
and Socinians of our Times to embrace those damnable Heresies.

In his 8th Book we have an Account, That a Gentlewoman at Antioch and two
beautiful Virgins her Daughters, threw themselves into a River, where they were
drowned, rather than they would submit to the Brutish Lusts of their Heathen
Persecuters. And in Cap. 14, of that same Book, we have a Relation, how
Maxentius, and other Persecuters of the Christians, omitted no manner of Action
that was impure and libidinous; they committed Adulteries and Rapes of all
sorts; he parted Husbands, by Divorce, from their lawful Wives, and when he had
defiled them he most dishonourably sent them back again to their Husbands. And
thus he treated Persons of all Qualities. He passed through no City in his
Journey without ravishing Women and Virgins; and these his vile Practices
succeeded according to his desire against all Persons, the Christians only
excepted, who having contemned Death, despised his outrageous Tyranny. And thus
one of the most noted Women of Alexandria, being a beautiful Person, and
solicited to commit Adultery with him, chose rather to expose her Life to
Danger, and so was sent into Exile: And a Roman Lady, whose Husband was Prefect
of Rome, being sent for by Maxentius, in order to be defiled by him, and
finding that her Husband had, for fear, permitted the Soldiers to carry her
away, she killed her self, rather than she would be defiled by the lustful
Tyrant. So that to the shame of many who call themselves Christians now-adays,
their abominable Lecheries were formerly the Character of their Persecuters;
and nothing could be more odious to the Primitive Christians than such vile
Practices, as many who bear that Name do now indulge themselves in. But to
return to this Monster of Tyranny Maxentius, the Divine Vengeance pursued him;
for, his Arm^^ being defeated by Constantine, he himself, and a great part of
them, were drowned in the Tiber, after which his Corpse were dragged out, and
his Head being cut off, it was carried about on a Lance, as a joyful Spectacle
to the People.

Eusebius also takes notice, that the Heathens were at that time punished with
intestine Wars, Famine, and Pestilence, on the account of their Persecution and
those impure Practices; and, that Galerius Maximianus, who to his Persecution
of the Christians had also added Impurity of Life, died of a most dreadful
Distemper in his Genitals, and a Fistula in Ano, to the Horror and Amazement
of all that were about him, the stink of his Body being so intolerable, that it
killed diverse of his Physicians.

In his 10th Book, he gives us an Account of the wicked Emperor Licinius, who
to his hatred of the Christian Religion and Learning of all sorts, joined
abominable Uncleanness, forcing Wives from their Husbands, and giving them to
be defiled by his Slaves. Nay, his own Lustful Rage was so great, that his
decrepit Years could not assuage the same, but even then he abused married
Women and Virgins, toward the fulfilling of his insatiable Lust; at last
Judgment pursued him; for being overcome by Constantine the Great, and
continuing unreclaimable, notwithstanding the Clemency used toward him by that
gracious Christian Emperor, he ordered him to be strangled: And thus was his
Exit suitable to his inglorious Life.

Socrates, lib. 5, cap 18, gives us an Account, That the Heathen Romans had
Victualling-houses under Ground, wherein they prostituted Whores, by which
Devices they trepanned many persons, some going in thither to supply themselves
with Food, others to satisfy their libidinous and filthy Desires, for by a
certain Engine purposely made for that end, they were conveyed from the
Victualling-house down into the Bakehouse, where they were forced to work, and
continued there till they were grown old, and being never suffered to go out,
their Relations took it for granted that they were dead. This Trick was chiefly
put upon Strangers, and was discovered by one of the Emperor Theodosius's
Soldiers, who being trappan'd in this manner, killed some of those with his
Dagger that would have detained him; and escaping by this means, acquainted the
Emperor with it, who ordered those Houses to be pulled down, and the Masters of
them to be punished. Another abominable Custom they had, which was abolished
also by this Emperor, of which he gives the following Account: If a Woman were
taken in Adultery, they shut her up in a narrow Brothel- house, and forced her
to play the Whore in a most impudent manner; and during the performance of that
unclean Act, they caused little Bells to be rung, to the end that what was done
within might be known to those who passed by; of which the Emperor Theodosius
being informed, he ordered those Stews to be pulled down, and commanded, that
Women taken in Adultery should be otherwise punished. It Is true that Valesius,
in his Notes upon this Passage, thinks that this Custom was discontinu'd long
before, Adultery being punished by the Romans as a capital Crime, after
Constantine's Reign, and says, that they were common Prostitutes, who rung
Bells to invite Passengers in to them; and quotes Dio Cassius, speaking of the
Emperor Heliogabalus, thus: Having made a Cell within the Palace, he acted his
Lechery therein, standing naked before the Door thereof, as Whores usually do,
shaking his Shirt, which was hung up with Golden Rings, and with a soft,
delicate, broken Voice inviting his Companions to him. So that, be how it will,
it is plain that those abominable things were practiced by the Heathens, and the
Houses or Vaults (whence the word Fornication is derived) where they acted
those Impurities were destroyed by the Christians; whereas so many of those who
call themselves by that venerable Name, in our Days, frequent such loathsome and
execrable Houses.

In the 19th Chapter of that same Book, he relates how the Office of the
Penitentiary Presbyter was abrogated at Constantinople, because a certain
Gentlewoman, who had by him been enjoined to Prayer and Fasting in the Church,
upon the account of her Faults, was debauched there by the Deacon of the said
Church, for which he was ejected, and the People were in hazard of making a
Tumult, because that Fact had brought an Infamy and Disgrace upon the Church;
and therefore Eudaemon, a Presbyter of that Church, advised Nectarius the
Bishop to abolish the Penitentiary Presbyters, and to leave every person to his
own Conscience for the participation of the Holy Mysteries.

Evagrius Scholasti^us, in his 3d Book, Cap. 1, gives us an Account, That the
Emperor Zeno was a lewd debauched Man; that he gave himself wholly up to the
Attempts and Alurements of Lust; that he restrained himself from no manner of
filthy and flagitious Facts, but wallow'd in the commission thereof, in such a
manner, that he thought it vile and mean to commit those things in Darkness and
Obscurity, and that to perpetrate them openly and in the sight of all* he
accounted Royal and becoming an Emperor.

These Courses did quickly render Zeno odious in the sight of all Men;
whereupon Basiliscus improving the general Hatred against Zeno, usurped the
Imperial Diadem, and dethroned him: It Is true, that Zeno afterward reobtain'd
his Crown, and counterfeited the good Christian; but persisting however in his
Impurities and Drunkenness, which threw him into an Epilepsie or
Falling Sickness, he was miserably buried by the Empresses Order, (says
Baronius) in one of those Fits; and when he recovered in his Grave, and cried
to the Soldiers to take him out, they answered, That there was another chosen
in his room; whereupon he entreated to be taken out, and suffered at least to
end his days in a Monastery; but this was also denied him, and in this
miserable condition he ended his wretched Life, while the Soldiers in the mean
time did barbarously scoff at him. This Method did his Empress Ariadne take to
be revenged on him for having defiled her Bed, which though it cannot be
justified in her, yet must certainly be justified, as coming from the Hand of
God.

Evagrius, Book 3, Cap. 39, gives us an account of a wicked Tax, that had
continued a long time among the Romans, called Chrysargyrum, which was imposed
upon those Women who prostituted themselves, and also upon Catamites, insomuch
that this Tax, instead of a Law, made loud Proclamation, That those who had a
mind, might securely, and with Impunity, commit such abominable Lechery; which
the good Emperor Anastasius thought so disgraceful to a Christian Empire, that
he not only abolished the said Tax, but burnt all the Records concerning it,
and the Papers which contained the Methods of collecting it, that none of his
Successors might renew the Infamy of this Exaction.

Having thus taken a short view of what is to be found suitable to our purpose
in the Ecclesiastical Histories of Eusebius, Socrates, and Evagrius, we shall
conclude this part with some account of the Penance which the Ancients
enjoined upon Christians for Uncleanness, viz. The time of Penance for
Fornication was Seven Years, and for Adultery Fifteen. The Penitents presented
themselves before the Door of the Church, in poor, sordid, and ragged Apparel;
being entered into the Church, they received Ashes upon their Heads and
Hair-Cloth upon their Bodies, and then went out of the Church, the Door being
usually shut after them. It was customary for them to remain shut up weeping
and groaning, unless on Festival days, when they presented themselves in the
Church Porch; some time after they were admitted to hear the Lectures, with
command to go out before Prayers. At the end of a certain time they were
allowed to pray with the Congregation, but lying all-along upon the Earth, and
at length, were suffered to pray standing, until the Offertory, when they went
out: The space of time was often abridg'd by the Clergy, according as they
perceived the Penitents deserved Indulgence.

Thus we see what an odious Sin Uncleanness was reckoned amongst the Primitive
Christians. Clemens Alexandrinus thought that there was no Mercy nor Repentance
for them that were guilty of Uncleanness above once or twice. Nay, some Authors
say, That in the first times perpetual Penance was enjoined for Adultery, and
they were scarcely admitted into Communion at ^^e Hour of Death, till Pope
Zephyrinus, about the Year 216, appointed a shorter time, wherein he was
opposed by the African Churches. The Ancyran Council, Anno 315, appointed seven
Years Penance for the first Fault, and upon a Relapse forbad the receiving of
them into Communion at the hour of Death. In the Synod of Illiberis, Can. 1,
they enjoin the same punishment upon Bawds, and such as prostitute the Bodies
of their Children. ^t is well known, says Bishop Tailor, that the Civil Laws in
the Primitive Church punished Adultery with Death, the Husband killing the Wife
in the Act, with the Allowance of the Law.

If the Christians in Clemens Alexandrinus's time had been guilty of those
Impurities which many of those that bear that Name now are, with what Face
could he have upbraided the Heathens of his time, as he does in his Admonition
to the Greeks, p. 39, 40. viz. That as they had ordered the matter, by the
Marriages, Propagation, Adulteries, and Banquets of their Gods, they had turned
Heaven into a Comical Scene, and jested Religion into Scorn and Laughter? there
being nothing more usual with them, than to hang their Rooms with the Pictures
of their Gods, drawn in the most obscene postures, and engaged in the most
filthy and dishonest actions, enough to shame even Vice it self. These, says
he, are the Original Patterns of your soft Effeminacy; this is your brutish and
profane Divinity; these are the Do^^rines of your Gods, Copartners with you in
your ^ncleanness and Adultery.

The like we may observe from that passage of Tertullian, ad Nationes, lib. 1,
cap 4, where he says, That he knew of some Husbands, when Heathens, who were so
very jealous of their Wives (and possibly not without reason) that a Mouse
could not stir in the Room, but it must be a Gallant creeping to their Bed:
Yet, upon their turning Christians, they became so eminently reserved, chaste,
and modest, that there was not the least Foundation of Suspicion; their
Jealousy was converted into Hatred, and they vowed they had rather their Wives
should be Strumpets than Christians.

Of the same nature is the Passage of Origin to Celsus, lib. 1, p. 21. where he
says, They (meaning the Heathens) must needs confess the Excellency and
Divinity of Christ's Doctrine, who do but look into the Lives of those who
adhere unto it, comparing their former Course of Life with that which they now
lead, and considering in what Impurities, Lusts, and Wickedness every one of
them wallow'd before they embraced this Doctrine; but since, how much better
they are become, insomuch that some of them, out of a more transcendent desire
of Purity, and that they may worship God with a chaste Mind, deny themselves
even the Pleasures of a Lawful Bed. And, lib. 7, p. 365, That the Christians
had no need, as some of the best among the Gentiles had, to use Arts and
Medicines, or to have Guardians over them, to preserve their Chastity, the Word
of God being sufficient to expel irregular Appetites. Nay, and that which is
more observable, Pliny, though a Heathen himself, and a persecuter, wrote to the
Emperor Trajan, That the Christians detested Murder, Adultery, and such other
Ungodliness.

Tertullian, in his Apology, cap. 9, p. 10, says of the Heathens, Wherever you
are, at home or abroad, Lust is your Companion; whereas Chastity, diligently
and faithfully preserved, keeps us from any such Event; and we are far from
Incest, which ye often stumble upon in your Lusts, as we are from Whoredom, or
any Excess in a married state. And in the close of his Apology, cap. ult. p.
40, he says, While you choose to condemn a Woman that is a Christian, to the
Stews, rather than to the Lions, you plainly own, that the violation of
Chastity is accounted by us an heavier Penalty than any Punishment or kind of
Death which you can inflict upon us.

And that this may appear not to have been their Doctrine only, but also their
Practice, we referr to the Instances of the Chastity of the Governor of Rome's
Wife, who chose rather to kill her self than to be defiled by the Emperor
Maxentius, as before mentioned. And that remarkable Instance related by St.
Jerome, in the Life of Paul the Hermit, Tom. 1, p. 237. In the Decian
Persecution, a young Man, a Christian, in the Flower of his age, was carried
into a Garden that had all things conspiring to make it a place for pleasure
and delight; being laid upon a Bed of Down, and fastened to it with silken
Cords, the Company withdrawing, a beautiful Strumpet was sent in to him, who
caressing and treating him with all the Arts of Wantonness, not consisting with
Modesty to name, the young Man finding the Temptation ready to prevail,
presently bit off his Tongue, and spit in her Face as she attempted to kiss
him. Many other Instances of this nature might be added, but these are enough
to testify how much the Primitive and Ancient Christians abhorred Uncleanness,
in Practice as well as Principle.

Then as to the Opinion which the Primitive Christians had of Marriage, and
their Reasons for entering into it; let us hear what Athenagoras says in his
Apology, p. 37. Either, says he, we marry not at all, but keep our selves
always continent, or if we do marry, it is for no ^ther End, but the bringing up
of Children: Whoever among us takes a Wife, according to the Laws prescribed
us, he reckons he does it only for ^^e begetting of Children; within this his
Desires ^re bound and limited, as the Husbandman con^^rns himself no further in
tilling his Ground and ^owing his Corn, than to bring forth the Crop at
Harvest. And hence it was that they seldom ^arried oftener than once, as
Minutius Faelix ^ays, p. 26.

Origin against Celsus, lib. 5, p. 264, says, We in all our Abstinences do it
only to keep under ^he Body, and to bring it into subjection, endea^ouring to
mortify the Deeds of the Body, to ex^el and extinguish our Members upon the
Earth, ^ornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, and every evil
Concupiscence and Desire. The Hatred which that Great Man had against
Uncleanness is sufficiently manifest by his ^ismembring himself, as formerly
mentioned, and choosing rather to have Incense forced in^o his Hand, and so
offered up to Idols at Athens, than to have his Body abused by an Ethiopian,
which the Heathens threatened him with.

How careful the Primitive Christians were ^o avoid all occasions of
Uncleanness, appears from Cyprian, de Discip. and Habit. Virg. p. 167. where he
justly chides some Virgins for being present at Weddings, where they laughed
freely, could not but hear loose Discourses, see uncomely Behavior, feed upon
luxurious Dishes, all which must not only kindle^ but add Fuel to the Fire, and
fill the Min^ with undecent Thoughts and Desires.

St. Jerome on the other hand does as much commend such Virgins who always kept
a^ home on Festival days, to avoid the crowd^ and Gazes of the People, and
would never go abroad at those times when they could not venture into the
public without the greatest Care and Custody of themselves* Such was the
Cautiousness of the Primitiv^ Christians, they stood at a distance from
whatever was offensive either to their Eyes or Ears. Their Ears they stopped
against all loose idle Songs, all filthy and obscene^ Discourses; their Eyes
they shut against al^ uncomely Objects, all wanton and lascivious Pictures,
and, as Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, not doing any thing that seemed to carry
an^ ill color with it.

The Council of Laodicea, in their 30th Canon, forbad Christian Men to use the
same common Baths with Women; nay, so abominable were all Uncleanness to the
ancient Church, that they were even too severe against second Marriages, as
Zonaras tells us, Can. 7, Council. Neocaes. suspended such as married twice from
the Communion a whole Year. And the Council of Laodicea, Can. 1, required, that
they should spend some time at least in Penance, Fasting, and Prayer, before
they be received to the Communion. Tertul^ian, Cyprian, Minutius, Faelix, and
St. Jerome, ^^veigh*d also against second Marriages, ^herein though they acted
not only without, ^ut even against Divine Authority, seeing ^he Apostle limits
no number of Times, but ^^ys positively, that it is better to marry than to
^^rn, yet it shows how careful the ancient Christians were to avoid those
Impurities, which many who call themselves Christians ^ill scarcely own now to
be a Crime.

St. Ambrose says, The Apostle did well to warn ^hristians to flee Fornication,
by which the Sons of ^od, says he, are made the Children of the De^il. Nay, the
Schoolmen make simple For^ication to be a deadly Sin, and that in such ^easure
as Peraldus a Papist concludes, That ^ one who had never before sinned, but had
done ^ll the Good that could be imagined, should but ^nce commit this Sin, he
must of necessity be damned without Repentance. Aquinas says, That simple
^ornication, inasmuch as it is against the Good of ^he Offspring to be brought
forth, is so unlawful, ^^at it is a deadly Sin. Epiphanius, against the
^arpocratians, Lib. 1, Tom. 2, Cap. 27, says, That because of their
Debaucheries they were ^^t forth by Satan, to the Reproach and Scandal ^^ the
Church of God, as the Gnostics had been before them.

Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Effeminacy were much exclaimed against by the
Ancients, because they were Incentives to Uncleanness, whereupon St. Jero^e
says, It Is a difficult thing to preserve Chastity in the midst of Feasting
Bernard says, That Chastity is much endanger'^ by Delicacies. Ericius Putecinus
says, Tha^ Lust is nourished by Feasting and Dainties. An^ St. Augustine, in
his 33d Sermon, ad Fr. ^^ Er. gives us this strange Instance of the Effect of
Drunkenness, viz. That the Son o^ one Cyril a noble Citizen of Hippo, who ha^ a
Son whom he loved even above his Maker, not contradicting him in any Desire nor
correcting him for any Fault. Thi^ riotous Youngster, not content to roar i^
abroad, and spend his Father's Estate, cam^ home drunk, villainously ravished
his ow^ Mother, big with Child, endeavored to deflower one of his Sisters,
wounded two o^ them, that they died, and killed his Father outright.

FINIS.

