The Good and Prosperous Success OF THE PARLIAMENTS FORCES IN YORKSHIRE:
Against the Earl of NEW CASTLE And his Popish Adherents.

As it was sent in a Letter from the Right Honorable the Lord Fairefax, and
read in both Houses of Parliament, on Monday, Ian. 30. 1642.

With some Observations of the Lords and Commons upon the said happy
Proceedings, as so many Answers from Heaven, which God has given to the
Prayers of his Servants.

Published, that their Mouths and Hearts may be as much enlarged in Praises, as
they have been in Prayers.

Die Lunae, 30 Ian. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Letter,
with the Observations thereon, be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown, Cler. Parliament.

Ian. 31. Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey. 1642.

The Lord Fairfax his Letter.
SIR,
IT is most necessary that I continue my Relation to you, of the state and
condition of the affairs in this Country, that they may be made known to both
Houses, and Provision made for succors to be sent us, which have hitherto come
very slowly, though they have made large expressions of their care, we have
been long destitute of money to pay the Army, and to supply that want, I have
used all possible industry, by taking up money upon Exchange, and by calling
upon the Country to supply me for the present upon the public Faith: The want
of money does so perplex that part of the Army here, as I imagine, the House
will not expect any considerable matter to be done by us, though God be thanked
the Forces I send from hence and are raised by the Country with other places,
are daily acting something to advance the public service, as in the
Northriding where Sir Hugh Cholmley has carried himself very bravely, giving
several defeates to the Enemy nere Malton, and on monday the 16. of this
month, joining his Forces to Sir Matthew Boynton, they fell upon Colonel
Slingsby at Gisbrowgh, where they defeated him and 600. Horse and Foot with
him, that had done much spoil in the Northriding, they wounded and took
Colonel Slingsby himself, with 140. other Prisoners, killed a great many, and
recovered 200. Arms with the place; amongst the Prisoners taken by Sir Hugh
Cholmley at Malton, and here at Gisbrowgh, it is found that a great number are
Papists, and indeed the strength of the Enemies will be found to consist much
of Papists and Popish affected, the Earl of New Castle, granting his
Commissions for raising men to Papists for the most part, I have heard of late
of Commissions granted to twelve Recusants of these parts, whose names I send
enclosed, ^^t is not to be doubted he walks the same ways in other places as
well as here, which courses have so advanced Popery as I hear, that in York
where many Recusants are settled, Mass is ordinarily said in every street, and
such affronts offered to the Protestants and their Ministry, as few dare
resort to Church, and in other parts of the Country I am informed, that for
many miles together the religious Ministry, are all either fled or imprisoned*
which persecutions, if they be not timely repressed, will extirpe or much
depresse the Protestant Religion in these parts, about Bradford and Hallifax,
God has blessed my Son and those small Forces with good success against the
Enemy in several light skirmishes, and on monday was seven night, he seized on
the Lord Saviles house at Howley, and put about 100. Musketeers into it, and
on tuesday I sent Sir William Fairfax, and his Officers with some arms, to
raise his Regiment in those parts, and for his convoy I sent what horse and
Dragooners I could spare from hence, directing them to stay with my Son to
assist him in his design against Leeds, and yesternight I received Letters
from him, wherein he relates to me, that on monday last he drew his Forces out
of Bradford, and marched to Leeds, where Sir William Savill commanded in
chief, my son first summoned them by a Trumpet to yield, which being refused,
the Assault began, wherein his men carried themselves with great Resolution,
the Town being fortyfied on all sides, furnished with two brass Sakers, and
manned with 1500. Soldiers, yet they forced an Entry in two hours fight,
there being not lost on both sides above 40. men, but he took 4. colors, 500.
Prisoners (of which 6 are Commanders) and with the Prisoners they took many
Arms, the Sakers and all the Munition they had, which was not much; On our
part we lost 13. men, and Capt. Briggs, and Capt. Lee, both sore wounded, and I
perceive that in this exploit Sir William Fairfax, Sir Thomas Norcliffe, and
Sarjeant major Forbes, with the rest of the Commanders carried themselves very
gallantly, the people do observe that Sir William Savill, and the chief
Commanders, on the other side soon after the fight began, fled by secret ways
toward Pomfret, and their men after them by degrees, but by the way Sergeant
major (...) was drowned crossing the River, and Sir William Savill very
narrowly escaped the like fate. After Leeds was thus won, my Son writes that
he intended to have marched to Wakefield, where Sir George Wentworth
commanded, but was prevented therein by the enemies fears, who hearing he had
taken Leeds, fled all away from Wakefield to Pontefract, and left the Town, so
he has sent some Forces to invest and keep that place: Thus has God blessed
their endeavors on that side, and now I am told that Capt. Hotham and Sir John
Savill, are gone up yesterday with some Forces into those parts, but upon what
design I know not, yesterday morning I had some intelligence, that the most
part of the Forces were marched the day before out of Doncaster, so I have sent
(...) Sergeant major General with six companies of (...) to invest that place,
and to leave some Forces to keep it until more strength come to us, out of
the Southern Counties, which if they could be hastened hither might very much
advance the cause, and crush their Popish forces before they be supplied by the
Queens coming, or their party in Scotland, of which there is so^e expectation,
I desire you will make known to the house the great extremities that are put
upon me, and that a certain course may be settled for supplying us with Money
for the entertainment of the army, insuch season, as our men may be encouraged
in the service, and not fall into a way of plundering for want of pay, my Son
upon the taking of Leeds, though he entered it by force, yet he restrained his
Army from pillaging, so I have ordered that the Malignants in lieu of the
spoil, challenged to be due unto the Soldiers, shall give them a Months
entertainment, which I hope will content both Parties, yesternight
Intelligence was brought to me, that the Earl of New Castle has drawn down
all his Forces from the South-Parts of Yorkshire, those only excepted that
keep the Castle at Pomfret, for yesterday he marched from Sherborne, to York,
with 36 Colors, ^ Pieces of of Canon, and 43 other carriages, the certain
cause I do not yet know, but suppose it is to meet the Arms and Munition
coming from New Castle, or to prepare for the Queens Entertainment at York,
which is much spoken of, I shall carry a vigilant eye upon his designs, and
endeavor to prevent them, so far as can he expected from the forces under
the command of*

Selby, 26. Ian. 1642. Sir, Your most affectionate Friend and servant. Fer.
Fairefax,

I have sent unto Master White to be hewed unto you thr^^ papers found with
Col. nell Slingsby when he was taken at Gisbrough by Sir Hugh Cholmely which
may peradventure be thought necessary to be made known to the House, if Sir
Hugh have not already presented the transcript to you.

The Names of Recusants in these parts, to whom the Earl of New Castle has
granted Commissions to raise Forces.
M. Robert Traps. M. Stevenson of Thornton. S. John Middleton. S. Walter
Vavasor. M. Andes. M. Tindall. M. Bretton. S. Philip Hungate. M. Waterson. M.
Thwenge. Capt. Sare. Capt. Granger.
Besides those formerly printed by Order of this House, and many more which are
omitted.

The Observations of both Houses of Parliament, upon the aforesaid Letter.
Whereas many and fervent prayers have been sent up to God for his blessings
to be powered down upon the Endeavors of the Parliament in maintenance of his
own Cause, and Religion, now openly assaulted by Papists, and because it is
most just and necessary to observe the return of these Prayers, that our
mouths and hearts may be as much enlarged in praises, as they have been in
Prayers. The Lords and Commons have thought fit to pnblish some late good
successes, as so many Answers from Heaven which God has given to the Prayers
of his servants.

And whereas sundry late Declarations have showed to the world diverse
Informations and proofs concerning the raising of a Popish Army with an
intention to subvert Gods true Religion* professed and by Law established in
this Kingdom and to introduce popish Idollatry, and Superstition, that it may
appear that, what was before an intention is now matter of fact, and really
put in Execution, a most certain and true Relation is here offered to public
notice and observation wherein it may be seen that this Popish Army has set
up the open practice of their abominable Idolatry in York the second City of
this Kingdom, and are grown to that height of Insolence that they terrify and
drive away Protestant Ministers and people from frequenting, their own
Churches and from the practice of their own Religion, wherein they have given a
pattern and pledge what they intend to do, and what must be expected from
them through the whole Kingdom, the consideration hereof (whereby the most
precious things in the world* Gods Glory and true worship, and the salvation,
and souls of men are brought into danger) ought to excite* and stir up (and we
are confident it will) the strongest endeavors and most united conjunctions of
all Religions, and well affected Protestants and Patriots (...) and suppress
these common Enemies of God, Piety their Country and Commonwealth, for now, it
plainly appears that how ever they pretend to defend the authority and the
Laws, yet their maine intention is to Establish Popery in this Kingdom, and
to extirpate the Protestant Religion which cannot be done without subversion of
the Laws, as the Papists have all most effected in Ireland.

FINIS.

