THE REASONABLENESS OF Personal Reformation, And the NECESSITY OF CONVERSION;

The true Methods of making all Men happy in this World, and in the World to
come. Seasonably discoursed, and earnestly pressed upon this Licentious Age.

By J. F. A sincere lover of his Native Country, and the Souls of Men.

Levit. 26. 23, 24, 25. And if ye will not be reformed by these things, but
will walk contrary unto me: then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will
punish you yet seven times for your sins. And I will bring a sword upon you,
that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant.

Isa. 48. 18. Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandments! then had thy
peace been as a River, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over
against the Stocks-Market. 1691.

To all such as are most immediately and particularly concerned in the
following Treatise, of what Rank or Quality soever they be.
Gentlemen,
TWO of the greatest, faithfullest, and most intimate Friends in the World,
Reason and Conscience, command me here in their Names, courteously to salute
and invite you in.

They earnestly desire three or four Hours serious and private conference with
you about some very important Personal Concerns of yours, which cannot admit of
denial, or long delay. And if you make any trifling excuses, they have
commanded and instructed me here to answer them.

In case of absolute and obstinate refusal to hear them, they order me to tell
you, If you will not talk with them now, they will talk with you shortly whether
you will or no. If you say, you are not now at leisure, having other business
to do; they both desire you to consider, First, You can have no Business in the
World of equal importance with theirs. Secondly, That whatever other lawful
Affairs you are pursuing, their Business with you will no way obstruct, but
greatly promote it. And Lastly, That a greater Person than any of you lost his
Life by pocketing up a Letter at Night, saying, To morrow is a new Day; and it
proved to him indeed D^es novissima, his last Day, he losing by that Neglect
the only Opportunity of living longer.

If you demand how your Reason came to be bound up in this little Book, and
say, That which is Reason to this Author, may be folly and nonsense to you; I
am bid to tell you, you are obliged first to read and compare, else your own
Reason will presently call it your own folly and nonsense so to pronounce.
Sound Reason is uniform, and like it self all the World over. Its true Laws and
Dictates equally oblige one, as another, in like cases and circumstances.

If you say, there have been some Jars and Disgusts betwixt you, and your
Reasons and Consciences; you and they have fallen out so often, that you have no
great fancy to come near them in private, for you expect nothing but harsh and
chideing Language from them, and therefore are fain by continual Diversions and
quick Successions of Business, to maintain your Peace, by keeping at as great a
distance from them as you can.

It Is their desire you should here know, First, That their debates with you
will be as calm and friendly, as they are seasonable and necessary. Secondly,
That they both profess (and you may believe them) they neither do, nor can
design any thing but your good. Thirdly, That that Person is certainly in a
very bad Case, that cannot endure to converse with himself. Fourthly, That you
herein deny a Civility to your own Reasons and Consciences, which you daily pay
to Strangers and Inferiors. And in a Word, that they desire a reconciliation
with you, upon as fair and honorable terms, as can well be desired. And that
this being done, they will both stick faithfully by you in all the troubles and
dangers of your Lives, and follow you as your inseparable Friends, into any
thing but Sin.

If you say, This is but a Wheedle to draw you into a Book, that will make you
melancholy, and perhaps mad.

It Is their Sense and Judgment, that of all men living, you have least reason
to pretend the one or the other in this Case. For they are very confident you
are now in the most Melancholy circumstances men can ordinarily be in on this
side Hell. And for Madness, they desire to know what you your selves would call
that man, that is running with such posthaste to Hell (as will not admit of two
or three hours stop upon the Road) to prove himself to be no Madman, but in
his right mind and wits?

Moreover, they command me to inform you, It is their desire, that seeing their
debates with you will neither be tiresome nor impertinent, you will please to
hear them out what they have to say to you; and then if you shall find cause to
complain that your Pleas and Excuses are not fairly drawn, or that you have new
Matter to furnish a better Apology, they are both content you shall have your
liberty to amend or add what you please; and if they be not able to refute
them, they will give you no further trouble or interruption in your course.

This, Gentlemen, is what I have in charge to say to you in the Porch; and now
if you please, the Door is open; you may be as private as you will. They Will
attend you to your Bedchamber or Closet; and I heartily wish an happy issue to
this friendly debate.

J. F.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. Containing the Introduction, and State of the Case, in Twelve
Sections.
Sect. I. REason is Man's Dignity and Excellency. And what its proper Province.
Page 1. Sect. II. Reason darkened by the Fall. p. 3. Sect. III. Reason further
corrupted ^y the cunning Applications of Lusts to the Affections. ibid. Sect.
IV. Inbred Principles of Reason and Conscience not wholly to be eradicated in
the vilest. p. 4. Sect. V. To these the Scriptur^s often appeal. p. 5. Sect.
VI. Appeals to these in Atheistical Times, an hopeful way. p. 6. Sect. VII. How
Reasonable that Men should attend to their own Reasons and Consciences. p. 7.
Sect. VIII. Light of Reason and Conscience assisted by the general Light of the
Gospel. p. 9. Sect. IX. What these two faithful Guides, Reason and Conscience,
assure all Men with respect to themselves. p. 10. Sect. X. What with respect to
the Community they belong to. p. 13. Sect. XI. Reformation of profane men this
way, not absolutely impossible. p 15. Sect. XII. What the Government may, and
ought to do in order to it, and what benefit would accrue to them thereby. p.
16.
CAAP. II. Producing one Dictate or Maxim of Right Reason, generally allowed,
in Seven Sections.
Sect. I. DEgenerate Nature affects Liberty, and is captivated by Sensual
Pleasures. p. 19. Sect. II. Reason may recover men from this Captivity. p. 20.
Sect. III. The Self-evident Dictates of Reason propounded. p. 21. Sect. IV.
That good is to be chosen, and evil avoided, and that there are degrees of
Goodness found in Pleasures and Delights. p. 22. Sect. V. The Wisdom and
Goodness of God admired in leaving Principles of Reason, and Notices of
Conscience in men after the Fall. p. 24. Sect. VI. The Wickedness of violating
and abusing these Notices and Principles. p. 26. Sect. VII. How reasonable it
is that men should consult their Reasons and Consciences. p. 29.
CAAP. III. Giving the true censure of Reason and Conscience, upon Profane,
Swearing, in Nine Sections.
Sect. I. TWO Ends for which God bestowed the noble Faculty of Speech upon man.
p. 31. Sect. II. The Nature and Grounds of Lawful Oaths. p. 33. Sect. III. The
Contumely and Malignity of Profane Oaths. p. 34. Sect. IV. What a dreadful
provocation to God, and hazard to the Community, contumelious Blasphemy is. p.
37. Sect. V. Till Public Justice lay hold on Offenders, the force of Reason
tried upon them. p. 39. Sect. VI. The Swearer's first Plea from the Lepor and
Ornament that Oaths give to his Language, weighed and rejected by Reason. p.
41. Sect. VII. His second Plea from provocations by men, bafled by Reason. p.
43. Sect. VIII. His Third Plea, That Swearing is modish, and a Badge of
Gentility, confuted and overthrown by Six Reasons. p. 44. Sect. IX. The Last
Plea for Swearing from Custom, cast over the Bar of Reason. p. 53.
CHAP. IV. Reason and Conscience again consulted about the Sin of Drunkenness,
in Five Sections.
Sect. I. THE intimate and admirable love of Souls to their Bodies. p. 57.
Sect. II. The Prudence of the Soul manifested in its government of the Body. p.
59. Sect. III. The dethroning of Reason by Drunkenness, the highest exaltation
of folly. p. 61. Sect. IV. The Moans and Laments of a Drunkard's Body to his
Soul, represented in a pathetical Prosopopaea. p. 63. Sect. V. The Drunkards
First Plea, from his Natural Ability. p. 65. His Second Excuse from the relief
of his anxious Cares. p. 70. His Third Excuse, from his Delight and Pleasure in
Wine, etc. p. 72. His Fourth Excuse, from alluring Company and Business. p. 75.
His Fifth Excuse, from pretended Loyalty to the King, p. 77. His Sixth Excuse,
from his plentiful Estate. p. 78.
CHAP. V. Containing the Determination of Reason and Conscience about the Sin
of Uncleanness, in Eight Sections.
Sect. I. GOD has made more abundant Provision for the delight of Rational,
than of Brutal Beings, within the Pale of his Laws. p. 81. Sect. II. Corrupt
Nature hates God's Confinements. p. 82. Sect. III. God's Choice better than our
own, in Five Respects. p. 84. Sect. IV. What should induce men to break out of
God's Enclosure. p. 87. Sect. V. The First Inducement from the Examples of
Great Ones, bafled by Reason. p. 88. Sect. VI. The Second Inducement from
pretended Necessity, cashiered by Reason. p. 89. Sect. VII. The Third
Inducement from the absence of lawful Remedies, rejected by Reason. p. 92.
Sect. VIII. The Fourth Inducement from the Commonness of it, wholly shamm'd and
bafled by Reason, p. 93.
CHAP. VI. The Last Debate with Reason and Conscience, about the bitter enmity
and spirit of Persecution among professed Protestants, in Six Sections.
Sect. I. Man naturally a sociable Creature, p. 96 Sect. II. The Interest of
States and Churches, to make every Individual as useful as may be to the whole,
p. 98 Sect. III. The folly and misery of the feuds and animosities in the same
Civil and Religious Societies, ibid. Sect. IV. These Feuds presages of National
Misery, p. 100 Sect. V. The true Rise and Cause of this fixed Hatred, p. 101
Sect. VI. This true cause politickly suppressed, and silenced. Hypocrisy
pretended, and the Pretense hafled, p. 102 The Second Pretense of their
Sedition and Rebellion, bafled by Reason five ways, p. 106
The CONTENTS of the SECOND PART.
Of the Possibility, Nature and Necessity of Conversion to God, in Ten Sections.
Sect. I. Conviction supposed, and Grace therein admired, p. 121 Sect. II. The
Conversion of the vilest sinner possible, demonstrated three ways, p. 125 Sect.
III. The Conversion of profane Persons more probable than others, fixed on
their own Righteousness, p. 129 Sect. IV. True Conversion frequently and
fatally mistken, p. 132 Sect. V. The Nature of true Conversion to God opened,
p. 135 Sect. VI. Opening one great hazard attending Conversion, p. 136 Sect.
VII. Demonstrating the absolute Necessisy of thorough Conversion, p. 138 Sect.
VIII. Men may do more than they do toward their own Conversion. And what these
things are, p. 140 Sect. IX. Discouragements removed out of the way of
Conversion, and the Sinners way prepared to Christ, p. 142 Sect. X. Powerful
Motives persuading to Conversion, p. 144
THE REASONABLENESS OF Personal Reformation,
CHAP. I.
The Introduction and State of the Case.
SECT. I.
REason exalts Man above all earthly Beings: It Is his Dignity and Privilege
that God has furnished him with Abilities of Mind to recollect, animadvert,
compare, infer, ponder and judge his own Actions. Hereby he becomes not only
capable of Moral Government by Humane Laws, which no Creature beside him is;
but also of Spiritual Government by Divine Laws; and the blessed Frutions of
God in Glory, which no other Species of Creatures (Angels only excepted) have a
subjective capacity for.

Right Reason by the Law of Nature (as an ^ome-born Judge) arbitrates and
determines all things within its proper Province, which Province is extended
far and wide. All Action Natural, Moral and Civil are weighed at thi^ Beam and
Standard: None are exempted but ma^ters of supernatural Revelation; and yet
eve^ these are not wholly and in every respect exemp^ from Right Reason. For
though there be some Mysteries in Religion above the sphere and fligh^ of
Reason, yet nothing can be found in Religion that is unreasonable.

And though these Mysteries be not of natural investigation, but of
supernatural Revelation yet Reason is convinced nothing can be more reasonable,
than that it take its place at the fee^^ of Faith, which is but to suffer it
self to becom^ Pupil to an Omniscient and Infallible Instructo^^ The resolution
of our Reason into Faith, an^ of Faith into God's Veracity, are Acts highly
be^coming Reasonable Beings in such Cases a^ these.

It may not pry too nicely into unrevealed My^^steries, demand the Reasons, or
examine th^^ Causes of them, (as bold and daring Socinians do^ but it feels it
self obliged to receive all those thing both as possible and true which God
has revealed counting his Revelation alone to be Reason suffi^cient. For the
Veracity of God takes out of Rea^sons mouth all Objections against the truth
(...) them, and his Almighty Power silences all its Scru^^ples against the
possibility of them.

But in all Matters properly under the jurisdi^ction of Reason, every man is
obliged to accoun^ with himself, as well as others, for the reasona^bleness of
his own Actions; and that Act which will not endure the test of sound Reason,
i^ judges not fit for the entertainment of a Man. (...) Reason cannot justify
it, it is beneath the rank and dignity of a Man to do it.

SECT. II.
The Light of Reason was at first the bright Lamp or Candle of the Lord, till
Sin like a Thief melted it down to a Snuff; whereby (comparatively speaking) it
is become a poor glimmering Light in the best of men, and almost quite
extinguished in some men. Fallen Man is become less than himself, and will
never act like himself, till he be fully restored to himself.

Sanctification indeed snuffs and trims the Lamp of Reason; but there being few
sanctified Persons among men, a double Misery consequently befalls a very great
part of Mankind: whose Conversation speaks them not only destitute of Religion,
which bereaves them of the blessedness of the World to come; but men almost
entirely despoiled of the Benefits and Blessings of their own Reason, which
makes them unhappy and miserable ^n this World: Beasts, rather than Men, as the
sa^red Scripture styles them: Unreasonable men, ^nen fallen out with their own
faculties, who after many a sharp battle with their Reason, are ^ow dragging it
like a conquered Captive, at ^he Chariot-wheels of their victorious and
trium^hant Lusts.

SECT. III.
It Is scarce imaginable that ever Sin should pre^ail so far as it does to the
very unmanning of ^en, did they not first delude and bribe their Reason by
close and cunning Applications^ their bewitched Affections; whereby though th^^
cannot make it a party, yet they make it stand (...) as a silent Spectator or
Neuter, whilst they act (...) Beast, yea, the Devil rather than the Man.

We little know how far unsanctified Reas^^ may this way be prevailed upon to
quit its Thro^^ and resign its Scepter into the hands of Lust a^ appetite; yea,
to engage in the defense of the most absurd Laws and Dictates. It only serves
some men to invent excuses, pleas and specio^ pretenses, to justify or
extenuate their beast-li^ actions; the basest servitude it can be condemn^^ to.

If this will not do, sensual Lusts have anoth^ way to obtain their
satisfaction in despite of Re^^son and Conscience, even by stopping their ears
the voices of both, and pushing on with a br^tish impetus, they suffer neither
to enjoy the o^^portunity of a calm debate of these matters wi^^ them.

SECT. IV.
But let men do what they will, it is next to (...) impossibility they should so
far subdue and d^^stroy those inbred Principles of Reason and Co^^science, but
that they will at one time or oth^^ give them some checks and oppositions in
the profane courses, especially when they shall get t^ advantage of some
eminent distress, or special da^^ger; which disposes them to lend an ear to the
voices; and there be few men in the Worl^ but are sometimes providentially cast
into such ^^ses and conditions.

So that appeals to the Reason of the most pro^^igate wretches are not
altogether vain and use^ess.

For if the case cannot be tried and decided at the bar of Reason and
Conscience one time, it ^ay with more advantage at another; and happily Appeals
to Reason may produce Reformation in ^ome men, sooner than Appeals to the
Scriptures, ^r Principles of Faith; especially when the World (...) so
notoriously drenched in practical Atheism, that serious Religion becomes the
common subject of drollery amongst multitudes of men.

Yet it were hard and uncharitable to imagine any man sunk so deep into the
mire of bestiality and profaneness, as not still to retain some value and
veneration for his own Reason, and as much as he abuses it, yet to refuse the
whole world in exchange for it; and to account it a greater misery to be
utterly deprived of it, than to have the hoofs of an Horse given him in
exchange for his Hands and Feet.

SECT. V.
The Scriptures therefore do in many cases appeal to the Reason of Sinners, and
design their reformation by such Appeals. For it being a most shameful thing
for a man to be convicted at the bar of his own Reason, of acting like a beast
rather than a man, every man is presumed to be afraid and ashamed of such an
Indictment. Such Miscreants are the shame and reproach of Humanity it self.
They are branded for bruits throughout the sober world. Their company declined
and shunned by all wise and good men. He that has no reason to justify his
actions, may yet be supposed to be owner of some stock of natural shame, which
cannot but afford a blush upon su^^ a plain conviction. This therefore was the
coun^ which the Prophet Isaiah took by divine direction to reform the
idolatrous Israelites, Isa. 46. 8. ^^^states the case at the bar of their own
Reason, an^ calls for a verdict upon it. The case was this; Wh^^ther Idols
having not power enough to show themsel^ Gods, those that worship them must not
want wisdom enough to show themselves men? Remember this, a^^ show your selves
men, and bring it again to mind, (...) transgressors! q. d. for shame let not
men act li^^ bruits, which have no animadversion.

SECT. VI.
When things therefore are brought to such (...) exigence, that ruin or
reformation is the on^ Choice men have to make, and all religious in pressions
so obliterated and worn out, that me^ pay no reverence to them; an Appeal to
the Reason of men seems then to be an hopeful method (...) prevailing with
them, to suffer a reformation (...) ^^ther than a ruin. Not that I imagine the
Topics (...) Reason able to afford more powerful Argumen^ than those of
Religion do; but that they who (...) their ignorance, and strong prejudices
against R^^ligion, have made themselves more uncapab^ of conviction that way,
may happily feel the for^^ of Reason prevailing so far, at least, as to (...)
their outrageous lusts under some restraint.

As for the Scriptures, and serious Religion (...) gotten by them in the souls
of men, they are pe^^fect strangers to all, but the names of these thing^^ And
even their very Names are grown almost r^^diculous with them too. But Reason
may convince and shame them. What force the Reason of man has, even without
saving grace, to produce Civility, Sobriety, and other Moral Virtues, is
abundantly evident in the very Heathens, who by the only Light of Reason
discovered so much ^diousness in Vice and Immorality, and such amiable beauty
in Justice, Temperance, and the other Moral Virtues, that their praises for
them are sounded throughout the world.

Now whatever unthinking men dream, to me it is evident, that when Kingdoms and
Commonwealths are overflowed with unrestrained Vices and Immoralities; when
cursing and swearing becomes the common Language; Drunkenness and Adultery the
common practices of the Inhabitants; God will either sweep away the filth of
those Nations by the Besom of a general Reformation, or he will sweep away
their Inhabitants out of them with the Besom of Destruction. For if we have not
excussed the Notion and Belief of a God, and that he animadverts the wickedness
of men (which the very Heathens by the Light of Nature, saw and acknowledged)
we may thereby easily be led to this Conclusion, that such overflowings of
abomination do, and must certainly presage our Desolation, except speedy and
general Reformation do prevent it.

SECT. VII.
Now the persons whose Reformation I particularly design by this method, being
men that exercise more Reason than Religion, might (methinks) be prevailed with
to take up at last, and reform their unreasonable as well as ungod^ courses,
could they be once prevailed with (...) debate these matters with cool,
considerative mind becoming men governed by reason, not wholl^ swayed like
bruit-beasts by lust and appetite.

And is it not highly reasonable, that men should weigh their own actions at
the same beam an^ standard where they weigh other men's actions, an^ renounce
all that with shame and detestation which they themselves must censure as
utterl^ beneath and unworthy of a man? Wherefore hat^ God planted a principle
of Reason and Consc^^ence within us? Is it rational to think it was plan^ted
there for no other end or use but to scan and censure other men's words and
actions by, bu^ not our own? Or to be wholly useful to other men's interests,
without any benefit to our selves* Ask thine own Reason, silly man, why God
Pla^ced it in thy Soul, and for what use it was inten^ded and it will tell
thee, it was particularly de^signed and appointed to regulate and order thin^
own life and actions; and next, for the benefit and good of the Community. It
will tell thee, there is not a single act thou do of any weight or mo^ment,
but thou ought to consult with it, and have its Pass or License before thou
do it. But when thou entrest into a series and course of actions, thy
consultations with it ought to be very frequent and solemn, because these
things are o^ great importance to thee.

Thy Reason will tell thee, Sinner, that it is ^^ vile affront to it, to be
thrust by thee from the Council Table, unworthily dismissed from its office,
and discharged from any further attendance upon thy life, and the concerns
thereof, and brutish lust and appetite consulted in its room; and that it
needed not at all to have been implanted into thy soul, if the same Principles
that govern the beasts of the field must also be thy governing Principles. It
stands ready to offer its service to thee, to save thee from, or to receive
thee out of those mischiefs thou have or may run thy self into; if thou will
but hear and obey its advice. It tells thee, it is thy Privy-Councellor by
God's appointment; and if thou will not find leisure among the heats and
hurries of thy lusts, to consult it, and ^hearken to its counsels now; if thou will forsake the conduct of thine own Reason and Conscience, which have a right
and authority to govern thy words and actions, and follow thy blind and
headstrong lusts and passions, thou shall hear other language from them, when
thy lusts have precipitated thee into thine own ruin and destruction, as they
speedily and inevitably must and will do, according to the course they now
steer for thee.

SECT. VIII.
And there is yet more ground to hope, that reason may prevail with men living
under the Gospel, to return to sobriety and temperance, when we consider their
Reason is assisted by some illumination from the Christian Religion. They live
in a Land of Bibles and Ministers, where they cannot avoid the light; an
advantage far beyond whatever the Heathens enjoyed, who yet by their single
unassisted Reason arrived to an eminency in Moral Virtues.

Our Reasons and Consciences do not only con^vince us (as theirs also did them)
that there is a God, and a future life of retribution, wherein e^very man shall
be judged according to his work^ but also, that the Scriptures are the very
Word o^ God, and Rule of Faith and Manners. And i^ there be any among the
debauched Crew that que^stion or deny it, we may be confident none of them are
able by plain and sound reason to overthrow those mighty Arguments pleaded for
the confir^mation of that truth. At least they find in them^selves a strong
suspicion, and fear, that they man prove to be true; which jealousy and
suspicio^ working together with their own Reason and Consciences, are no
contemptible helps toward their recovery.

For if what Reason, Conscience and Scripture with one mouth pronounce, be true
and certain (as undoubtedly it will be found to be) then i^ must be plain and
obvious to them also, that their brutish lusts have put them into the direct
and rea^dy way both to ruin themselves, and also greatly to hazard the
Community to which they belong.

SECT. IX.
As for themselves, if they will make a judg^ment upon their own condition in
the light of^ Reason, Conscience, or Scripture, (and they ve^ry well know they
take their measures in perfec^ darkness, if they take them not by this
direction then continuing the same course they now do, they are a lost
generation.

All their lawful and faithful guides tell then with one mouth, they are
certainly in the broa^^way to damnation. And that how irksome and terrible
soever the thoughts and apprehensions of Hell are to them, yet thither they
must certainly come, if they pursue this course. Their Reason plainly tells
them, he that chooses the means, and engages in the way leading to Hell, must
and ought to make account that Hell is the place he is preparing for.

Conscience is as plain and positive with them, that they must either return or
perish. The Scripture confirms the testimonies of both, by telling them
plainly, that the end of these things is death, Romans 6. 21.

It Is downright folly and madness, by the vote of the whole rational and sober
world, for any man to conclude, or hope he shall be happy in the world to come,
whose life is drawn through and finished in all manner of obscenity,
filthiness, and profaneness in the present world.

For let the case be brought into the light of your own Reason, as dim as it
is, and let it freely judge when you are belching out your black and horrid
Blasphemies against God, imprecating damnation from him upon your own souls,
wallowing in beastly lusts, vomiting and roaring in Taverns and Alehouses: Ask,
I say, your own Reason, Conscience, or the Scripture, whether all or either of
them will allow you to say or think, Now we are in the right way to eternal
blessedness? This is the very course that will bring us to happiness in the
world to come: This pleases God better, and is a surer path to glory, than
Repentance or Faith, Mortification, Prayer, or Reformation. No, no; as blind as
your Reason is, and as seared as your Consciences are, you will never bring
them to comprobate or subscribe such absurd and horrid conclusions a^ these.

But on the contrary, they will tell you, That i^ you will have the pleasure,
you must have the pain and torment of sin. That it is madness to sa^ you are
afraid to burn, but not afraid to sin: Tha^ you are loath to be damned, and yet
challenge the^ Almighty God to his face to damn you; as much a folly as to
drink a baneful Dose of known Poison, and think to feel no painful gripes
afterward.

As for the Scriptures, they appeal to the Reason of men in this case, as a
most known and allowed thing, scarce imaginable to lie hid from any man, 1 Cor.
6. 9. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God..

It would make the bowels of a compassionate Christian to roll and yearn within
him to behold multitudes of souls of invaluable worth, running greedily on to
their eternal ruin, wilfully stopping their ears all the way to the voices of
their own Reason and Conscience, as well as to the voice of God in his word,
not once making a pause, till they fall into that gulf of eternal and
intolerable misery, into which with great precipitation they are casting
themselves.

SECT. X.
And then for the Community to which they belong, how dangerous, yea, how
destructive such persons are to it, cannot possibly be hid from any wise and
serious observer. For if one Sinner destroys much good, if one Achan trouble
the whole Camp of Israel, how much more will whole swarms and droves of
drunkards, blasphemers and adulterers, as now fill every place, pull down the
judgments of God upon those States and Kingdoms wherein they breathe? If our
fears and dangers were greater than they are, yet Reformation might save us:
Jer. 5. 1. Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and
know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, (i. e. a
public man, a man in authority) if there be any that executes judgment, that
seeks the truth, and I will pardon it. And if our hopes and confidences were
much higher than they are, yet unre^^ained sin would undo us. Kingdoms and
Commonwealths are not so much endangered by the pow^rs and policies of their
enemies without them, ^s they are by the unreformedness of profligate wretches
within the amongst them. Reformation quickly recovers the Ancient Glory of
Kingdoms, and makes them the terror of their Enemies.

For tho there will be still too much sin privately committed under the best
Laws, and most vigorous and impartial execution of them; yet abundance of sin
would thereby be prevented, and the sins that are committed would not become
National, but personal only, and these would not so much concern and hazard the
public weal and tranqui^^lity of the State.

Moreover, States and Kingdoms are in no sma^^ hazard by the public debauchery
and common profaneness of their Subjects, for as much as (...) this very sink
and puddle of their lusts, the man^ wisdom, sprightly courage, and true
gallant^ of their Subjects are quenched and drowned, the Spirits softened and
effeminated. It Is hard to im^^gine those men will engage far in the Cause of
R^^formation, when Reformation it self is the on^^thing they hate and fear.

Nor need we wonder to find men intimidat^ and low-spirited in times and places
of emine^^ danger, who not only carry about them so much guilt (which is the
fountain of fear) but are who^^ly addicted to sensual pleasures which they are
lo^ to hazard upon public accounts and considerat^^ons, these being the only
Heaven they have, (...) hope for; Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take^way the
heart, Hos. 4. 11. It Is in the very natu^^^ of these sins to make men sottish,
and in the ve^^ nature of guilt to make them pusillanimous.

Seneea observes (and his Observa^^on is true) That the conscience of a wick
man is a terrible scourge and torment him, Seneca, Epist. 97.
perpetually lashing him with solli^tous thoughts and fears, so that he
distrusts all secyrti^ and knows not where to be safe. Hence it comes pass,
that many men of good Extraction, Libe^^^ Education, and Excellent Natural
Endowmen^ become so useless, yea, so pernicious as they a^^ who could they be
recovered but to temperan^ and sobriety, would become both excellently u^^^ful
and ornamental to the Nation where they (...) their birth, and to the safety
and honor whereof they owe their service.

SECT. XI.
This most desirable recovery and reformation of profane debauched persons, is
not simply and absolutely impossible: And if Magistrates and Ministers were
every where exemplary themselves for sobriety and piety, zealous and impartial
in the discharge of their respective Duties, a general Reformation would not be
difficult. But when those, whose Office it is to suppress wickedness, shall
associate themselves with lewd and profligate persons, and vye with them in
their profane courses, or discourage more conscientious persons in the
discharge of their Duties; this makes Reformation morally impossible.

If Profaneness were once found the general Odium of the people, and a bar to
all Preferments, it might be hoped things would quickly alter for the better.
'Twas an ancient custom among the Heathens (as Learned and Excellent Mr. Hale
of Eaton, out of Chrysostom observes) that if a man offered himself to contend
in the Olympick-Games, he was not permitted so to do, till Proclamation had
been first made, whether any man knew him to be either a Servant, or a man of
infamous Life; and if any such Imputation were proved against him, it was
sufficient to keep him back, let his skill be what it would.

What care was here taken that their Vanities should not be discredited! And
will neither Reason nor Religion convince us, that not only equal, but far
greater care ought to be taken to discourage profaneness among Christians,
than the blind Heathens ever took to preserve the reputati^on of their vain
Exercises? Let all subordinate Mi^nisters of State, and Officers in the Church,
consi^der how great a part of this blessed Reformation is demandated to their
hands.

SECT. XII.
Were Kingdoms and Commonwealths on^ purged from that spirit of profaneness
and d^^bauchery, which thus defiles and overflows them and the people generally
reduced but to civility, so^briety and temperance, experience would quickl^
show them the comfortable effects and happy fruit^ thereof.

For though this be much short of what Christi^anity exacts from all its
professors, and insuffici^ent to obtain the happiness of the world to come yet
it is greatly conducent to the civil happines^ and flourishing of the Kingdoms
of this world and therefore richly worth the studies and endeavors of all men
to promote and obtain it.

There is no Kingdom or Commonwealth in the Christian world, which would not by
thi^ means breed and send forth multitudes more than they do, with excellent
abilities and qualification^ fitting them to sit at the Helm of Government* and
steer a more prosperous course than they do at present. A wise and steady
direction of the a^duous and important affairs of Kingdoms, can only be
expected from those that are able to govern themselves, and their own affairs,
with sobriety and discretion.

If the Laws of Nations take care for the preservation and growth of Timber fit
for the building of Houses and Ships, and every one sees the usefulness and
necessity of such acts; much more ought they to take care for such an education
of men, as may render them serviceable members to the State both in Camp and
Council.

Magistrates are (in a Sense) the foundation of Kingdoms, the strong Shoulders
that bear the burden of Government; and reason will tell, that so great a
weight and stress as the Affairs and Concerns of Kingdoms, ought not to be laid
on their Shoulders, whose Legs through debauchery are too weak to bear their
own reeling and staggering Bodies.

Seamen and Soldiers are the Walls of Kingdoms, and under God their Prudence
and Courage are the Peoples defense and safeguard. Plutarch tells us, there
were two Virtues in Hannibal which made him prosperous and successful. There
was in him plurimum audaciae ad capienda pericula, and plurimum consilii inter
ipsa pericula. He was bold in attempting, and prudent in managing the most
difficult Services; the former had signified little without the latter. Courage
may throw Men into the midst of difficulties, but Counsel and Wisdom helps them
to emerge those difficulties; and I Am sure that cannot be rationally expected
from Men that daily dethrone their own Reason by debauchery.

But when Men not only sober, just and temperate, but religiously good, are
employed in public Trusts and Services, we cannot but think the Security and
Prosperity of such a State are abundantly provided for. And our confidence
hereof is not only founded upon the Maxims of Hum^^ Reason, but of Scripture,
Wisdom, and Authori^^ also.

What a renowned, prosperous, and successf^^ Captain of the Armies of Israel
was good Joshu^^ No Man was able to stand before him all the da^^ of his Life,
Josh. 1. 5. But what bred those brav^^ gallant and undaunted spirits in the
breast of the Hero, and crowned his noble designs with suc^ admirable success?
If we look into ver. 8. we sha^^ find, it was Religion that gave both the edg^
and point to his natural courage. This Book of t^^ Law shall not depart out of
thy mouth, but thou sha^^ meditate therein day and night, that thou may
obser^^ to do all that is written therein: for then thou sha^^ make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have go^^ success.

Hezekiah this way became a nonesuch amon^ the Kings of Judah; for he clave to
the Lord, a^^ the Lord was with him, and he prospered whithe^soever he went
forth, 2 Kings 18. 5, 6, 7. And d^ing David from an whole life of experiences,
n^^ commended this as the only method of prosper^ty unto Solomon his Son, Keep
the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, that thou may prosp^^ in
all that thou do, and whithersoever thou turn^^ thy self, 1 Kings 2. 3, 4.

How great a luster therefore does this Trut^ cast about it, that the restraint
and reformation o^^ Vice, and the due encouragement of Virtue an^ Piety,
becomes the very Civil interest of Kingdom and Nations, by the joint votes and
suffrages both of Humane and Divine Wisdom? Let any Kingdom or State make trial
of this method, and from that very time they shall date their prosperity This
will make them become the Terrors of their Enemies round about them; Peace and
Prosperity shall flourish in the midst of them, which is the true Level and
Design of this most necessary and seasonable attempt.

CHAP. II.
Producing one Dictate or Rule of right Reason respecting Morality, allowed by
Mankind; and passing current through the World without one Negative Voice,
except only from those Men whose Reasons are utterly captivated by their Lusts.
SECT. I.
SUch is the degeneracy and deep Corruption of some Men's Natures by ill
Education, base Company, and long Custom in Sin; that abandoning and casting
away the bonds and restraints of right Reason, as well as Religion, they give
the full scope and Liberty to their Lusts and Passions, reckoning their chief
happiness to consist in the Gratification and Satisfaction of their Sensitive
Appetites. They affect a soft, delicate, sensepleasing Life, reckoning it the
only real Heaven to be desired and sought by them; and any other Heaven beside
that, to be merely notional and fantastic. This is the Element they desire to
live and sport in, fitly described, Tit. 3. 3. (...) serving diverse Lusts and
Pleasures. Hence it com^^ to pass, that their Bodies serve only to be straine^^
for Meats and Drinks, and Channels for filth^ Lusts to stream through. In this
stream the^^ Masculine Agility melts away, and all publi^^ Hopes and
Expectations from them are totall^ defeated and disappointed. Appetite is the
Maste^ and Reason the Slave.

These Men (if it be fit to call them Men) have bid de^iance to their own
Reason, and denounce^ a War against their own faculties, as if Reason had
licensed and privileged (which it never di^ nor can do) their worse-than
brutish Lusts, to (...) to the uttermost of their Abilities, without an^
master of restraint over them.

SECT. II.
But notwithstanding the present Captivity (...) Reason under usurping and
domineering Lust (...) so long as it has a permanent and fixed Root an^
Principle in their Nature, it is possible it may r^^cover its Throne and Empire
over them agai^^^ as many an imprisoned King has done, and pr^^bably would do
it in a very short space, if tho^^ prejudices they have conceived against its
G^^vernment, were but once fairly confuted and r^moved, which certainly is not
hard to do.

They are of Opinion, that the Laws of Reaso^^ are too severe, strict, and
rigorous. That they to much abridg them of their Pleasures and Delight^ and
that the Government of Sensuality being more easy, favorable and indulgent, is
for th^^ reason much more eligible and d^sirable.

Whereas right Reason designs not the abandoning of all Pleasures, but only the
exchange of them, and that exchange every way to our great Advantage. The only
hurt or loss (if this must be accounted so) any Man can sustain by the exchange
of Pleasures made by Reason and Religion, is this, that they design for you the
rational, ordinate, and congruous Delights, both of a Man, and of a Christian,
in lieu of the lower, baser, and filthy Pleasures of a Beast, or a Devil.

They propose to you Rules about Pleasures far more safe and grateful, without
any culpable severity or austerity in them. Reason would only regulate and
legitimate your Delights, and Religion sanctify them, that you might much more
purely and sweetly enjoy them without either shame arising from their
turpitude, or fear from their guilt. The Rules of both are large and indulgent
enough, and keeping within their lines and limits, Men shall find such
generous, manly, and agreeable delights, as are no where to be enjoyed without
them.

SECT. III.
To make this evident, I shall postulate and presume but one thing, and that a
thing so immediately true and self-evident, that in the first naked proposal of
it, it naturally and easily lets it self into every Man's understanding, and
(...) sooner asks, but gains the Approbation of right Reason. And that
self-evident Principle which I take for granted no Man of sound intellectuals
will quarrel or dispute, is this;

That good which compriseth and involveth the tr^^ Honor, Profit, and Pleasure
of the whole Man, which is more congruous to Humane Nature, and preserv^tive of
it, is to be preferred in our Estimation an^ Choice to that which only yields a
lower degree o^ Pleasure, without Profit or Honor to the basest part o^ Man;
and that low and transient Pleasure it do^ yield, attended and followed with
many present an^ future Miseries, destructive to the whole Man.

The several parts of this complex Proposition cast such a Light and Glory
round about them that I cannot imagine, but as soon as it shall b^ propounded
to the Judgment and Censure o^ sound Reason, it must immediately gain both it^
Approbation and Applause.

But because Reason in many Men is so be clouded, and disturbed by Lusts and
Passions that it can neither receive things orderly, nor judge of them truly and
impartially: I conceive it needful to demand the Censure and Judgmen^ of their
Reason upon the Particulars comprised in this general complex Proposition, that
so weighing and examining them one by one, we may try whether sound Reason has
any valuable Exception against any Part or Member thereof.

SECT. IV.
And First, I take it for granted, that no Man's Reason will deny or demur to
this Proposition, That Good is to be chosen, and Evil to be avoided. For the
will is naturally carried to that which is good, as to its proper Object, and
shuns that which is Evil. And that is naturally good which is convenient, and
agreeable to Nature; and that naturally Evil which is disconvenient and hurtful
to Nature. So that the choice of Good rather than Evil, is the natural choice
of the Will; and this choice of the Will is founded upon the Law of
Self-preservation, without which the Creation would quickly disband, and no
particular being could be long preserved.

And not only the Will of rational Creatures chooses the Good, and refuses the
Evil; but every sensitive Creature is endowed with a natural Faculty to discern
the one from the other in order to the preservation of their beings. You find
it in the smallest and most despicable Animals, and therefore cannot deny it
unto Man, the noblest and most excellent Being on Earth, except only in his
Nonage, before he has lived to the years of Discretion. Children indeed in
their Infancy have no knowledge to discern between Good and Evil, Deuteronomy. 1. 39.
But Men not discerning Good from Evil, or choosing Evil rather than Good, are
many degrees beneath Babes.

Secondly, Nor will Reason haesitate at all upon this Particular, That there
are degrees of Goodness found among Pleasures and Delights; some are better
than others. Every Life is not alike pleasant and happy. To deny this, is to
make the most despicable Worm, or Fly, equally happy with the most excellent
Creature upon Earth. And beside, for the Conviction of such debauched Persons,
as I am here arguing with, it will follow clearly from the denial of that
truth, that they really gain nothing to themselves by all their extravagant and
licentious Courses, there being altogether as much Pleasure and Felicity in a
temperate, chaste, and sober Life, as there is in that beastly Life they live.
An^ their very departure from the way of Sobriety, (...) embrace the ways of
debauchery, most clea^^^ evinceth to the World, that they do not think (...)
Pleasures equal, but that they do confidently e^^pect to find more Pleasure and
Satisfaction in the way that they choose, than they did in (...) way of
Sobriety, which they have left and aba^^doned.

Thirdly, I cannot be so uncharitable to thin^ but the Relics of Reason in the
most profliga^^^ Person, will readily admi^ and grant, that wher^ever the good
of Pleasure, Profit, and Honor (...) together, and jointly conspire to make
the life of a (...) more comfortable, and more durable upon Earth, th^^ is much
rather to be chosen, than a mere transie^^ touch of sensitive Pleasure,
accompanied with prese^^ regret, and followed with the Ruin of Estate, Nam^^
Honor, Soul, and Body. He that thinks otherwise^ is more fit for a Bedlam,
than a rational and sobe^^ Confutation. These things therefore I take for
granted, they being innate and self-evident Not^^ons and Principles in all Men.

SECT. V.
The Wisdom and Goodness of God are clearl^ discernable in leaving such
Principles of Reason and common notices of Conscience in Men aft^^ the fall, as
prompt them naturally unto Justic^ Chastity, Temperance, and Sobriety, and do
strug^gle within them to restrain them from, or recove^ them out of their
Immoralities, from which man^ advantages do result.

For hereby God is acknowledged all the World over, Men every where showing by
these things the work of the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2. 15.

Hereby Kingdoms and Commonwealths are preserved, this being the common Bridle
which restrains the outrageous Lusts of millions of Men, which else would turn
the World into Confusion, tho here and there some have slipped Bridle, and run
into all excess of Riot. We justly admire the Providence of God in butting,
bounding, and restraining the boisterous Ocean by Mountains, Rocks and Sands;
and as much is he to be admired in curbing the in^ariable Lusts of Men by these
innate Principles of Reason and Conscience.

Hereby the way to Sin is in some measure b^rr'd and shut up, and the further
progress of Sinners, already entered into it, stopped and denied. For Actions
done with regret, cannot be supposed to be done so frequently and furiously, as
if they were done without any regret; or that the way ^o Sin were smoothed to
them with a full Cons^nt and Approbation of their whole self. For most Sinners
find in themselves what Med^a did, -- Video melior^ proboque,
(...) s^quor --
They both (...) and approve that which is better, tho they follow that which
is worse.

In a word, these R^li^^s of Reason and Conscience in Men, are ^it handles to
catch hold on, for the turning them about from Satan unto God. When Paul
reasoned with Felix about Temperance, Righteousness, and Judgment to come,
(...) words laid hold upon these handles, and gave (...) such a shake, that the
Text says, Felix trem^^ And oh! that this Discourse might take hold the Reason
and Conscience of every profane ^^der, and produce some more excellent and
las^^ effect upon his Soul.

SECT. VI.
These notices and dictates of Reason and (...) science in Men being so
necessary and many (...) beneficial to themselves, as well as to the w^^^
Community; it must therefore be an horrid ^^^lany to war against them, and by
violence to (...) press and enslave them to our own Lust.

This is as if a Company of desperate R^^^ should assault Innocent and Noble
Traveller^ on the lawful Road, bind and gag their Gu^^^ whilst they Rob and
Prostitute them. Thus (...) brutish Lusts, headed by the Devil, with the
^^^ctions of Men, traveling along the lawful R^^^ of Duty, under the conduct
of Reason and ^^^^science. For this Villainy it was that the ^^^stle tells us,
The wrath of God was revealed (...) Heaven against the Heathens, who held the
(...) in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. They ha^ Light of Natural Reason and
Conscience in (...) the inbred Notions of Good and Evil, (...) raised their
hopes or fears according to the N^^^ and Quality of their Actions.

Conscia men's ut cuique su^ est, ita concipit int^^^
Pectora pro facto spemque me^umq^e suo.
But their headstrong boisterous Lusts rudely and violently brake in upon
Reason and Conscience, imprisoned and bound them as Zedekiah did the faithful
Prophet Jeremiah for the discharge of his Duty to him. For this the Wrath of
God was revealed from Heaven against them. And indeed we cannot wonder it
should be incensed against them, as it will against all that act like them. For
into such a Sin as this, many direful Aggravations fall in together to make it
a monstrous and prodigious Sin.

Here we find an high and causeless Abuse of the noblest natural ^aculties and
Powers of a Man's own Soul. What harm have thy Reason and Conscience done thee
by stimulating and persuading to Temperance, Chastity, and Sobriety, or by
struggling and striving with thee to prevent both thy present and future Ruin?
Do they lay their faithful and loving Hands of restraint upon thee, when they
see thee running headlong into Destruction? And do they deserve for this, and
no worse than this, to be thus trampled under foot and abused? Ask thy self,
Man, whether thou think thy very Dog deserves to be hanged for opening at
midnight, and taking that thief by the throat who came to cut thine? And dare
thou use those noble Powers within thee, worse than thou would use a Dog?
Humanity would blush at such an Action.

These vile Abuses of thy Reason and Conscience car^y also in them an horrid
contempt of God, whose Patent, Officers, and Delegates thy Reason and
Conscience are. Those certainly Sin with an high hand against the Lord, who
make nothing to control, kick, and lay in Irons his Commission-Officers,
appointed for no other end, by their present and future Felicity. Nay,

Such Men as these are found in a plain Conf^^racy with the Devil, and that in
a most unnat^^^^ and horrid Plot against their own Souls and Bod^^ Their Light
and their Lusts are struggling to^^^ther. Sin and Conscience are combating one
w^^^ the other; the one to destroy, the other to save (...) Man. Dare thou
join with thy Lusts against (...) light, and think not to be brought in as a
Party, (...) confederate with the Devil? The stopping of (...) Mouth of thy
Conscience, fully proves both (...) Consent and Concealment. And if proved
C^^^sent and Concealment make the^ not a Party (...) Accessory, it will be very
strange.

Plutarch in this Book de Ami^^ti^ relates a St^^^ of a Persian, who scuffling
in the dark with a M^^^^an, against whom he had a grudge, and not (...) able to
conquer him himself, called upon (...) Friend, who stood by with a naked Sword
read^^^ strike, but durst not for fear of killing his Fri^^^^ The Persian cries
out, Strike, strike, however (...) stroke fall; thrust at an adventure; I care
not so (...) kill the Magician, tho thou kill him through my (...) Body.

Much so stands the case here with a little ^^^riation. Thou art furiously set
upon the En^^^ meant of thy Lusts, nothing will quiet thee (...) their
Satisfaction. Thy Reason and Conscie^^^^ will oppose it, and struggle hard with
thee to w^^^ hold thee from them. But thou carest not in^^^ rage of thine
insatiable Appetite, tho thy Re^^^ and Conscience both fall in the Combat,
rat^^^ than thy Lusts should not be satisfied Oh, (...) Bruits! yea, what
Monsters can Sin turn (...) into!

SECT. VII.
If Men have not quite extinguished both Reason and Conscience by debauchery,
and divested themselves of Humanity, one would think no Motion (...) Address
can possibly be made to them more fair, ^ational, and inoffensive than this,
that they would ^e pleased but to consult themselves, and hearken ^o the native
and unconstrained Voice of their ^wn Reason and Conscience, before they engage
^^emselves in matters of great Concernment, upon which both their present and
eternal welfare do ^epend; or if they are already engaged, yet at ^^st to lend
an ear to what they have to offer for ^eir recovery, before it be too late.

You are not here urged and pressed to hearken ^o the Voices of your Enemies
that hate you, or ^o the counsel and advice of mere Strangers who ^now not your
Affairs; but to hearken to your ^lves, to be your own Arbitrators and Judges,
^o draw up the Award with your own hand. It Is ^strange and an hard case ind^ed,
and scarce to be ^upposed, that Men should fall out with themselves ^ such a
rate, that they had rather hear the Voice ^f their mortal Enemy the Devil, and
listen to his Advice and Counsel, than to the Voice of their ^wn Reason and
Conscience.

We all account in madness in Balaam to beat ^^is innocent Ass, and threaten to
kill her for ^^unning the Sword of the Angel that opposed his ^assage in a
sin^ul and dangerous Expedition. But ^ow many use both their Reason and
Conscience ^orse than Asses, because they dare not go forward, and desperately
carry them into the very midst of Dangers and Miseries, which they plainly
foresee and warn them of?

What Injuries have thy Reason or Conscienc^ done thee, Man? What Affronts have
they give^ thee? That thou will not suffer them to speak o^^ offer one word,
tho never so pertinent, seasonable^ and necessary? There is a Civility due from
us t^^meer Strangers, yea, to Strangers of an inferio^^ Rank and Quality. The
least we can do, is (...) give them a patient hearing, and not interrup^^ them
whilst they speak nothing but what is rational, pertinent, and necessary,
especially if it b^ to their own good and advantage. It Is strang^ Men should
not think themselves as much oblige^ to pay Civility and Respect to their own
Reason and Consciences, as they daily pay to mere Strangers and Inferiors. Give
them but a patient hearing, and they will both tell thee:

We are thine appointed Guardians, and have ou^ Commission from God to advise,
direct, and counsel th^^ We are thy faithful and inward Friends; yea, we an^
thine own self, and the best and noblest part of thy se^ too. At our hands G^^
will require thy Blood, should^ thou perish by our Silence or Treachery. We
cannot b^ both Silent and Innocent, are both in such hazar^ Don't abuse us, and
stop our Mouths for crying ou^ Stop, Stop, when we see thee departing from the
Paths (...) Honesty, Honor, and Safety, and taking the direct Roa^ to that
Gulf of Misery, in which few, if any foot-step are found of such as return
again, that are far engage^ therein.

Suffer us but fairly and friendly to expostulate the matter with thee. What
design can we have against the true Interest, whilst thine and ours cannot
possibly (...) opposite or disjunct, but one and the same Interest.

Well then, that which thy Reason and Conscience offers being so weighty, fair,
and just, and what thine own Interest plainly lies in, I will not be so
uncharitable, as to suppose thou will either refuse to hear, or reject what
they have to say in the following Cases and Debates.

CHAP. III.
Wherein the true Censure and Judgment of right Reason and Conscience, are
given upon profane Swearing and Blaspheming the Name of God: As also their
Replies to several Pleas offered in Defense or Excuse thereof.

SECT. I.
GOD bestowed on Man the Noble Faculty of Speech (a peculiar Favor and
Privilege) for two Ends and Uses. (1.) That by the use of his Tongue he may
glorify his Maker, and sound forth the Praises of his Redeemer. (2.) That we
might thereby be able to communicate our minds one to another in all our
necessary and convenient Interests and Concernments, whether Civil or
Religious. This Member, the Tongue, tho small in quantity, is found to be
mighty in efficacy; and whilst it is kept under the Rule and Government of
Grace, the words that drop from it are as Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.
Gracious words are Bread to feed, and Water to refresh the Souls of others. A
sanctified Tongue is as a Tree of Life. Conversion, Edification, and
Consolation, are the delicious Fruits of the Lips.

But the Tongues of some Men break loose from under all the Laws and Rules both
of Reason and Religion, and serve only to vent the froth and filth which
abounds in the heart, as in a Fountain of Pollution. For out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks. The Tongue moves lightly, but falls heavily;
it strikes soft, but wounds deep. It would not spare Men of the highest Rank
and Eminence, did not the fear of capital Punishments teach them so much Wit to
keep their Tongues in Prison, that they may keep their Bodies out of Prison.
And tho for this reason they are afraid of making too bold with the Names of
Men; yet having no fear of God at all, they fall upon his great and dreadful
Name, tossing it to and f^o without any Respect or Reverence.

Augustus prohibited the common use of his Name, left it should grow too cheap
and vile, by the common and needless using of it. The Name of Mercurius
Trismegistus was very sparingly used, because of the great Reverence the People
had for him. The very Heathens were afraid to pronounce the Name of their great
god, Demogorgon, as fearing the Earth would tremble when his Name was
mentioned. How does the Reverence of Heathens to their false gods expose and
aggravate the impudence of professed Christians in their vile Indignities and
Abuses of the Great and Terrible Name of the True God! Yea, they not only take
up his Name vainly and rashly into their Lips, but audaciously insert it by a
profane Oath into their common Talk, as that which gives the Grace, Lepor, and
Ornament to their Discourses. Some have not been ashamed to say, What pity is
it that Swearing should be a Sin, which gives so great a Grace and Ornament to
Language?

SECT. II.
Swearing by the Name of God in a righteous Cause, when called thereto by due
Authority, is not only a lawful, but a religious Act, founded upon, and
directed to the Honor of God's Omniscience, whereunto there is a solemn Appeal
made in every assertory and promissory Oath, and a religious Acknowledgment
made him of his infallible Knowledge of the Truth or Falsehood of our Hearts, and
all the Secrets of them, be they never so involved and inward things.

The lawful use and end of Swearing, is to put an end to all Strife, and to
maintain both Equity and Charity among Men, the two Bonds and Ligaments of
Humane Society. Now it being the Sovereign Right and Property of God alone,
infallibly to search and try the hearts and reins of Men, he thereby becomes
the in^allible Witness to the Truth or Falsehood of what they speak; so that in
every such lawful Oath, there is not only a solemn Appeal, and in that Appeal
an Ascription of Glory to his Sovereign Omniscience* but therein (implicitly
at least) they put themselves under his Wrath and Curse, in case they Swear
falsely, which makes this Action most sacred and solemn.

The deep Corruption of Humane Nature by the fall, makes these Appeals to God
under a Curse necessary. For it is supposed, tho Men be false and deceitful,
yet there is some Reverence of a Deity, and fear of his Wrath and Curse, left
unextinguished in their fallen Nature. So that Men will rather speak the truth,
(tho to their own shame and loss) than by invocating so glorious a Name in
vain, put both Soul and Body under his Wrath and Curse. By which it appears
what an awful and solemn thing an Oath is; and that every good Man not only
takes a lawful Oath with holy fear and trembling, because of the Solemnity of
the Action; but rather ought to choose Death, than to Swear profanely, because
of the horrid Malignity of the Action.

SECT. III.
The contumely and malignity found in profane Oaths, appears in that terrible
threatening, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain;
a threatening altogether as Just and Righteous, as it is Severe and Terrible.
This Sin admits of degrees of Guilt. It Is highly sinful to Swear by the Name of
God lightly and vainly in our common Discourses, tho the Oath be clipped, and
half suppressed, or disguised in the Pronunciation of it, which argues some
remains of fear and shame in the Sinner.

It Is yet worse (and indeed not a jot below Blasphemy) to swear by any other
Name, than the Name of God. For in so doing, they attribute to a Creature the
Sovereign and Incommunicable property of God, set that Creature in the very
Throne of God, and Invest it with the Regalities of his Omniscience, to know
our Hearts, and Almighty Power to avenge the wrong upon us done to himself, as
well as to Men by false swearing.

But to break in rudely and blasphemously upon the Sacred and Tremendous Name
of God, with bold and full-mouthed Oaths, striking through his Sacred Name,
with direct contumelious Blasphemies; this argues an heart from which all fear
of God is utterly expelled and banished.

Yet some there are grown up to that prodigious height of Impiety, that they
dare assault the very Heavens, and discharge whole Vollies of Blasphemies
against that Glorious Majesty which dwells there. They are not afraid to bid
defiance to him, and challenge the God that made them, to do his worst. They
deck and adorn (as they account it) their common Discourses with bloody Oaths,
and horrid Imprecations, not reckoning them Genteel and Modish without them. It
consists not with the greatness of their Spirits to be wicked at the common
rate. They are willing to let the World know, that they are none of those puny,
silly Fellows, that are afraid of invisible Powers, or so much Cowards as to
clip a full-mouthed Oath, by suppressing, or whispering the Emphatical sounding
Syllable; but think an horrid Blasphemy makes the most sweet and graceful
Cadency in their Hellish Rhetoric.

They glory that they have fully conquered all those troublesome Notions of
Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice, Heaven and Hell, to that degree, that they can
now Affront the Divine Majesty to his very Face, and not fear the worst he
threatens in his Word against their wickedness.

If there be a God (which they scarce believe) they are resolved audaciously to
provoke him to give them a convincing Evidence of his Being. And if he be (as
they are told he is) rich in Patience and Forbearance, they are resolved to try
how far his Patience will extend, and what load of wickedness it is capable to
bear.

If their Damnation be not yet sure enough, they will do their utmost to make
it sure, by breaking down the only Bridge whereby they can escape Damnation; I
mean, by trampling under their feet the precious Blood and Wounds of the Son of
God, and imprecating the Damnation of Hell upon their own Souls, as if it
slumbred too long, and were too slow-paced in its motions toward them. I am of
Opinion, there are few Christians to be found on Earth, crying so often, Lord,
pardon, Lord, save me, as some Wretches among us cry, ( Horresco referens!) God
damn me, the Devil take me.

Herein they seem to envy the happiness of the Devils, and damned Wretches in
Hell, and endeavor (as one speaks) to snatch Damnation out of Gods hands
before the time, as if they could not be soon enough among their roaring and
howling Companions in the midst of the everlasting burnings. But, why such
haste to be perfectly miserable? The very Devils themselves deprecate Torments
before their time, tho you impreca^e them. Your misery makes haste enough
toward you; you need not quicken it, or thus run to meet it.

I am persuaded, that if the Bars of the Bottomless Pit were broken up, and
Devils should ascend in Humane Shapes, none among them would be sound hastening
upon themselves the fullness and compleatness of their Misery as you do. It Is a
Truth, though a strange one, That it is much easier to find, than imagine men
upon Earth professing Christian Religion, yet in some respect sunk below the
wickedness of the Diabolical nature, by making Damnation both the Subject of
their Drollery, and the object of their very wishes and desires. Some greater
Masters of our Language, may more lively and emphatically express the horrid
nature of this Sin; but excuse me, Reader, if I believe no Words or Thoughts
can measure the height or depth of this monstrous Abomination.

SECT. IV.
Such contumelious Language as this (especially when grown modish and common)
cannot but be a most high and dreadful provocation of God, and such an one as
will certainly bring down his desolating vengeance, not only upon the heads of
blasphemers themselves, but upon the States and Kingdoms that connive at, or
tolerate them. We read Zech. 5. 2, 3, 4. of a flying Roll-full of Curses, the
length thereof twenty Cubits, and the breadth thereof ten Cubits, which shall
enter into the house of the Swearer, remain in the midst of his House, and
consume it with the Timber and Stones thereof. Blasphemy and profane swearing
are like Barrels of Gunpowder laid under the Foundation of many great and noble
Families, many of which are already blown up, and laid in ruins by this Sin,
and many more ready to follow, as soon as the Justice of God shall give fire to
it.

And (comparatively speaking) it were happy if the mischief ended here; but
alas! it causes God to commence a quarrel with the whole Land, Hos. 4. 2, 3.
And because of Oaths the Land mourns. You find in Isa. 38. what it was that
brought that unparalleled desolation upon that famous and flourishing City
Jerusalem, and the whole Land of Judah: For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is
^allen, because their tongues and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke
the eyes of his glory.

But alas! Scripture-threatnings signify scarce so much with these men, as the
Predictions of the Weather in an Almanac; and which is strange to consider,
the very execution of Scripture-threatnings before their eyes, will not
terrify them from this inhumane wickedness: Even these also are laughed to
scorn, or easily forgotten.

Oh! that God would set it home with power upon the Spirits of all that are in
Power, to take some speedy and effectual course to remove this accursed thing,
this iniquity to be punished by the Judge; one (and a chief one too) of those
direful provocations of Heaven, to which we owe a special part of our National
infelicity at this day. We all acknowledge, that all prosperity and success
depends upon God: If so, Reason will subsume, that it must be therefore the
interest of Kingdoms and Commonwealths to prevent and restrain those impieties,
which so audaciously provoke and incense his wrath. As much is this their duty
and interest, as it is the interest of a Courtier to avoid offenses of his
Royal Master, the King, upon whose Favor, his Honor and Preferment depends.
Or as it is the duty of the Owner, to keep in that Ox which is used to goring;
or cover that pit into which some have, and others of his Family are like to
fall; Or carefully and speedily to remove that Gunpowder which his enemies have
placed under the ^oundation of his house to blow it up. Both Reason and
Experience will inform the Rulers of this World, That professed Rebels to the
God of Heaven, are never like to make useful Subjects in the Kingdoms of men.

SECT, V.
Till public Justice lay hold upon such Offenders, let us try what close
reasoning may effect for their Reformation. It Is hard to imagine, that men of
Sense should so generally and so far engage themselves in this Course of
profane swearing, and have nothing at all to say for themselves.

If they have no reason at all to offer in justification, or excuse of what
they do, they act the bruits, not the men, and are self-condemned already.

It Is a question with me, whether the Soul of man on this side Hell can sink so
far into the nature of a Devil, as to sin because he will sin, or to engage
himself in a Course of Sin, without any respect at all to some carnal interest,
either of Profit, Pleasure or Honor.

The Thief has a visible Temptation of Gain to allure him, or pinching
Necessity to induce him. The Liar is drawn in to commit that second Sin, to
cover the shame and turpitude of a former. The Adulterer promises himself
Pleasure in the satisfaction of his Lusts. And though men generally stand
amazed to think what that Temptation should be which prevails upon the Swearer,
yet doubtless something there is he has to plead in excuse and extenuation of
his Fault. Whatsoever it be, let it be produced and weighed in the balance of
right Reason; valeat quantum valer^ potest, let it have its due value and
consideration. And could I imagine any thing more likely to be their
inducements, than what I shall here mention, I would not conceal them. There
are only four things that can fall within the compass of my imagination
pleadable by them, when seriously charged with the evil of the Fact.

1. Some of them will happily tell us, that they would not swear as they do, if
they could gain credit to what they say without it; but the incredulity of
others provokes them to add so many Oaths to their single Affirmations.

2. Others of them will tell us, they only swear in their passion, when
provoked by injuries received from others; and if men did not wrong them, they
would not wrong God as they do.

3. Some will plead, that Swearing is become modish, the Badge and Character of
a Gentleman, that it gives them reputation among men of their own rank and
quality, and that they shall be looked upon as sneaking fools, unfit for the
Company of Gentlemen, if they could not discourse with them in this Dialect.

4. And some will confess the Practice is evil, but that they have gotten such
an ill habit, and the Sin is become so customary with them, that many times
they know not whether they swear or no.

I cannot imagine, nor (I think) they themselves, what else is pleadable in
excuse or extenuation of this horrid Sin: Let these that are produced have a
fair trial at the bar of Reason, and carry your selves toward this Sin for
ever hereafter, according to that righteous verdict your selves shall now be
forced to pass upon it

SECT. VI.
To begin with the first Plea; You say, you would not swear as you do, could
you gain credit to your words without it. Weigh this question in the upright
balance of thine own Reason, whether any wise or sober man in the world, will
find himself ever the more obliged to believe what you say, by the addition of
blasphemou^ Oaths and Imprecations, to your plain and simple Affirmations and
Negations. I cannot think that you your selves would give the more credit to
any man that shall prosess his sincerity to you, by finding him in that his
very Profession false and treacherous to his God. Say, Reason, do not thou
take this for a sure truth, That he who makes no conscience of being true to
God, will never make much conscience of being false to men? For what is that
which gives any man's words reputation among wise and sober men, but the
supposition of his integrity and conscientious fear of his deceit and guile?
Take away that, and with it you take away the credibility of all his Reports
and Affirmations.

If I look upon the person that speaks, as a man of integrity and
conscienscious tenderness, I have a sufficient ordinary security of the truth
of what he says. But if I look upon him as a man of a prostitute and seared
Conscience, that dares venture upon any sin; a man in whom there is no awe of
God to produce veracity in his words; then my Reason presently concludes, that
where there is no Truth, there ought to be no Trust: For Truth is the very
groundwork and foundation of Trust. Now what truth can we suppose to be left
in that man, that sticks not upon any trivial occasion to break asunder all the
obligations of a Creature to his Creator; together with all the bonds of
kindness his great and best Benefactor has bound him withal, and without any
the least Injury he can pretend his God has done him, to fly in his very face
with the most contumelious Language? Can we suppose any truth to be in, or any
trust to be due to such a man as this?

Good men and bad are thus contradistinguished, Eccl. 9. 2. Him that swears,
and he that fears an oath. A conscientious man is so afraid of an Oath, that
he would rather choose to die than swear some kind of Oaths: And though he be
satisfied of the lawfulness of an Oath in general, and of the matter of that
Oath he swears in particular; yet an holy awe and fear of God fills his
heart, when he swears lawfully and necessarily, lest he should sail in the
manner of it, by not giving that due reverence to the Name of God, which so
sacred and solemn an Action requires.

But from profane swearing and blaspheming the Name of God, every man's Reason
may justly and plai^ly infer this Conclusion; That the fear of God is not in
that man's heart: And where there is no fear of God, what truth can be supposed
in him, or what trust can be due to his Words or Oaths? but the more he swears,
still the less reason all wise men have to believe him. And I am sure the
credulity of Fools adds little reputation to him. This Plea therefore for
profane Swearing, is altogether shamed, bafled and cashiered by the common
Reason of Mankind.

SECT. VII.
Call therefore to the Bar of Reason, the second Plea or Apology for profane
Swearing.

You say, you swear not, unless provoked by injuries men have done you.

This is so weak a Plea for so great a Sin, that I wonder men are not ashamed
to bring it into the Court of Reason. This is the true sense and strength of
it. My enemy has abused me, therefore I Will avenge the wrong my enemy has done
me, upon my best Friend and Benefactor. I challenge you to give but the color
or the shadow of a sound Reason, why upon any abuse you have received from men,
you should fall so injuriously upon the Name of God, who never abused or
injured you, since he gave you a Being, but has always done you good. Tell me,
Man, (if thou have the Reason of a man in thee) what wrong has God done thee?
Wherein has he injured thee, that thou thus wreakest thy revenge upon him? If
an enemy have affronted you, Reason would tell you, you ought not to take
reveng^ for it, upon your Friend and best Benefactor. Have you none but God to
abuse, when men abuse and injure you? Can your Reason comprobate and allow such
an Action as this? Satan instigates the corruptions of men to injur^ you, and
you fly in the face of God for it, whose Laws severely prohibit such Actions,
and will avenge the injuries done unto him. Speak no more therefore for ever in
the way of excusing the ho^rid sinfulness of this fact against God, upon the
account of injuries done thee by thy Fellow Creature. The Case is plainly
determined, and cast over the bar of Reason with contempt and abhorrence.

SECT. VIII.
Come we next to your third Excuse or Plea; That Swearing is become ^^odish,
and gives you a Reputation among men of your own Rank and Quality, and that you
shall be looked upon as sneaking ^ellows, unfit for the Society of Gentl^men,
if you did not discourse with them in their own Dialect.

This Apology for Sin is of no late date: Salvian mentions it as far back as
his own Time; profane persons then Mali esse cog^ntur, ne viles h^beantur.
thus pleaded for themselves, That they were compelled to be evil, lest they
should he accounted vile.

Whether there be any weight in this Apology for Swearing, will quickly appear,
now it is to be laid in the balance of true Reason.

1. And first of all, let us consider what makes a true Gentleman, and whether
profane Swearing have any place in his true Character and Description. A
Gentleman is one that springs from famous and renowned Ancestors, and
degenerates not from their Probity and Honor. Generosus, nobilis, ex praeclaro
genere ortus, qui a genere non de^^ectit.


This is the man whom the Latins call Generosus, and we a Gentleman. Because we
suppose a man of such an Extraction and Education more Gentle, affable, and
condescending to Inferiors, and to keep a stricter government over his Tongue
and Passions, than rude Plebeans are wont to do. Upon this account the Poet
rightly observes, Quo major est quisquis, magis est placabilis ira,
Et Faciles motus men's generosa capit.
Men of Genteel Extraction and Education, are Persons whose Passions are
supposed to move more gently than other men's: And if at any time they be moved
disorderly, yet are they more placable, and sooner reduced, than those of
sordid and baser Spirits are.

It Is Virtue which raises and ennobles Families at first: for omnis sanguis
concolor, all Humane Blood is derived from, and equally tainted by Adam. Nobler
and Baser Blood is an after Difference, made by Virtue and Vice among men. And
as Virtue first ennobled and raised some Families above others, so it will
still continue the (...) of Honor in their Posterity: And as their V^^tues
shall increase, so will their Honor prop^^tionably do.

The Case truly and plainly standing thus, (...) morally impossible to make
Debauchery the p^^per Badge and Character of Gentility. For m^^ of Eminency
above the Vulgar, are more (...) bliged than they to shun all base and sordid
Ac^ons: And as their Honor increases, so do the obligations to Temperance and
Sobriety e^^crease and strengthen upon them proport^^^nably.

'Twas therefore a right and rational Observ^^tion of Hi^rome, I see nothing
desirable in Nobi^^^ (says he) but this, that such men are bound by a^^ tain
kind of necessity, not to degenerate from, or s^^^ the glory and honor of
their renowned Ancest^^^ And the Reason is strong and evident. For Ve^^tue
being that which first differenced their Blo^^ from others, they are obliged by
all the val^^ they have for the honor of their Blood and ^^^milies, to shun
those Vices which stain that h^^nour and dignity. And what Vice can dishono^^
and debase them more, than profane Swearing For if the Arms of many Noble
Families ha^ been reversed for Treason against the King; '(...) irrational to
imagine, that Treason against the King of Kings, should add a new mark of
h^nour: And what is Blasphemy but Treason* against God? It Is plain then from
the true R^^ and Character of a Gentleman, profane Swea^ing neither first
raised, nor can preserve and continue, but rather blots and exposes their
Reputation and Honor.

2. Though I am most willing to pay a becoming deference to all Persons of
Noble and Genteel Extraction, yet in faithfulness to their true honor, I am
here obliged to say, (and in saying it, I can offend no man that has a true
sense of honor) that their natural Descent can never give them so much honor,
as the Vices I am here censuring will reflect ignominy and dishonor upon them.
To be a slave of Satan, and your own lusts, is such a mark of infamy, as all
the honorable and illustrious Titles in the world can never cover. It is
better to rise by Virtue to Honor, from contemptible Parents, than by Vice and
profaneness to grow contemptible from honorable Parents. It Is your honor to
have many Servants at your command, obsequiously attending a nod of your head,
or a beck of your finger: but ask your own Reason, Gentlemen, whether it be not
a greater dishonor for you to attend as obsequiously your selves upon every
beck and nod of Satan, and your own lusts.

Were your Natural Birth once ennobled by the New Birth, you would be more than
thrice honorable: Grace would make you more illustrious, than your natural
Extraction does or can do. Or if Morality (which is far inferior to that
honor, and for which, Heathens themselves have been renowned in the Pagan
world) did but adorn and beautify your Conversations, though it cannot entitle
you to Heaven, or secure to you the glory of the world to come, yet it would
make you shine in the eyes of men in this World, and taking its advantage from
your honorable Extraction, make you differ from persons of an inferior rank,
as Stars of a greater magnitude and luster.

I hope, Gentlemen valuing themselves upon the honor, will not be offended at
a sharper invecti^^ than this, against those Vices that darken and eclipse
their honor, both in the eyes of God, a^ well as in the judgment of all wise
and goo^ men.

3. Suppose what you say to be true, that some profane Gentlemen should scoff
and deride yo^ for your sober Carriage, and decorous Language (things which
ought to be inseparable from tru^ Gentility) I would in this case appeal to
your ow^ Reason, why you should not enjoy your ow^ pleasure in as full latitude
and liberty, as they d^ theirs? They delight in the Dialect of Devils you in
pure and inoffensive Language. If the^ will drink the pudled Waters, and you
refus^ them for the pure Cristal Streams, you have t^ be sure as much reason
(and a thousand time^ more) to assert your liberty to be virtuous, th^^ they
have (or can pretend to have) a priviledg^ to be vicious.

And if they will be offended with you for this their offense is groundless in
themselves, and will be greatly advantageous to you. For you need not doubt but
you may find better Company th^^ theirs any where on this side Hell. I remember
tha^ ^ational and excellent Apology, which Tertullian made for the Christians
in his time against the Gentiles: Wherein (says he) do we offend you, if we
will not partake with you in your Delights? If we sustain any damage by such
ou^ refusal, the injury can be only our own. We reject your Pleasures, and you
are not delighted with ours.

You will show your selves true and worthy Gentlemen in abandoning and
rejecting (upon so noble an account as this) all further unnecessary Society
with such Genteil-men; for so they deserve to be called, rather than Gentl^men.
They boast indeed the honor of their Blood, whilst they trample the precious
and invaluable Blood of Christ under their feet: They boast their Eminency
above the Vulgar, whilst mean time they labor vilely to debase him that set
them there.

I am sure there is not a Devil in Hell, but is by nature of a more honorable
and illustrious House, than the proudest of Blasphemers. They are Angels by
Nature, though Devils by Practice. They have little reason to boast of their
Original Excellency, which now aggravates their misery. Sin darkened their
luster, degraded them from their Natural Dignity; and so it will do theirs
also, that imitate Devils in their Blasphemy and Malignity against God.

4. It may as easily be proved as asserted, That to make Cursing, Swearing and
Blas^heming, the Badges and Characteristical marks of a true Gentleman, is the
foulest blot and mark of infamy, which the malice of their Enemies can devise
to put into their Es^utcheons; and such an affront, as ought to be highly
resented by all true Gentlemen.

Should the most malicious Enemy you have in the world, see an Herald to devise
a mark of Infamy for your Coats of Arms, to make you ridiculous and a byword
among the people, he could never dishonor you at that rate you this way
dishonor your selves.

For if Debauchery beboth asserted and allow^ to be the true Badge of
Gentility, then your ow^^ Reason will infer, that all the Ancient Epithets
(...) Gentility ought thereupon to be altered. An^ would those Gentlemen, think
you, take it well, (...) have the Titles and Epithets of Ingenuo^s, Worth^
Honorable, and Noble, changed into Cursing, Swea^^ing, Damning, Blaspheming
Gentlemen? You cannon but see the inconsistency of both; If therefore yo^ will
adopt and wear the latter, you must either cashier and renounce the former, or
try to mak^ the former consistent with the latter, which I^^^sure the most
ingenious among you will find (...) hard task to do.

5. I humbly beg leave to propound one plai^ blunt Question to you, Gentlemen.
The matte^ of it is too rational to be rejected, and let th^^ make atonement
for the blunt manner of its proposal. And the Question is this.

Qu. Whether your Reason and Conscience be full^ s^tisfied, that when you die
(as you know you shorth must) you shall then appear before the Judgment-se^t of
God, in the quality and character of Gentlemen* Do you verily think you shall
find the more favou^ there, for the sake of your Noble Descent, and Honorable
Extraction, or that your Gentility shall make a^ atonement for all your impiety?

I am persuaded, Gentlemen, you do not, you cannot think so. You know you must
appea^ before that God, with whom there is no respect of persons: a God that
will certainly damn the impenitent Blasphemer. The man must assuredly go to
Hell, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and if the man be damned, certainly the Gentleman is in
a bad Case.

6. In a word, I am past all doubt, and so may you too, that this genteel mode
of Swearing, Drinking and Whoreing, which has spread so far in the present
infamous Age, into Protestant States and Kingdoms, is the very Spirit and
strength of a Popish Plot, Subtly projected, and industriously managed for
their effectual reduction to Popery.

For nothing in the world can reconcile men to Popery, yea, and even endear
them to it, like Debauchery. Under Popery, Gentlemen may come up to the rates
of costly Pardons and Indulgences, for their greatest Sins. They may give
themselves liberty to wallow in profaneness all the days of their life. They
may give their lusts the utmost scope and liberty, and yet have a plenary
Pardon when they die. So that they need not abridge themselves of any sinful
liberty, or boggle at the loudest Blasphemy, whilst they have that in their
Pocket to still and quiet something that grumbles in their Bosom. Do you not
see, Gentlemen, the narural tendencies of these things? Does not Debauchery
look like a Shooing-Horn to Popery.

Besides, Gentlemen, the Devil and the Pope are confederates in a farther
design upon you; and if their design hit, they hope to win by Power what they
may miss by Policy; and that by the very same method of corrupting and
debauching Persons of eminent Rank and Quality, in Protestant Kingdoms and
Commonwealths. For (as a Lauren. Humphredus de Nobilitate. p. 64.
Learned man in Queen Elizabeth's Days rightly observed); These are the men
especially interested in the public Affairs of Kingdoms. Qui publicis rebus
intersunt and praesunt, nisi viri summi ac nobiles? Quis in Senatu praeit, in
foro praesidet? principes sane viri and nobiles. Quis jubet, vetat, agit,
satagit? Quis versat and volvit omnia? Quis leges fingit and refingit? Quis in
pace Rempublicam, contra hosts bella administrat, praeterquam viri nobiles?
etc.
These represent the People in Parliaments. These make their Laws, administer
the Government in Peace and War. To their hands are committed the great
concerns of Nations. These are they that fill the Seats of public Judicature.

If Gentlemen therefore by this means be generally corrupted and infected by
Debauchery, their influence and example is likely to infect the greatest part
of the Body-Politick, and either make the people easily pliable to the charms
and courtships of Popery, for the Reason before mentioned, or so besot their
excellent Parts, and enervate their Mafculine Courage, that they shall fall an
easy prey to their (otherwise) weak and despicable Enemies.

And certainly, Gentlemen, we have all cause to reckon this Plot very far
advanced, when we shall see Debauchery every where made the Badge of Gentility;
and Chastity, Temperance and Sobriety, become the marks and notes of Infamy.
When Civility it self shall be hissed with derision out of some Gentlemen's
Company; and the more temperate and sober any man is, by so much the less fit
to be a Gentleman's Companion.

By this time I hope you are convinced, that true Gentility is no enemy to
Sobriety, nor Debauchery the Character of Gentility; and will at least pardon,
if not thank me, for endeavoring this way to secure the true honor of some,
whilst I rationally argue down the Vices and Follies of others. This Plea for
Debauchery, you see has the same fate the former had, and deserves never to be
mentioned more.

SECT. IX.
There is but one Plea more, and that as silly and irrational as any of the
former; And that is,

The custom and habit of Swearing, which you say is hard to be broken. This Sin
is become so customary to you, that now you scarce note or observe it in your
selves.

That there may be Truth in the Matter of this Plea, I neither deny nor doubt;
but that it is a rational and allowable Plea, will never be granted by your own
Reason. The thing you say may be true; for we sometimes find that when you are
taxed for Swearing, you will presently swear that you did not swear; and curse
him to his face, that accuses you for Cursing.

But pray, Gentlemen, make your own Reason judge, whether Custom be a valid and
allowed Plea for profane Swearing and Cursing. Say, Reason, will thou allow
that one of the highest aggravations of Sin, is pleadable in thy Court for the
excuse or extenuation of it? Will thou give it under thy hand, that the man is
the less guilty, because the more wicked? Dare thou to warrant it, that God
will take the less notice of the wrongs men do him, because they are used and
accustomed so to wrong and abuse him every hour in the day? If your Reason can
allow and warrant this, I must say it is different, yea, and opposite to the
common Reason of Mankind.

Say not, I make my own Reason the Rule and Standard of yours or other men's.
For I argue here (as I have done all along before) upon the common Topics and
Maxims of Reason, generally allowed all the World over by Mankind. If a
Practice be evil, the oftener it is repeated, the more still it is aggravated.

To be plain and faithful with you, Gentlemen, if it be your custom to
blaspheme, it is God's custom to damn Blasphemers. If you use to be drunk and
unclean, God uses to punish Drunk^rds and Adulterers (if impenitent and
unreformed) with his everlasting wrath.

And when you are cited (as shortly you must be) before the awful Tribunal of
the great, the just, and the terrible God, ask but your selves, whether such a
Plea as this, be like to excuse you in whole or in part, and take off the
heinousness of these horrid Impieties? Will your profane Oaths, and direful
Execrations and Imprecations, be excused in the least degree, by telling him,
Lord, I was so accustomed to blaspheme thy Name, Cursing, Swearing and Damning
were so familiar Language in my Lips from day to day, that I had quite lost the
sense of the Action, as well as of the evil thereof; and therefore, Lord, pity,
spare and have mercy on me: O damn not my soul to thine everlasting wrath. For
though I have imprecated it upon my self, yet frequent custom at length
extinguished all my sense and conscience of the evil thereof, till at length I
could play with a direful imprecation as an harmless thing; nay, thought it an
ornament and grace to my Speech, a gallant Expression alamode the Times and
Places I lived in.

Is not this as good a Plea, and not a jot better than that of a Malefactor
upon his Trial for Life and Death, when Theft or Robbery have been evidently
and substantially proved upon him, and the Judge demands what he has to say
for himself, why Sentence of Death should not pass upon him? Mercy, my Lord,
Mercy, cries he; for I have been so used and accustomed to filching and
thieving from my Youth up, that for some years before I was apprehended, every
ones Goods and Cattle seemed to me to look like my own; so that I scarce knew
when I stole, and when I did not.

And thus, Gentlemen, you have heard a fair Trial of the Sin of profane
Swearing and Imprecations of Damnation, and you have heard the verdict of your
own Reason and Conscience upon the Case. The Lord help you to break off and
reform that sin, for which there is not one word of Apology or excuse now left
in your Mouths.

Let me close all I have to say upon this head with one plain Question: Do you
think you must die, or live here for ever, as you now do? If you are convinced
(as all the Living are supposed to be) that you must die, do you desire an
easy and comfortable, or a painful and terrible Death? I presume there is no
man living that is convinced he must die, but desires naturally and rationally
an (...), as easy and comfortable a dissolution as may be. If so, I appeal to
your Reason, whether profane swearing and blaspheming the Name of God, be a
proper rational way to obtain peace and comfort at death? With what hope or
encouragement can those tongues of yours cry at death, Lord have mercy upon me,
which have profaned that Name, and imprecated Damnation from him, till you
came into your last extremities, which convinced you, you could live no longer.

It Is a serious Question, and well worth a cool and solemn debate in your own
Reasons and Consciences. Some of you are more immediately exposed to the
dangers of death than others, ready to be disbanded by a Bullet. If you fall,
you must either fall considerately, or inconsiderately. If inconsiderately, and
without any sense or conscience of this horrid guilt, you die impenitently, and
consequently desperately and miserably. If considerately, and with awakened
Consciences, I demand, Whether such guilt as this will not roar louder than the
Peals and Vollies of those great and small Guns do, which breathe Destruction
upon you, and round about you? I have done my Message plainly and faithfully to
the very face of your Reason and Conscience; and if for my faithfulness and
zeal both for God's honor and yours, I am rewarded with your C^rses; yet if
you would forbear to blaspheme and ^end in pieces the Name of God, I shall not
much regard the obloquy and reproach my Name shall undergo and suffer upon that
account. But I expect from you better fruit than this.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein Reason and Conscience are again consulted about the Practice of
Drunkenness; and their righteous and impartial Censure given upon that Case.

SECT. I.
THough our Souls and Bodies be of vastly different Natures and Originals, yet
they do clasp and embrace each other with most dear and tender affection. It Is
mavelous to behold such a Spiritual and Heavenly Creature as the Soul in all
men, fervently loving, and in most men fondly doting upon a lump of Clay, a
clod of Earth: It sympathizeth tenderly with it. If the meanest Member of the
Body be in pain, the Soul is presently concerned for it, and evidences it self
to be so, by commanding the eyes both to watch and weep; the Tongue to complain
and moan; the Hands to bind up its Wounds with all imaginable tenderness, and
carefully defend it from the least injurious touch^ But if the whole be in
danger, how do its nobler Faculties of Understanding, Memory and Invention,
awaken and bestir themselves to the uttermost for its deliverance and safety.

Whilst the Soul lives in union with the Body, it is filled with assiduous (and
too often with exorbitant and distracting) cares for its necessary support and
comfort. And when it must be separated from it by death, what strong
aversations to death does it ordinarily discover? The strong ties and bonds
betwixt it and the Body, cannot be loosed without much conflict and struggling,
evidenced by these Emphatical groans it sends forth; groans which other men
understand not, nor can be supposed to understand, till they themselves come to
feel the parting. Pull.

The reason of all which, lies in the intimate relation which is betwixt these
different Natures, which God has married together in the Womb, from which time
they have been companions and partners in all the comforts and troubles of
life. The Body is the Soul's house in which i^ dwells, and still shall dwell,
till death dissolve it. It Is the Soul's Garment, that clothes and covers it. It
has worn this Garment of Flesh from the beginning, and is to wear it still,
till Sickness has brought it to Rags, and Death stripped it from the Soul.

It Is the Tool and Instrument by which it does all its Works, whilst it is in
this state of composition; and therefore the Soul cannot but love it fervently.
No man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it.

SECT. II.
The case so standing betwixt the Soul and Body, the wisdom or folly of the
Soul is plainly discovered in its way and manner of governing the Body, as the
love and prudence of an Husband is in the government of his Wife; Or the Master
in ordering the Affairs of his House; or the neat breeding of a Man in the
comely wearing of his Garments; Or the skill and care of an Artificer in the
brightness, keenness, and sharpness of his Tools.

Some Husbands give evidence to the world of their governing-prudence and
ability, in such an allowance of liberty to their Wives, as the Laws of
Conjugal Love require, and their Estates and Incomes will conveniently bear,
and no more; and in restraining their Extravagances, as well as by encouraging
their virtuous Courses, in keeping back no due encouragement to Virtue, nor
giving the least encouragement unto Vice.

A well-bred man, that carries with him a becoming-sense of his Quality, and
the Decorum he ought accordingly to observe, will wear his Garments decently,
and becoming his Rank: They shall be sure to be neat and clean, and sit fit and
comely upon his Body. He abhors to wear a Garment tumbled in the Mire, and go
like a Beast, without regard to his Reputation.

No prudent Owner and Governor of an House, will let the Rain drop through the
Roof, nor choke up the Passage to his Door with a nasty Dunghill. His House
within shall be neat, and not nasty: The Rooms clean and comely: And yet abhors
to suffer superfluous Ornaments, and costly Vanities to swallow up his Estate
that should maintain it, and bring Bailiffs (more odious than a Dunghill) to
his very Doors.

The curious Artificer neither grinds away the substance of his Instruments to
make them bright and glittering, and set an Edge too fine to hold one minutes
use; nor yet suffers them to be thrown aside in some neglected corner, where
Rust and Flaws shall render them utterly useless, or make him blush at the
botches such Instruments will cause in his Work.

The prudent Husbandman will neither break the heart of his Ground for want of
rest and compost, nor yet over-load it with dressing, which brings forth
nothing but rank and useless Weeds; He will in a fit season turn in a stream of
Water to his Meadows, like a Cordial-draught to fainting spirits; but will not
drown it, and rot the very roots of his Grass, by letting in too much, or by
suffering it to lie under Water too long. He will feed his Horse high enough to
perform his Journey, and carry him through the Mire; but will not feed him to
such an height, that the Rider shall neither be able to sit, nor command him.

In all these cases, the common prudence of every man, directs him to that just
mediocrity, wherein both his Honor and Profit do apparently lie. And what we
say in such common cases and concerns as these, is as true, and much more
excellent in the Soul's prudent government of its own Body, unto which it was
espoused in the Womb, and is its dear and constant Partner, both in present and
future Good or Evil. It Is the Garment it wears, the Instrument it uses, and
the Field it cultiva^es. It must neither deny the Body those necessary Supports
and Comforts which God and Nature allow it, nor yet surfeit and overcharge it
with more than it is able to bear. In either of these Extremes, the extreme
folly of the Soul is discovered.

SECT. III.
Now the dethroning of Reason, and frequent Oppressions of Nature by the
practice of Drunk^nness, is the highest Exaltation of Folly in the Soul of Man;
plainly manifesting its ignorance and inability to order and govern the Body,
to which it is married by a vital Union.

Here Is a foolish Soul by misgovernment, dishonouring, and destroying its
vigorous and comely Body, under a pretense of Love and Kindness to it. We
account it one of the greatest outward Infelicities in this World, incident to
a discreet and virtuous Woman, to be headed and governed by a sottish Fool,
neither able to govern himself, or her, nor give a reason of his own Actions or
Commands. A Man whose folly shall make her blush in all sober Companies he
comes into, and forces her upon such a Course of Life, as she perfectly abhors,
and will bring speedy Ruin upon her; all Men pity such a Case as this. And this
is the very Case of many a comely, vigorous Body.

Only such a Woman has two reliefs under her Bondage, which the Body of a
Drunkard wants. She can sometimes withdraw and retire from his Company, and
enjoy the relief of her Solitude, which the wretched Body of a Drunkard cannot
do till Death, but is tied day and night to the Company of its foolish Soul,
which is frequently abusing it, and imposing upon it.

Besides, such a Woman may happily over-live her vicious, abusive Husband, and
spend many a comfortable year in the World with a more discreet, sober, and
religious Partner of her Life, whose Sobriety, Discretion, Piety, and Love
shall make full Compensation for all those years of Misery and Slavery she
endured before. But the Case before us, admits no such Relief: For as long as
ever the Body lives and breathes, the Soul is, and must be with it, and in it.
And tho Death will for a time separate and divorce them, yet the Bodies second
Marriage at the Resurrection can be with no other but the same Soul which
oppre^sed and ruined it in this World And this second Marriage will be far
worse than the first. For tho it were the sottish Souls slave and drudge in
this World, and suffered many ^ sickness, shame, and loss by its Folly; yet in
the World to come it must be its Partner and Companion in Hell Torments for
evermore, in a^ much as it was the Instrument the Soul used i^ most of those
Sins committed by it in this World And this is the case of all Bodies married
to and governed by Souls that have neither Reason* nor Religion enough
prudently and soberly to order and govern their own Bodies.

SECT. IV.
Sad and doleful therefore are the Laments and Complaints of the Bodies of
Drunkards, against the Folly and Tyranny of their Souls; and as just as sad.
Let me therefore here act the part of an Advocate for your Bodies, which is a
part of your selves, and to which by the Law of Nature you owe Love, Care, and
Honor; or rather by a Prosopopaea, let me bring in the Body sighing out its
own Complaints in the Ears of its own Soul, and thus bemoaning it self to it.

Oh, my Soul! I have cause to lament the day that ever I was married to such a
sottish Fool as thou art, who art destitute both of Wisdom and Love to Rule and
Govern me. I may justly resume Job's Lamentation upon thy account, and say with
him, Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night wherein it was said,
there is a man-child conceived. Why died I not from the Womb? Why did I not
giv^ up the Ghost when I came out of the Belly? For now should I have lien
still and been quiet; I should have slept; then I had been at rest.

I have been a perfect Slave and Drudge to thy unreasonable Lusts and
Impositions. I was once an active, vigorous, comely Body, and had thou been
Wise and Sober, I had been happy. But thou have been a cruel Tyrant to me,
oppressing and loading me with more than I was able to stand under. Thou have
plunged me many times into those puddles of Excess, wherein thou have drowned
thy own Reason, and my Health. My well-mixed Beauty is now turned into the
color of flaming Fire; my Hands and Legs shake, my Tongue falters; my natural
Crasis and Temperament is destroyed. Thou have made me miserable in this World,
and intendest to make me more wretched in the World to come.

Sober Nature gave me my stint and measure. I knew when it was enough, and gave
thee sufficient Items and Intimations (amidst thy foolish Frolicks) that I
could neither with Honor or Safety bear one Glass more. But thou wast deaf to
all my moans, and shewedst more Mercy to thy Horse than me. Sick or well, able
or unable, live or die, I must take in the full number of Cups and Bottles thou
enjoynedst me to take. Like another Pharaoh, thou have required of me the full
tale, whether I had strength to perform it or no. Yea, like another Devil, thou
have sometimes cast me into fiery Fevers, and watery Dropsies; and will next
cast me, if thou continue this course, into Hellfire it self.

Other Souls have set thee a better Pattern in their more sober and prudent
Government of their Bodies. They give their Bodies the true Pleasure of the
Creature, by keeping them to that happy Mediocrity in which it consists. They
devote their Bodies to the Service of God; thou have devoted me to the
immediate Service of the Devil. A Majestic Beauty sits upon their Faces;
Sottishness and Folly upon mine. Their Knees are daily bowed in Prayer to God;
mine shake and tremble in the Service of the Devil. They enjoy pure and
sanctified Pleasures every day; but I am denied the sober Pleasures of a Beast.
Their Bodies will be happy with their Souls in the World to come; but I must
suffer Eternally with thee, and for thee. Thou have both consumed me, and thy
Estate given to support me; and now I am like to suffer as much by want, as I
have done by excess; and all this through thy misgovernment. These Feet (if
thou had pleased to command them) would as readily have carried thee to thy
Closer, or the Assemblies of God's People, as to an Alehouse, or Tavern. These
Fingers would have served to open and turn the blessed Pages, which contain the
Oracles of God, as to Cog a Die, or have Shuffled and Dealt a Pack of Cards.
This Tongue might have been melodiously employed in singing the Praises of God
among his People, as well as in Swearing, Roaring, and Singing among drunken
Sots and Fools, if thou had been endued with governing Wisdom.

Thou know I could do nothing without thee. Thou have a despotical Power
over all my Members. They are at thy beck, and thou at the Devil's. Better had
it been for me, had I been the Body of a contemptible Worm or Fly, than a Body
animated and governed by such a sottish Soul as thou art.

And now, my Soul, what have thou to say for thy self? What tolerable account
can thou give to God or me, of these thy vile Abuses of both?

SECT. V.
Now let us hear what the Soul of the Drunkard has to plead in its own Excuse
and Defense for all his wrongs against God, mischiefs to it self, ruin to his
Health, Name, and Estate. They have various Excuses, tho not one sound or
rational one among them all. Such as they are, let them be tried by the Rule of
Reason, if any Reason by yet left in them, who daily dethrone it by this
worse-than brutish Practice.

That which they have to say for themselves* is this,

1. That their Bodies are strongly constituted more capacious to receive, and
able to bear greate^ quantities of Wine and Strong-drink than other^ are; and
therefore, why should they not drink down, and glory over those that vye with
them.

2. Others say, They would not take that Course they do, but that when they are
Sober and Solitary they are so pressed with the thoughts of their Debt^ and
Encumbrances in the World, that they are upon a perfect Rack, and they find
nothing like good-fellowship in a Tavern or Alehouse, so effectually relieving
against the Cares and Anxieties of their Minds.

3. Some will tell us, they are drawn into it by the snare of Pleasure, nothing
being so grateful to their Palate, as their full load of generous Wine or
Strong-drink. And seeing it is so pleasant and delightsome to them, why should
they deny and abridge themselves of their Pleasure?

4. Others will profess they had never taken this Course, which they find upon
many account^ pernicious to them, but that they are not able in Civility to
deny their intimate Friends and Companions, especially such with whom they have
concerns in Trade and Business, and they must drink as they do, or suffer loss
in their Trade, and beside that, be stigmatized for Phanaticks.

5. They will also say, they are obliged in point of Loyalty to pledge him that
Consecrates (as they Catechrestically call it) the first Glass to the King, or
Persons of Quality and Honor.

6. And lastly, some will tell us, They have plentiful Estates that will bear
such Expenses; and since their Pockets are full, why should not their Heads and
Stomachs be for too?

Beside these six Apologies for Drunkenness, nothing falls into my Imagination
pleadable for this Sin. We will weigh these that are pleaded, in the common
Balance of the Reason of Mankind, and try the validity of them one by one. And
for the

Excuse I.
And first, to what you say of the Capacity of your Bodies, Strength, and
Ability of your Constitutions, to receive and bear greater Quantities of Wine
and strong Drink than others can; and therefore, why should you not give a
proof of it when challenged, and get Reputation to your selves by drinking
down, and glorying over such as vye with you?

To this I reply three things, which must be laid in the Counter-ballance, and
let the Balance be held in the upright Hand of your own Reason.

1. A strong and vigorous Constitution will be readily acknowledged to be so
great an external Blessing and Mercy, that no Man of sound Intellectuals ought
to do any thing to destroy it; but is obliged to use all proper Methods for the
Preservation of it. If therefore Temperance shall be found to preserve it, and
excess to impair and destroy it; let your own Reason judge which o^ these two
Courses you are obliged to take. Consult either the best Physicians, or your
own, and other Men's Experience, and they will tell you, that Apoplexies,
Palsies, Gout, and innumerabl^ other Diseases, are bred by such Excesses in the
soundest and strongest Constitutions, and Death it self hastened by such
intemperate course^* whereas Temperance and Sobriety might have made your Lives
more comfortable and durabl^^ As strong as you are, frequent Drunkenness wi^^
bring Cain's Curse upon your vigorous Bodies, and make you go shaking and
trembling (as he did) about the World.

2. Let it be demanded of your own Reason* Whether it do really judge that God
bestowed more Strength and Vigor upon your Bodies, than he has upon others,
to Arm a stronger Enemy than others are, to fight more vigorously against him,
than others do, or can do? Or whether it were not designed by him for greater
Use and Service to his Glory in the World, than other^ of his People (how
willing soever they be) can do for want of that strength you have? I am
confident no Man of sound Intellectuals will dare to assert the former, or deny
the latter.

3. And lastly, for your glorying in Drinking down, and conquering others, you
will certainly put your own reason to a blush, by offering such a Plea as this
to it. You are not yet arrived to Impudence enough to deny Drunkenness to be a
Sin, and your Reason is yet sound enough, easily and naturally to infer, That
by how much the more any Man exceeds and goes beyond others in Sin, by so much
the greater Sinner that Man is.

And as for the Honor and Glory you talk of in exceeding others in your
Abilities to drink, your Reason will quickly make you ashamed of that Glory;
and prove, as well as assert it to be a Mark of basest Infamy.

Do you think that Lombard was really honored, or stigmatized, whom Tiberius
C^^sar dubbed a Knight for drinking off three Gallon of Wine at one Draught, and
Surnamed him Tricongius, that is to say, the Three Gallon Knight; Pliny Not.
Hist. Lib. 14. Cap. 22.
which Story Pliny in his Natural History relates to the perpetual Infamy of
them both? Or, think you it added to the Glory of Tiberius himself, who
Knighted this Three Gallon (not thrice Gallant) Knight, to have his Name
changed among the People, from Tiberius into Biberius, as afterward they did
the Name of that Monster Nero into Mero?

Gentlemen, I appeal to your own Reason, if the vast Continent you have within
you for Wine and strong Drink, be really your Honor; whether the Butt or
Hogshead whence you have it, be not for the same reason much more honorable
than you? Your Reason will plainly give the Conclusion.

But, oh! consider not only what Reason says, but what God the Fountain of
that Reason says in Isa. 5. 22. Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine* and
men of strength to mingle strong drink. Methinks it should make you sit in as
little ease upon the Tavern, or Alehouse Bench, as that Court-Parasite sat at
a rich Banquet, furnished with variety of Dainties, and all sorts of generous
Wine, over whose head Dionysius caused an heavy Sword to be hanged with the
Point downwar^ by a single Hair, every moment ready to dro^ perpendicularly
upon it.

Excuse II.
As for those that throw themselves into these Excesses on purpose to delude
those anxious Car^ and Thoughts, which cruciate and oppress them* whenever they
are Sober and Solitary: I sha^^ only propound three plain Questions to the
sma^^ remainders of Reason in them, which yet ^ presume sufficient to determine
rightly upon them.

Quest. I.
Whether they think that which greatly increases Want and Poverty, be a
rational Cur^* and proper Remedy of it? And whether a Jar o^ Oil be not as fit
to quench a Flame, as Tavern and Alehouse Scores and Reckonings are to buoy u^
a sinking Trade, and keep Bailiffs from Men doors? Certainly none but a sottish
Fool ca^ think it to be otherwise. Your own improve^^dence, or God's afflictive
Providence have brough^ you into other Men's Books; and certainly yo^ cannot
think, if you be in your Wits, that Chamberlains Bills for so many Bottles of
Wine, an^ Flaggons of Beer, will be accepted by your Creditors for good Bills,
to quit your Scores wi^^ them. Were you Sober, Frugal, and Industrious you
would put your selves thereby into a better way to obtain a Blessing from God,
and Respects, and Forbearance from Men, than in the Course you now take.

Quest. 2.
Nor can you without manifest impudence propound such a Question as this to
your own Reason, Whether the addition of Injustice to Profaneness, be a
rational Plea or excuse for it? And is not that the very case here? Whose Money
is that you so lavishly and prodigally waste out of your consuming Estates?
it is either your Creditors, or the small remains of your own. Whether the one
or the other, methinks that Wine and Drink should not go down very pleasantly,
which must be mingled with manifest injustice, or with the tears, and (in a
sense) the Blood of your Wives and Children. If your Reasons can allow these
things for Lawful Excuses, then you are excused, else self-condemned.

Quest. 3.
I shall trouble your Reason with the decision but of one Question more, and
it is briefly and plainly this*

Whether the addition of far greater troubles, or causes of troubles to the
inner man, be a proper expedient to alleviate and ease the loads and burdens of
your outward troubles, already grown almost too heavy for you to bear.

I dare venture all that I am worth, upon sound Reason's side, that it will
never allow or comprobate such an absurdity, as the affirmative part of this
Question draws along with it.

Believe it, Sirs, all the outward necessities, cares and fears, which now
oppress you upon the score of worldly affairs (which frame not to your minds)
are much more tolerable, and comparatively light and easy, to the Stings,
Wounds, and Lashes of a guilty Conscience: But when all these inward Troubles
shall be superadded to your outward Troubles, they will in conjunction make a
burden too heavy for Man to bear.

What ever Cares or Troubles Providence involves any good Man in, in the honest
and painful pursuit of his civil Calling, he may in a great measure relieve his
burdened Spirit under them, by the comfortabel Testimony of his own
Conscience, and his free Addresses to God in Prayer. These will sweetly support
him under his other Intanglements and Perplexities in the World. But the Course
you take, does not only strike away these props from under your Minds; but
doubles and trebles the burden upon them. Were Men but once acquainted with
that relie^ and cheariness of Spirit which a good Conscience, and a Spiritual
Address to God in Prayer, afford in the midst of Troubles, they would run to
then Closets, rather than to Taverns and Ale-house^ to divert and cure their
Troubles. I leave it therefore before your own Reason to consider* what weight
or validity there is in this Second Excuse for Drunkenness.

Excuse III.
Others plead they are drawn into this Sin by Pleasure and Delight, whose
Charms are too strong for them to resist.

In this, as in all the former, I resolve to make you your own Judges. Give me
leave but to state the Questions right, and let your own Reason freely
determine them. And what f^irer dealing can men that exercise Reason expect?
And let the first Question be this;

Quest. I.
Whether the Pleasures of Temperance do not far excel those of Intemperance? If
they do, then this your Plea is vain and irrational. For you foolishly choose a
lesser Pleasure, and refuse a greater and sweeter one. And that you do so in
this case, no wise man can deny or doubt.

For temperate drinking refreshes the Body, and no way burdens it, as
excessive drinking does. And that which burdens Nature can never be equally
pleasant with that, which yields nothing but due refreshment. Temperance does
not vitiate, but raises the pure and ordinate Appetite of Nature to its just
pitch and height; in which temper, and at which height, it is most capable of
the sweetest pleasure from the Creature. As the Strings of a Lute give us the
sweetest and most delicious Notes when they are not let down too low, but are
all sixed at their due height.

Temperance gives us the most pleasing Enjoyment of the good things of this
Life, still leaving the Mind free and fit for the more Spiritual and sweet
Enjoyments of a better and more excellent Life; which Excess never did, nor can
do.

Moreover, Temperance maintains the manly grace and majesty of the Countenance,
but Excess totally disguises it. It draws the lines of Drunkards faces into a
form much like those ridiculous Dutch Pictures, which some set upon their
Chimney-pieces, to move laughter in those that behold them.

Now by the vote of universal Reason, that Pleasure which ref^eshes the Body,
but no way burdens it, which raises the ordinate and unvitiated Appetite of
Nature to its just pitch and due height, which gives Nature the sweetest
refreshment, leaving it always fitter and freer for higher and better
pleasures, which maintains the manly grace and majesty of the Countenance, and
makes not a wise man look like a Fool or an Antic, must needs be better than
the lower and flatter Pleasures of a burdened Body, and vitiated Palate, which
draw after them so great a train o^ present mischiefs (which Temperance avoids)
besides far heavier and more durable ones in the Life to come.

Quest. 2.
But if the present Pleasures of Temperance were in some respect inferior to
those of Excess (which I have proved they neither are, nor can be) I demand in
the second place, whether the loss of your Honor and Health, your Time and
Estate, your present Peace, and future hopes, do not make such sensitive
Pleasures base and inferior, compared with those of Temperance and Sobriety? Do
you in good earnest think a Glass (...) two above what satisfies and refreshes
Nature, can recompense for all that shame, sickness, poverty and guilt that
follows it? If you think so, sin has turned you into Brutes, and made you
utterly incapable of all Arguments and manly considerations to reduce and
recover you.

Excuse IV.
You say you would not haunt Taverns and Alehouses as you do, but that you are
drawn in by Company and Business, which you cannot well resist or avoid, and
should you do so, it would be to your loss; and besides that, you should be
branded for Phanaticks.

I deny not but there is a Snare in vain Company; yet give me leave to propound
a few, plain and easy Questions to your Reason.

Quest. 1.
Why must the importunity of Good Fellows (as you call them) be an irresistible
Temptation to you, and deprive you of all power to deny them, whilst you
discern the Snares and Mischiefs they draw you into? This seems to be a thing
unaccountable to Reason. Suppose you were allowed to spend the longest Summers
Day in the highest gratifications of all your Senses together, or successively
one after another, upon condition that you would endure the Torments of the
Rack till that day twelvemonth came about again; do you think the importunity
of all your intimates in the world would prevail with you to accept the
Pleasures of a day under such a condition as this? And yet what are the
Torments of a year upon the Rack, to the Torments of Hell for ever and ever? Or
to come lower; suppose one of those lewd Companions, not worth a Groat if every
man had his own, should request you to lend him an Hundred Pound upon his own
security, could you find no power (think you) to deny him, especially if the
loss of that Hundred Pound would certainly ruin you? If you would deny him (as
I doubt not but in such a case you would) tell me then, why you should not find
power to deny him when he asks a far greater matter than an Hundred Pound, even
the Peace, Purity and Safety of your Souls, as well as the Health of your
Bodies, and Honor of your Names? Why then should you be so easy and flexible
when they ask the latter, and so stiff and unperswadable to the former?

Quest. 2.
You say you have Business and Concerns in Trade to dispatch in such Places and
Companies, and this draws you into the Snares of Excess. I will not deny but
men may lawfully transact their Business in such Places, and there may be a
convenience, and sometimes a necessity for it: But that is not the Case. The
Question referred to the determination of your Reason, is this, Why Drunkenness
must accompany Business? and whether a man be not more fit to transact his
Business, and drive Bargains of the greatest value, whilst his Body and Mind
are cool, sober and temperate, than when his Reason is beclouded and deposed,
by Drunkenness? How many men have undone themselves, their Wives and Children
by Drunken-Bargains!

Besides, I must tell you, that in all such Drunken Meetings, the Devil comes
to drive his Bargain with you, as well as your other Customers. He bids for
your Souls, and offers you such Pleasures as you there find in exchange for
them, and is content to make your dying-day the time of your delivering them
into his possession. How do you like such Trading as this, Gentlemen?

Quest. 3.
You say, should you refuse to accompany them, and do as they do, you should be
branded for Phanaticks. I would fain know, whether such a Plea for Drunkenness
as this, does not justly cast the greatest reproach of Phana^icism upon your
selves, and set a Mark of true Honor upon those men whom the world unjustly
stigmatizes with that Title? Gentlemen, I do assure you the Phanaticks (as you
call them) have reason to thank you for the Honor and Justice you have done
them, in acknowledging them to be none of the Members of your hellish Society,
but Persons of a more sober and honorable Character. And I appeal to your
Reason, whether it would not be more for your Honor, to wear the unjust Title
of a Phanatick, than the just censure of a Drunken Sot.

Excuse 5.
You say you are obliged in poin^ of Loyalty to pledge him that consecrates the
first Glass to the Health of the King, or any Person of Eminency. I leave it
still to your Reason to be Judge,

1. Whether the King have cause to account the manifest breach of the Laws by
which he governs, to be a signal expression of his Subjects Loyalty to him? Is
not his Royal Authority his Honor and Safety in his Laws? And is he not finely
honored, think you, by such drunken Loyalty as this? Gentlemen, you have a
King over you of sounder Intellectuals, and more exemplary Temperance and
Sobriety, than to be thus imposed upon.

2. Can you think he reckons his Health in the least degree advanced or secured
by the ruin and subversion of his Subjects Health? No no; Did the genteelest
Drunkards in England enquire, they would quickly find, it would more please
him, if they would consult their own Health better, and pray for his more
sincerely and fervently than they do.

Excuse VI.
Your last Excuse is, That you have plentiful Estates that will bear it; and
since your Pockets are full, why should your Heads or Stomachs be empty?

Question.
The only Question I would here state, and leave your own Reason to determine,
is this, Whether you think the expense of the redundancy and overplus of your
Estates in Excess and Drunke^ness, be the very end and design God aimed at in
bestowing those things with such a bountiful hand upon you? and whether the
expense of it in this way, will please him as well, as if you clothed the
Naked, and fed the Hungry with it, and brought the Blessings of them that are
ready to perish, upon you and your Families? Ah, Gentlemen, you must come to a
day of reckoning. Your Reasons and Consciences can never tell you, you can make
up as comfortable an account with God by setting down so many Hundred Pound in
Wine and Strong Drink more than was necessary or beneficial: Item so many
Thousand Pounds lost in Play: So much upon Whores; as if yo^ set down so much
to feed and cloth the Naked and Hungry. So that all your Excuses for this Sin,
are bafled by your own Reason; and it was easy to conclude, that such a Traitor
to Reason as Drunkenness is, which has so often d^throned it, could not
possibly receive a more favorable Judgment and Sentence than this now given
upon it.

Let all Drunkards henceforth consider what a voluntary madness the Sin of
Drunkenness is, how it unmans them, and sets them below the very Brutes. A
Grace Father calls it rightly A Distemper of the Head; a subversion of the
Senses, a tempest in the Tongue; the Storm of the Body, the shipwreck of
Virtue, the loss of Time, a wilful madness, a pleasant Devil, a sugared Poison,
a sweet Sin, which he that has, has not himself; and he that commits it, does
no^ only commit Sin, but himself is altogether Sin. Turbatio capit^s, subversio
sensus, tempestas linguae, procella corporis, naufragium virtutis, amissio
temporis, insania voluntaria, blande Demon, dulce venenum, suave pecatum, quam
qui habet, seipsum non habet, quam qui facit, peccatum non tantum facit, sed
ipse totus est peccatum.

It Is a Sin at which the most sober Heathens blushed. The Policy of the
Spartan^ was more commendable than their Piety, in making Men drunk, that their
Children might gaze upon them as a Monster, and be scared for ever from such an
horrid Practice. He that is mastered by Drunkenness, can never be Master of his
own Counsels. Both Reason and Religion condemn this Course. Make a Pause
therefore where you are, and rather throw that Wine or Beer upon the Ground,
which else will cast thy Body upon the Ground, and thy Soul and Body into Hell.

CHAP. V.
Containing the result and issue of the Third Consultation with Reason, upon
the Case of Uncleanness; and the true Report of the Determination of every man's
Reason, with respect thereunto.
SECT. I.
THe Bountiful and Indulgent God has made more abundant provision for the
Pleasure and Delight of Rational, than of Brutal Beings: And his Wise and
Righteous Laws order and limit their Pleasures to their great advantage; his
Allowances under those Restrictions being large and full enough. Both Reason
and Experience assure us, that the truest Pleasures are most freely and
honorably to be enjoyed within the Pale and Boundary of his Laws; and that
there are none fit for the enjoyment of a Man or Christian, to be found without
or beyond them.

That prudent Owner provides best for his Cattle, who puts them into enclosed
fragrant Fields, where they have plenty of proper and pleasant Food, Sweet and
pure Springs of Water, the pleasant Covert of shady Trees, and all that is
either necessary or convenient for them; although those Fields be so enclosed
within Pales or Walls, that they cannot stray without those Boundaries i^ to
other men's Grounds, to be by them impounded, and brought back lank, tired, and
dirty, to their Owner; or by straying into Wastes and Wildernesses, fall a Prey
(as Straglers use to do) to Wolves and Lions.

God envies not any true, rational and proper pleasure to Men or Women; when he
bounds them in by his Command, within the allowance whereof, sufficient
provision is made for the benefit and delight of propagation. And though it be
all men's Duty, to tremble at the awful Solemnity, yet it would be any man's sin
to repine and murmur at the strictness and severity of his Command delivered
with Thunder and Lightning from Mount Sinai, Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Man's honorable Liberty, and God's wise and just Restraint and Limitation
thereof, are both set together before our eyes, in that one Scripture, Heb. 13.
4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and
Adulterors God will judge. Here Is a liberal allowance granted, and a severe
Punishment threatened for the inordinancies and exorbitancies of boundless and
ungovernable Lusts. God will judge with temporal Judgments in this world; and
upon impenitent persistents, with eternal Judgments in the world to come.

SECT. II.
Such is the corruption of Man's Nature by the Fall, that it hates Enclosures,
Restraints and Limitations. These things which were intended to regulate, serve
only to sharpen and e^^age their sensual Appetite. No Fruit so sweet to corrupt
Nature, as forbidden Fruit. Nitimur in vetit^^^ semper, cupimusque negata. The
very restraint of Evil makes it look like a pleasant and desirable Good. Sons
of Belial can endure no yoke of restraint. There Is a great truth in that
Observation of the Divine Herbert, That if God had laid all common, man himself
would have been the Incloser. For his Reason and Experience would have plainly
informed him of the great and manifold advantages of distinction and propriety.
How many Quarrels and barbarous Murders have been occasioned by Whores! which
by keeping within God's bounds and rules, had been both honestly and honorably
prevented.

Were Men left to that Liberty Brutes are, to scatter their Lusts
promiscuously, Fathers would not know their own Children, nor Children their
Fathers; whereby both their Duties and Comforts would be prescinded together.
Such Mischiefs as these would make men glad of that Enclosure, which the Laws
of God have made for them. But behold with admiration the perverse wickedness
of Corrupt Nature, manifested in this, that because God has enclosed and
secured their Relations to them by his Laws (which Enclosure is every way to
their advantage) yet this makes their Lusts the more headstrong and
outrageous, and they cannot take that comfort in their own, because their own,
that they think to find in another's, because another's.

Remarkable to this purpose is that Relation of Mr. Firmin's, Real Christian,
page 60.
which he received from his near Relation, who was Minister to the Company of
English Merchants in Prussia. The Consul or Governor of that Company being a
Married Man, and that to a very proper and comely Woman, was yet enslaved to
others not to be compared with his own Wife for comeliness. This Minister dealt
with him about it. One Argument he urged was this; That of all Men he had the
least Temptation, having a Wife so comely, that few Women were like her. He
answered, yea, were she not my Wife I could love her. Had she been his Whore,
he could have loved her; he thought none like her; but because she was his
Wife, hedged in by God, he cared not for her. Oh! what hearts have Men, that
they should ever think that to be best for them, which is most cross to God!
Why should stolen Waters be sweeter than those of our own Fountain?

SECT. III.
God's choice must needs be far better for us than our own. Ordinate and lawful
Pleasures and Enjoyments far better and sweeter than exorbi^ant and forbidden
ones. And the Reason is evident and undeniable. For amongst all the operations
of the Mind, its reflex acts are the acts that best relish pleasure. And indeed
without self-reflexion, a man cannot tell whether he delights or no. All sense
of pleasure implies some reflection of the Mind: And those pleasures of a man
must needs be the sweetest, which afford the sweetest reflections upon them
afterward: And those the ba^est pleasures, which are accompanied and followed
with present regret, or the stinging and cutting reflections of the Conscience
upon them afterward.

Lawful and ordinate Enjoyments are as Honey without the Sting. Forbidden
Pleasures are embittered and extinguished by these regrets and reflections of
the Conscience, They are like that pleasant Fruit which the Spaniards found in
the Indies, which were sweet to the taste, but so environed and armed on every
side with dangerous Briers and Thorns, that they tore not only their Clothes
off their Backs, but the Skin off their Flesh to come at them: And therefore
they called them Comfits in Hell; and such are all forbidden and unlawful
Pleasures.

A Merchant (says the forenamed Author) dining with the Friars at Dantzick,
his Entertainment was very noble. Page 63.
After he had dined and seen all, the Merchant fell to commending their
Pleasant Life. Yea, said one of the Friars to him) we live gallantly indeed, if
we had any body to go to Hell for us when we die. You see what mingles with
Men's Sensual and Sinful Lusts.

2. Your Honor is secured by keeping within God's Bounds and Limits. Marriage
is honorable in all. Here Guilt can neither wrong your Consciences, nor Infamy
your Reputations. ^ornicators and Adulterers go up and down the world, as men
burnt in the Hand: Their Conscience lashes them within, and men point at them
abroad. They are a terror to themselves, and a scorn to men.

3. The Health of the Body is secured by chaste and regular Enjoyments; but
exposed to destruction the other way. God has plagued the Inordinacy of men's
Lusts with most strange and horrid Diseases. That Morbus Gallicus, Sudor
Anglicus, and Plica Polonica were Judgments sent immediately by God's own hand,
as the Witnesses of his high displeasure, against the bold and daring
contemners of his sacred and awful Command. Thus as Prove. 5. 11. They mourn at
last, when their flesh and body are consumed. Other sins are committed in the
Body, but this against it, as well as in it.

4. The blast and waste of our Estates (which is the usual consequent of
uncleanness) is prevented and avoided, by keeping within God's Rules. The truth
of what the Scripture tells us, Prove. 10. 5. is often exemplified before our
eyes; that by reason of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread.
Adultery gives a man Rags for his Livery; it lodges his Substance in the House
of Strangers, and entails wants and curses on him and his.

5. In a word, Continence or lawful Marriage exposes not the Soul to the
eternal wrath of God, as Uncleanness does, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. This sin does not
only shut a man out of his own House, and the Hearts of good men, but out of
Heaven it self, without through Repentance and Reformation.

SECT. IV.
The case standing thus, it is matter of just Admiration how the Sin of
Uncleanness should grow so Epidemical and Common, as it does, seeing such as
live in this filthy Course, must needs counteract and oppose their own Reason
and Interest together. For they forsake God's way, which gives them as much
liberty as can be reasonably desired, and cast themselves into a course of
Life, clogged with all manner of temporal and eternal Miseries of Soul and Body,
Honor and Estate.

The plain Rule and Dictate of common Reason, which I laid down before, being
applied to this particular Case, manifestly condemns it. For seeing Honesty and
Chastity comprizes the true Pleasure, Profit, and Honor of the whole Man, is
more congruous to humane Nature, and Preservative of it, it ought therefore to
be preferred in the Estimation and Choice of all Men to unlawful adulterous
Pleasures, which (for the Reasons above) are inferior in themselves to chaste,
conjugal Enjoyments; and besides that, are attended and followed with such a
Train of present and future Miseries, destructive to the whole Man.

And yet for all this, to the amazement of all serious Observers, never was any
Age more infamous for this Sin, than the present Age is, and that under the
clear shining Light of the Gospel.

What the special Causes and Inducements to the overflowing and abounding of
this Sin, are in the present Age, will be well worth the enquiring and sifting
at this time

SECT. V.
Inducement 1.
It Is highly probable the influencing Examples of great Men have had no small
hand in the spreading of this abominable and crying Sin amongst all inferior
Ranks and Orders of Men.

Great Men's ill Examples, like a bag of Poison in the Fountain, corrupt and
infect Multitudes. The Vulgar think they are privileged, or at the least very
much excused, when they do but follow the Presidents and Examples of Great and
Eminent Persons.

But this will be found a weak and foolish Plea for Uncleanness, which will
never be able to endure the test of your own Reason. For the inbred Notions of
a God, and of a future Life of Retribution being so firmly sealed and engraven
upon humane Nature, that they can never be utterly eradicated; your own Reason
will argue from those inbred Notions in this manner, and how you will be able
to refel the Argument, and escape Conviction and Self-condemnation, quite
surmounts my Imagination, whatever it do yours. And thus it will dispute, and
Dilemma you, do what you can.

That God, before whom greater and lesser, honorable and baser Sinners shall
appear in Judgment, will be either partial or impartial in his Judgments upon
them. There is, or there is not Respect of Persons with him. If there be (which
both his Nature and Word utterly deny) then those great and honorable
Adulterers or ^ornicators, whose Examples you follow, may happily be excused for
their Eminency and Honors sake; but you that have no such Eminency and Honor
in the World, as they have, must be condemned, tho you thought to escape as
well as they.

But if there be no Partiality, or Respect of Persons with God (as most
assuredly there is none) then both greater and lesser, honorable and baser
Adulterers must be condemned together to the same common and intolerable Misery.

So that to take any (tho the least) encouragement to Sin from the Presidents
and Examples of Great Ones, is a most senseless and irrational thing, utterly
unworthy of one that believes there is a just and impartial God; and he is
worse than a Devil that believes it not. For the Devils themselves believe and
tremble.

SECT. VI.
Inducement 2.
But others would persuade us they are drawn into this Sin by a kind of
inevitable necessity, they being neither able to contain, nor Marry.

They are not yet arrived to Estate sufficient to maintain a Family with
Reputation: But when they have gotten enough by Trade, or by the fall of their
paternal Estates to live in equal Reputation with their Neighbors, then they
design to alter their Course of Life, and abandon these Follies.

But, Reader, if this be thy Plea for Uncleanness, thou shall have as fair a
Trial for a foul Fact, as thine own heart can desire; be still thine own Judge,
and let thine own Reason give a fair Answer to these three pertinent Questions*

Quest. 1.
Whether Whoredom be as likely and promising a way to engage God's Blessing
upon your Trades and Employments, as Continence or conjugal Chastity are? That
is to say plainly, Whether Obedience and Disobedience to the Law of God, be all
one, and please him alike? You know your success of Business is not in your own
hand; it is God that gives thee Power to get Wealth. His Blessing makes Rich.
And is Sin as likely a way to engage his Blessing, as Duty and Obedience is? I
am confident your own Reason will never give it.

Object. If you say such Persons prosper in the World, as well as others for
ought you can see.

Sol. The contrary is evident in the common Observation of Mankind; by reason
of Whoredom, Multitudes are brought to a piece of Bread. And tho God suffer
some unclean Persons to prosper in the World, yet Chastity with Poverty, is
infinitely preferable to such accursed Prosperity.

Quest. 2.
Whether the Course of Sin you are now driving and accustoming your selves to,
will not in all probability so infatuate and bewitch you, that when you come
into a married Estate, you shall still be under the Power of this Sin, and so
ruin the Person you Marry, as well as your self? If the Word of God signify any
thing with you' it signifies this, that there is a Witchcraft in Whoredom; and
comparatively speaking, None that go to her return again, neither take they
hold of the Paths of Life, Prove. 2. 18, 19.

Object. If to invalidate this Testimony you shall say, That he that spoke
this, did himself go after strange Women.

Sol. It Is true, he did so; but when withal, you must remember, that he has
warned you by his own sad Experience, that you never follow him in those his
footsteps, Eccles. 7. 26. I find (says he) more bitter than death, the woman
whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands. Whosoever pleases God,
shall escape from her; but the sin^er shall be taken by her.

Quest. 3.
And lastly, I demand of your reason, whether it can, or will allow any place
to this Plea of necessity, before you have used and tried all God's appointed
Remedies, which are sufficient to prevent that necessity you plead.

There are lawful Remedies enough, sufficient with God's blessing to keep you
from such a necessity to Sin; such as Temperance, and more abstemiousness in
Meats and Drinks; avoiding lascivious Books, Play Houses, and filthy Company;
laborious Diligence in your lawful Callings, and fervent Prayer for mortifying
and preventing Grace; and if Temptations still stir amidst all these
preventives, then casting your selves upon the Directions and Supply of
Providence in the honorable Estate of Marriage. Never plead necessity, whilst
all these preventives might, but have not been used.

SECT. VII.
Inducement 3.
Others plead the absence of their lawful Remedies, and presence of tempting
Objects. This is the Case of our Soldiers and Seamen. But tho this be the most
colorable pretense of all the rest, yet your own Reason and Consciences will
even in this Case so Dilemma and Nonplus you, that if you will adventure upon
the Sin, you shall never have their leave or consent with you. For they have a
special and peculiar consideration of you, as Persons more eminently and
immediately exposed to the Dangers of Death than other Men. And thus (would you
but give them a fair hearing) they will expostulate and reason out the matter
with you.

Either thou shall escape, or not escape the hazard of this Voyage or Battle.
If thou fall (as to be sure many will) will this be an honorable, safe, and
comfortable close and winding up of thy Life! What, from a Whore to thy Grave!
God forbid. From burning Lusts to everlasting Burnings! Better thou had never
been born.

Or if thou do escape and return again to thy Family, how can thou look her
in the Face, with whom thou have so basely broken thy Marriage Vow and
Covenant? Whatever else thou bring home with thee, to be sure thou shall bring
home Guilt with thee, and a Blot never to be wiped away.

Object. If you say, you are not such Fools to publish your own Shame, you will
follow Caesar's Advice to the young Adulterer, Si non cast, ^amen caute; If I
act not chastely, I Will act cautelously.

Sol. Your Reason and Conscience will both de^ide the Weakness and Folly of
this Pretense. For they both very well know, no Man sins so secretly, but he
Sins before two infallible Witnesses, ^iz. God and his own Conscience, and that
the last and least of these, is more than a thousand Witnesses. That God
usually detects it in this World, carry it as closely as you will; but to be
sure, it shall be published as upon the Housetop, before Men and Angels in the
great Day.

SECT. VIII.
Inducement 4.
Another Inducement to this Sin, (and the last I shall mention) is the
Commonness of it, which ^bates the Shame of it.

What need they trouble themselves so much, or be so shy of that which is
practiced by thousands, which is so frequently acted in every place, and little
made of it?

But if either your Reason or Conscience will admit this Plea for good and
lawful, the Devil has utterly blinded or infatuated the one or other, as will
evidently appear by the following Reasons. For,

Reason I.
If the thing be Evil, (as you cannot deny but it is) then by how much the
commoner, by so much the worse it must needs be. Indeed, if a thing be good, by
how much the commoner, so much the better; but to atttibute this essential
Property of Good unto Evil, is to confound and destroy the difference between
them, and make Good and Evil both alike.

Reason II.
If the commonness of Uncleanness will excuse you, it will more excuse all
others that shall commit this Sin after you; and still by how much more the
numbers of Adulterers and Fornicato^^ are increased, still the less scruple Men
need make to commit it; and so the whole Community shall in a little time be so
infected and defiled, that Christian Kingdoms shall quickly become like Sodo^*
and God provoked to deal with them, as he did by that wretched City.

Reason III.
If the commonness of Sin be an Excuse and Plea for it, suppose the Roads
should be more infested than they are with Highway-men, so that every Month you
should see whole Cart-loads of them drawn to Tyburn; would your Reason infer
from thence, that because Hanging is grown so common, you need not scruple so
much, as you were wont to do, to Take a Purse, or Pistol an honest innocent
Traveller upon the Road?

Object. If you shall say, Uncleanness is not so costly a Sin as Robbery is,
there is a great deal of difference between Tyburn, and a Whore-house punishment.

Sol. There is a great difference indeed, even as much as is betwixt Tyburn and
Hell, or a small Mulct in the Courts of Men, and the Eternal Wrath of a
Sin-revenging God. So great will the difference betwixt the Punishments of all
Sins by God, and by Men be found.

Thus you see, Gentlemen, the common Pleas for Uncleanness overruled by your
own Reasons and Consciences.

We live in a plentiful Land, abounding with all the Comforts of this Life, and
with thousands of full-fed Wantons, of whom the Lord complains this day, as he
did of the Jews, whom that flowing-land vomited out, Jer. 5. 7. When I had fed
them to the full, they committed Adultery, and assembled themselves by Troops
in the Harlots houses; they were as fed Horses in the morning, every one
neighed after his Neighbors Wife. How many such Stallions are thus neighing in
the fat Pastures of this good Land!

Nor do I wonder at all to see the growth of Atheism, in a Land swarmed and
overrun with so many thousands of Blasphemers, Drunkards, and Adulterers. It
was a grave Observation of that gallant Moralist, Plutarch, If Epicurus (says
he) should but grant a God in his full Perfections, he must change his Life
presently, he must be a Swine no longer.

The Lord purge out this crying Abomination also, with Atheism and Drunkenness
the inlets of it, which darken our Glory, and threaten to make us desolate.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein Reason and Conscience are once more consulted about that bitter and
implacable Enmity, found in thousands this day, against all serious Piety, and
the strict Professors thereof, who differ from them in some external Modes and
Rites of Worship, and their Determination upon that Case impartially reported.
SECT. I.
MAN is naturally a sociable Creature, delighting in Company and Converse. He
that affects to live by, and to himself, must be (says the Philosopher) (...),
either a God that is self-sufficient, and stands in need of none; or a (...)
Beast so savage and fierce, that it can endure nothing but it self.

This natural Quality of sociableness is diversely improved. Sometimes sinfully
in wicked Combinations to do mischief, like the herding together of Wolves and
Tigers. Such was the Confederation of Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity,
Genesis 49. 56. Sometimes it is improved Civilly for the more orderly and
prosperous Management of human Affairs. Thus all civilized Countries have
improved it for common Security and Benefit. And sometimes Religiously, for the
better promoting of each others spiritual and eternal Good.

Now the more firmly any Civil or Religious Societies are knit together by
Love, and coalesce in Unity, by so much the better they are secured against
their common Enemies and Dangers, and become still the more prosperous and
flourishing within and among themselves. For when every Man finds his
particular Interest involved in the public Safety and Security, (as every
private Cabin and Passenger is in the safety of the Ship) every particular
Person will then stand ready to contribute his uttermost Assistance for the
public Interest both in Peace and War. United Force, we all know, is more than
single; and in this Sense we say, Unus homo, nullus homo; one Man is no Man,
that is, considered disjunctively and alone; when yet that single Person
standing in a proper place of Service in the Body, may by his Prudence and
Courage, signify very much to the Public Weal of his Country; as Fabius did to
the Roman State, of whom the Poet truly observed, Unus homo nobis cunctando
restituit rem.
That one Man by his prudent Delay and Conduct, has saved the whole
Commonwealth.

SECT* II.
It Is therefore the undoubted Interest of Christian States and Churches, to
make every individual Person^s useful as may be to the whole, and to enjoy the
Services of all their Subjects and Members, one way or other, according to
their different Capacities, that it may be said of them (as the Historian
speaks of the Land of Canaan) that there was in it, Nihil infruct ^uosum, nihil
sterile; not a shrub but bare some Fruit.

No prudent Kingdom or Church, will deprive themselves of the benefits they may
enjoy by the Services of any considerable Number of Men (especially if they be
able and good Men) without a plain inevitable necessity. No Man without such a
necessity will part with the Use and Service of the least Finger or Toe, much
less with a Leg or Arm; but would reckon himself half (...) done, if a
Paralytick Disease should strike one half of the Body, and render it utterly
useless to defend and succor the other Part in time of danger.

SECT. III.
Much so stands the Case with Churches and Kingdoms, when the causeless and
cruel Enmity of one part, prevails so far against the other, as to deprive that
State or Church of the Use and Service of Multitudes of good and faithful
Members.

It is Folly in its highest exaltation, for one part of a Nation, out of bitter
Enmity to the other, not only to seek all ways and means to suppress and ruin
it, whilst a common Danger hangs over the whole; but to rejoice in the Miseries
of their Brethren, as the principal thing which they fancy would contribute to
the great Advantage of their Cause. What but a general Punishment (if that will
do it) can work Men's hearts into a more general Compassion?

The Histories of those times sufficiently inform us, That the great Feuds and
Factions in the Western Church, not only immediately preceded, but opened the
way to the terrible Inundations of the Goths and Vandals. Whilst the suffering
Par cries out, Cruelty, Cruelty; those that inflict it cry, as loud, Justice,
Justice. Whatever rational Apologies or Methods of Peace come from the
oppressed Party, are censured by the other as Murmur and Mutiny. All Men
commend Unity, and assert it to be the Interest of Kingdoms and Churches. They
wish all Men were of one Mind, but what Mind must that be? To be sure, none but
their own.

The more cool, prudent, and moderate Spirits of each Party, may strive to the
uttermost to allay these unnatural Feuds and Animosities. The Wisdom of the
governing-part may take the Instruments of Cruelty out of their hand; but it is
God alone that can pluck up the roots of Enmity out of their hearts.

And what is the matter, when all is sifted and examined? Why, the matter is
this; some will be more serious, strict, and conscientious, than others think
fit or necessary for them to be. They ^are not Curse, Swear, Who^e, and be
Drunk as others do. They scruple to comply with what God has not commanded,
and the very Imposers confess to be indifferent antecedently to their Command.
They reverently mention the Name of God without an Oath, and the solemn Matters
of Religion, without a Jest in their Company. They will assume as much Liberty
to reprove Sin, as others do to commit it. They take more pleasure in heavenly
Duties and holy Conferences, than in Ranting and Roaring in Taverns and
Alehouses. That is, in a word, they live up to the Principles of Religion,
which all pretend to; and this is their unpardonable Crime, a fault never to be
expiated by any less punishment than their destruction.

And are not People (think you) come to a fine pass, when the strictest
Obedience to the Laws of God shall be accounted more criminal, than the most
open and profane Violation of them? Nay, tho they reprove the other Parties
Sins no other way, but by their more serious and religious Lives; yet this
alone shall be sufficient to make them culpable and obnoxious.

SECT. IV.
If the Party thus generally hated and maligned, be (for the generality of
them) serious and godly Christians; or if the strictness and holiness of their
Lives, and tenderness of their Consciences be the true Ground and Reason of our
hatred of them; such an hatred, when it becomes general, is a direful presage
of some common Calamity and Misery hastening upon such a People, Hos. 9. 7. The
days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel shall know
it; the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad; for the multitude of thine
iniquity, and the great hatred.

And our own Reason will give us this Conclusion, as well as Scripture. For
whatsoever brings Sin to its full maturity, must needs hasten Judgments. And
what can heighten and accent the Sins of a People more than such a cruel hatred
of good Men upon the score and account before given? All hatred of Godliness
has a tang of Devilishness. It Is a desperate flying in the very Face of God,
whose Image Holiness is. Sin can scarce be graduated a peg higher

Reason tells the Husbandman, it is time to Mow and Reap his Corn when it is
full Ripe. And it may convince you, that God's time of reaping down a sinful
People is near, when their Sins are grown to such full maturity as this. Put ye
in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, get ye down, for the press is
full, the fats overflow, for their wickedness is great, Joel 3. 13.

SECT. V.
The true Cause and Rise of this great and fixed Hatred amongst professed
Christians (whatever may be pretended to salve Reputation) is the Contrariety
and Repugnancy of the Natures and Principles by which the Godly and Ungodly are
governed. There is an Enmity betwixt the two Seeds, Genesis 3. 15. And this Enmity
runs down in a Blood, more or less in all Ages and Places, Gul. 4. 29. As then,
he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit, even so it is now. So it was, and so it is, and so it will be, till
Conversion changes the heart and principle. This Enmity cannot die, whilst
Satan ^ives, and rules in the hearts of Children of Disobedience.

And the Enmity is mutual. An unjust man i^ ^n abomination to the just; and he
that is upright in the way, is an abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29. 27. Only
with this difference; The good Man hates, Non virum, sed vitium, not the
Person, but his Sin. The wicked Man hates both the Person of the Godly, and his
Godliness too; yea, the Person for his Godliness sake.

This hatred of the Godly, secretly and habitually lurks in the Nature of a
wicked Man, as Rapaciousness does in a young Wolf that never saw a Lamb. It
extends it self universally to the whole Kind, and reaches those, whose lives
are most obligingly sweet; yea, those that are bound to them in the strictest
Bonds of Nature. As we may see in that most unnatural Instance of Cain's
murdering his own Brother Abel. It discovers it self in seeking the
Destruction of them they hate upon a Religious account, and in rejoicing at any
Evil that be^als them. Nothing is more grateful to them, than any occasion to
disgrace and expose them with contempt to the World.

SECT. VI.
But tho the strictness and holiness of good Men, causing the Consciences of
wicked Men privately to condemn, and inwardly to gaul and grate them for their
looseness and prof^neness, be the true and read Ground and Cause of the Grudge
and Hatred; yet they think it fit for Reputation s^ke, that this be wholly
suppressed and silen^^d, and something else pretended for the Cause and Reason
of it, else it would look too like the Devil himself. And therefore amongst
other plausible Pret^nsions for their Malignity to those that are better th^n
themselves, these three are principally insisted on, and pleaded.

1. That it is not their Piety, but their Hypocrisy which they hate. Not
because they have indeed more Piety than others, but because they make more
vain Show and Ostentation of it, than themselves do; who, setting aside their
ridiculous Grimaces, and affected fantastic Words and Actions, are every whit
as good as themselves.

2. Because under a pretense of greater strictness in Religion, they do but
hatch and carry on Sedition and Rebellion; and that the World will never be
quiet, whilst such Vipers are suffered in the Bowels of it.

3. That both the former have been made su^^iciently evident and apparent in
several former, and more recent Instances of the Hypocrisy and seditious
Designs of as high Pretenders to Religion and Reformation, as those are, whom
they truly hate, and would not suffer them to live, if their Power were
answerable to their Hatred.

As to this first Plea, viz. Their Hypocrisy, 'twill quickly be found to be too
thin and weak, to endure the Test of your own Reason and Consciences. For how
will you answer them, when they shall thus argue and expostulate the matter
with you?

You that thus Censure, and those that are censured for Hypocrisy by you, do
both profess one and the same Religion. Your profane Lives are ^^^toriously
contrary to all the Principles of this Religion. You Swear, Drink, Whore,
Revile, and Persecute the others, only because you fancy their Tones, G^stures,
etc. to be some way or other ind^cent* You cannot deny, but they live Soberly
and Godly. They attend upon all the Duties of Religion strictly and
conscientiously. Your Malice against them can find nothing to carp at, but some
little Trifles, with which the Essence of Religion is not concerned. Did they
run into the same excess of riot with you, greater matters than these would be
over-looked, yea, and applauded too.

Now let Reason and Conscience say, who is most likely to be the Hypocrite, the
Man that calls himself a Christian, and under that Profession wallows in all
profaneness, not once censuring himself for it; or he that lives Soberly and
Godly, against whom Malice it self can produce nothing but such inconsiderable
Trifles as these? Is not this the very Case which Christ has determined to our
hands, and made such Censurers the Hypocrites, Matthew. 7. 3. And why beholdest
thou the mote that is in thy Brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is
in thine own eye? It was but one blemish, and that a very small one too, but a
Mote; however this you can quickly spy, and as rashly censure. But mean while
there is a Beam, an horrid flagitious wickedness in your selves; but it is too
near your own Eyes to be discerned by you. Which of these two (think you) is
the Hypocrite?

2. But what if this Mote that you discern, be but a fancy, a mere imagination
of your own, how will that aggravate your Sin, and evince both your Malice and
Hypocrisy together? You say their Tones and Gestures in Religious Duties are
Ridiculous and Scenical. This you take up lightly against some few of them, and
as unjustly apply unto the aspersing of the whole Party, which your own Reason
must and will immediately condemn. For there are multitudes of that Party,
whose Countenances, Tones, and Gestures, are as decorous, grave, and becoming
the presence of that God with whom they they have to do, as any Men in the
World.

3. And as for those few whom you thus blemish for their indecent Tones or
Gestures; what if those Tones you speak of, amount to no more, but natural
Defects, and unavoidable Infirmities, which they would, but cannot help? Do
they for this, and no worse than this, deserve to be censured and condemned for
Hypocrites? Or, what if they be insensible Actions, occasioned by the greater
Intention of their Spirits in the Service of God? May not those very things
which you profanely flou^* censure, and scoff at, either not all be noted as
blemishes to their Devotion by the Eye of God, or noted with Approbation and
Delight, as the effects of spiritual fervency in his Service? Certainly,
Gentlemen, you are no good Marks-men, that neither draw the right Arrow, nor
level at the true mark.

4. And were not this a vain and empty Pretense to cover your own Malice
against Godliness; how comes it to pass that more Scenical Habits, Words, and
Gestures, should pass as Ornaments in others, whom you affect? Whether this be
not partiality unworthy of a Man, let Reason and Conscience freely judge.

In a word, What Commission or Authority, can you produce thus to ascend the
Throne of God, and draw your bitterest Censures through the very Hearts of Gods
People for such pitiful Tri^les as these; first condemning them as Hypocrites,
which is a most unwarrantable Presumption; and then persecute them as far as
you can for their presumed Hypocrisy? Have a care what you do; be not Mockers,
lest your Bonds be made strong. This is a Sin which hastens National
Desolation, 2 Chr. 36. 16, 17. They mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his Word, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
his People, till there was no ^emedy. Therefore he brought upon them the King
of the Chal^ees, who s^ew their young Men with the Sword, etc.

Plea II.
You say, It Is not Godliness you hate, and would persecute; but they are a sort
of Persons, who under a pretense of Zeal for Religion and Reformation, design
nothing else but Sedition and Rebellion; that the Nation will never be quiet,
whi^st such Vip^rs are suffered to live in it; and to fortify this Plea, you
add, that both their Hypocrisy and Sedition have been ma^e sufficiently ^vident
to the World in many Instances.

Zeal for the Laws, and Security of the Government, if rightly tempered and
qualified, is highly commendable; and wherever Sincerity animates, and Prudence
governs it, it ought by no means to be discouraged. But there are too many
Grounds and Causes of Suspicion, that both these will be found wholly wanting,
or extremely defective in many high Pretenders to it, when it comes to be
sifted to its bottom Principles, and weighed in the just Balance of sound
Reason.

For if you be in^lamed with a pure Zeal for the Laws and Government you live
under, then you will find your selves obliged for your own Vindication to
satisfy the just Expectation of your own, and other men's Reasons and
Consciences in the following Particulars.

Expectation I.
First, Reason and Conscience in your selves and others, will expect it from
you, that you of all Men living should be most precisely and punctually
Obedient to all those just and goo^ Laws you live under, since your Zeal burn^
so hot against those that comply not punctually with them. For those that make
so much Conscience (as you seem to do) of other Men's Offenses against the Laws,
must be presumed (if your Profession be sincere) to make at least as much
Conscience of breaking any of them in your own Persons; else neither Reason nor
Conscience will ever admit this Plea of yours for sound and good.

Now the Laws sometimes appoint Punishments for Nonconformity to the Rites and
Ceremonies, affixed to the public National Worship; and so they do always for
convicted Swearing, Drunkenness, and Adultery. All these Laws have the very
same Sanction by the Authority we live under. They forbid, and punish the one
as well as the other. And if there be any difference, it lies in this, that
these latter are expressly forbidden and threatened by God, antecedently to the
Magistrate's Prohibition of them, which has no small weight in the matter
under consideration.

Now if any Man shall pretend Zeal and Conscience against dissent in Judgment
or Practice from the Church, but makes no Conscience at all to Curse and Swear,
be Drunk or Unclean; he will find it a difficult task to persuade his own, or
other men's Reasons or Consciences, that this his Zeal for the Laws and
Government, is sincere and pure. For were it so, it could never allow him to
live in the notorious Violation of the Laws himself, which he is so fierce and
bitter against others for

Expectation II.
Secondly, If your Zeal be sincere, it will contain it self within the Bounds
and Limits of the Offense, and not lay hold upon the Innocent, as well as upon
the Guilty, and make you hate and persecute them that were never Turbulent and
Seditious, equally with the greatest Criminals. If you will hug this Principle,
as things stand now, Reason will tell you, it is as just at all other times, as
it is at this.

Would you not think it an unreasonable and most injurious thing to be plucked
out of your Shops, or Houses, and hurried away to the Goal, because two or
three dissolute Fellows in the City or Town where you live, have been Riotous
or Seditious, tho you possibly know not the Men, nor can be so much as justly
suspected of any Confederacy with them? True Zeal for the Laws and Government
is content to wait, and suspend its Revenges, till a fair Conviction have
passed upon the Guilty. And when it falls upon them, it is careful that it touch
none besides them; but suffers a Man to retain in the very height of it, due
Love and Honor for all that are Innocent.

If Christians be first denominated by general Titles and Terms of distinction,
which they cannot help, and then the Crimes of any particular Person, that the
World pleases to denominate as one of the same Party, must be charged and
imputed to the whole; what must the consequence of this be, but that the whole
Community become obnoxious to Punishment, and the very Government it self
thereupon be dissolved?

For I take it to be past denial or doubt, that some of each Denomination have
been, are, or may be guilty of seditious Practices. Some Hypocrites will lurk
among those vast Bodies of People under the most strict and watchful
Government; but God forbid their guilt should affect the whole Body, under
whose Name they shelter themselves. God, Reason, and Conscience do all command
the hottest Zeal to make its Pause and just Distinction here. Let the Guilty be
brought to Condign Punishment upon fair Trial and Conviction. This Discourse
designs no Favor for such. But let not those who abhor their Wickedness, and
are as pure from their Crimes as your selves, suffer with them, or for them.
For then your Reason will tell you, your selves are as liable to sufferings as
they, and that your Zeal is not kindled by love to Justice, but the hatred of a
Party.

It is not in the Body Politic, as in the Body Natural. If the hand Steal, the
feet are justly laid in Irons, and the Neck put into an Halter; because all the
Members of the Body Natural are animated and governed but by one Soul. But in
the Body Politic every Individual has a distinct Soul of his own, and
therefore that Member only that offends, ought to be punished, and all the rest
to enjoy their full Liberty and Honor as before. Away therefore for ever with
this Church and State-destroying Synecdoche.

Expectation III.
Thirdly, If there be a change made upon the Laws, and they shall at any time
tolerate and protect that Party and Practice which once they made Criminal;
then your Reason, and every Man's else will expect from you (if your Zeal for
the Laws and Government be sincere and unfeigned) that your Countenance and
Carriage to that People be changed and altered, according to the different
aspect of the Laws and Government upon them: That your Envy and Hatred cease
with the offense, and that you be as ready to assist and encourage them, when
they act according to Law, as you formerly were to afflict and prosecute them
for acting contrary to Law; else, pretend what you will, it is plain enough,
that it was not Zeal for the Laws and Government, but somewhat else (which
every Body may guess at) that inflamed your Rage against them.

For whenever the Wisdom of the Government finds it necessary by Toleration
to take away the Crime and Offense, it must necessarily take away this very
Plea for Hatred and Persecution with it. Otherwise it would be all one to act
for Law, and against Law; to punish them that are Offenders, and them that
offend no more than your selves; to turn the Edg of your Rage and Fury against
those that undermine the Government, and those that are as Zealous as your
selves to support and defend it by their Persons and Purses.

Expectation IV.
Fourthly, Your Reason will justly expect it from you, that when or wheresoever
you shall see eminent Piety meeting with punctual Conformity in one Man, that
Man shall be your very Darling, and that both these Qualifications should
recommend him to your dearest Affection. The more strictly godly he is, the
more conformable he is to the Laws of God; as well as by his punctual
Compliance with enjoined Rules and Rites of Worship to the Laws of Men. If he
be a Man of Catholic Charity to all of every Persuasion, whom he judges to
fear God, and be truly conscientious; if he boldly and impartially reprove Sin
wherever he finds it, tho it be in his own Patron, or Men of his own
Profession; you will still love him the more for that. For if Sincerity and
Conformity (as you pretend) be the very things which you make such a Noise and
Bussle for in the World, here you have them both in conjunction. This is the
Man you seem to seek (by these Pleas of yours) for a Pattern and Standard to
reduce other Men to.

And is it really so, Gentlemen, with you? Do you heartily affect and prize a
strict and serious Conformist, that fears not to expose the odious Shamefulness
and Wickedness of profane Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness, and Uncleanness,
without respect of Persons, both in his Pulpit and private Converses? Do you
love him the better for his plain dealing with your Consciences, in detecting
the grand Cheat of Formality in Religion; for his close cutting Convictions of
the insufficiency of mere Civility to your Salvation, and the indispensable
necessity of Regeneration? Do you heartily Love and Honor him for thundering
you out of Alehouses and Taverns, unto your Family and Closet-duties? For
telling you plainly, your Love must not be confined to your own Party, but
extended to all that fear God, however they be externally distinguished among
Men? Nay, for convincing you plainly, that Religion lies not in external Modes
and Rites, in Standing, Kneeling, or Responses? That the Name and Cry of the
Church, the Church, will as little avail to your Salvation, as the cry of the
Superstitious and Profane Jews, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord
are these? That true Religion is an inward, serious, spiritual thing,
consisting in, and evidencing it self by the Mortification of your Sins, and
real devotedness of your Hearts to the Lord?

If such a Man as this will please, and delight your very hearts; then my
Reason is bound to conclude, there may be reality in what you pretend. But if
you shall hate and loath such a Man as this, equally with a professed
Dissenter, you must excuse me, and all the Rational World with me, if we shall
conclude, that it is not true Zeal for the Laws, for the Church, or for the
sincerity and peaceable Lives of its Professors, but an inward, rooted Enmity
at Religion it self, that sets you on work under the feigned pretenses of other
things.

Expectation V.
Fifthly, Your Reason will expect and exact it from you, that whenever you
shall be convinced that all these Stirs and Bussles that have been in the
World, all this Fining, Imprisoning, and Impoverishing your Protestant Brethren
and Neighbors for their Conscience Sake, has done the Church no good, but
given a great and real Advantage to our common Enemy to ruin us together; that
we may distinguish our selves how we please in our Folly, but they will never
distinguish us in their Fury; for we are all known to them by one common Name
of H^reticks.

In this Case, your Reason exacts it from you, and so does the common Reason of
Mankind, that a Sense of common Interest, and common Danger, now quiet those
Fe^ds, and extinguish those Fires, which our own Lusts first kindled, and the
Devil and our common Enemies have incensed, to the great Damage and Hazard of
the whole Protestant Cause.

Such a seasonable and becoming Sense as this, were in it self sufficient to
cool a wise Man's heats, if Penal Laws were left standing in their full force
and vigor; but when the Wisdom and Reason of the State shall plainly discern
both the Usefulness and Necessity of Liberty, and thereupon take away (as they
have now most prudently and seasonably done) the further occasions of mischief
to the whole, by relaxing the Yoke that bound some (and those a very great Body
of truly Loyal and Useful Subjects) leaving the rest in the quiet Possession of
their own Liberties and Properties; what shall we call that Fire, which still
continues burning and increasing, not only after, but by all this, but an
unquenchable Hellfire?

If Chimaera's, and self-created Jealousies, That some carnal Interests of ours
are not so well secured to us under Liberty, as they were under Persecution and
Tyranny; this were the right way to perpetuate Dissentions and Persecutions to
the end of the World.

And now, Gentlemen, I hope I may say, without being vain or opinionative, that
your own Reason has fairly disarmed you of these Pleas and Excuses, by which
you have hitherto defended your selves in your most sinful Practices of profane
Cursing, and Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and bitter Enmity against your
Protestant Brethren for things that touch not the Essence of Christianity.

And believe it, Sirs, it is truly Genteel and Glorious, to suffer your selves
to be subdued and conquered by the plain Convictions of your own Reason and
Conscience. It Is ten thousand times more Honorable and Glorious to lay down
your Arms at the feet of these, than to lay down both Reason and Conscience at
the feet of Satan and your Lusts, and continue sighting obstinately against
God, your own Souls, Bodies, Estates, Reputations; yea, your very Reasons and
Consciences, your Innocent Brethren, and the Peace of Church and State, under
Satan's Banner.

In all this Discourse, I have not designed to exasperate, but assuage and
restrain your Lusts and Passions, by laying the loving and gentle hands of your
own Reasons and Consciences upon them. I have not given the least Injurious
touch to your Honor, but all along pleaded for the Recovery, or Security of
it. I have exposed no Man by any particular Mark or Indigitation.

But now I have done with you; if your own Consciences shall begin to make a
rounder and more particular Application of these general Reasonings and
Arguments, and say to you, as Nathan to David, Thou art the Man, I am not
accountable for that. But be confident of it, you are accountable to God for
all those plain Convictions and faithful Endeavors used with you, and tried
upon you, to save you from all those Miseries your headstrong Lusts with
furious Precipitation are manifestly running you into.

If you can substantially and solidly refel those Arguments against, and
vindicate those Pleas for Sin, which Reason and Conscience have urged and
censured above; and can produce stronger and clearer Arguments to defend and
justify the Courses here censured and condemned: Or if you can obtain a Writ of
Error to remove these Causes to another lawful Court of Judicature, where you
shall obtain a more favorable Verdict, your complaint of severe Dealing with
you here, will not want some Ground or Color: But if you cannot (as you know
you cannot) then never blame your own Reasons, nor mine, for dealing Rigorously
or Injuriously with you.

I am willing to hope, and persuade my self, that I shall at least obtain a
Reformation of Life from many of you. I have tugged hard for it with you here.
I will tug harder with God in Prayer to obtain it for you. But yet, Gentlemen,
I must tell you in the close, That tho an external Reformation of these Evil
Courses may make your Lives more healthy, happy, and durable in this World, and
will greatly conduce to the public, as well as your personal and private
Interest; yet if you expect complete and perfect Happiness in the World to
come, you must advance one step further beyond Reformation, unto sound
Conversion. The first makes you comparatively happy here; but the second will
make you perfectly happy and blessed for ever hereafter. The first frees you
from many temporal Miseries upon Earth; but the second from eternal Miseries in
Hell. And this brings you to the other blessed Step, by Conversion, which is
the Second Part.

The Second Part: Evincing the POSSIBILITY, NECESSITY, AND EXCELLENCY OF
Conversion to God,

The only Thing that makes Men truly happy, and perfectly blessed in the World
to come.

By the same Author.

Isa. 55. 7, 8. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord.

Isa. 1. 18. Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; tho they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool.

1 Cor. 6. 11: And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, etc.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over
against the Stocks-Market. 1691.

THE Possibility, Nature and Necessity OF CONVERSION Opened and Evinced.
SECT. I.
Conviction supposed, and Grace admired.
REason and Conscience have been shaming men out of their Profaneness, in the
former Part of this Discourse. Free Grace invites them to the Life of Holiness,
and thereby to the Life of Blessedness in this Second Part.

There you see what it is to live like Beasts. Here you may see what it is to
live like Christians.

My Charity commands me to suppose, that some Readers stand by this time
convicted in their own Consciences, both of the extreme wickedness, and the
immediate danger of that profane Course they have heitherto pursued, and
persisted in. And that by this time they begin to interrogate them in the
Apostle's close and cutting Language, Romans 6. 21. What fruit had ye then in
those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
It Is hard to imagine, that so many close Debates and Reasonings as you have
heard in the former Part, should not leave many of you under conviction and
trouble of Spirit. You see your own Reasons and Consciences have condemned you;
And if our heart condemn us (says the Apostle) God is greater than our heart,
and knows all things, 1 John 3. 20. It Is folly to imagine, you shall be
acquitted at God's immediate Bar, who are already cast and condemned at your
own Privy Sessions.

If this be the happy effect (as I hope it is) of all the former close and
solemn Debates with your Consciences, it will naturally and immediately cast
thy Soul, Reader, into great admiration of, an astonishment at the patience and
long-suffering of God, that has born with thee, under a life of prodigious and
reiterated provocations until this day. And his Goodness will be as admirable
to thee, as his Patience; in that he has not only suffered thee to live till
this day, but made it the day of thy Conviction, the first necessary step
toward thy Conversion: and the very first things he entertains thy convinced
and troubled Soul with, to be the possibility and probability of thy Conversion
to God.

The greatness of his Patience shows his Almighty Power, Romans 9. 22. Nahum 1.
3. But his willingness to pass by all the wrongs you have done him, and to be
at peace with you, discovers the immense riches of his grace, Tit. 3. 3, 4.

That God should be so quick in the executions of his wrath upon your
Companions in sin, and so patient and long-suffering toward you, that have
out-sinned them all, is such a comparative consideration of his bounty, as
should even overwhelm the man that beholds it, Romans 11. 22. Behold the goodness
and severity of God! on them that fell, severity; but toward thee goodness.

If thou be that very man, who in the past course of thy Life, have been a
profane Swearer, a beastly Drunkard, a lascivious person, an hater and
persecutor of good men; and after all this, the Lord has brought an offer of
mercy to thy Soul, and shall convince thee it is not come too late, but that
the Door of Hope stands yet open to thee; my advice to thee is, That thou cast
thy self down at the feet of mercy, and after this manner pour forth thy
laments and desires before the Lord.

And is there yet a possibility of mercy, O Lord God, for such a vile wretch as
I have been! Can the arms of Free Grace yet open themselves to embrace such a
Monster of wickedness as I am! Who then is a God like unto thee! and what
patience, mercy and goodness is like thine! I have far exceeded others in sin;
I have lived the Life of a Beast, yea, of a Devil. I have darted thy dreadful
and glorious Name with thousands of horrid Blasphemies, trampled all thy
glorious Attributes under my feet; challenged thee to thy very face to do thy
worst, even to damn me to the pit of Hell; I have yielded up this Soul with all
its noble Faculties and Powers, as instruments of sin unto the Devil; and made
this Body which should have been the hallowed Temple of thy Spirit, to be the
noysom Sink or Common-Shore for all unclean and abominable Lusts to run and
settle in. I have hated, reviled and persecuted those that were more strictly
sober and godly than my self, because their convincing-examples disquieted,
checked and convicted my Conscience in the eager pursuit of my Lusts and
Pleasures.

I have lived in the profane neglect of Prayer, Meditation, Self-reflection,
and all other spiritual Christian Duties, thinking to make an atonement for
all, by a few hypocritical external Formalities.

To accommodate my carnal interest in the world, I have come ^eeking hot out of
an Alehouse, or Whore-House, to the Table of the Lord, where with unhallowed
hands, and a more unhallowed heart, I have crucified again the Lord of Glory;
and given the vilest affront and despite to that most sacred and precious
blood, which now must save me, or I am lost for ever. Thus have I done; and
because thou kepst silent, I thought thee to be altogether such an one as my
self. But this day have thou reproved me, and set mine abominations in order
before me.

I have tempted and induced many others into the same Impieties with me, of
whom some are already gone down to the dead; and others so fixed, and fully
engaged in the pursuit of their Lusts, that there appear no signs of repentance
or recovery in them.

Thy wrath, Lord, soon brake forth against the Angels that sinned in Heaven;
yet hitherto have thou forborne and spared me, who have been highly provoking
thee, ever since I was born, by life of unparalleled wickedness upon Earth.
Vile wretch that I am! I have despised the riches of thy goodness, forbearance,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads me to
repentance. And after all, here I am told, that there is yet a possibility of
pardon, mercy and salvation for me. The news is so great and so good, that I am
zealously concerned to exa^^^^ the grounds and e^idences of it. And if it shall
appear to be as true, as it is astonishingly (...) and ravishingly sweet, I
hope it shall effectually lead me to repentance, and dissolve for ever the
strongest ties betwixt me and my lusts.

SECT. II.
Conversion of the vilest Sinner possible.
THAT it is possible for the greatest and most infamous Sinner to be recovered
by Repentance and Conversion, and thereupon to find mercy and forgiveness with
God, is a truth as sure and firm, as it is sweet and comfortable. Three things
will give full evidence of it.

1. That their Sins do not exceed the power and sufficiency of the causes of
Remission.

2. That such Sinners are within the calls and invitations of the Gospel.

3. That such Sinners are found among the instances and Examples of pardoning
mercy, recorded in the Scriptures.

And if the Causes of Pardon be sufficient, and able to produce it; if the
Gospel-invitations do take them in; and such sinners as these, every way as
vile and wicked, have not been shut out, but received to mercy; then it is
beyond all doubt that there is (at least) a possibility of mercy for such
sinners as you are.

I. It Is past all rational doubt, that the Causes of Remission are every way
sufficient and able to produce the forgiveness of such sins as yours are. For
consider with your selves, The power of
1. The Impulsive Cause. 2. The Meritorious Cause. 3. The Applying Cause.


1. The sufficiency and ability of the Impulsive Cause of Pardon, which is none
other but the Free Grace of God, the immense riches and treasures whereof, do
infinitely exceed the accounts and computations both of Angels and Men, Exodus
34. 6, 7. And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin.
Mic. 7. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy* He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
our sins into the depths of the Sea. Once more, Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded,
grace did much more abound. So that whatever thy sins have been, they do not,
they cannot exceed the ability and power of the Grace of God, the
all-sufficient Impulsive Cause of Remission. That infinite Abyss or Sea of
mercy can swallow up and cover such mountains of guilt as thine have been.

2. Nor do thy sins exceed the power and ability of the Meritorious Cause of
Remission, namely, the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ; for that Blood is the
Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. He is the Lamb of God, whose blood is sufficient to
take away the sins of the world, John 1. 29. There is but one sin in the world
exempt from Remission by this blood; and if thy heart be now wounded with the
sense of sin (as I here suppose it to be) that is none of thy sin, how heinous
soever thy other sins be.

3. Nor do thy sins exceed the ability and power of the Applying Cause of
pardon, namely, the Spirit of God. For though I should suppose thy mind to be
clouded and overshadowed with grossest ignorance, thy Heart to be as hard as an
Adamant or Nether Millstone, thy Will stiff and obstinate, thy Affections
enchanted and bewitched with the pleasures of Sin; yet this Spirit of God in a
moment can make a convincing beam of light to dart into thy dark mind, make thy
hard heart relent, thy stubborn will to bow, and all the affecti^ns of thy Soul
to comply, and open obedientially to Christ, John 16. 9, 10. The Spirit, when
he comes, he shall convince the world of Sin, etc.

Thus you see whatever your guilt be, it does not exceed the abilities of the
Causes of Remission. On what an Encouragement is this!

II. And there is yet further Encouragement in this, that if you will open your
Bibles, you may find your selves within the Calls and Invitations of the
Gospel. And no man can say that man is without hope, that is within a
Gospel-invitation. Consider Isa. 55. 7, 8. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon: for my
thoughts are not your thoughts, etc. Here you have the nature of Conversion
described Negatively and Positively, by forsaking your ways and thoughts, and
turning to the Lord, The way notes the external course of the Conversation; the
thoughts denote the internal frame and temper of the Mind; both these must be
forsaken. And turning to the Lord, denotes the sincere dedication of the whole
man to God; all which is possible and easy for the Spirit of God to do; and
this being once done, abundant Pardon is assured. If you say you cannot think
it; God tells you in the very next words, That his thoughts are not your
thoughts, but as far above them as the Heavens are higher than the Earth. Read
to the same purpose, Isaiah 1. 18, Rev. 3. 20. John 7. 37.

III. And to make the possibility of Remission yet clearer, know for your
encouragement, that as vile, infamous, and prodigious Sinners as your selves,
are recorded and found amongst the instances and examples of forgiven sinners
in Scripture. Paul was once a fierce and cruel Persecutor and Blasphemer, yet
he obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14. That sinful Woman recorded Luke 7. 37, 38,
was an infamous and a notorious sinner, yet her sins, which were many, were
forgiven her, v. 47. Manasseh was a Monster of wickedness, as you may read, 2 Chronicles. 33. yet found mercy. And if you view that Catalogue of sinners given in
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. you will seem to find among them the very forlorn-hope of
desperate sinners, advanced nearest to Hell of any men upon Earth; yet see ver.
11. what is said of some of them: And such were some of you; but ye are washed,
but ye are justified.

All these things plainly show (I say not the Certainty that you shall be, but)
the Possibility that you may be pardoned; which is a mercy and encouragement
unspeakable.

SECT. III.
The Conversion of profane ones highly probable.
AND because Satan labors to discourage them that are gone in sin so far as
you are, by cutting off all hope^ of mercy from them, and bringing them to this
desperate Conclusion, Damned we know we shall and must be, and therefore as
good be damned for more, as less. If we had lived sober and civil lives, we
might have had some hope; but because we have no hope, it is as good for us to
take our full swinge in sin, as to think of returning by Repentance and
Conversion, so late in the day as this is.

To obviate this deadly snare of Satan, I shall here further add, That there is
not only a Possibility of your recovery, but in some respect a stronger
Possibility, that such as you may be converted and saved, than there is for
those that have ^ed a smoother and more civil life in the world, and wholly
trust to their own Civility for their salvation, instead of the imputed
righteousness of Christ.

This plainly appears by that convictive Expression of Christ to the Scribes
and Pharisees, Mat. 21. 31. Verily I say unto you, That the Publicans and
Harlots go into the Kingdom of Heaven before you. Publicans, the most infamous
among men, and Harlots the worst of women; yet these are sooner wrought over to
Christ by Faith and Repentance, than the more civil and self-righteous Scribes
and Pharisees.

And indeed it is far easier to come at the Consciences of such sinners by
Conviction, than at the others. They have nothing to ward off the stroke of
conviction: It must fall directly and immediately upon their Consciences. The
most smooth and civil part of the world trust to their own righteousness, and
this self-confidence, like Armor of proof, resists all attempts to bring them
to Christ for righteousness. Nothing ^ixes men in a state of evil more, than a
strong conceit that their Condition is good.

But such as you are, whose whole lives have been polluted with profaneness
and all impiety, your Consciences will more easily receive convictions of your
present danger, and of the necessity of a speedy and through change. You cannot
think as others do, that you need no Repentance or Reformation. In this
respect, therefore, you lie nearer the Door of Hope and Mercy, than other
Sinners do.

If therefore it shall please the Lord (whose grace is rich and free to the
vilest of sinners) to pluck out such as you, as brands out of the burning, by
thorough conversion to Christ, you will not only become real Christians (as all
true Converts are) but the most excellent, useful and zealous amongst all
Christians. As you will be most eminent Instances of his Grace, so will you be
the most eminent Instruments for his Glory. As you have gone beyond other
sinners in wickedness, so you will strive to exceed them all in your love to
Christ, Luke 7. 47. She loved much, for much was forgiven her. You Will never
think you can do enough for him, who has done such great things for you.

Who more fierce and vile before Conversion, than Paul, who was a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor and injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 13? And who among all the servants of
Christ loved or labored for him more than he? How did he rather fly, than
travel up and down the world, in a flame of Zeal for Christ? As you have been
Ringleaders in sin, so you will not endure to come behind any in zeal and love
to the Lord Jesus: Yet not thinking this way to make him a requital for the
injuries you have done him (that would be the most injurious act of all the
rest): But to testify this way the deep sense you have of the riches and
transcendency of his goodness and mercy to you above others*

SECT. IV.
Conversion frequently and fatally mistaken.
BUT here I must warn you of some common, but most dangerous Mistakes committed
in the world with respect to Conversion unto God. Except these be seasonably
prevented or removed, none of you will ever stir or move further than you are
toward Christ. Amongst others, beware especially of these three following
fatal Mistakes. That of 1. Baptismal Regeneration. 2. Common Profession of
Christianity. 3. Formality in Religious Duties.


1. There is a notion spread among men, and almost every where obtaining, That
the Scriptures mean nothing else by Conversion, but to be baptized in our
infancy into the visible Church; and that this Ordinance having past upon them
long ago, they are sufficiently converted already; and that men make but a
needless stir and bussle in the world about any other or further Conversion.

But, Sirs, I beseech you consider how dangerous a thing it is to take your own
Shadow for a Bridge, and venturing upon it drown your selves. If Baptism be
Conversion enough, why does Christ say, Mark 16. 16. H^ that believes and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned? Baptism
without Faith signifies nothing to Salvation; but Faith without Baptism (where
it cannot be had) secures Salvation. And why does the Apostle say, Gal. 6. 15.
Neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature?
Or what needed Christ to have pressed and inculcated the indispensible
necessity of Regeneration upon Nicodemus, as he does, Joh. 3. 3, 5, 7. who had
been many years a circumcised Jew? This your dangerous dependence upon your
Baptismal Regeneration, is what has given such deep offense and prejudice to
many (though without just cause) against that Ordinance. I lament it as much as
they, that men should turn it into such a deadly snare to their own Souls, yet
will still honor Christ's abused Ordinance.

2. Some think the common profession of Christianity makes them Christians
enough. They are no Heathens, Mahometans, or idolatrous Papists, but
Protestants, within the Pale of the True Church, that is, professed reformed
Christians.

But Friends, I beg you to consider, that convictive Text, 1 Cor. 4. 20. The
Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Many there be, that in words
confess Christ, but in works they deny him. And why were the foolish Virgins
(that is, professed reformed Christians) shut out of the Kingdom of God, if the
Lamps of verbal profession, without the Oil of Internal Godliness, were enough
for our Salvation? Mat. 25. 3, 12. Believe it, Sirs, many will claim
acquaintance with Christ upon this account, and expect favor from him in the
great day, of whom he will profess he never knew them, Mat. 7. 22. Christ need
not have put men upon striving as in an Agony to enter in at the strait Gate,
if Baptism in our Infancy, or Verbal Profession of Christianity were all the
difficulties men had to encounter in the way to Heaven.

3. Formality in external Duties of Religion, is another fatal mistake of
Conversion. Have not these been the inward thoughts of your hearts; As bad as
we are, though we take liberty to swear, be drunk, and unclean sometimes; yet
we say our Prayers, keep our Church, and hope for Heaven and Salvation, as well
as those that are more precise?

But tell me, Gentlemen, seriously, What do you say or plead for your selves
more in all this, than those convicted Hypocrites did, Isa. 58. 2. Yet they
seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness,
and forsook not the Ordinances of their God: They ask of me the Ordinances of
justice; they take delight in approaching to God. Or to come nearer yet to your
Case, and cut off at one stroke for ever this vain Plea of yours, read and
ponder God's own Censure of it, in Jer. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Behold, ye trust
in lying words, that cannot profit: Will ye steal, murder, commit Adultery, and
swear falsely, etc. and come and stand before me in this House, which is called
by my Name, and say we are delivered to do all these Abominations? Is this
House which is called by my Name, become a Den of Robbers in your eyes? Behold,
even I have seen it, says the Lord; but go ye now to my place, which was in
Shilo, where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the
wickedness of my people Israel

SECT. V.
Of the Nature of true C^nversion.
YOU have heard that Conversion does not consist in these External things; at
your Eternal peril be it if you trust in them. But true Conversion is the
turning of the whole man to God, Acts 26. 18. It Is nothing less than the total
change of the inward temper and frame of the Heart, and the external course of
the Life, Isa. 55. 8. It Is not the cold Confession, but the real forsaking of
sin, in which we shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. Thy heart and will, love and
delight must turn sin out, and take Christ in, or thou art no Gospel-Convert. A
true Convert loathes every sin, and himself for sin, Ezekiel. 36. 31. But general
Confessions of sin, are consistent with the full dominion of sin. Moreover, in
all true Conversion there is a positive turning unto God, a whole heart-choice
of him for your supreme and ultimate happiness and portion, Psalm. 73. 25. And
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as your Prince and Savior, Acts 5. 31. And
answerably it will devote your whole Life to his Service and Glory, Phil. 1.
21. And thus it brings forth the new man. And the whole Frame of your Heart and
Life is marvellously changed and altered, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Old things are passed
away, behold all things are become new.

It may be you will think such a change as this impossible to be made upon you.
And so it is indeed, until the day of God's power come, Psalm 110. 3* What! to
forsake with loathing your old Companions and Courses, which you have so long
lived with, and delighted in, and to embrace with highest pleasure strict
Godliness, which you have so loathed and ridiculed! This would be a strange
alteration indeed. But as strange as it seems to be, 'twill be effected in a
moment, when God fulfils that gracious Promise (as I hope he is now doing) to
you, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you; Operations follow Natures. When the heart of a Beast was given
to that great King Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5. 21. his dwelling was with the wild
Asses, they ^ed him with Grass like Oxen. But let the Spirit of a man return to
him again, and he will blush to think of his brutish Company, and way of Life:
And so will you of yours also. As mavelous a change as this has past upon as
eminent and notorious sinners as your selves, Gal. 1. 22. the God of the
Spirits of all flesh can with ease and speed produce all this by that Almighty
Power whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

SECT. VI.
Of the Hazards attending Conversion.
IF the Lord shall in his rich grace and mercy to your Souls stir up in them
the thoughts and resolutions of a change of your course, great care ought to be
taken in the time of this change, lest they miscarry in their remove from one
State to another. Multitudes miscarry betwixt a State of Profaneness, and true
Godliness. To continue in the State of Profaneness, is to be certainly lost;
and so it is to take up short of Christ in mere Civility and Formality in
Religion. This middle state takes up multitudes by the way, who do but change
the open Road for a more private way to Hell.

Mere Civilized Nature is Unregenerated Nature still. They return, but not to
the most high; they are like a deceitful Bow, says the Prophet, Hos. 7. 16.
They seem to aim at Christ and Salvation; but as an Arrow from a weak Bow, it
goes not home; or as from a deceitful Bow, it slents aside, and misses the
Mark. It Is true, they are not openly profane, as they were before; but they
take up, and settle in an Unregenerate State still. Their Condition is the
same, tho their Company be not.

This is excellently set forth by our Savior, Matt. 12. 43, 44, 45. The Devil
may be cast out as a profane Devil, and yet keep his propriety still as a
formal Devil. The sense of that Text is well expressed by one in this Note upon
it* That a restraint by Formality keeps the Devil's Propriety, and disposes the
Soul to final Apostasy. You are as far from Christ and Salvation under the
power of Formality, as you were before. He that is cured of a Fever, has no
great cause to rejoice, if his Fever have left him under a Consumption, which
will kill him as surely, though it may be less violently or speedily.

SECT. VII.
Of the absolute Necessity of a through Change.
WHatever the Difficulties and Hazards be that attend this Change by Conversion
unto God, the Change it self is absolutely and indispensibly necessary to every
man's Salvation. The Door of Salvation can never be opened without the Key of
Regeneration. Christ assures Civil and Formal Nicodemus, that except he be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 3. Think not Conversion to be
the attainment of some singular and extraordinary Christians; for it is the very
point upon which every man's eternal Happiness or Misery depends. There is one
Law for all the world, They must be changed or damned. No Restitutions or
Reformations, no common Gifts or Abilities, no Religious Duties or Services,
can save any man from Hell without a Change by thorough Conversion, Romans 8. 8.
They that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

Satisfy and please not your selves with this; Though we live in sin, yet God
is a merciful God; we will confess our sins to him, say our Prayers, keep our
Church, and no doubt, but God will be merciful to us, as well as others.
Consider it, man, that this merciful God is also a God of Truth, and this God
of Truth has plainly assured thee, That all these external things signify
nothing to thy Salvation, unless thou become a new Creature, Gal. 6. 15. And
that thou must be born again, John 3. 3. Say not without this, you will hope in
God. If you hope in God, you must hope in his Word, Psalm 119. 81. Now where
will you find that Word in the Bible, that warrants the hope of Salvation in an
unregenerate person? All Scriptural hope is of a purifying nature, and evermore
productive of an holy life, 1 John 3. 3.

If you say, Christ died for the greatest of sinners, and you trust to be saved
through him: it is true he did so; but Conversion is his only method of
Salvation, Tit. 2. 14. And those that are not washed by Sanctification, have no
part in him, or in his Blood, John 13. 8. He came not to save men continuing in
their sins, but to save his people from their sins, Matt. 1. 21. His way is to
lead you through Sanctification unto Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. If you have a
mind to see whom and now he saves, you have it before your eyes, Tit. 2. 14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Those only are saved by
him, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, live not only soberly and
righteously, but godly in this present world.

And this is the Change I am here pressing you to: and until this change be
made, you cannot find your selves within the compass of any Covenant-Promise,
Ephesians. 2. 12. But if you will turn to Heb. 12. 14. You may the very next minute
find your selves barred out of Heaven by a Scripture-threatning. Let no man
therefore impose so great a cheat upon his own Soul, as once to imagine, that
any thing short of sound Conversion, can ever put him out of the danger of
Damnation.

SECT. VIII.
Every man might do more than he does toward his own Conversion.
IT is not in any man's power to convert himself: but yet because every man
might do more toward it than he does do, and does it not, he is justly
chargeable with his own Damn^tion. We are bid and bound to strive to enter in
at the strait gate, L^ke 13. 24. It Is true, a man in his natural state can do
nothing that is spiritually or supernaturally good; yet he can do, and forbear
to do many things, the doing or forbearing of which have a true, though remoter
tendency to his Conversion; and not doing or forbearing of them, his
Destruction is of, and from himself.

You can, if you will, forbear to swear and blaspheme the Name of ^od: who can
or does compel or force your tongues to it? The Devil can temp^, but not compel
them. You can, if you will, stop when nature is duly refreshed: Your wicked
Companions can provoke, but not force you. You can, if you please, shun
Lascivious Books and Company, and keep your Bodies chaste, at least from the
External Acts of Uncleanness.

And why cannot you (if you please) perform, as well as neglect, the external
Acts of Religious Duties? The same feet that carry you to a Tavern, can carry
you to your Closets, if you please to have them do so. Nor do I know any reason
why you cannot compose your selves, when engaged in God's public or private
Worship, to a close and serious attendance to those Duties. The application of
the mind to what is spoken, is of great concernment to you: And if an
unsanctified Minister can apply his thoughts to compose a Sermon and preach it,
I see no reason why an unsanctified Hearer may not also compose and apply his
mind to hear it. And I am past all doubt, that something may be done beyond all
this. You have some power certainly to reflect upon, and consider what
concernment you have in the things you read or hear, and how they agree or
disagree with your experience.

Now if men would but do this (which certainly they have a power to do) though
they cannot convert themselves, yet hereby they would lie in the hopeful way of
Converting Grace; which is more than they could ever yet be persuaded to do.
And though there be no positive certainty or assurance that Conversion and
Salvation shall follow these Acts; yet hope and probability are engagements
enough. Hope sets all the World on work without Assurance. The Plough-man
ploughs in hope, and the Merchant ventures in hope. Do but as much for your
Souls, as these do for their Bodies.

SECT. IX.
Temptations and Discouragements in the way of Conversion.
BUT here I expect to be encountered by all the policy and power of Hell. Satan
and your own Lusts are in confederacy to turn away your minds from such
Counsels and Persuasions as these. They will tell you, this is no proper season
to mind your Conversion: it is either too soon, or too late. You have not yet
had pleasure enough in sin, or so much as has put you beyond all hope of
mercy: That Religion is a melancholy thing, and if once you look that way,
you will never have a merry day or hour more, With a thousand such damps and
discouragements.

But pray, Gentlemen, do so much at least for your Souls before you turn away
your ear from the instructions of life, as to hear these matters examined. If
they be not worth that, they are worth nothing.

I will suppose you in the flower and vigor of your Youth, and this dangerous
season now nicked with a more dangerous Temptation, that it is too soon to mind
such serious Matters now: You have not yet had your full pleasure out of sin.

Need I to spend a word to refute and baffle such a Temptation as this? I doubt
not but you your selves can easily do it. Ask your selves, Sirs, if sentence of
Death were passed upon you by Men (as it is by God, John 3. 18. He that
believes not is condemned already) would you think a Pardon could come too
soon? Be assured every bit of Bread you eat, is the Bread of the Condemned. You
are in hazard of Hell every day and hour: There wants nothing but a Sword, a
Bullet, a Shipwreck, or Disease (of which Multitudes wait on you every day) to
put you beyond mercy, and all hopes of mercy. And can you get too soon (think
you) out of this danger and misery? Oh, why do you linger any longer? The
danger is too great and imminent to admit one hours longer delay.

And it is as strange and strong a delusion on the other side, to fancy it is
now too late. The vanity and groundlesness of this has been evinced in the
Second Section, to which I refer you for full satisfaction.

And for the loss of your Pleasures by Conversion to God, that is the thinnest
and silliest Pretense of all the rest. That Is the same thing as to imagine it
is to a Thirsty Man's loss, to leave the puddle-waters of a broken Cistern, to
enjoy the Cristal Streams of a flowing Fountain: For the Pleasures of an
Alehouse, Playhouse or Whore-house, to be sweeter than the light of God's
Countenance, the Comforts of his Pardon, or the lively Hopes of Glory with him
in Heaven, of which you read, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Poor men! O that you did but once know what the Life of Holiness, and
Dedication to God is; what the Seals, Earnest, and first Fruits of his Spirit
are! how willingly and joyfully would you trample all the ^ordid Pleasures of
Sin under your feet, to enjoy them!

SECT. X.
Motives and Considerations persuading to Conversion.
THIS short Discourse shall wind up it self in Motives and Considerations to
prevail with You, not only to make the first Step out of Profaneness to
Civility; but the other necessary and happy Step too, for the Lord's sake,
Gentlemen; that blessed Step beyond mere Civility, to serious Godliness.

Oh, that I knew what Words to choose, and what Arguments to urge, that might
possibly prevail with you! My Witness is in Heaven, I would do any thing within
my power to procure your temporal and eternal Happiness. I beg you in the
bowels of Christ Jesus, as if I were upon my bended knees before your feet,
turn not away your eye or ear from these Discourses. Ponder and consider once
and again what has been rationally debated in the First Part, about your
Reformation, and what has and shall be offered in this Second Part.

Oh, my God! thou that have counted me faithful, and put me into the Ministry;
thou that have inclined my heart to make this attempt, and encouraged me with
hope that it shall not be in vain to all them that read it, if it must be so to
some; I beseech thee, lay the hand of thy Spirit upon the heart and hand of thy
Servant, strengthen and guide him in drawing the Bow of the Gospel, and
directing the Arrows, that they may strike the Mark he aims at, even the
Conviction and Conversion of l^u^d and dissolute sinners. Command these
Considerations to stay and settle in their hearts, till they bring them fully
over to thy self in Christ.

I. Consideration.
And first, O that you would consider how the whole of your Life past has been
cast away in vain, as to the great end and business you came into the world
for. You have breathed many Years, but not lived one Day to God. Your
Consciences could never yet prevail with you to get out of the noise and hurry
of the World, and go along with it into some private retiring-place to debate
the state of your Souls, and think close (but for one hour) to such aw^ul
Subjects as God, Soul, Christ and Eternity, Heaven, Hell, Death and Judgment.
Do you think, Gentlemen, that you came into this world to do nothing else but
to eat and drink, sport and play, sleep and die? Ask your selves, I beseech
you, whether the life you have hitherto lived, have looked to your own eyes
like an earnest ^light from Hell, and a serious pursuit of Heaven and
Salvation? How much nearer are you got to Christ now, than you were when in
your Cradles? The sweetest and ^ittest part of your life is past away in
Vanity, and there is no calling one day or hour of it back again.

II. Consideration
Consider, Gentlemen, for Christ Jesus sake, you have yet an opportunity to be
eternally happy, if you will slight and neglect opportunities of Salvation no
longer. The Door of mercy is not yet finally shut up. The Lord Jesus yet waits
to be gracious to you. Such is his astonishing grace and mercy, he will pardon
and pass by all that you have done against him; if now after all you will but
come unto him that you may have life. Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die?
Your Swearing and Blaspheming* your Drunkenness, Unclea^ness and Enmity at
Godliness, shall never be mentioned, if you will yet repent and return, Ezekiel.
18. 21, 22. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed,
and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he has committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him.

If you say, these are hard and impossible terms to Nature. It Is true they are
so; and God's e^d in urging them here upon you, is to convince you of your
natural impotence, and drive you to Christ, that by union with him, the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in you.

III. Consideration.
Let it be thoroughly considered, It Is no less than Salvation, and your own
Salvation too, which depends upon your Conversion. How diligent was Christ in
purchasing Salvation! How negligent and remiss are we in applying it! Oh, what
compositions of sloth and stupidity are unconverted Sinners! How do they sit
with folded arms, as if it were easy to perish? Is this your running and
striving to obtain the Palms and Crowns of Immortal Glory? Work out (says the
Apostle Phil. 2. 12, 13.) your own salvation with fear and trembling. It Is for
Salvation, and nothing less, you are here pressed to strive And what care,
pains, or so^licitude of ours can be equal and proportionate to so great a
thing as salvation? If every thought of the heart were rescued from all other
concerns, and the mind stand continu^lly ^ixed with utmost intention upon this
Subject, (...) such a Subject deserves it all, and much more.

But when you consider it is not an there is, but your own Salvation you are
striving for, how powerfully should the Principle of Self-preservation awaken
and invigorate your utmost endeavors after it! The Law of Charity and Bowels
of Mercy would compel us to do much to save the Body, and much more the Soul of
another; and will they move us to do nothing for our own Salvation?

Say not, if I should be careless and neglective, yet God is good and gracious;
if this Season be neglected, there be more to come. Alas! that is more than you
know. It Is possible your Eternal Happiness may depend upon the improvement of
this present opportunity. There Is much of time in a short opportunity.

IV. Consideration.
Do you think your hearts would be in such a dead, careless and unconcerned
^rame, al^o at this great and awful matter of your Conversion and Salvation, if
those things were now before your eyes, which certainly and shortly must be
before them?

How rational and necessary is it for you now to suppose those very things, as
present before you, which you know to be near you, and a few Days or Hours will
make present? Here let me make a few Suppositions, so rational, because
certainly future and near, that no wise man will or dare to slight them as
Fictions or Chimaera's.

I. Supposition.
Suppose your selves now upon your Deathbeds, your heart and breath failing,
your eye and heart strings breaking, all Earthly Comforts failing and shrinking
from you; These things, you know, are unavoidable, and must shortly befall you,
Eccles. 8. 8. Suppose also in these your last Extremities, your Consciences
should awake (as probably they will, there being now no more Charms of
Pleasure, and sinful Companions to divert of stupifie them) what a case will
you then find your selves in! What a cold sweat will then lie upon your panting
bosoms! What a pale horror will appear in your countenances? Will you not then
wish, Oh that the time I have spent in vanity, had been spent in the Duties of
serious Piety! Oh that I had been as careful of my Soul as I was of my Body!
What are the pains of Mortification, which I was so afraid of, to the pains of
Damnation, which I begin to scent and apprehend! I thought it hard to pray,
mourn, and deny my self, but I shall find it harder to grapple with the Wrath
of an incensed God to all Eternity.

II. Supposition.
Suppose your selves now to be at the Judgment Seat of God, where you know you
must be immediately after Death; or that you did behold the Process and awful
solemnity of the general Judgment of the great Day, both which appearances are
indisputably sure and certain, Heb. 9. 27. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Suppose you saw all
Adam's Posterity there assembled and convened, even Multitudes, Multitudes,
which no man can number; all these separated into two grand Divisions; Christ
the Supreme and final Judge upon the Judgment Seat, the Christless and
Unregenerate World quivering at the Bar, the last Sentence pronouncing on them,
the Executioners standing ready to take them away: will you not then (think
you) be ready to tear your selves with indignation for this your supine and
sottish carelessness? A Voice from the Throne, like the Voice of a Trumpet,
sounds a loud Alarm to all Careless, Negligent and Trifling Sinners; and this
is the Voice, if you will not be in the same case with the miserable condemned
World. Put to it heartily then in the use of all means with God and Men, for
converting and regenerating Grace now, which is the only thing that differences
your state from those miserable Wretches then.

III. Supposition.
Suppose God did but give you a foresight or fore-taste in the Terrors of your
Consciences of that Damnation you have jested at, and so often imprecated upon
your selves; did you but lie one Night in that Plight poor Spira and many
others beside him have done, with the terrors of the Lord upon your spirits,
under horror and remorse of Conscience, which are the first niblings and
bitings of that Worm that shall never die, -- Tum pallida m^ns est,
Criminibus, tacita sudant praecordia culpa.
Paleness and horror, fear and trembling upon the outward and inward man,
whilst God is making the immediate impressions of his wrath upon the
Conscience; seeming to want some one to let out that miserable wretched Soul,
that is weary to stay any longer in the Body, and yet afraid to be dislodged,
lest its Condition be made worse by the exchange; do you think you would ever
imprecate Damnation any more? and yet all these terrors and horrors upon the
Conscience are but as the sweating of Marble-Stones before the great Rain fall.

But what if God should give you a Vision of Hell it self, and of the
inconceivable and unexpressible misery of those desperate and forlorn Wretches,
that lie there sweltring and groaning under the heavy pressures of the wrath of
a great and terrible God, immediately and everlastingly transacted upon their
Souls? would you ever jest with Damnation any more, as with an harmless thing?
Nay, would you not strive to the uttermost to flee from this wrath to come? Do
you not seem to hear in this rational and just Supposition, a doleful Cry
coming from Hell, and the state of the Damned, with this very Sound and Sense;
Good Souls, if ever you expect to be delivered from this state and place of
Torments, strive to the utmost, strive while you have opportunity, strive
whilst breath and strength do last, to flee from, and escape by sound
Conversion this doleful state of Eternal Damnation.

IV. Supposition.
Lastly, and in a word; Suppose you had a Vision of Heaven, as Stephen and Paul
had in the Body; suppose you saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing at his
right hand, surrounded with the triumphant Myriads of Palm-bearing Saints,
singing Hosanna's and Allelujah's to God and the Lamb for ever, and blessing,
praising and admiring him, that gave them another spirit vastly different from
that which governs such as you; blessing the Lord that enabled them to be
praying and praising, whilst others were cursing and swearing; to be sighing
and groaning for sin in secret, whilst others were shouting and singing in
Taverns and Alehouses; to beat down their Bodies, and keep them under, whilst
others were pleasing and gratifying their Lusts; would you still drive that
course you do? Well, Sirs, if ever you expect to come where these blessed ones
are, you must take the course they did. Let this be your endeavor, and it
shall be my fervent and hearty Prayer.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs over against the
Stocks-Market.
THE Works of the Late Learned Divine, Stephen Charnock, B. D. In ^ Vol. Fol.

(...): A Succinct and Seasonable Discourse, of the Occasions, Causes, Nature,
Rise, Growth and Remedies of Mental-Errors: Written some Months since; and now
made public, both for the healing and prevention of the Sins and Calamities
which have broken in this way upon the Churches of Christ, to the great scandal
of Religion, hardening of the Wicked, and obstruction of Reformation. Whereunto
are ^ubjoyned by way of Appendix:

I. Vindi^iarum Vendix: Being a Succinct, but full Answer to Mr. Philip Cary's
Weak Impertinent Exceptions to my Vindiciae Legis and Foederis.

II. A Synopsis of Ancient and Modern Antinomian Errors, with
Scriptural-Arguments an^ Reasons against them.

III. Sermon composed for the preventing and healing of Rents and Divisions of
the Church: by John Flavel, Preacher of the Gospel a^ Dar^^mouth in Devon: With
an Epistle of several D^^vines, relating to Dr. Crisp's Works.

A Discourse of Regeneration, Faith and Repentance, Preached at the Merchant's
Lecture in Broadstreet, by Thomas ^ole, Minister of the Gospel, London.

English Exercises, for Schoolboys to translate into Latin. Comprising all the
Rules of Grammar: And other necessary Observations; Ascending gradually from
the Meanest to higher Capacities* By J. Garr^tson, Schoolmaster: The third
Edition; with large Additions; By an eminent Schoolmaster in London.


