Fitz-Harys's Last Sham detected: Or, A Vindication of His Sacred Majesty from
those foul Aspersions cast upon him by that impudent Libel called, Fitz-Harys's
last Confession, left under his own Hand, and published by Dr. Hawkins.
By a truly Loyal Subject.
HOra mortis, hora veritatis, is an usual Saying, and the Product of a
Christian Charity, presuming all Men to be Men, and to have knowledge of an
Eternal State, and some dread of God upon their Souls: but it fails in
several Cases. 1. Where Persons in that hour have no just use of their Reason;
and so speak they know not what. 2. Where the Person is not sure of his Death,
but is muzzled up in an hope of Life, if he will speak to such a sense. 3.
Where the Person is ignorant, or Atheistical; either not knowing. or not
believing an Eternal State. Or, 4. Where the Party, though believing an Eternal
State, yet is persuaded, that the nearest way to it is by speaking false, to
save the Repute of a Sham-Religion, into which he has been Baptized, and in
which he has lived. In the first Case, the same Reason that allows no great
Credit to be given to one mad or drunk, in his Fits, while he lives, will also
discharge our Charity for giving their Dying Words no more credit. The Reason
for the second is as plain, because the only Reason of Men's charitable
Presumption in that Case, is our fancy of the Persons Apprehension, that he is
presently going before the Tribunal of the just Judge of the whole Earth, who
has told us, that all Liars shall go into the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Now he who has no such Apprehension, has no more credit due to his
Words dying, than when he was living; nay, so much less, as he valueth Life,
which he hopes may be prolonged by Lying. For the third, whosoever considers,
that the Reason why Charity directs more credit to the Words of a dying than of
a living Man, is, because it presumes a Christian, possessed with the belief of
an Immortal State, and Eternity, and of the truth of Holy Writ, will without
difficulty understand why the Words of a dying Man, that either does not know,
or, though he has heard such things, yet accounts them Romantique, deserve
no more credit than they had due to them when the Person was at furthest
distance from his Latter-end; especially if he suffers as a Malefactor: for
though it may be he either knows not or believes not that he has an
Immortal Soul, capable of eternal Happiness or Misery, yet he cannot but know
that his Repute will outlive him, and when he is dead he will be yet spoken
of, and his Relations also will be a little concerned in the Worlds Discourses
of him, may justly be presumed, not knowing of any inconvenience from false
Discourses tending to that end, to lie for his and his Families and Friends
Reputation. And in the fourth Case it is as plain, adm^^ting a Man to believe
an Eternity, and the Immortallity of the Soul in Bliss or Misery; yet (...) he
believes that the nearest way in his State to that Bliss, is to tell Lies for
the Glory of God (as he is persuaded), to uphold the Reputation of the Church
(the only true Apostolic Church), and the true Catholic Religion, he has
all the reason in the World, and it is a great piece of his Religion, to die
with a Lie in his Mouth; that is, an highly officious Lie; and so far from
guilt, that it becomes meritorious. The third of these is the Case of too many
who are no pr^fest Papists. Some scores die by the Hand of the Executioner
every year, boldly denying what must be true, or double the number of them (not
tainted with any ill Repute) must be perjured; and an easy Judgment will
determine, That a double or treble number of Persons, of known Integrity, are
rather to be believed upon their Oaths, than half or a third part of that
number are, who have been ignorant and Atheistical Persons (of no repute)
during the time of their Lives, dying without any sense of their other Sins, or
due knowledge of the Principles of Religion; which has put me into some
admiration of the Credulity of some amongst us, who will so often say of
Persons professing our own Religion, (though they have died denying the Fact
for which they have died) Doubtless they were guilty, whatever they said at the
Gallows; that they should so easily credit Papists dying Words, contrary to the
most evident proof; especially considering, that by the Principles of Popery,
and the Determination of the generality of their Directors of Consciences,
Papists may tell Lies in an hundred Cases, and in some Cases ought to do it;
which is directly contrary to all the Principles of that Religion which
Protestants profess. The fourth is the Case of Papists, who do not only judge
that jocose Lies are no Sins, and officious Lies (to save themselves, without
wronging others) but venial Sins; but pernicious Lies also, such as are to the
injury of others, and the violation of Justice, in many Cases, either not Sins,
or very little ones, attoned presently by Confession; as, in case they do not
tend to some notable damage of others; of which I hope their Priests must be
Judges. He who will read in English what their Divines say in this Case, may
find it in a Book called The Practical Divinity of Papists, p. 248, 249, etc.
And if any desire to have it from the Pens of their Divines themselves, he
shall find them there quoted to his full satisfaction. And if it be meritorious
to lie for the Catholic Cause, Lying with them in their hour of death, for the
Credit of their Church or pretended Religion, is plainly the nearest way the
Malefactors of that Religion can take to go to Heaven. But yet when any of
these Persons tell or write Lies, at such a distance from the hour of their
Death, that they have time to make Confession and take Absolution, according to
their Religious Principles, they are as innocent as the Child unborn. So that I
confess I have not been much affected with the Writings, or pretended Writings,
or Speeches of Men of this Religion, some short time before their Death, or in
their dying hour; and have had a great temptation upon me to think, that those
Protestants who have been moved at them. have been very ignorant of their
Principles, or at best too much inclinable to their Religion; they would never
else at that rate defame their own Religion, by denying or questioning the
truth of what has been said by those who have been bred and lived in the
Profession of it, and credited the Romish Religion, by a credulity of any thing
the Professors of that say, because (forsooth) they are Dying Words; as if
Protestants might (I am sure by their Principles they may not) die with Lies in
their Mouths; but Papists (who by their Principles may, and perhaps ought) may
not do the same. But amongst all the most notorious Shams of this nature, there
has been none so foul and impudent as that which we have in a late Pamphlet
entitled, The Confession of Edward Fitz-Harys Esquire written with his own Hand,
and delivered to Dr. Hawkins Minister in the Tower, 1. July, 1681, being the
day of his Execution.

I must confess, I have often wondered that the Magistrates of this Noble City,
being Men of so great Loyalty and Integrity, and who have lately been reflected
on for suffering Pamphlets with ill Reflections to His Majesty to be printed and
sold, have nor before this time bound over to the Sessions the Publishers of
that impudent Pamphlet, which reflects upon His Majesty to a degree beyond any
Pamphlet that I have met with, and such a one as no good Subject ought to have
patience for. For, considering that the Trial and Execution of that wretched
Villain were both ^cted by His Majesty, he must have entertained most vile
Thoughts of His Majesty, that can believe Fitz-Harys, saying, -- As to the
Crimes for which I die, I was no further concerned in the Libel, than as
EMPLOYED to give the King notice of what Libels and other Accusations were
against him and to this intent, and no other, I endeavored to get this Libel.
This he repeats again in his Speech at his Execution; and he further tells the
Reader, Mrs. Wall was she by whose Hands he conveyed such Libels, and he was
taken with this Libel while he was going to my Lord Clarendon or Hyde. Can any
who has one dram in him either of Loyalty or Reason, believe this? And will
not all the World both admire the Loyalty, Reason, or Policy of him who was the
Man-Midwife to this spurious Pamphlet, and the Sponsor for it too?

After such an avowed Piece of Villainy and Falsehood as this, is it at all to be
admired, that he says against my Lord Howard, or indeed any other? All which
may be reasonably presumed as true, as that he had no other concern in the
Libel than what he mentions: for, if he had no concern in the first composing
of it, or adding to it, or dispensing of it, they must have strange
Apprehensions of their Sovereign, that will think he should for a Piece of
Loyalty and Service, direct this Man's Trial and Execution. He who can believe
this, may easily believe what he says else, which cannot reasonably be thought
to be more true than this idle and scandalous Story, having as much, yea more,
the Emphasis of Dying Words (for it is repeated at his Execution again) than
any thing else he said. But it is evident, that he who drew up that Paper, had
a thousand times more regard to the Reputation of a Roman Catholic, and the
Reputation of the Church and Religion of Rome, than to the Reputation and
Honor of His Sacred Majesty, His most Honorable Council, and the Reverend
Judges: And those that publish or vouch it, fall not much less under the same
suspicion.

What Everard is, or what Parts he has to fit him to draw Libels, I cannot
tell; but it is not probable that the King, or His Honorable Council, or His
Judges, believed a word of what he says, That he had the Libel from Everard;
for then Everard, in stead of being pardoned, and used as a Witness, had
doubtless been indicted and prosecuted as the Principal, in as foul a piece of
Villainy as ever was acted upon an English Theater. For it had been the highest
Injustice imaginable, to have proceeded so severely against an Accessory, (yea,
no Accessory, if what he said before of his Employ be true) and to have let the
Principal go free.

For what he says of my Lord Howard, I shall leave it to time to discover the
truth or falsehood of it; but it is all prefaced with such an apparent Lie as he
had just before told about the Libel, and his only concern in it. Admit my
Lord Howard had had or known of such a Design as he mentions, it is hard to
imagine what could move him to communicate it to such a Fellow, who as he lived
upon others Trenchers, and was not likely to have advantaged it by his Purse;
so having never risen higher in Military Affairs than an ordinary Captain or
Ensign (in which Employ his famous Military E^ploits are yet to be made known
to the World too) it is as hard to conceive how he could advantage it by his
Arms or Interest; so as we that live abroad in the Wo^ld cannot fancy my Lord
Howard should communicate such things to him, unless his Lordship had a mind to
capacitate a Witness or two to take away his Life, of which I never heard that
his Lordship had reason to be weary.

His next Paragraph sufficiently reflects upon our two Sheriffs. Men known to
all the City to be Men of Integrity and Truth: He says they came to him in
Newgate (that is, March 12. for after that they saw him not, he was the next
day removed to the Tower,) he says. They told him that he was to be tried
within three or four days [that must be at furthest by March 14.] That the
People would Prosecute him, and the Parliament would Impeach him. Within a few
Lines after, he says, The Sheriffs brought instructions, which they said came
from the Lords and Commons, who met that day in order to Address to the King on
his behalf, if he should confirm the Instructions. Fitz-Harys could not but
know, that the Parliament was Proclaimed to meet at Oxford, March 21. The
Sheriffs came to him the Tenth of March, to inform him he would be Tried by the
Fourteenth of March, and that not at the Suit of the King (which might have
been true), but at the Prosecution of the People, upon the Impeachment of the
Commons, which could not possibly be till March 24, or 25. For they met out the
21. and two or three days must at least be allowed them to swear their Members,
and settle their Great Committees, before they could think of Impeachments. Now
is it not likely that the Sheriffs should tell him a Story which himself could
not but know was impossible, and they must know was no less than a most
impudent Lie?

In the next place he reflects upon our Renowned Recorder: He brings him in
swearing, Gods-wounds, what were you ever but a Rogue? Let all who ever
conversed with Sir George testify, whether he be a Person ever used his Tongue
to such a Dialect: It is not very probable that his first Oath should be
Gods-wounds, especially to a Prisoner, and upon no further Provocation than the
Paper mentions.

The Integrity of Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby is too well known,
for any but Papists to believe they would either of them solicit ot subborn
Men against the Duke, and the Lords Bellasis, Arundel, and Powis; besides that
Sir George Treby knew so much of what was deposed before the Committee of
Secrecy, that he could not but know, that against the Lords in the Tower there
was no need of such Arts for Witnesses, more than against Lord Stafford, if his
Conscience would have dispensed with such Villainy.

But the impudent Author of that Pamphlet will not allow Sir George the
Discretion of an ordinary Petti-Constable; for (if any body would believe him)
either Sir George, or my Lord Shaftsbury (who, by the way, was not in Newgate
with him) said to him, You know more of these Matters than any Man. Then he
adds, Sir George would have had me speak to the Consult, That the Duke was at
it, the Lords Arundel, Bellasis, and Powis were at it; you have seen them go to
it at St. Jameses, without doubt they were there: DO YOU BUT SAY IT, WE HAVE
THOSE THAT WILL SWEAR IT. Sir George is a Person not only of known Integrity,
but also Skill in the Laws, and is looked upon as a Person not ordinarily
versed in Men. Would any silly Constable of a Parish have spoken this Language
to one that had been his Prisoner? Or was there ever any such Intimacy betwixt
Fitz-Harys and Sir George, as he could be presumed to have thus exposed his
Honor and Reputation to him? Or could Sir George (had he been never so
viciously disposed) have such a confidence in a Villain, who but a day or two
before had been accused of High Treason by Sir William Waller, etc? If ever the
Popish Faction were infatuated in any thing, it certainly was in this, in
publishing to the World a Story, which if any credulous Fool could imagine the
least truth in, yet a Man of the least sense must judge it to have such degrees
of improbability in it, as a known Lie might have expected an easier Credit to.

For what he says next, retracting what he had said about Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey's Murder, and the Earl of Darby, etc. it might have obtained some
credit with some, had not it been known, that Sir Edmondbury was certainty
murdered in Somerset House; and that besides the abundant Evidence of certain
Papists murdering him, it is most certain also, that those of that Religion
were those who raised the Reports, That he was alive, and gone to marry Mrs.
Offlet: Then, That he was a melancholy Man, and had murdered himself: And had
they not lately found out one to witness be cut him down, with abundance of
more Circumstances of that nature? Though what Consults and Deliberations were
previous to it, I know not of any that discovered, till Fitz-Harys appeared:
And for his saying now, He was put upon it, he should have done well to have
said by whom; for certain it is, that what he said of this nature was in
Westminster Hall, at his Arraignment, many Weeks after the Recorder, or Sir
Robert Clayton, or the Sheriffs had spoke to him. In his Examination before Sir
George Treby and Sir Robert Clayton, 10 March, he said no more than that De Puy
told him, That that Murder was consulted at Windsor; and that in Appil, 1680.
Kelly told him at Calais, That he was one of the Persons concerned in the
Murder, and that the same was done much in manner as Prance had related it.
After that time he could not be put upon it by any that went to him to Newgate.

For the Earl of Danby, besides the Reflection cast upon him by the Narrative of
Mr. Christopher Kirkby, which tells us, That upon August 13. Mr. Kirkby
presented His Majesty with the First Discovery, brought him by Dr. Tongue, who
referred Mr. Kirkby to the Earl of Danby, ordering Dr. Tongue and Mr. Kirkby to
wait on the Earl the next Morning, August 14. which they did; but nothing was
done in it, nor a Person apprehended of six Weeks after, and that upon another
Information, given in to Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, Sept. 6. Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey read not the Information, as appears by the Narrative, it having been
Three Weeks before delivered to the Earl of Danby. September 28. (says that
Narrative) was the first time Sir Edmondbury Godfrey read the Informations,
when also he took the Copy of them; then began the Prosecution, full Six Weeks
after the Earl of Danby first had them: This begat in some, some hard thoughts
of the Earl; but yet so free was the Protestant Party from charging the Earl of
Danby with that Guilt, that when a Sheet of Paper came out, called, Reflections
on the Earl of Danby, with reference to that Murder, a Vindication of him from
that Charge was also published, by him that put out Mr. Kirkby's Narrative, and
ordinarily sold with it: many sober Persons apprehending, that the Design of
that Paper reflecting on his Lordship was merely Popish, that the Papists by it
might throw on the Earl the Odium of that Murder. Though it was true, the
Publisher of that Paper seemed not to answer all that was in the Paper of
Reflections; for though it sufficiently vindicates the Earl from any Capacity of
Concealment of Treason, His Majesty having had the first Information, and
giving the Earl the Informations brought to him; yet others thought it did not
vindicate him from the Non-presecution of the Informations from Augvst 14. to
September. 28. and not prosecuting it then until Sir Edmondbury Godfrey had
received the same Informations, and given them in to the Council, keeping a
Copy of them: And many wondered that there was nothing said to what was
suggested in that Paper, That Sir Edmondbury Godfrey dined at the Earl of
Danby's that day in which he was murdered; and that none is yet discovered who
saw him that Afternoon, after he had been in Mr. Christian's Company (who was
my Lord of Danby's Gentleman) till he was murdered. But it sufficiently
appears how little any considerable Protestants judged my Lord of Danby
concerned in that matter, till Fitz-Harys himself discovered what he here
retracts. Here any may judge how likely he was to be put upon it, unless it
were by his Confessor, who might have a g(...)e the Odium of that foul Act from
off their Church or Party.

He says farther, And what I said concerning Fitz-Patrick was serced out of
me, and what I said concerning him is not true. This looks so like an
Interpolation of a Popish Priest (to clear their Church), as it is hardly
possible any should believe it to be any other. Who charged Fitz-Patrick? or
thought him more concerned in this Plot than most of their Priests, till
Fitz-Harys first stained his Reputation? How then could any body force an
Accusation of him out of him?

Nor does his further calling of God and all his Angels to witness the Truth of
what he said, or his renouncing Mercy at the hands of God Almighty, at all
contribute to the Credit of what he said: For there are several Lies in it,
evident to all our English World; and those kind of Appeals and Attestations,
where the Matter is so, signify nothing, but that such of that Religion as use
them are Atheists as well as Papists, or have a great confidence in their
Confessors Absolutions after such Confessions: And it may be, to give some due
time for Confession and Absolution after such notorious things, it is of late
that they have rather chosen to write something aforehand, than to speak much
at the Hour of the Execution.

It much affects some credulous Persons, that he, in the beginning of his
Confession, declares, That he does profess and declare his Religion in the
general to be that which has been truly and anciently delivered in the Four
first General Councils; and in particular, my Belief is that true Faith of a
Christian briefly contained in those Three Creeds commonly called The Apostles
Creed, St. Athanasius's, and The Nicene Creed. And I die a Member, and in the
Communion of Christ's Holy Catholic Church, hoping for Mercy through the alone
Merits of the Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Whether Fitz-Harys was of Parts enough to draw up this Confession himself, or
who drew it for him, I cannot tell; sure I am, it was drawn with subtlety
enough, and I fear with more subtlety than sincerity. The Design I perceive is
to leave us in the dark, as to making any judgment whether he died a Protestant
or a Papist. That he did not die a Protestant Dissenter is evident enough; for
although any of them would at their death have professed their hope for Mercy
through the alone Merits of Jesus Christ, and also have agreed to the Articles
of Faith expressed in the Three Creeds; yet none of them would (especially
having not read the Four first General Councils) dying, have declared their
Faith at adventures, according to what they Decreed; nor admitted any General
in this Case, but the Doctrine contained in Holy Writ. So as the Scuffle about
this Man's Bones must be betwixt Dr. Hawkins and the Romish Priests; the one on
the behalf of the Church of England, the other on the behalf of the Church of
Rome: nor dare I determine who has the Right. For, both Papists and knowing
Protestants are agreed in the Doctrine contained in the Three Creeds; both
Parties will own a Communion of Christ's Holy Catholic Church; both of them
will declare their hope for Mercy through the Merits of Jesus Christ: The Word
[alone] is all the Papist will stumble at; and, when they come to die, they
will, in conformity to their great Cardinal Bellarmine, own that too, as the
safest. So as nothing appears from this Paragraph (too subtlely drawn for a
Soldier of Fortune to be indeed the Author of the Draught) but Fitz-Harys might
die a Papist or a Protestant.

But though I believe this Confession calculated for the purpose to give credit
to a Protestant Plot, yet it will not reach the End; for in the first Words of
his Examination, taken before Sir George Treby and Sir Robert Clayton, May 10.
1681. he says, That he was born in Ireland, and is the Son of Sir Edward
Fitz-Harys; and that he was bred, and is a Roman Catholic. So that while he
was a Plotter, we are sure he was a Papist, from his own Confession; and it is
not likely he was any other when he told so many Lies for the Credit of the
Roman Catholic Cause, as he has done in his Confession. Let them that desire
such a Member of their Church, rejoice in his Memory.

That which is most to be admired is, to see the Midwifery of a Doctor of the
Church of England to this Monster (if not Bastard), and the various Arts
expressed in his Attestation, to pursuade the World that the Contents are true.
He tells us, he was perfectly by him first convinced that there was no hopes of
Life for him; (so as he did it not, it seems, to save his Life.) Indeed he
might have been perfectly convinced of this long since: The Commons in
Parliament could not do it; for as they had Impeached him, so they were bound
in Honor to make their Charge good. The Lords were not like to have found so
notorious a Malefactor Not guilty; and his dying Reflections upon His Majesty
let all the World see, he could have no hope of Mercy from him. But what his
Wife might, from some Suggestions of Persons of her own Sex, persuade him, who
knows? And therefore how Dr. Hawkins could assure the World he was so perfectly
convinced there was no hope of Mercy for him, I cannot tell. I much less
understand to what purpose the same Doctor tells us of his kneeling down and
protesting the truth of several Paragraphs, unless it were to induce the World
to believe he spoke truth; when it is impossible any should believe it, that
has any reverent or indeed decent thoughts of His Majesty, or that will not
believe His Majesty's Privy Council and Ministers of Justice so unrighteous, as
to punish the Accessory, and let the Principal go free; nay, so severely to
punish one that was no Accessory, but a Servant to His Majesty, and that by
the appointment of some, first to get, then to acquaint His Majesty with
Seditious and Treasonable Libels, for what he did in that Service: Or who
will not believe Sir George Treby and Sir Robert Clayton, and both the
Sheriffs at London, not only egregiously wicked, but every whit as rash and
vveak, and very unfit for so great Trusts. He that can get leave of his Reason
to believe all these things, may believe Fitz-Harys's Confession: But he that
cannot, may see reason to adore, and to be thankful for the good Providence of
God, in suffering such a Villain for ever to defame Dying Words of Papists, and
to disabuse a company of poor credulous Souls, who have had so much Faith to
spare for their Shams, upon this single account, because they were the Words
of Dying Men. That when Gavan's Lie, in his Dying Speech, about the One
Mariana amongst the Jesuits that had held it lavvful for private Persons to
kill the King, when it is known it is the avovved Doctrine of multitudes of
them in their Printed Books, would not convince people, it being only what
Learned Men could by Reading find to be a Lie in a Dying Month; nor my Lord
Stafford's Denial of his knowledge of Turbervill, when the contrary
afterward was made appear by multitudes of Depositions printed by Smith;
People might at last have so plentiful a Proof of the falsehood of their Dying
Words, as ordinary Persons might understand, and none of any reasonable modesty
could deny. And how he who has taken such pains to attest the most impudent
Libel ever printed, will for it acquit himself to His most Sacred Majesty, to
the whole Nation, and particularly to those worthy Patriots who are so abused
in it, will be his, not my Concern to study. He who observed Fitz-Harys's
Demeanor from the first to the last, could not but discern him, after his
first Apprehension, ready to say, deny, affirm, or to do any thing, to save his
Life: And if these were indeed his own Words, and he had not drank too much
Brandy before he vvrote them, (as many thought he had the Morning he came to
his Trial) it is hard to imagine what, but some hopes of saving his Life,
could make him the Author of so impudent a Story; unless some Popish Priest had
persuaded him it was the next way to Heaven, and secured him a sudden Pardon
and Absolution for the Sin of what he did upon his Confession. But after this,
it may well be hoped, we shall hear no more of the undoubted Credit to be
given to Men's Dying Words.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin. 1681.


