THE LAST SPEECH OF Edward Fitz-harris, At the time of his EXECUTION AT TYBURN
The First of July, 1681.
THIS day, pursuant to the Sentence passed at the King's Bench Bar at
Westminster, on Mr. Edward Fitz-harris, for Treason, etc. he was near the Tower
Gate, on Tower Hill, delivered into the Custody of the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, viz. Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish Esquires; who upon the Place
signed a Discharge for him, to the Lieutenant of the Tower. Then he was put on
a Sledge, and thence conveyed through the City of London to Newgate, where he
overtook Oliver Plunket, who was just before on another Sledge, passing to the
same Place of Execution.

Where being come, (soon after Plunket's private Prayers, etc.) Fitz-harris
asked Captain Richardson whether the Sheriffs had a Warrant for the disposal of
his Body, Captain Richardson answered Yes. Then he desired Dr. Hawkins
Assistance, which the Sheriffs ^eadily granted, and called for him to go to him
on the Sledge; which the Doctor did, and on his Knees embraced him, and
con^inued a private Discourse with him for some time.

Sheriff Bethel asked Mr. Fitz-harris, What have you to say? Mr. Fitz-harris
answered, The Doctor of the Tower would answer for him, he having left his Mind
with him,

Mr. Sheriff Bethel. You will do well to discharge your Conscience.


Fitz harris. I have left it all with the Doctor in Writing, under my hand, who
will communicate it with Witness to the World.


Doctor Martin of Wood-street being at the same time in the presence of the
Sheriffs, desired Master Fitz-harris to declare whether he died a Protestant or
a Papist. He answered. Having left his mind fully with Doctor Hawkins, he hoped
it might be satisfactory. The Doctor replied, it would be more satisfactory to
declare himself there, and that it was no shame to die a Protestant. To which
Master Fitz harris replied as before.

Then Master Fitz-harris said, Good People, This infamous kind of Death is much
more irksome to me than Death it self: Such Judgments as these my Sins against
God may justly bring upon me, and I do most humbly submit unto it. But as to
the Crimes which I now die for, I take God to witness, I was no further
concerned in the Libel, than to discover to the King what Practices of that
kind were against him, being employed to that end, though those that employed
me refused to do me Justice at my Trial. And I call God to Witness, I never had
a Farthing of Money of the King in my life, but on the Account of the like
Service. And as to the Witnesses that have sworn against me, I do here solemnly
declare, now at my Death, that I have not seen the French Ambassador since the
beginning of the breaking out of the Plot, neither have I had any Acquaintance
with him. And as to his Confessor, I never spoke with him in my life; neither
have I had any dealing, either directly or indirectly, in my life with them,
though Sir W. Waller and the rest swore most falsely to the contrary. And how
like it is that the French Ambassador would give three thousand Crowns for
writing that Libel, I leave the World to judge. What I may further declare, I
have left with Doctor Hawkins. I forgive all the World, and do hope that God
will forgive me. I beg the Prayers of all good People for a happy Passage into
the other World.

Master Fitzharris desired to know of the Sheriffs, whether his Body might not
be at the disposal of his Wife, without Quartering. Upon which the Sheriff read
him the Warrant.

LONDON, Printed for R. Harbottle, and sold by R. Janeway, in
Queen's-Head-Alley, in Paternoster Row, 1681.


