^ffigies of John Flavell.

Aetatis suoe. 59 An^o Dom 1689.



Englands Duty, Under the Present GOSPEL LIBERTY. FROM Revel. III. verse. 20.
Wherein is Opened The Admirable Condescension and Patience of Christ, in
waiting upon trifling and obstinate Sinners. The wretched State of the
Unconverted. The nature of Evangelical Faith, with the Difficulties, Trials,
and Means thereof. The Riches of Free Grace in the offers of Christ, Pardon,
and Peace to the worst of Sinners. The invaluable Privileges of Union, and
Communion, granted to all that receive him, and the great Duty of opening to
him at the present Knocks and Calls of the Gospel; with the danger of
neglecting these Loud (and it may be) last Knocks and Calls of Christ,
discovered. By John Flavell, Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth in Devon.

Romans II. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? London, Printed for Matthew Wotton at the Three Daggers near the
Inner Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1689.

Licensed,

September. 29th. 1688.
AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
THE following Discourse comes to thy hand in that Native plainness wherein it
was Preached. I was conscienciously unwilling to alter it, because I found by
experience, the Lord had blessed and prosper'd it in that dress, far beyond any
other composures on which I had bestowed more pains. Let it not be censured, as
vanity or ostentation, that I here acknowledge the goodness of God in leading
me to, and blessing my poor Labors upon this Subject: Who, and what am I, that
I should be continued, and again employed in the Lords Harvest, and that with
success and encouragment; when so many of my Brethren, with their much richer
Furnitures of Gifts and Graces, have, in my time, been called out of the
Vineyard, and are now silent in the Grave! It Is true, they enjoy what I do not;
and it is as true, I am capable of doing some Services for God which they are
not. In Preaching these Sermons I had many occasions to reflect upon the
mystical sense of that Scripture, Amos 9. 13. The Plowman shall overtake the
Reaper, and the Treader of Grapes, him that sows Seed. Sowing and Reaping
time trod so close upon one another, that (in all humility I speak it to the
praise of God) it was the busiest and blessedst time I ever saw, since I first
Preached the Gospel.

England has now a day of special Mercy: There is a wide door of opportunity
opened to it; O that it might prove an effectual door! It Is transporting and
astonishing, that after all the high and horrid provocations, the Atheism,
Profaneness, and bitter enmity against Light and Re^ormation; this sweet Voice
is still heard in England, Behold, I stand at the door and knock. The Mercies
and Liberties of this day are a new Trial obtained for us by our potent
Advocate in the Heavens: If we bring forth fruit, well, if not, the Ax lies at
the root of the Tree. Let us not be secure. Jerusalem was the City of the great
King: The seat of his Worship and Symbols of his presence were fixed there. It
was the joy of the whole Earth; the House of Prayer for all Nations; thither
the Tribes went up to Worship; the Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of
Israel. For there were set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of
David, Psalm. 122. 4, 5. These privileges she enjoyed through the succession of
many Ages, and had ramained the glory of all Nations to this day, had she
known, and improved, in that day the things that belonged to her peace; but
they neglected their season, rejected their mercies, and miserably perished in
their sins: for there ever was, and will be found, an inseparable connection
betwixt the final rejection of Christ, and the destruction of the Rejecters,
Matthew. 22. 5, 6, 7. The contemplation whereof drew those compassionate Tears
from the Redeemers eyes, when he beheld it in his descent from the Mount of
Olives, Luke 19. 41, 42.

Let all that are wise in Heart henceforth depose their animosities; sadly
reflect on their past follies, encourage and assist the Labors of their
Brethren in the Lords Harvest; and rejoice that God has set them at liberty by
Law, whose assistance, in so great an opportunity, is so necessary and
desirable: It is against the Laws of Wisdom and Charity, to envy the Liberty,
and much more the Success, of our Brethren, 1 Cor. 13. 4. If the Workmen
contend and scuffle in a catching Harvest, who but the owner suffers damage by
it? If after so miraculous, recent, and common a Salvation as this, we still
retain our old prejudices and bitter envyings; if we smite with the Pen and
Tongue when we cannot with the Hand; and study to blast the Reputations and
Labors of our Brethren; and still hate those we cannot hurt. In a word, if we
still bite and devour one another, we shall be devoured one of another: let us
not lay the fault upon others, we our selves have been the Authors and
Instruments of our own ruin; and this must be the inscription upon our
Toombstone, O England, thou have Destroyed thy Self. I am more afraid of the
rooted enmity, and fixed prejudices, that are to be found in many against
holiness, and the serious Professors of it; and inflexible obstinacy and dead
formality in many others, (the tokens of a tremendous infatuation) than I am of
all the whispered fears from other Hands, or common Enemies upon our borders.

To prevent these mischiefs, and promote zeal and unanimity among the Ministers
of the Gospel, I have presumed to address to them in the following Epistle. I
judged it necessary on several reasons to write it in Latin, as what allowed me
a greater freedom of expression, than might seem convenient in the common
Language. I am conscious of my own unworthiness to be their Monitor, and of the
defects their Judicious Eyes will easily discern, in the style wherein it is
written; and yet can promise my self a becoming reception of what is so
faithfully, seasonably, and honestly designed for their good. I am satisfied
that no candid and ingenuous Person will put Words upon the Rack, quarrel a
Similitude, or expose a Trifle, when he finds the design Honest, and the matter
Good and Necessary.

As to the Treatise it self, thou will find it a Persuasive to open thy Heart
to Christ. Thy Soul, Reader, is a magnificent Structure built by Christ; such
stately Rooms as thy Understanding, Will, Conscience, and Affections; are too
good for any other to Inhabit. If thou be in thy Unregenerate state, then he
solemnly demands, in this Text, admission into the Soul he made, by the consent
of the Will: which if thou refuse to give him, then Witness is taken that
Christ once more demanded entrance into thy Soul which he made, and was denied
it. If thou have opened thy Heart to him, thou will, I hope, meet somewhat in
this Treatise that will clear thy Evidences, and cheer thy Heart; Pray, Read,
Ponder, and Apply.

I am, Thine and the Churches Servant John Flavell.

EPISTOLA Dilectissimis, and in Christo prequam Reverendis Evangelii Ministris;
nunc demum miranda Dei providentia libertati restitutis: Senioribus quidem
supplex, Iunioribus vero and Candidatis Paraenetica.
Patres, Fratresque in Christo Colendissimi,
QUamvis nobis non convenit pro arbitratu nostro cudere Metaphoras, eas tamen
amplecti convenit, quas ipse Spiritus Scriptura signavit: signavit autem and
graphice depinxit exulantis Ecclesiae liberationem, ingruentis and amoeni veris
suavibus deliciis, Cant. II. v. 11, 12.

Sub Sole vernalitellus velut parens benignissima sinus suos recludit, herbas
varias expromit, prata florum copia condecorat, Arbores prioribus viduatae,
novis frondibus se induunt: pulso frigore, aer tepet; pecudes ubera tumentia
domum referunt, Avia tunc Avibus resonant virgulta
Canoris.
Virgil. revirescunt, and rident omnia. Tempus quidem propitium, beneficum; and
rebus omnibus, praecipue viventibus mirifice commodum ac amicum.

Quae omnia a Brightmanno nostro, summa, quidem industria, ac miro ingenii
acumine accommodantur insigni isti temporis periodo, qua Cyrus Edictum suum
(nunquam satis laudandum) de liberando populo emittebat. Consimilis
providentiae radii animantes, veluti Sol Arietem ingrediens, nos semi-mortuos
revirescere fecerunt.

Non nos latet; (adhuc enim crudescunt vulnera) quam dura and acerba a multis
retro annis conscientiae causa sustinuimus; heu! quae non vidimus! quae non
perpessi fuimus indigna! Durante hac hyeme aspera, tristi, and omnimodo
molesta, vi^^imus aequora horridis tumentia procellis; quibus aliqui territi ac
attoniti, cuilibet vento vela dedere. Vidimus Arbores tam fructu, quam forma
aliis praecellentes, nimbosis ventis prosternatas: alias sine fructu vel fronde
quasi sideratas. Montes crebris pruinis albicantes, flumina glacie
concrescentia, terras nivibus obrutas, imo sepultas. Alituum pecudumque greges
famelicos undique dispersos, and angustiis pressos. Aucupes astutos retia sua
non fine successu dispandentes. Ut verbo absolvam, vidimus eheu! Ecclesiam
Christi propriis pennis transfixam. Rempublicam legibus fundatam legibus fere
subversam, inauspicata omnia, and in deterius indies vergentia.

Diu direque in hoc malorum pelago agitati fuimus. Juvenes inibamus, Senes
emergimus; idem nobis evenit quod in obsidione Tyri recordatur, Ezekiel. XXIX. 18.
Omne caput decalvatum, and omnis humerus depilatus est. Attamen haec omnia
molesta potius quam miranda illi videntur, qui serio perpendit verba fatidica
magni Apostoli, 1 Timothy III. 1. (...). ^act. lib. 70. de divina praemio. p. 578,
579.
De quibus temporibus formidolosis ita Lactantius, Propinquante igitur hujus
seculi termino, humanarum rerum statum commutari necesse est; and in deterius
nequitia in valescente prolabi: ut etiam nostra haec tempor a quibus iniquitas
and malitia usque ad summum gradum crevit, in illius tamen insanabilis mali
comparationem foelicia and prope aurea possint judicari. Ita enim justitia
rarescet, ita impietas and avaritia, and cupiditas, and libido crebrescent, ut
si qui tum forte fuerint boni, praedae sint sceleratis, ac divexentur undique
ab injustis. Soli autem mali opulenti sint, boni vero in omnibus contumeliis
atque in egestate jactentur. Confundetur omne jus, and leges interibunt, nihil
quisquam tune habebit nisi aut male quaesitum, aut manu defensum, audacia and
vi omnia possidebunt. Non fides in hominibus, non pax, non humanitas, non
pudor, non veritas erit, atque ita securitas, neque reginem, neque requies a
malis ulla; omnis enim terra tumultuabitur, frement ubique bella. Omnes gentes
in armis erunt, and seinvicem oppugnabunt. Civitates inter se finitimae
preliabuntur; tunc per agrabit clades orbem, metens omnia, and tanquam messem
cuncta prosternans: cujus vastitatis and confusionis haec erit causa, quod
Romanum nomen quo nunc regitur Orbis, (horret animus dicere, sed dicendum, quia
futurum est) tolletur de terra.

Quid tibi videtur Lector? nostrane heic tempora describuntur, an longius
expectandum donec hoc hominum genus pestiferum in Scenam prodeat? nemo sane de
iis dubitet quae sanis ac illaesis sensibus persentiscit.

Caeterum Deus tandem nostri misertus, virum pietatis amantem, and very
studiosum excitavit; qui summis laboribus and maximis periculis causam suam
fortiter assereret, and faciem terrae renovaret. Secundum hoc tempus dicetur,
quid operatus est Deus! Nunc omni impedimento sublaturo, horrida procella
sedata; (quae nos huc illuc sicut stipulas dispergebat) Deus noster propitius
nos ita alloquitur, Surge Amica mea and veni, ecce enim hyems transiit, pluvia
praeteriit, flores conspiciuntur in terra, tempus minuritionis advenit; and vox
Turturis auditur in terra nostra. q. d. jam satis domi latitasti, potes in
publicum prodire. Signa Salutis, and incitamenta laboris undiquaque apparent.
Sic hyemis asperitas nobis commendat suavitatem Veris.

Ad me quod attinet, quam primum vox laeta libertatis aurem attigerat, proprio
and exoptato operi meipsum statim accingere cepi. Si enim tanta Dulcedo in
mathematicarum artium studiis invenitur, and cum quis eam degustaverit, quafi
Circeis poculis captus se non finit ab illis divelli: dulcissimum erit labores
nostros quamvis exantlatos, gloria Christi, and animarum salute ultro
impendere. Gaudio igitur non vulgari gavisus sum, quod demum falcem meam fere
rubigine exesam, in messem Domini (...) immittarem. Gratias ago Deo meo
benignissimo, qui opportunitatis o^tium non tantum tempestive apperuit, quin
etiam (mihi supplicanti) Salubrioris doctrinae (...) suppeditavit; multisque
jamdudum benedixit.

Has^e ergo primitias restitutae libertatis, quales, quales, quas autem non
pauci acrius efflagitarunt, ut in apricum cum feram; vobis perquam humillime
offero. Venia sit fratri, omnium minimo; seque infra omnes Christi Legatos
merito aestimanti; si signata and celeberrima hac occasion, audacius paulo
quam pro eruditionis aut experientiae modulo, sese efferat Christianus ^ervor.

Pompaticam eloquentiam non ambiit Concionator vester. Oratione populari, non
polita; pressa, non praeculta; per totum usus fui. Non minus enim de rebus
Theologicis dicendum duxi, quam de Philosophicis Cicero. Istiusmodi res dicere
ornate puerile est, plane autem and perspicue expedire posse, docti and
intelligentis viri. Merito displiceat, si doctrinam Christi crucifixi; stylo
non crucifixo, hoc est turgido pertractarem.

Hisce praemissis.
I.
Laetemur liberate nostra laetitia debite temperata, laetitia dico, suis
ponderibus aeque librata; and utrinque munita, peccatorum sc. praeteritorum
moestitia, nec non futurorum metu. Legimus Ier. XXIX. 12. de voce gemitus ac
fletus qua sub tempus liberationis agnoscerent fideles pristina sua peccata;
quibus Deum lacessiverant; and eadem emollitis cordibus ex animis lugerent. Et
quam congrua fuit vox ista Ecclesiae, vel ad jacta fundamenta redivivi Templi?
vox laeta vociferatione, ac uberi fletu aequaliter mista, Ezra III. 10. Multi
flebant vace magna, multi vociferatione ex laetitia efferebant vocem; ita ut
populus non internosceret sonum vociferationis ex laetitia, a voce fletus
populi. Nec pudet sanctos lapsus sui and dedecoris ad gloriam Dei meminisse;
nihil enim nobis decedit, quod cedit in illius honorem. Venustae admodum and
amabiles conspectu suo erunt facies nostrae, cum lachrymas plorantes
gratulabundis lachrymis supervenientes viderit! very poenitentis est flere
commissa, ne flenda committeret.

Praecessit nobis Asaphus laudabili ^uo poenitentiae exemplo, Psalm. LXXIX. 8.
Ne recorderis (in quit) iniquitatem priorum, etc. recordari Deus dicitur
iniquitatum, cum peccata quasi ad calculum vocans, and tam magnitudinem, quam
multitudinem horum aestimans, punire constituit. Loquitur de Deo more humano,
homines enim gravius offensi, and poenas de liberis suis sumpturi; in memoriam
sibi vocant priora delicta omnia quae liberi commiserunt: Revocemus itidem, and
ex animis ploremus desidiam nostram praeteritam libertatem male concomitantem.
Ardenti desiderio non ita flagravimus; Ex imo pectore non ingemiscimus: Ex
cerebro saepe, non medullitus proloquuti fuimus. Nimis frigide de rebus vere
tremendis inter orandum and praedicandum disseruimus. Antecessores superioris
seculi non aequis passibus sequuti sumus. Gravitate morum, and utilitate
sermonum majestatem religionis non conservavimus. Quorum causa Deus noster
justam concepit iram, eamque praeteritis calamitatibus patefecit, and
patefaciendo de futuro nos palam admonuit.

II.
Proinde Fratres in Visceribus Christi enixe postulo, Secundo.
ne excidat vobis illud Paulinum, Si fieri (...), and quantum in vobis est, cum
omnibus hominibus in pace viventes, Romans XII. 18. Duplex additur limitatio.
Prima, Si fieri potest, nempe salva justitia, pietate, ac veritate: Ratio
veritatis non est sic habenda, ut pacis cura prorsus negligatur, nec unitas
talis ambienda qua veritas deseratur: sed (...), ut ipse loquitur, Ephesians. IV. 15.
Neutram enim ex animo diligunt (ut recte Davenantius noster) qui utramque non
diligunt. Christiani ergo, (...) maxim ornant Christianum nomen. Altera,
quantum in vobis est, (i. e.) omnium amici este, si ^ieri potest, si non potest
utrinque, certe ex vestra part amici este. Veritas inter im probos odium
parit, and pietas semper invisa est, cujus rei hanc rationem reddit Lactantius,
Lact. de justitia l. 5. p. 382, 383.
Quod is qui peccat vult habere liberum peccandi locum; non aliter se putat
malefactorum voluptate securius perfrui posse, quam si nemo sit cui delicta non
placeant. Ergo tanquam scelerum and malitiae suae testes extirpare funditus
nituntur, and tollere; gravesque sibi putant tanquam vita eorum coarguatur:
horum igitur amicitia pietas periclitatur.

Alios habemus formam pietatis induentes, Bernardi Sermo 33* in ^antic.
sed qui vim ejus abnegarint. De his ita questus est Bernardus, Vae generationi
huic a fermento Pharisaeorum quod est hypocrisis; si tamen hypocrisis dici
debet, quam jam latere prae abundantia non valet, and prae impudentia non
quaerit. Serpit hodie putida Tabes per omne corpus Ecclesiae: and quo latius,
eo desperatius: eoque periculosius, quo interius. Nam si insurgeret apertus
inimicus haereticus, mitteretur for as. Si violentus inimicus, absconderet se
forsitan ab eo. Nunc vero quem ejiciet, aut a quo absconderet se? omnes Amici,
and omnes inimici; omnes necessarii, and omnes Adversarii. Omnes domestici, and
nulli pacifici. Omnes proximi, and omnes quae sua sunt quaerentes. Ministri
Christi sunt, and serviunt Antichristo. Honor ati incedunt de bonis Domini, cum
Domino honorem non deferunt, etc. De his dicam, in Consilium eorum non veniat
anima mea, in Coetu illorum non sit gloria mea.

Multi vero sunt pacis and veritatis studiosi, in fundamentalibus
consentientes, and contra communes reformatae religionis hosts pariter
conscripti; qui nihilominus proh dolor! in non necessariis dissiliunt, and suos
utrinque ad parts and pugnas vocant. Dum pugna haec hostilis gliscit inter
fratres, hostibus suis perpetuas insultandi and nocendi opportunitates
suppeditant. Si quis huic morbo epidemico medicamentum reperire posset, been de
Ecclesia merueret: at cum tot annorum experientia sit compertissimum, illud
vix, aut ne vix fieri posse pulvere scholastico luctand^, aut conscientiam
poenis premendo; consultius esset omnia haec certamina consopire, quam frustra
luctando Ecclesiam dilaniare; and tandem ad utilissimam, si non unicam istam
pacis regulam redire, Phil. III. 16. In eo ad quod usque pervenimus, eadem
incedamus regula, etc. cui convenit saluberrimum istud Tossani consilium,
Academiae Tubingensi his verbis traditum,

Tollenda merito omnis criminandi and maledicendi amarulentia, and judicum
filio Dei domino nostro Jesus Christo ipsisque posteris nostris, qui certaminis
non Auctores, sed spectatores, aequius sepositis affectibus judicaturi sunt
permittendum. Adversarii nostri etiamnum vivunt, and quotidie audaciores fiunt.
Noctes and dies hoc agunt and meditantur, ut exortum Evangelii lumen
extinguant; antiquasq: tenebras revocent. Interea nos qui initio unanimos per
Dei gratiam Evangelium enunciavimus, conversis armis in mutua vulnera ruimus;
gratumque hostibus spectaculum exhibemus: qui plus praesidii atque fiduciae in
concertationibus nostris, quam inani causae suae fundamento collocant.

Iterum iterumque respiciamus illud Apostoli, Gal. V. 15. Quod si alii aliis
mordetis ac exeditis; videte ne vicissim alii ab aliis consumamini. Quod enim
Cicero de clarorum virorum discordiis dixit, id Davenantius noster de
Ecclesiarum discordiis non dubitat affirmare; non alios solere esse illarum
exitus, nisi aut universarum interitum, aut victricium in reliquas injustum
dominatum. Valde metuendum est ne hisce diuturnis and funestis contentionibus
(quod Deus avertat) suum omnes accelerent interitum. Nec dubito discordias
inter pios extingui posse, quicquid in contrarium aliqui obtendunt, si
quorundam mentes ab omnis suspicionis, irae, ac invidiae spumis and scoriis
been expurgatae essent: En Fratres, quam propriam tempestivamque (...)
prudentissimus noster Medicus nobis omnibus hoc tempore adaptavit! det Deus
effectum desideratum, Ne, Vulnus in antiquum redeat male firma cicatrix.

Pii ubique gemunt praesentem and deplorandum Ecclesiae statum: and ex clade
nonnullorum, conjecturam faciunt quid periculi immineat universis.

-- En quo discordia gentes,
Perduxit miseras!
Nec potest quisquam in^icias ire sanctos and sapientes ex utraque part
(Quantum inter se dissentiunt) in hoc saltem unanimos esse, quod haec non sunt
litigandi, sed orandi, and redintegrandi tempora; tales enim voces ubique
effundunt, Convertat Deus cor patrum ad filios, et cor filiorum ad patres; ne
veniens percutiat terram anathemate. Suis non recte consulunt, qui ob
Controversias nunquam fortasse inter doctos terminandas, perpetuis dissidiis
lacerant Ecclesiam. Fratres nostri qui serio profitentur se nulla alia causa a
nobis dissentire in minutioribus Religionis, quam formidine peccandi; ambabus
ulnis sunt amplectendi: Cito igitur tollantur omnia offendicula, ne bis
impingeremus in eundem lapidem. Si iterum collidimur, frustulatim frangimur;
nolumus illis hanc laudem concedere, quod illi pacis and concordiae
studiosiores quam nos evaderent; in fundamentalibus and necessariis
conformitatem exigite, in (...) and non necessariis debitam, amplam, and non
hamatam libertatem concedite. Nemo sibi arroget li^entiam dividendi Ecclesiam,
and dissolvendi fraternam unitatem ex ea causa quam nec Christus, nec Apostoli,
nec Ecclesia pure primitiva unquam approbasset.

Omnes Controversias^e medio tolli non posse concedimus, sed omnibus discordiis
valedicere poteramus; opinionum enim varietas, and Opinantium unitas non sunt
(...): Quid facit in pectore Christiano Luporum feritas, Canum rabies, venenum
lethale Serpentum, cruenta saevitia bestiarum? ut olim Cyprianus. Nova atque
inaudita (inquit Gregorius) est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus exigit fidem;
facessat ergo omnis criminandi and maledicendi amarulentia; tranquillus Deus
tranquillet omnia.

III.
Praecipue ac prae omnibus suppliciter vos rogo, ut sepositis omnibus levioris
naturae studiis, hoc unum intendatis, quomodo animas vobis commissas, (quibus
omnia terrena sunt long postponenda) Christo lucrifaciatis: Hic labor, hoc
opus est.

Procul absit a vobis detestanda illa donorum parsimonia, mundanorum immunda
cura, corporis vilissimi nimis cautela; non magnum nobis videatur vilem sudorem
nostrum illarum gratia dispendere, cum Christus pretiosissimum suum sanguinem
tam libere ac libentissime effudit. Si Domini talenta sudario abscondimus, ubi
fudaria inveniemus cruentas lachry mas nostras pro tanto facinore exsiccare?

Recolligite Fratres, omne tempus nobis impensum, requiretur a nobis qualiter
sit expensum. Quantum temporis inutili silentio jamdudum amisimus! Sed inter
omnia gravamina sub quibus diu gemuistis, nullum persuasissimum habeo aegrius
tulistis quam oribus occlusis inter animas egenas tam diu latitasse; praesens
opportunitas labilis est, quod ad futurum attinet, nubes post pluvias
revertantur: Surgite ergo viri optimi, agite hoc negotium, and erit Dominus
vobiscum. Communes carnis querelas despicite, Coronam istam Coelestem
prospicite. Splendebunt prudentes quasi splendour expansi, and qui multos
instituunt, quasi stellae in sempiterna secula.

Hac spe labefactantes animos erigamus, and muniamus adversus irrisiones and
molestias quas Evangelii nomine expectandas habemus; quae non induenda viscera
misericordiae, cum tales de salute recuperenda, and exitio ad quod in instanti
abripi possunt, vitando, cum interim nihil minus de se cogitant; alloquimur?
conqueritur apud Amesium Author laudatus, Casus Consc. lib. 3
Verba vitae in quorundam doctorum et praedicatorum labiis quantum ad virtutem
et efficaciam, p. 116.
moriuntur. Adeo enim tepide, adeo remiss verba Dei enunciant, ut extincta in
labiis eorum penitus videantur; unde sicut ipsi frigidi sunt et extincti, sic
frigidos et extinctos relinquunt. Novi quendam propter hoc de civitate
Parisiaca aufugisse: Dicebat enim, se praedicationibus and lectionibus
Parisiensibus de die in diem, amplius, and amplius infrigidari, and se timere,
si moram diuturniorem ibi traheret, ne tandem spirituali gelicidio
extingueretur: propter quod transtulit se ad viros ferventes, velut ad carbones
vivos, ut inter eos conversans ardorem nutriret, and augeret.

Attollite oculos, and regiones spectate; albae enim jam sunt ad messem. Nonne
videtis vosmet esurientium animarum turmis undique stipatos, hianti ore,
solicitisque oculis a vobis panem poscentibus? si viscera Pastorum Principis
nobis insunt, pascamus oves suas. Nonnulli senectute and variis aerumnis pene
confecti sunt, alii minutiis Scripturae majestatem minuunt; auresque vulgi vano
verborum strepitu complent, aut lenociniis titillant: Interea, si vos quoque
qui omnigena donorum copia locupletati estis, and opportunitatem tam commodam
and amicam habetis, zelo Dei and animarum non ardesceretis, horrescam
prospicere funestissimum ac vere miserabilem omnium exitum.

IV.
Postremo, paucis expediam quae necessaria dicenda duxi junioribus Theologis,
and sacri Ministerii Candidatis; qui tempore pernecessario huic operi seipsos
libentissime dederunt, vel daturi sunt; Nos aestum pondusque diei long
portavimus. Milites pene emeriti sumus; dabit posterior aetas tractabiliores
fortasse animos, mitiora pectora quam nostrum habet seculum.

Faustis Natalitiis vestris ergo congratulor; praesertim si vestra (...)
nobilitata and sanctificata sit vel fuerit; idque eo magis, quia jam omnes
praestantissimi Chronologi, and temporum Indagatores qui computationi operam
dederunt, evaserunt similes mulieri gravidae temporis pariendi computum suum
praetergressae; quae singulis horis partus dolores expectare necesse habet.
Valde probabile est diem illum de quo omnes Prophetae Prophetarunt, and quem
omnes boni, quasi exerto capite expectarunt, prae foribus jam esse.

Quapropter, Juvenes spectatissimi, spes and expectatio renascentis Ecclesiae,
hanc opportunitatem mordicus arripite mentes vestras omnigena donorum copia
ditare. Lectionibus assiduis ac precibus ferventissimis reserate diem, and
obserate noctem; Qui prostratus studet optimus Theologus evasurus est. Nudati
donis, non possumus veritatem propugnare, aut veritatis inimicos oppugnare. Non
bona indoles, nec elocutionis gratia; non gestus decor, aut conversationis
urbanitas pro egestate donorum compensare queat.

Utcunque Fratres, prae omnibus cavete, ne germinante indies Arbore scientiae,
S. Ford. Ambitio Sac.
sola sterilescat Arbor vitae, ut eximius Theologus satis apposite l^quitur; ne
sint apud vos ultima prima, and prima vicissim ultima; tam pestifera inversio,
toto conversionis operi exitialis erit; caput regulatum est valde desiderandum,
sed cor sanctum absolute necessarium. (...), 1 Cor. XII. 31. Vigeant (...), sed
emineat (...), altius radices figant cordibus vestris (...) magni Apostoli, 1
Cor. IX. 27. (...). Quid enim prodest peritum esse, and periturum? Aliud est
erudiri de veritatibus Christi, aliud edoceri de eo, sicut veritas est in Jesu.

Noctes atques dies mentibus vestris insideat grav is ista cautela
literatissimi Reynoldi nostri; Ne nobis nimium adblandiamur, Animalis hom^.
si forsan exquisitissimis naturae dotibus, ingenii acumine, sermonis
elegantia, varia lectione, longo rerum usu, Artium, linguarum, scientiarum
omnium peritia, judicii gravitate, and rationis pene angelica perspicacia nos
Deus ornaverit: nisi simul accedat Spiritualis gratiae adjutorium, quo
Coelestis mysterii cognitionemque adaptemur. Quamvis enim splendidissima haec
(...) merito nobis in animis and affectibus hominum famam gratiamque
conciliant, quamvis magnum inde Reipub* literariae, and Ecclesiae Christi
emolumentum accedat; nullum tamen ex sese aut ad Dei favorem, aut ad Coelestis
beatitudinis mercedem consequendam momentum conferunt. Det Deus dona
ministrantia and sanctificantia, ut Christi Propugnatores, and inimicorum ejus
Expugnatores vosmet comprobetis. Sed manum de tabula, Epistolam hanc
levidensem, and pingui (ut aiunt) Minerva contextam; benevole tamen excipite
(...) debitae observantiae

A Conservo vestro in Evangelio Christi Johanne Flavello.

By reason of the Authors distance from the Press, some mistakes have escaped
which the Candid Reader is desired to Correct.
ERRATA in this Epistle.
PAge 3. l. 4. read omnimode. p. 5. l. 9. after ita, add neque. ib. r. regimen.
p. 7. l. 6. for and, r. ut. p. 10. l. 12. for iniquitatem, r. iniquitatum.

TO THE READER.
THE worthy Author of the Discourse emitted herewith, is one whose praise is in
the Gospel throughout all the Churches. His other Books have made his Name
precious and famous in both Englands. Nor can my Testimony add any thing to one
every way greater than my self. Nevertheless, a singular Providence having cast
my Lot to be at present in this great City* I could not withstand the
importunity of them, who desi^ed a few Prefatory Lines to manifest the Respect
I owe to this Renowned and Learned Man.

It was a wife Reproof which a grave Divine administered to a young Preacher,
who entertained his Auditory with an elaborate Discourse: After he had
commended his parts and pains, there was (said he) one thing wanting in the
Sermon; I could not perceive that the Spirit of God was in it. And though
Morality is good and necessary to be taught and practiced, yet it is much to be
lamented, that many Preachers in these days have hardly any other Discourses in
their Pulpits than what we may find in Seneca, Epictetus, Plutarch, or some
such Heathen Moralist. Christ, the Holy Spirit, and (in a word) the Gospel is
not in their Sermons. But blessed be God, that there are some (and great is
their Company in this Land of Light) who preach the Truth as it is in Jesus:
And he who has taken the Book out of the Right Hand of him that sits on the
Throne, and is worthy to open the Seals thereof, has been pleased in wonderful
ways to set open and keep open a door of Liberty to the Gospel, that they, unto
whom he has given an Heart to Preach Christ, may do it. This is the Lords
doings; This is a Spirit of Life from God. When Cyrus proclaimed Liberty for
the free Exercise of Religion, the Lords Servants, who for some years had lain
dead, were brought out of their Graves, Ezekiel. 37. 12, 13.

This Treatise is a word in season: God has made the Author to be a wise
Master Builder in his House, and acccording to the Wisdom given him of God, he
has enlarged on a Gospel subject very proper to be insisted on at such a day as
this. I am informed by unquestionable hands that there was a remarkable pouring
out of the Spirit when these Sermons were viva voce delivered, a great number
of Souls having been brought home to Christ thereby. The Lord grant that the
second preaching of them to far greater Multitudes by this way of the Press,
may by the same Spirit be made abundantly successful for the Conversion and
Salvation of Gods Elect. The Fruit brought forth by the Holy Apostles in
respect of the Writings of some, (as well as the Doctrine preached by all) of
them, does still remain. The fruitful Labors of this faithful Servant of Christ
will promote the Glory of God, and the good of Souls, when he himself shall
cease from his Labors and his Works shall follow him. Let the Lords people be
thankful to him for that he has sent such a Labourer into the Harvest, and
pray, that he may be continued long therein, and that many such (for there are
but ^ew such) may be raised up, and be made eminently successful in their holy
endeavors, to the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ and of God; and let him
reign in this Land for ever and ever, which is the Hearts Desire and Prayer of
one who is,

Less then the least of all Saints INCREASE MATHER.
London, *18. 1689.
Books written by the Author, and sold by Matthew Wotton at the Three Daggers
in Fleetstreet.
FLavell's Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Medi^torial Glory. 4o.

-- The Method of Grace in bringing ho^^ the Eternal Redemption. 4o.

-- Discourse of the Immortality of the Soul. 4o.

-- Husbandry Spiritualized, or the Heavenly use of Earthly things. 4o.

-- Two Treatises of Fear and Evil days. 8o.

-- Divine Conduct, or the Mystery of Providence. 8o.

-- The Saint Indeed, the great Work of a Christian, opened and pressed, from
Prov^r^ 4. 23. 12o.

-- The Touchstone of sincerity, or signs of Grace and Symptoms of Hypocrisy.
Being the second Part of the Saint Indeed.

-- The Seaman's Compass. 8o.

-- The Seaman's Companion, containing Six Sermons suited to the various
conditions of Seamen. 12o.

-- Token for Mourners, or Boundaries for Sorrow on Death of Friends. 12o.

-- Preparation for Sufferings. 12o.

-- Sacramental Meditations. 12o.

-- Balm of the Covenant, applied to the Bleeding Wounds of Afflicted Saints.
12o.

-- A Sermon Preached at the Public Thanksgiving Feb. 14. 1689. for Englands
Deliverance from Popery.

Books Printed for Matthew Wotton.

Smith's David's Repentance.

-- Great Assize.

-- David's Blessed Man.

Dent's Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven.

Farnaby's Rhetoric.

Inet's Devout Christian in Three Parts, first, Prayers for a single Person;
secondly, Prayers for a Family; thirdly, A Discourse on, and Prayers at, the
Sacrament.

Winchester's Phrases.

Markham's Master piece. 4o.

English Gardner. 4o.

Salmon's Dispensatory.

-- Doron Medicum, or Supplement to the Dispensatory.

Baker's Arithmetic.

York's Arithmetic.

Lucian's Dialogues Greek and Latin.

ERRATA.
Si accentus, Comma, Colon, Periodus omittantur, vel id genus lelevior a occurr
ant festinantis preli (...); tuam rogatam velim indulgentiam: graviora quod
attinet, exhibeo tibi indicem, ut videre est.

In the Latin Epistle.
PAge 5. line 9. after ita add neque. ib. read Regimen. p. 7. l. 6 for and r.
ut. and l. 18. r. aperuit. p. 10. l. 12. r. iniquiratum. p. 13. l. 6. for quam
qu^^. p. 15. l. 4. r. judicium. l. 23. for aliis r. alies. p. 25. l. 7. for
atques r. aqtue. l. 19. r. Cognitionem Dilectionemque.

In the Book it self Correct thus.
Page 17. l. 23. r. how. To. p. 26. l. 3. r. Co extended. p 39. l. ult. for but
r. and. p. 40. l. 15. r. Angel of God p. 41. l. 14 for World r. Word. p. 53. l.
4. r. a point. p. 57. l. 24. r. the Doctrine of Free Grace. p. 65. l. 23. for
though r. because. p. 95. l. 4. r. fell. p. 142. l. ult. r. home. p. 159. l6.
r. Four. p. 177. l. 19 for too r. some. p. 192. l. 21. r. the Curse. p. 216. l.
28. r. your. p. 227. l. 21. r. hold. p. 246. l. 1. r. once. p. 251. l. 26. for
by r. for. p. 256. l. 20. r. Thousands. p. 264. l. 9. for seem r. serve. p.
268. l. 17. r. which. p. 269. l. 17. dele the. p. 270. l. 29. r. scared. p.
275. l. 23. for that r. the. p. 278. l. 1^. song. p. 281. Marg. for est r. and
p. 284. l. 22. for have r. hear. p. 291. l. 23. dele and. p. 305. l. 19. r.
Word. p. 311. l. ult. r. strikes. p. 312. l. 19. r. you. p. 318. l. 7. for
means r. signs. p. 322. l. 5. r. Christ's. p. 326. l. 17. r. gaining. p. 329.
l. 25. add not. p. 342. l. 20. for in r. with. p. 394. l. 7. r. to sit. p. 414.
l. 17. r. believers. p. 417. l. 14. r. hides. and l. 28. r. poured out. P. 445.
l. 3. r. first is this the. l. 19. dele a.

In the Appendix.
Page 17. line 11. add to. p. 41. l. 13. r. when it. p. 54. 1. 27. r. by their.
p. 62. l. 18. r. abeneus.

SERMON. I.
Revel. 3. 20. [Behold] I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with
me.
THis day has our compassionate Redeemer opened unto us a door of liberty,
liberty to us to preach, and liberty for you to hear the glad tidings of the
Gospel. This is a day few looked for; how often have I said in the years that
are past, God has no more work for me to do, and I shall have no more strength
and opportunities to work for God? And how often have you said in your hearts,
we have sinned our Ministers out of their Pulpits, and our eyes shall no more
behold those our Teachers? But lo, beyond the thoughts of most hearts, a wide
(and I hope) an effect^al door is now opened in the midst of us. Oh! that it
might be to us as the Valley of Achor was to Israel, for a door of hope: Hosea
2. 15. ( i. e.) not only making the troubles they met with in that Valley an
Inlet to their mercies, as ours have been to us; but giving them that Valley
pignoris nomine, as a pledge of greater mercies intended for them. Upon the
first appearance of this mercy, my next thoughts were how to make the most
fruitful improvement of it amongst you, lest we should twice stumble at the
same stone, and sin our selves back again into our old bondage.

In the contemplation of this matter, the Lord directed me to this Scripture,
wherein the same hand that opened to you the door of liberty, knocks
importunately at the doors of your hearts for entrance into them, for union and
communion with them. It will be sad indeed if he that has let you in to all
these mercies, should himself be shut out of your hearts: But if the Lord
should help you to open your hearts now to Christ, I doubt not but this door of
liberty will be kept open to you, how many soever the Adversaries be that envy
it, and will do their uttermost to shut it up, Ezech. 39. 29. The mercies you
enjoy this day, are the fruits of Christ's intercession with the Father, for one
trial more; if we bring forth fruit, well, if not, the Ax lies at the Root of
the Tree. Under this consideration I desire to Preach, and even so the Lord
help you to hear what shall be spoken from this precious Scripture, Behold I
stand at the door and knock, etc.

These words are a branch of that excellent Epistle dictated by Christ, and
sent by his servant John to the Church of Laodicea, the most formal,
hypocritical and degenerate of all the seven Churches; yet the great Physician
will try his skill upon them, both by the rebukes of the rod, ver. 19. and by
the persuasive power of the word; ver. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and
knock, etc.

This Text is Christ's wooing voice, full of Heavenly Rhetoric to win and gain
the hearts of Sinners to himself; wherein we have these two general parts. 1.
Christ's suit for a Sinners heart. 2. The powerful Arguments enforcing his suit.


First, Christ's suit for a Sinners heart, wherein we 1st) the solemn Preface,
ushering it in, behold. (2dly) the suit it self. The Preface is exceeding
solemn, for beside the common use of this word behold, in other places to
excite attention, or exaggerate and put weight into an affirmation; Durham in
loc.
it stands here as a Judicious Expositor notes, as a term of notification, or
public record, wherein Christ takes witness of the most gracious offer he was
now about to make to their souls, and will have it stand in perpetuam rei
memoriam, as a testimony for or against their souls to all Eternity, to cut off
all excuses and pretenses for time to come.

2. The suit it self, wherein we have 1. The Suitor, Jesus Christ. 2. His
posture and action; I stand at the door and knock. 3. The suit it self, which
is for opening, If any man open.


1. The Suitor Christ himself, I stand; I that have a right of Sovereignty over
you; I that have shed my invaluable blood to purchase you, and might justly
condemn you upon the first denial or demur, behold I stand, this is the Suitor.

2. His posture and action, I stand at the door and knock; (...).
the word is in the Preter Tense, I have stood, but being here joined with
another Verb of the Present Tense, it is fitly translated, I stand, yet so as
that it notes a continued action. I have stood and do still stand with
unwearied patience; I once stood personally and bodily among you in the days of
my flesh, and I still stand spiritually and representatively in my Ambassadors
at the door, (i. e.) the mind and conscience, the faculties and powers which
are introductive into the whole soul.

The word Door is here improperly put to signify those introductive faculties
of the soul which are of a like use to it, as the Door is to the House. This is
the Redeemer's posture, his action is knocking; (i. e.) his powerful essays,
and gracious attempts to open the heart to give him admission. The word Knock
signifies a strong and powerful knock, (...) Cornu, and sic fit (...), and per
synco^en (...).
he stands patiently, and knocks powerfully by the Word outwardly, by the
convictions, motions, impulses, strivings, and instigations of his Spirit
inwardly.

3. The design and end of the Suit, it is for opening (i. e.) consenting,
receiving, embracing and hearty accepting of him by faith. Acts 16. 14. The
Lord opened the heart of Lydia, (i. e.) persuaded her soul to believe;
implying, that the heart by nature is strongly barred and locked up against
Christ, and that nothing but a power from him can open it.

drawn from two inestimable benefits accrewing to the opening or believing
soul. viz.

1. Union. 2. Communion with Christ.
1. Union, I will come in to him, that is, I will unite my self with the
opening believing soul, he shall be mystically one with me, and I with him.

2. Communion, I will sup with him, and he with me; that is, I will feast the
believing soul with the delicates of Heaven. Such comforts, such joys, such
pleasures as none in the World but Believers are capable of.

And to set home all, these special benefits are proposed by Christ to all
sorts of Sinners great and small, old and young, if any man hear my voice and
open the door, that so no soul might be discouraged from believing, by the
greatness or multitude of his sins, but the vilest of Sinners may see free
grace triumphing over all their unworthiness, upon their consent to take Christ
according to the gracious offers of the Gospel.

The words thus opened, afford many great and useful points of Doctrine,
comprehending in them the very sum and substance of the Gospel. The first which
arises from the solemn and remarkable Preface Behold, will be this.

I. DOCTRINE.
That every offer of Christ to the Souls of Sinners is recorded and witnessed
with respect to the day of account and r^ckoning. Doct. ^.


Here we shall enquire into three things.

1. Who are Gods Witnesses to all Gospel tenders? 2. What are the object
matters they witness to? 3. Why God records every offer of Christ, and takes
witness thereof?


1. His Ministers by whom he makes them are all Witnesses as well as Officers
of Christ to the People, Acts 26. 16. I have appeared unto thee for this
purpose, to make thee a Minister and a Witness. Here you see Ministers have a
double office to propose and offer Christ, and then to bear witness for or
against those to whom he is thus offered: They are expressly called Gods
Witnesses, Rev. 11. 6, 7. Their labors witness, their sufferings witness,
their solemn appeals to God witness, yea, the very dust of their feet shaken
off against the refusers of Christ, turns to a testimony against them; Mark 6.
11. Every groan and sigh, every drop of sweat, much more of blood, are placed
in Gods Book as Marginal Notes by all their Sermons and Prayers, and will be
produced and read in the great day against all the refusers and despisers of
Christ.

2. The Gospel it self which is preached to you is a Testimony or Witness for
God, for or against every one that hears it, John 12. 48. He that rejects me,
and receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. And this is the sense of
Christ's words, Matthew. 24. 14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached
in all the World, for a Witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come. Ah
Lord, what a solemn record is here! Every Sermon you hear, yea, every reproof,
persuasion and conviction is a Witness for God to cast and condemn every Soul
in Judgment, that complies not obediently with the calls of the Gospel: So
many Sermons, so many Witnesses.

3. Every man's own conscience is a Witness for God, that he has a fair offer
once made him; the very consciences of the Heathens that never saw a Bible,
that had no other Preachers but the Sun, Moon and Stars, and other works of
Nature; yet of them the Apostle says, Romans 2. 15. That they show the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one another. Certainly if
such vigor and activity was put into the consciences of Heathens, who could
only read the will of God by the dim Moonlight of natural reason; how much more
vigorous and active will conscience be in its accusing office against all that
live under the bright beams of Gospel light? Their consciences will be swift
Witnesses, and will ring sad Peals in their ears another day. You shall know
that there has been a Prophet among you, Ezekiel. 2. 5. This single Witness is
instead of a thousand Witnesses for God.

4. The examples of all those that do believe and obey the Gospel, are so many
Witnesses for God against the despisers and neglecters of the great Salvation.
Every mourning trembling Soul among you is a Witness against all the dead
hearted, unbelieving, disobedient ones, that sit with them under the same
ordinances. Hence it is said, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Know ye not that the Saints shall
judge the World? They shall be Assessors with Christ in the great day, and
condemn the world by their examples, as Noah did the old world; and thus Matthew.
21. 32. John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him
not, but the Publicans and Harlots believed him, and ye when ye had seen it,
repented not afterward that ye might believe him. q. d. What shift did you make
to quiet your consciences, and stifle your convictions, when you saw Publicans
the worst of men, and Harlots the worst of women, repenting, believing and
hungering after Christ! Their examples shall be your Judges. These are Gods
Witnesses.

object matters unto which they give their testimony, and that will be found
twofold, according to the twofold event the Gospel has upon them that hear
it: of both which, the Apostle gives us this account, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Unto some
we are the savor of life unto life, and unto others the savor of death unto
death. Accordingly a double Record is made,

1. Of the obedience and faith of some, which Record will be produced to their
joy and comfort in the day of the Lord, when he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, because our testimony
among you was believed in that day. Ministers are Instruments of espousing
Souls to Christ, and Witnesses to those espousals and contracts made betwixt
him and them, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Both these offices are exceeding grateful, and
pleasant to every faithful Minister.

2. A Record is made, and Witness taken of all the refusals, disobedience, and
slightings of Christ by others. Thus Moses will be the accuser of the Jews,
John 5. 45. Do not think I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that
accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust. This is the saddest part of a
Ministers-work; the fore-thoughts of it are more afflictive than all our
Labors and Sufferings. There is a threefold Record made in this case, ( 1st.)
Of the time men have enjoyed under the means of Salvation; how many years they
have sat barren and dead hearted, under the labors of Gods faithful Ministers,
Luke 13. 7. Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree and
find none. Behold the same term of Notification with that in the Text, applied
to the time of Gods patience toward them: And again, Ier. 25. 3. From the
thirteenth year of Josiah even unto this day (that is, the three and twentieth
year) the word of the Lord has come unto me, and I have spoken unto you rising
early, and speaking, but ye have not hearkened. Oh consider all the years and
days you have spent under the Gospel, are upon your Dooms-day-book. ( 2dly,)
Records are also made of all the instruments that ever God employed for the
Conversion and Salvation of your Souls. So many Ministers, whether fixed or
transient, as have spent their labors upon you, are upon the Book of your
account. Ier. 25. 4. The Lord has sent unto you all his servants the Prophets,
rising early and sending them, but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear
to hear. They have wasted their Lungs, dropped their compassionate tears, and
burnt down one after another as Candles to direct you to Christ and Salvation,
but all in vain. ( 3dly,) Every call, persuasion and argument used by them to
espouse you to Christ, is likewise upon the Book of account, Prove. 1. 24. 25.
Because I have called and you refused, I have stretched my hand, and no man
regarded, but you have set at naught all my counsels, and would none of my
reproofs. These calls and counsels are of too great value with God, (though of
none with you) to be lost and left out of your account.



First, ^. Reason.
that wherever the end of the Gospel is attained in the Conversion of any soul,
that soul, and all that were instrumentally employed about the salvation of it,
may have their proper reward and comfort in the great day, 2 Cor. 1. 14. As
also you have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye
also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus. This will be matter of joy
unspeakable, both to you that shall receive, and to them that shall give such a
comfortable testimony for you. Oh the joyful congratulations that will be in
that day between Laborious Faithful Ministers, and their Believing Obedient
Hearers! Lord, this was the blessed instrument of my happy Illumination and
Conversion; though I might have ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet not
many Fathers; for by the blessing of thy Spirit upon this man's Ministry, my
Soul was begotten to Christ. And on the other side, Lord, these are the Souls
for whom I traveled as in birth until Christ was formed in them. It Is a
glorious thing to say as the Prophet, Here am I, and the children God has
given me.

Nay, those that were but collaterally useful to help on the work of God begun
by others, must not lose their reward in that day, John 4. 36. And he that
reapeth receives wages, and gathers fruit unto life eternal, that both he
that sows and he that reapeth may rejoice together.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
Records are now made, and Witnesses taken, that thereby the Judicial Sentence
of Jesus Christ in the last day may be made clear and perspicuous to all the
world; that every mouth may be stopped, and no Plea or Apology left in the mouth
of any condemned Sinner. For Christ in that day comes to convince all that are
ungodly, Jude ver. 15. to convince by demonstration, that all that are
Christless now, may be found speechless then, Matthew. 22. 12. Here it is said,
Psalm. 1. 5. That the wicked shall not stand, or rise up in the Judgment. And no
wonder when so many full testimonies and unexceptionable Witnesses shall come
point blank against them, the Minister that preached, the word they preached,
their own consciences, and the examples of all Believers will be produced
against them.

1. INFERENCE.
First, The undoubted certainty of a day of Judgment, is hence evinced. To what
purpose else are Records made, and Witnesses taken, but with respect to an
Audit day; this is a truth sealed upon the consciences of the very Heathens,
Romans 2. 15. their consciences bear witness. But in vain are all these Records
made, unless there be a day to produce and plead them, and of that day the
Prophet Daniel speaks, Dan. 7. 10. The Judgment was set, and the Books were
opened. And again, Rev. 20. 12. And I saw the Dead small and great stand before
God, and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book
of Life, and the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
Books according to their works.

Believe it Friends, these are no devised Fables, but most awful and infallible
truths; according to the saving effects the Gospel now has, it will be a time
of refreshing to our Souls, Acts 3. 19. to all others a day of terror, wrath
and amazement, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. The day in which the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

2. INFER.
What a spur is here to Ministerial diligence and faithfulness? It Is an awful
work that is under our hands; the effects of the Gospel which we preach will be
the savor of life or Death to them that hear us. If the Lord prosper it in our
hands, we shall be witnesses for you, it will be an addition to our glory in
Heaven, Dan. 12. 3. They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever. But if we be
Ignorant, Lazy, Men-pleasers, our people will come in as swift Witnesses
against us, and their blood will be required at our hands; it will be an
intolerable aggravation to our misery in Hell, to have any that sat under our
Ministry thus upbraiding us! O cruel man! thou saw my soul in danger, and
never dealt faithfully and plainly with me; the same time and breath which was
spent in idle and worldly discourse, might have been instrumental to have saved
me from this place of torment. Let Ministers consider themselves as Witnesses
for God, and their People as Witnesses for or against them; and under that
consideration, so study, preach and pray, that they may with Paul take God to
record, that they are free from the blood of all men; no sort of men upon earth
have more spurs to diligence and faithfulness than we have.

3. INFER.
What a Pill is this to purge formality out of all that hear us? every Sabbath,
every Sermon is recorded in Heaven for or against your souls; at what rate
soever you attend to the word, all that you hear is set down in the book of
your account; think not you shall return as you came, the word will have its
effect and end, it shall not return in vain, but shall accomplish the end for
which it is sent, Isaiah 55. 11. The decrees of Heaven are executed by the
Gospel, some souls shall be quickened, and others shall be slain by the words
of Gods mouth, Ezekiel. 47. 9, 10. The Gospel is a River of the waters of Life,
which quickens and refreshes every thing that lives; but the mire and marish
places shall not be healed. How weighty therefore is that caution of our
blessed Lord, Luke 8. 18. Take heed how you hear? When you come under an
ordinance, you are sowing seed for Eternity, Gal. 6. 7, 8. Which will spring up
in the world to come. Preaching and hearing may be considered two ways,
Physically or Morally, in the former respect, these acts are quickly over and
pass away: I shall by and by have done preaching, and you hearing, this Sermon
will be ended in a little time, but the consequences thereof will abide for
ever. Therefore for the Lords sake, away with formality, no more drowsy eyes
or wandering thoughts. Oh when you come to attend upon the Ministry of the
Gospel, that such thoughts as these might prepare your minds! The word I am
going to hear will quicken or kill, save or damn my soul; if I sit dead under
it, and return barren from it, I shall with one day that I had never seen the
face of that Minister, nor heard his voice that preached it.

4. INFER.
What a dreadful condition are all those in that are real and professed Enemies
to the Gospel and them that preach it! That instead of embracing and obeying
the message of the Gospel, reject and despise it; instead of opening their
hearts to receive it, open their blasphemous mouths against it to deride it,
and hiss it (if it were possible) out of the world. Ah, what a book of
remembrance is written for such men? I fear there never was an age since
Christianity blessed this Nation, that was more deeply drenched in the guilt of
this sin than the present age. How are the Messengers of the Gospel slighted
and rejected? What have we done to deserve it? Is not our case this day much
like that of the Prophet? Ier. 18. 20. Shall evil be recompensed for good? for
they have dug a Pit for my Soul; remember that I stood before thee to speak
good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them. What brutish madness has
possessed the souls of these men? but alas, it is not so much they, as Satan
acting in them; he is a jealous Prince, the Gospel allarms him, his Subjects
are in danger of revolting from him: No wonder therefore he makes an outcry at
the liberty of the Gospel, as is used to be made when an Enemy invades a
Kingdom. In this case Christ directs his Ministers to shake off the dust of
their feet for a testimony against them, Mark 6. 11. The signification and
meaning whereof is this, that look as you shake off the dust of your feet, even
so Jesus Christ will shake off those men that despise the Gospel and abuse its
Messengers.

5. INFER.
Hence it likewise follows, that the case of the Pagan world will be easier in
the day of Judgment, than theirs that live and dye unregenerate and disobedient
under the Gospel of Christ. There are more Witnesses prepared, and Records
filed against the day of your account, than can possibly be against them; they
have abused but one talent, the light of nature; but we thousands, even as many
thousands as we have had opportunities and calls under the Gospel. Upon this
account Christ says, Matthew. 10. 14, 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily, I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Judgment, than for that City.

Ah, what a fearful Aggravation does it put upon our sin and misery, that we
are not only accountable for all the light we had, but for all that we might
have had in the Gospel day! Capernaum was lifted up to Heaven in the enjoyment
of means and precious opportunities, and had an answerable downfall into the
depth of misery from that height of mercy; as the higher any one is lifted up
upon a Rack, the more terrible is the jerk he receives by the fall, Matthew. 11.
23.

6. INFER.
Lastly, hence it appears, that the day of Judgment must certainly take up a
vast space of time: For if God will bring every thing into Judgment, Eccles.
12. 14. not only sinful actions, but words, Matthew. 12. 36. not only words, but
heart secrets, Romans 2. 16. If all the Records and Registers now made, shall
then be opened and read, all the Witnesses for or against every man examined
and heard; judge then what a vast space of time will that great day take up.
Some Divines are of opinion it may last as long as the World has lasted, but
this is sure, things will not be hudled up, nor shuffled over in haste; you
have taken your time for Sinning, and God will take his time for Judging.

Consider the multitudes, multitudes without number, that are to be Judged in
that day, even all the posterity of Adam, which are as the Sand upon the Sea
shore; that not only so many persons, but all that they have done, must come
into Judgment, even the very thoughts of their Hearts, which never came to the
knowledge of Men; their Consciences to be interrogated, all other Witnesses
fully heard and examined; how great a day must this day of the Lord then be?

The Second Use.
But the main Use of this Point will be for Exhortation, that seeing all the
offers of Christ are recorded and witnessed, with respect to a day of account,
every one of you would therefore immediately embrace the present gracious
tender of Christ in the Gospel, as ever you expect to be acquitted and cleared
in that great day: take heed of denials, nay of delays and demurs; For if the
word spoken by Angels were steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation? Heb. 2. 2, 3. The question is put, but no answer made; How
shall we escape? The wisdom of Men and Angels cannot tell how to enforce this
Exhortation; I shall present you with Ten weighty Considerations upon the
matter, which the Lord follow home, by the blessing of his Spirit, upon all
your Hearts.

I. CONSIDERATION.
Consider how invaluable a mercy it is that you are yet within the reach of
offered Grace. The mercies that stand in offer before you, this day, were never
set before the Angels that fell; no Mediator was ever appointed for them. Oh
astonishing mercy! that those Vessels of Gold should be cast into everlasting
Fire, and such Clay Vessels as we are, thus put into a capacity of greater
happiness than ever they fell from: Nay, the mercy that stands before you is
not only denied to the Angels that fell, but to the greatest part of your
fellow Creatures, of the same rank and dignity with you, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He
shows his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; he has
not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not known
them; praise ye the Lord. A mercy deservedly celebrated with a Joyful
Allelujah. What vast Tracts are there in the habitable World, where the name of
Christ is unknown! It Is your special mercy to be born in a Land of Bibles, and
Ministers; where it is as difficult for you to avoid and shun the Light, as it
is for others to behold and enjoy it.

II. CONSIDERATION.
Consider the nature, weight, and worth of the mercies which are this day
freely offered you. Certainly they are mercies of the first Rank, the most
ponderous, precious, and necessary among all the mercies of God. Christ the
first born of mercies, and in him pardon, peace, and eternal Salvation are set
before you; it were astonishing to see a starving Man refusing offered bread,
or a condemned Man a gracious pardon. Lord what compositions of sloth and
stupidity are we that we should need so many entreaties to be happy!

III. CONSIDERATION.
Consider who it is that makes these gracious tenders of pardon, peace, and
Salvation, to you; even that God whom you have so deeply wronged, whose Laws
you have violated, whose mercies you have spurned, and whose wrath you have
justly incensed. His patience groans under the burden of your daily
provocations; he loses nothing if you be damned, and receives no benefit if you
be saved; yet the first motions of Mercy and Salvation to you, freely arise out
of his Grace and good pleasure. God entreats you to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.
20. The blessed Lord Jesus, whose blood thy sins have shed, now freely offers
that blood for thy Reconciliation, Justification, and Salvation, if thou will
but sincerely accept him ere it be too late.

IV. CONSIDERATION.
Reflect seriously upon your own vileness, to whom such gracious offers of
Peace and Mercy are made. Thy sins have set thee at as great a distance, from
the hopes and expectations of pardon, as any sinner in the World. Consider Man,
what thou have been, what thou have done, and what vast heaps of guilt thou
have contracted by a life of sin, and yet that unto thee Pardon and Peace
should be offered in Christ, after such a life of Rebellion, how astonishing is
the mercy! The Lord is contented to pass by all thy former Rebellions, thy deep
died Transgressions, and to sign an Act of Oblivion for all that is past, if
now at last thy Heart relent for Sin, and thy Will bow in obedience to the
great commands and call of the Gospel, Isa. 55. 2. and 1. 18.

V. CONSIDERATION.
Consider how many offers of mercy you have already refused, and that every
refusal is recorded against you. How long you have tried and even tired the
patience of God already, and that this may be the last overture of Grace that
ever God will make to your Souls. Certainly there is an offer that will be the
last offer, a striving of the Spirit which will be his last striving; and after
that no more offers without you, no more motions or strivings within you for
evermore. The Treaty is then ended, and your last neglect or rejection of
Christ recorded against the day of your account; and what if this should prove
to be that last tender of Grace which must conclude the Treaty betwixt Christ
and you, what undone wretches must you then be, with whom so gracious a Treaty
breaks off upon such dreadful terms!

VI. CONSIDERATION.
Consider well the reasonable, mild, and gracious nature of the Gospel terms,
on which Life and Pardon are offered to you. The Gospel requires nothing of you
but Repentance and Faith, Acts 20. 21. Can you think it hard when a Prince
pardons a Rebel to require him to fall upon his Knees, and stretch forth a
willing and thankful Hand to receive his Pardon? Your Repentance and Faith are
much of the same nature. Here is no legal satisfaction required at your Hands,
no reparation of the injured Law, by your doings or sufferings, but an hearty
sorrow for sins committed, sincere purposes and endeavors after new obedience,
and a hearty thankful acceptance of Christ your Savior; and for your
encouragement herein, his Spirit stands ready to furnish you with Powers and
Abilities, Prove. 1. 23. Turn ye at my reproof, behold I will pour out my Spirit
unto you, I will make known my Words unto you; and Isa. 26. 20. Lord thou have
wrought all our Works in us.

VII. CONSIDERATION.
Again, consider how your way to Christ by Repentance and Faith, is beaten
before you by thousands of sinners for your encouragement. You are not the
first that ever adventured your Souls in this path: multitudes are gone before
you, and that under as much guilt, fear and discouragement as you that come
after can pretend unto; and not a man among them repulsed or discouraged; here
they have found rest and peace to their weary Souls; Heb. 4. 3. Acts 13. 39.
Here the greatest of sinners have been set forth for an ensample to you that
should afterward believe on his Name; 1 Timothy 1. 16. You see if you will not,
others will joyfully accept the offers of Christ; what discouragements have you
that they had not? Or what greater encouragements had they which God has not
given you this day? Therefore they shall be your Judges.

VIII. CONSIDERATION.
Consider the great hazard of these precious seasons you now enjoy. Opportunity
is the golden spot of time, but it is tempus ^abi^e, a very slippery and
uncertain thing; great and manifold are the hazards and contingencies attending
it. Your life is immediately uncertain, your breath continually going in your
nostrils, and that which is every moment going, will be gone at last. The
Gospel is as uncertain as your life; God has made no such settlement of it but
that he may a^ pleasure remove it, and will certainly do so, if we thus trifle
under it; it is but a Candlestick, though a golden one, Rev. 2. 5. and that you
all know is a moveable thing; and not only your life and the means of your
eternal life, I mean the Gospel, are uncertain things; but even the motions and
strivings of the Spirit with your Souls are as uncertain as either, Phil. 12.
13. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. That God now works
with you is matter of great encouragement to your work; but that he works at
his own pleasure, as a free arbitrary agent who can cease when he pleases, and
never give one knock at your hearts more, should make you work with fear and
trembling.

IX. CONSIDERATION.
Think what a fearful aggravation it will be, both of your sin and misery, to
perish in the fight and presence of an offered remedy; to sink into Hell
betwixt the outstretched Arms of a compassionate Redeemer, that would have
gathered you but you would not.

Heathens, yea Devils will upbraid you in Hell for such unaccountable folly,
and desperate madness: Heathens will say, alas, we had but the dim Moonlight
of Nature, which did indeed discover sin, but not Christ the Remedy. Ah, had
your Preachers and your Bibles been sent among us, how glady would we have
embraced them! Surely, says God to Ezechiel, had I sent thee to them they
would have harkned unto thee, Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6. Matthew. 11. 21. The very Devils
will upbraid you; Oh, if God had sent a Mediator in our Nature, we had never
rejected him as you have done; but he took not on him the nature of Angels.

X. CONSIDERATION.
Lastly, How clear, as well as sure, will your condemnation be in the great day
against whom such a cloud of Witnesses will appear! Oh, how manifest will the
righteousness of God be! Men and Angels shall applaud the Sentence, and your
own Consciences shall acknowledge the equity of it. You that are Christless
now, will be speechless then, Matthew. 22. 12. Knowing therefore the terrors of
the Lord, I persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. as one that trembles to think of being
Summoned as a Witness against any of your Souls. Oh, that I might be your
rejoicing, and you mine in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ!

SERMON II.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold [I] stand at the door, etc.
Having in the former Sermon pondered Christ's solemn Preface to his earnest
Suit; the next thing that comes under our consideration, is the Person
soliciting, and pleading for admission into the Heart of sinners, which is
Christ himself.

Behold I stand. The only difficulty here is rightly to apprehend the manner of
Christ's presence in Gospel administrations; for it is manifest the person of
Christ was at this time in Heaven; his Bodily presence was removed from this
lower World above Sixty years before this Epistle was Written to the
Laodiceans. John's banishment into Patmos, is by Eusebius, out of Irenaeus and
Clemens Alexandrinus, placed in the Fourteenth Year of the Emperor Domitian,
and under his Second Persecution, which was about the Ninety seventh Year from
the Birth of Christ.

Yet here, he says, behold I stand, not my Messengers and Ministers only, but
I by my Spiritual presence among you, I your Sovereign Lord and Owner, who have
all Right and Authority by Creation and Redemption, to possess and dispose of
your Souls; it is I that stand at the Door and knock, I by my Spirit,
soliciting and moving by the Ministry of Men. You see none but Men; but
believe it, I am really and truly, though Spiritually and Invisibly present in
all those administrations, all those knocks, motions and solicitations are
truly mine, they are my acts, and I own them, and so I would have you conceive
and apprehend them. Hence the Second Note is this,

DOCT.
That Jesus Christ is truly present with men in his Ordinances, and has to do
with them, and they with him; though he be not visible to their carnal Eyes.

Thus runs the promise, Matthew. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. The middle place was the Seat of
the President in the Jewish assemblies, where he might equally hear and be
heard of all. So will I be in the midst of the Assemblies of the Faithful, met
together in my Name and Authority, to bless, guide and protect them. Hence the
Church is called the place of his Feet, Isa. 16. 13. a manifest allusion to the
Ark, called Gods Footstool, Psalm. 99. 5. and agreeably hereunto, Christ is said
to walk among the Seven golden Candlesticks, Revel. 2. 1. There are the
Spiritual walks of Christ, there his converses and communion with Men: And this
presence of Christ was not the peculiar privileges of the first Churches, but
is common to all the Churches of the Saints to the end of the World, as appears
by that glorious promise comfortably so extended with the Church from first to
last; Matthew. 28. ult. Lo, I am with you always to the end of the World. This
promise is the ground and reason of all our Faith, and expectations of benefit
from Ordinances; and the Subjects of it are not here considered Personally, but
Officially, to you and all that succeed you, in the same Work and Office; not
to you only as Extraordinary, but to all the succeeding Ordinary standing
Officers in my Church. As for the Apostles, neither their Persons, nor
extraordinary Office was to continue long, but this Promise was to continue to
the end of the World.

Nor is this Promise made absolutely, but conditionally; the connection of the
Promise, with the Command, enforces this qualified sense; as 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
The Lord is with you, whilst you are with him. Ignorant, idle, unqualified
persons, cannot claim the benefit of this gracious grant.

Once more, this Promise is made ot every hour and minute of time. I am with
you, all the days, as it is in the Greek Text; in dark and dangerous, as well
as peaceable and encouraging days; and it is closed up with a solemn Amen, So
be it, or, So it shall be.

To open this Point distinctly, we are to consider that there is a threefold
presence of Christ, 1. Corporeal. 2. Represented. 3. Spiritual.


First, There is a Corporeal Presence of Christ, which the Church once enjoyed
on Earth, when he went in and out amongst his People, Acts 1. 21. When their
Eyes saw him, and their Hands handled him, 1 John 1. 1. This presence was a
singular consolation to the Disciples, and therefore they were greatly dejected
when it was to be removed from them. But after Redemption-Work was finished on
Earth, this Bodily Presence was no longer necessary to be continued in this
World, but more expedient to be removed to Heaven, John 16. 7. as indeed it
was, and must there abide until the time of the restitution of all things, Acts
3. 21. And in this respect he tells the Disciples, John 16. 28. leave the World
and go to my Father.

Secondly, There is a Represented Presence of Christ in Ordinances. As the
Person of a King is represented in another Country by his Ambassadors, so is
Christ in this World by his Ministers, 2 cor. 5. 26. We then are Ambassadors
for God, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God. Christ is about other work for us in Heaven, but we stand
in his stead on Earth. And this speaks the great Dignity of the Ministerial
Office; whatever abuses or contempts are cast on them, they reflect upon
Christ, Luke 10. 16. He that despises you despises me. It also teaches us
whence the validity of Gospel administrations is; Christ ratifies and confirms
them with his own Authority. It also instructs us how Wise, Spiritual, and
Holy, Ministers should be, who represent Christ to the Word. A Drunkard, a
Persecutor, a sensual Worldling, is but an ill representative of the blessed
and holy Jesus.

Thirdly, Beside and above the two former, there is a Spiritual Presence of
Christ in the Churches, and Ordinances; and this Presence of Christ by his
Spirit, who is his Vicegerent, is to be considered as that from which all
Gospel Ordinances derive,

1. Their Beauty and Glory. 2. Their Power and Efficacy. 3. Their awful
Solemnity. 4. Their Continuance and Stability.
First, From the presence of Christ by his Spirit, the Ordinances and Churches
derive their beauty and glory, Psalm. 27. 4. To see thy power and thy glory, so
as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Look as the beauty of the Body is a
result from the Soul that animates it; and when the Soul is gone, the beauty of
the Body is gone also; so the beauty and glory of all Ordinances comes and goes
with the Spirit of Christ which is the very Soul of them. The Churches are
indeed golden Candlesticks, but the Candlestick has no light but what the
Candle gives it; hence that magnificent description of the new Temple is closed
up in this expression, Ezekiel. 48. ult. The name of that City shall be, The Lord
is there.

Secondly, From this Spiritual Presence of Christ, all Gospel Ordinances derive
all that Power and Efficacy which is by them exerted upon the Souls of Men;
either in their Conversion or Edification. This power is not inherent in them,
nor do they act as natural, necessary agents, but as instituted means, which
are successful or unsuccessful, according as Christ by his Spirit co-operates
with them, 1 Cor. 3. 7. He that plants is nothing, neither he that waters,
but God that gives the increase; that is, they are nothing to the purpose,
nothing to the accomplishment of Men's Salvation without the concurrence of the
Spirit of Christ. For when the Apostle makes himself and Apollos, with all
other Ministers, nothing, we must understand him speaking not absolutely, but
comparatively, and relatively; they are necessary in their places, and
sufficient in their kind, for what they are appointed to, else it would be a
reflection upon the Wisdom of God that instituted them; but singly in
themselves, and disjunctively considered, they are nothing; as a Trumpet or
wind Instrument is nothing, as to its end and use, except breath be inspired
into it, and that breath modulated by the art and skill of the inspirer; like
Ezekiets Wheels that move not but as the Spirit that was in them moved and
directed their motions. If Ordinances wrought upon Souls naturally, and
necessarily as the fire burns, then they could not fail of success upon all
that come under them: But it is with them as with the Waters of the Pool of
Bethesda, whose healing virtue was only found at that season when the Angel
descended and troubled them.

Thirdly, This Spiritual Presence of Christ, gives the Ordinances of the Gospel
that awful solemnity which is due upon that account to them. The Presence of
Christ in them commands reverence from all that are about him. God is greatly
to be feared in the Assemblies of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all
that are round about him. Hence is that solemn caution or threatening, Levit.
26. 23, 24. If you walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto
you; the Hebrew word in that Text signifies to walk rashly or at an adventure
with God, sine personae discrimine, without considering with whom we have to
do, and what an awful Majesty we stand before. And the punishment is suitable
to the sin; I also will walk at an adventure with you, making no discrimination
in my Judgments betwixt your persons and the persons of the worst of Men. Oh
that this were duly considered by all that have to do with God in Gospel
institutions!

Fourthly, It Is the Spiritual Presence of Christ in his Churches and Ordinances
that gives them their Continuance and Stability; when ever the Spirit of Christ
departs from them it will not be long before they depart from us; or if they
should not, their continuance will be little to our advantage. When the Glory
of the Lord once dismounted from betwixt the Cherubims, when that sad voice was
heard in the Temple, migremus hinc, let us go hence, how soon was both City and
Temple made a desolation! And truly Christ's Presence is not so fixed to any
Place, or any Ordinances, but the sins of the people may banish it away, Rev.
2. 5. Who will tarry in any place longer than he is welcome, if he have any
where else to go?

But more particularly, let us here discuss these two points,

I. How it appears Christ is thus Spiritually Present with his Churches and
Ordinances?

II. Why it is necessary he should be so?

First, By what evidences does it manifestly appear that there is such a
presence of Christ with his Churches and Ordinances? And this will appear by
two undeniable evidences thereof.

1. By their wonderful Preservations. 2. From their supernatural Effects.
First, From their wonderful Preservations, for it is wholly unaccountable, and
unconceiveable, how the Churches, Ministers and Ordinances, should be supported
and preserved without it, amidst such Hosts of potent and enraged Enemies. If
Christ were not among them they had certainly been swallowed up long ago. It Is
he that holds the Stars in his right hand* Rev. 2. 1. His walks among the seven
golden Candlesticks is their best security. The burning bush, Exodus 3. 3. is a
rare emblem to open this Mystery; the bush burned with fire, but was not
consumed. The bush was a resemblance of the Church of God in Egypt, the flames
upon it was their terrible Persecution; the wonder that no ashes appeared, as
the effects of those terrible flames, the reason thereof was, God was in the
bush; Jesus Christ was in the midst of his people.

By virtue of this Presence we are here this day, in the enjoyment of Gospel
Liberties; no Society of Men in the World have such security as the Church has
upon this account. The mightiest Monarchies have been over-turned, no Policies
nor humane Power could preserve them; but the Church and Ordinances are still
preserved, and shall ever be by virtue of that gracious Promise, Ier. 30. 11.
For I am with thee, says the Lord, to save thee: though I make a full end of
all Nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of
thee.

The Babilonian, Persian, Grecian, Monarchies have destroyed and ruined one
another, -- Sic Medus ademit
Assyrio, Syroque tulit moderamina Perses, etc.
but still the Church of Christ lifts up its Head, and beholds their ruins.

Secondly, This Presence of Christ in and with his Ordinances is undeniably
evinced, from their Supernatural effects upon the Souls of Men; 2 Cor. 10. 4.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds. It Is the Spirit of Christ that gives them their
success and efficacy: The Sword of the Gospel has its point and edge, but it
is impossible the Heart of a stupid hardened sinner should ever be pricked or
wounded by it, if the Spirit of Christ did not manage it. When sinners fall
down convinced under the authority of the Word, they feel, and readily
acknowledge, that God is in it of a truth, I Cor. 14. 25. Ruffinus reports,
that at the Council of Nice, a godly man, of no great learning, was the
instrument of converting a learned Philosopher, whom the Bishops with all their
Arguments could not persuade; of which the Philosopher himself gave this
remarkable account, Whilst you reasoned with me, said he, against words, I
opposed words, and what was spoken, I overthrew by the art of speaking; but
when, in stead of words, power came out of the mouth of the speaker, words
could no longer withstand truth, nor Man resist the power of God.

And this indeed is the true and just account of all those mavelous and
gracious changes made upon the Souls of Men by the Preaching of the Gospel: Can
the vanishing breath of a dying Man, think you, inspire Spiritual and Eternal
Life into the Souls of other Men? Can he search the Conscience, break the
Heart, and bow the Will at this rate? No, no, this is the Power and Operation
of Christ; Mr. Anth. Burgess on 1 Cor. 3.
and of that Presence we must say, says a Reverend Author, as Martha did to
her Savior, concerning the Death of her Brother Lazarus, John 11. 21. Lord if
thou had been here my Brother had not dyed. So, say I, if that Presence and
Power of Christ were felt by all, which has been certainly experienced and
felt by many, they had not remained in the state of Spiritual Death as they do.
But though there be thousands under Ordinances that never felt this Power of
Christ upon them, yet blessed be God there are also multitudes of Witnesses and
Evidences of this Truth, that there is a Real, Spiritual, Energetical Presence
of Christ in his own appointments; which was the first thing to be evinced.

Secondly, The second thing requiring Explication, is the Uses and Ends which
makes such a Presence of Christ necessary. And they are

1. To Preserve and Support his Ministers and Churches amidst such Hosts of
potent and enraged Enemies: This Presence of Christ is as a wall of Fire round
about them. It was the Divine Presence with Jeremiah that was as a Lifeguard
to him, against the rage of the Princes and Nobles of Israel, Jer. 15. 20, 21.
I will make thee unto this People a fenced brazen Wall, and they shall fight
against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee to
save thee and to deliver thee, says the Lord: And I will deliver thee out of
the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

It was easier for the Roman Army to scale the Walls, and batter down the
Towers of Jerusalem, than for all the Enemies in Jerusalem to destroy this
Prophet of God thus immured by the Divine Presence. Athanasius and Luther had
the Power of the Empire engaged against them, yet the Presence of Christ was
their security. The Witnesses could not be slain till they had finished their
Testimony, Rev. 11. 7. To this Presence alone the faithful Witnesses of Christ
owe their mavelous preservation at this day; had not Christ said, Lo, I am
with you, you had not said at this day, behold our Ministers are still with us.

Secondly, The Presence of Christ is necessary to assist and enable his
Ministers in their Work, for it is a Work quite above their own strength; it is
well we are Workers-together with God, else we should soon faint under our
Labors. When Moses objected, I am not eloquent, the Lord told him, I will be
with thy Mouth, Exodus 4. 10. When God guides the Tongue how powerful and
persuasive must the Language be! When the Apostles, illiterate men, were sent
out to convert the World, Christ promised to give them a Mouth and Wisdom, Luke
21. 15. a Mouth to speak, and Wisdom to guide that Mouth; and then their words
were demonstrations, all their adversaries could not resist that Spirit and
Power by which they spoke. Empires and Kingdoms full of Enemies, received the
Gospel; but the reason of this wonderful success is given us, in Mark 16. 20.
They went out and Preached every where, the Lord working with them. It Is sweet
and prosperous working in fellowship with Christ: The Spirit of Christ gives a
manifold assistance to his Ministers in their Work; it is he that guides and
directs their minds in the choice of those Subjects wherein they labor with
such success to their Hearers. He dictates the Matter, influences their
Affections, guides their Lips, follows home their Doctrine with success; and
this is a special Use and End of Christ's Presence with his Ministers and
Ordinances.

Thirdly, The Spiritual Presence of Christ is necessary for the preparation and
opening of the peoples Hearts to receive and embrace the Gospel to Salvation;
not an Heart will open to receive Christ till the Spirit of Christ unlock them.
Paul and Timothy were extraordinarily called to Preach the Gospel at Macedonia,
there Lydia was converted; but how? Not by their Skill or Eloquence, but the
Spirits influence, Acts 16. 14. The Lord opened the Heart of Lydia. The Church
could not be propagated without Conversion; Conversion could never be wrought
without Christ's Influence and Spiritual Presence. So that this Presence is of
absolute necessity; the Church cannot subsist, nor the great ends of Ordinances
attained without it.

The first Inference.
Is Christ really Present in all Gospel Administrations, how awfully Solemn
then is every part of Gospel Worship? We having to do with Christ himself, and
not with Men only, in Gospel Ordinances. Happy were it, if, under this
Consideration, all our People did receive the Word we Preach, as the
Thessalonians did, not as the Word of Man, but as the Word of God, 1 These. 2.
13. then it would Work effectually in us as it did in them. But alas! We have
loose and low apprehensions of the Word; we come to Judge the Gifts of the
Speaker, not to have our Minds informed, our Consciences searched, our Lusts
mortified, and our Lives regulated. But oh, that Men would realize the Presence
of Christ in Ordinances, and seriously consider that Word of his, Rev. 2. 23.
All the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the Reins and Hearts,
and I will give to every one of you according to your Works.

How would it compose vain and wandering Hearts unto holy seriousness! Oh, if
Men would but consider that they are before the Lord Jesus Christ, as Cornelius
and his Family did, Acts 10. 33. We are all here present before God, to hear
all things that are commanded thee of God. If they would consider the Word as
the executioner of Gods eternal Decrees which returns not in vain, but
accomplishes that whereunto God sends it, Isa. 55. 11. and eventually proves
the savor of Life or Death eternal to them that sit under it, 2 Cor. 2. 16. In
a word, were it but considered as the Rule by which its hearers shall be judged
in the great Day, Ioh. 12. 48. then how would Men tremble at the Word? What
mighty effects would it have upon their Hearts? How would it run and be
glorified? But alas, as Job speaks, Job 9. 11. He goes by me, and I see him
not; he passes on also, but I perceive him not. Few realize the Spiritual
Presence of Christ in Ordinances.

Second Inference.
If Christ be really present with his Churches and Ordinances, how vain are all
the attempts of Enemies to subvert and destroy them? That promise, Matthew. 28.
ult. supposes the continuance of a Gospel Church and Ministry to the end of the
World, else there would be a Promise without a Subject; as de Iure, there ought
to be a Church, so de facto, there shall be a Church with Ministers and
Ordinances, let Satan and Antichrist do their worst. I do not say this Promise
secures this or that particular Church or Nation, for the presence of Christ is
moveable from one place to another, but still the Church is safe. And there are
three things that secure it against all hazards.

First, The invaluable Treasures God has lodged in the Church, viz. his
Truths, his Worship, and his Elect; such a precious Cargo secures the Vessel
that carries it, what ever Storms or Tempests may befall it.

Secondly, The Covenant and Promise of God, with the Church, is its abundant
security, Matthew. 16. 18. Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it. The faithfulness of God is pawned for his
Peoples security. If the Church fail God's faithfulness must fail with it.

Thirdly, But above all, the Presence of Christ, in the midst of it, puts it
out of all danger of miscarrying. In that Promise, Lo, I am with you always, are
found all munitions and fortifications whatsoever: Here we have his Eye of
Providence, his Hand of Power, and whatsoever else is needful to support and
secure it. God accounts his Presence our safety, Isa. 41. 10. The Enemies of
God and his People account it so too, Exodus 14. 25. and shall it not be so in
our own account? Provoke not the Lord Jesus to withdraw his Presence, and fear
not the consultations and oppositions of Hell or Earth.

Third Inference.
From this Spiritual Presence of Christ all his faithful Ministers should draw
encouragement amidst the manifold difficulties and discouragements, they daily
encounter, in his Work and Service. Christ is with them, they Work in
Fellowship with him, let them not be dismayed.

The difficulties and discouragements the Ministers of Christ meet with are
great and many; and the more faithful and successful any of them are in their
Masters Work, the fiercer opposition they must expect: Besides all the
discouragements rising out of their own Hearts, which are not a few, they must
encounter.

First, The opposition of Enemies from abroad. Secondly, The obstinacy and
stubornness of the Hearts they work upon; Satan is a jealous Prince, and will
raise all manner of outcries and oppositions against those heavenly Heralds,
that come to Proclaim a new Prince in his Dominions, and withdraw his miserable
Subjects from their cursed Allegiance to him. What is it to Preach the Gospel
(said Luther) but to derive the fury of the World upon the Head of that
Preacher? But this would be easily supportable, did our Work but prosper upon
the hearts of our hearers; but this alas, is the killing consideration of all;
we know the worth of Souls, and how great a service it is to save them from
death, James 5. 20. We also know the terrors of the Lord, which excite our
utmost endeavors to persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. We feel the compassions of
Christ stirring in our own bowels, which makes us long after their Salvation,
Phil. 1. 8. We preach, we pray, yea, we travail again as it were in birth until
Christ be formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. And when we have done all, we find their
Hearts as Iron and Brass, Ier. 6. 28. We mourn in secret when we cannot
prevail, and often times our Hands hang down with discouragement, and we are
ready to say with the Prophet, We will speak no more in his name, Jer. 20. 9.
But here is our relief, under all discouragements from abroad and at home; the
Work is Christ's, the Power is his, he is with us, and we are Workers together
with him. There was a time when Three thousand Souls were born to Christ at one
Sermon, it may be now Three thousand Sermons may be preached and not a Soul
Converted: Yet let us not be discouraged, a time of eminent Conversions is
Promised, and to be expected in these latter days, Ezekiel. 47. 9. when the living
waters of the Gospel shall make every thing to live whither they come. And when
the Fishers ( i. e.) the Ministers of Christ shall not fish with Angles as now
they do, taking now one, then another single Convert, but shall spread forth
their Nets, but enclose multitudes at a draught; When they Shall flee as a
Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows. God now opens a door of opportunity
beyond expectation; Oh that the Hearts of Ministers and People were suitably
enlarged, and the People made willing in the day of his Power.

Fourth Inference.
Hence we also infer the great dignity of the ministerial Office, and the
suitable respect and honor due to all Christ's faithful Ministers.

The Lord Jesus himself is represented by them, they stand in his stead, 2 Cor.
5. 20. his authority is clothed upon them; the honors and dishonours given
them, redounds to the person of Christ, Luke 10. 16. The Galathians received
Paul as an Angel of Gold, even as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4. 14.

Yet how have their Persons and Office been vilified and despised in this
degenerate age! How many Learned, Pious, Laborious, Peaceful Ministers of
Christ have in this age, been hunted up and down the World as wild Beasts, been
made the filth and offscouring of all things unto this day, I Cor. 4. 13. The
Word signifies that dirt and filth which Scavengers rake together in the
Streets, to be carried to the Dunghill. No doubt but Satan drives a great design
in this to invalidate their Ministry, discourage their Labors, and break their
Hearts: but Jesus Christ will support us under all these abuses, wipe off the
dirt thrown at us, for his Name sake, and reserve some of us for better days.

Fifth Inference.
Is Christ Present in his Ordinances, what a strong engagement then lies upon
you all, to attend and wait assiduously upon the Ministry of the Word, and to
bring all yours, that are capable, there to wait upon Christ with you? We read
in the days of Christ's flesh, when he performed his miraculous Cures upon the
Sick, what thronging there was after him; how Parents brought their Children,
Masters their Servants, pressing in multitudes, untyling the House to let down
their Sick to him, Luke 12. 1. Ah, shall Men be so earnest for a Cure for their
Bodies, and so indifferent for their Souls? It Is true, the Spirit of Christ is
not tied by any necessity to act always with the World; he acts as an arbitrary
Agent, John 13. 8. The Wind blows where it lists: but it is engagement
enough to wait continually upon his Ordinances, that he sometimes graciously
and effectually concurreth with them. It Is good to lie in the way of the
Spirit, and there is a blessing pronounced upon them that wait continually at
his Gates, Prove. 8. 34. Oh therefore neglect no season within your reach, who
knows but that may be the season of Life to thy Soul?

Sixth Inference.
What an unspeakable loss is the loss of the Gospel, seeing the Presence of
Christ comes and goes with it? When the Gospel departs, the Spirit of Christ
departs with it from among Men; no more conversions, in Gods ordinary way, are
then to be expected: well therefore might the Lord say, in Hosea 9. 12. Woe to
them when I depart from them. The Spirit may in some sense depart whilst the
Ordinances are left standing for a time among the People, but then expect no
such blessings or benefits from them. But when God takes away Ordinances and
Spirit too, woe indeed to that People; and are there not Sins amongst us
presaging such a Judgment? Oh England reflect upon thy barrenness under it;
where be the fruits answerable to such precious means? The Gospel is a golden
Lamp, the graces of the Spirit communicated by it are golden Oil; as in that
stately vision, Zach. 4. will God maintain such a lamp fed with such precious
Oil for men to trifle and play by?

And no less ominous and portentous- is that bitter enmity to the Gospel and
the serious professors of it, which (I cannot speak without horror) is every
where found among us; this great hatred brings on the days of visitation, and
the days of recompense with a swift and dreadful motion upon any people, Hosea
9. 7.

Seventh Inference.
If Christ be present by way of Spirit and energy in his Ordinances, then there
is no reason to despair of the Conversion and Salvation of the greatest of
sinners that yet lie dead under the Gospel. What though their Hearts be hard,
their Understandings dark, and their Wills never so perverse and obstinate, all
must give way and open in the day of Christ's power, when his Spirit joins
himself with the Word. This makes it an irresistible Word; it is glorious to
observe the hearts of Publicans and Harlots opening and yielding to the voice
of Christ, Matthew. 21. 31. What were those three thousand persons pricked at the
Heart by Peter's Sermon, Acts 2. 36. but the very Men that with wicked Hands had
crucified the Lord Jesus? And what were the converted Corinthians, but
Idolaters turned from dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 12. 2. Whoremongers, Adulterers,
Effeminate, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 11. God has his elect among the vilest of Men: The
Gospel will find them out, and draw them home to Christ, when the Spirit of
Christ animates and blesses it. Well might the Apostle therefore say, that the
Gospel preached with the Holy Ghost, sent down from Heaven, is an object worthy
for Angels to behold with admiration, 1 Pet. 1. 12. What though Satan have
strongly fortified their Souls against Christ, with ignorance, prejudice and
enmity; yet the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to pull down
these strong holds. Despair not therefore of your carnal and dead hearted
relations, bring them to the Gospel upon the encouragement of these words of
Christ, Ioh. 5. 25. The hour comes, yea and now is, that the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live.

Eighth Inference.
Is Christ Spiritually present in his Ordinances, oh then what an indeared
affection should every gracious Soul bear to the Ordinances of God! They are
the walks of Christ and his Spirit; the appointed times and places for your
meeting and Communion with him; there your Souls first met with Christ, there
you began your acquaintance with him; there you have had many sweet converses
with him since that day; they were the seed of your regeneration, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
The bread of life by which your Souls have been sustained ever since, and
therefore to be more esteemed by you than your necessary food, Job 23. 12. Here
you have found the richest Cordials to revive and recover your drooping
Spirits, when ready to sink away in a faint fit under sin within you and
afflictions upon you, Psalm. 119. 50. No wonder David's Soul even fainted for the
Courts of God, and that Hezekiah desired a sign on his sick bed, that he should
go up to the House of the Lord. Here are the choicest comforts of the Saints
upon Earth; all our fresh springs are in Zion, Psalm. 87. 7. What a dungeon,
what a barren Wilderness were this World without them! Prize the Ordinances,
love the Ordinances, wait assiduously upon the Ordinances, and pray for the
liberty and efficacy of the Gospel, that it may set no more in your days, nor
in the days of your posterity.

SERMON III.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold I [Stand] at the door and knock, etc.
HAving finished Christ's solemn Preface, and cleared the manner of his Presence
in his Churches and Ordinances: I now come to a third Observation, which is
necessarily implied in these words, Behold I stand at the door and knock; and
that sad Truth therein implied is this,

DOCTRINE.
That the Hearts of Men are naturally locked up and fast barred against Jesus
Christ their only Savior.

If it were not so, what need were there of all that pains and patience, used
and exercised by Christ, in waiting patiently, and knocking importunately, for
entrance into the Hearts of Men? To keep a clear method in this point, three
things must be stated in the Doctrinal part, 1. How it appears the Hearts of
Men are thus shut up. 2. What are those Locks and Bars that shut them up. 3.
That no Power of Man can remove these Bars.


First, That all Hearts are naturally shut and made fast against Christ, is a
sad but certain truth; we read, John 1. 11, 12. He came unto his own, and his
own received him not, etc. He came unto his own People from whose stock he
sprang up; a People to whom he had been prefigured, in all the Sacrifices and
Types of the Law; and in whom they might all clearly discern the accomplishment
of them all. His Doctrines and his Miracles plainly told them who he was, and
whence he came; yet few discerned or received him as the Son of God. Christ
found the Doors of Men's Hearts generally shut against him, save only a few
whose Hearts were opened by the Almighty Power of God, in the way of Faith,
verse. 12. these indeed received him, but all the rest excluded and denied
entrance to the Son of God. So again, in John 5. from 33. to 40. Christ reasons
with them, and gives undeniable demonstrations, that he was the Messiah come to
save them; proves it from the testimony of John verse. 33. Ye sent unto John,
and he bare witness unto the Truth; Tells them the design of his coming among
them was their Salvation, verse. 34. shows them the great Seal of Heaven, his
uncontrollable Miracles, vess. 36. The Works that I do, bear witness of me,
that the Father has sent me: And if that were not enough, he reminds them of
the immediate testimony given of him from Heaven, verse. 37. The Father himself
which has sent me, bath born witness of me. He did so at his Baptism, Matthew.
3. 17. And lo a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased. And so again, at his transfiguration upon the holy Mount, Math.
17. 5. While be yet spoke, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them; and behold
a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him. He bids them search the Scriptures, and critically
examine his perfect correspondence to them, verse. 39. Enough one would think to
open the door of every Man's understanding and Heart to receive him with fullest
satisfaction: and yet after all behold the unreasonable obstinacy and
resistance of their Hearts against him, verse. 40. Ye will not come unto me that
you might have life.

Not a Soul will open, with all the reasons and demonstrations in the World,
till the Almighty power of God be pur forth to that end. If another come in his
own name (says he, verse. 43.) Him will ye receive; Any body rather than the
Son of God: Every cheat can impose upon you easily, it is to me only your Hearts
have such strong aversations. Now there is a twosold shutting up of the Heart
against Jesus Christ.

1. Natural. 2. Judicial.
First, Natural, every Soul comes into this World shut up and fast closed
against the Lord Jesus. The very Will of Man which is the freest and most
arbitrary faculty, come^ into the World barred and bolted against Christ, Romans
8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. Phil. 2. 13. It Is God that works in you both
to will and to do of his own good pleasure. This is a dismal effect of the
fall, who feels not strong aversations, violent rebellions, and obstinate
resistances in his own Heart when moving toward Christ in the first weak and
trembling acts of Faith?

Secondly, There is a Judicial shutting up of the Heart against Christ. This is
a sore and tremendous stroke of God, punishing former rebellions, Psalm. 81. 11,
12. Israel would have none of me, so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts.
This looks like a prelude of Damnation, a very near preparation to ruin.
Israel would have none of me, there is the natural shutting up of the Heart, So
I gave them up, there is the judicial shutting up of the Heart; they would not
hear, they shall not hear. Oh fearful Judgment! Thus the Lord gave up the
Heathens, Romans 1. 26. they had abused their natural light, and now their minds
are judicially darkened; given up to a sottish and injudicious mind, not able to
distinguish Duty from sin, Safety from danger; a mind that should elect the
worst things, and reprobate the best. This was the reprobate mind unto which
God gave them up; What sadder word can the Lord speak than this, unless it be
take him Devil? It Is true, those that God shuts up he can open, and those whom
Justice shuts up, Mercy can set free; but it is beyond all the power of Angels
and Men to do it, Job 12. 14. He shuts up a Man and there can be no opening.
These two closures of the Heart, are not always found together, in the same
subject, and blessed be God they are not. Christ meets with many a repulse, and
indures with much patience the gainsayings of sinners, before he pronounce that
dreadful sentence upon them, Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go and tell this people, hear ye
indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not: Make the heart
of this people fat, andC.

But when it comes to this once, dreadful is the case of such Souls; and none
are in greater danger of this Spiritual Judicial stroke of God, than those that
have sat long under the light, rebelling against it. That Is the first thing,
The Hearts of Men by nature are locked and shut up against Christ.

Secondly, In the next place, Let us examine what those Locks and Bars are
which oppose and forbid Christ's entrance into the Hearts of poor sinners. And
they will be found to be 1. Ignorance. 2. Unbelief. 3. Pride. 4. Custom in sin.
5. Presumption. 6. Prejudices against the ways of holiness.
Bars enough to secure the Soul in Satan's possession, and frustrate all the
designs of Mercy, except an Almighty power from Heaven break them asunder.

First Bar.
The first Bar making fast the Soul of Man against Christ, is Ignorance, that
obex infernalis, that hellish Bolt, which effectually keeps Christ out of the
Soul.

If Knowledge be the Key that opens the Heart to Christ, as its plain it is,
from Luke 11. 52. where Christ denounces a woe to them that took away the Key
of Knowledge; then Ignorance must needs be the shutter that makes fast the door
of the Heart against Christ. Upon this ground Christ told the Woman of Samaria,
John 4. 10. that her Infideli^y grew upon the root of her Ignorance, If thou
(...) the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou
would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. Ah
sinners, did you but know what a Christ he is that is offered to your Souls in
the Gospel, did you see his beauty, fullness, and suitablness, and feel your own
necessities of him, all the World could not keep you from him: You would break
through all reproaches, all sufferings, all self-denials, to come into the
enjoyment of him. But alas, it is with you as it was with those, Cant. 5. 9.
What is thy beloved (say they to the Spouse) more than another beloved, that
thou do so charge us? Unknown excellencies attract not: Ignorance is Satan's
Scepter, which he sways over all his Kingdom of darkness, and holds his Vassals
in miserable bondage to him. Hence the Devils are called, The rulers of the
darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6. 12. Alas, were the Eyes of sinners but opened
to see their woeful state, and their remedy in Christ, he could never hold them
in subjection one day longer; they would break away from under his cruel
Government, and run over by Thousands to Christ; for so they do as soon as ever
God opens their Eyes; in the same hour they are turned from darkness to light,
they are also turned from the power of Satan to God, Acts 28. 16. Oh, that you
did but know the worth of your Souls, the dreadful danger they are in, and the
fearf^l wrath that hangs over them; the willingness and ability of Christ to
save them, you could not sleep one night longer in the state you are: The next
cry would be, what shall I do to be saved? Who will show me the way to Christ?
Help Ministers, help Christians, yea, help Lord; these would be the laments and
cries of them that are now secure and quiet; but the God of this World has
blinded the Eyes of them that believe not. No cries for a Physician, because no
sense how their Souls are stabbed by sins of commission, and starved by sins of
omission. Oh, that the great Physician would once apply his excellent eye salve
to your understandings which are yet darkened with gross ignorance both of your
misery and remedy.

The Second Bar.
The Second Bar or Lock that shuts Christ out of Men's Souls, is the sin of
Unbelief; this is one of the strongest holds of Satan wherein he trusts; this
is a sin that not only locks up the Heart of a sinner, but also binds up the
Hand of a Savior, Matthew. 13. 58. He could do no mighty works there, because of
their unbelief.

It obstructed his miraculous Works when he was on Earth, and it obstructs his
gracious Works now he is in Heaven. A Savior is come into the World, but poor
Unbeliever, thy Soul can neither have Union nor Communion with him till this
Bar of thy unbelief be removed. The Gospel is come among us with mighty
Arguments to convince, and powerful Motives to persuade, but little saving
effect follows; its main design is to many frustrated, and all this through
unbelief shutting up and hardening Men's hearts under it. The Word preached did
not profit them because of their unbelief, Heb. 4. 2. Ah cursed Bar! Which
shuts up thy Heart, shuts out thy Savior, and will effectually shut thee out
of Heaven except the Almighty power of God break it asunder: They could not
enter in because of unbelief. The ruin of Souls is laid at the Door of
unbelief; it is the damning sin, Mark 16. 16. and truly called so, because no
other sin could damn but in the virtue of this sin. That Is the Second Bar to
Christ.

Third Bar.
The Third Bar denying entrance to Christ into the hearts of sinners is Pride,
and stoutness of Spirit. The natural Heart is a proud Heart; it lives upon its
own stock, it cannot stoop to a sincere and universal renunciation of its own
righteousness, Romans 10. 3. Being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and
going about to establish their own righteousness (...) they have not submitted
to the righteousness of God. Pride stiffens the Will that it cannot stoop or
condescend to declare their own emptiness, discover their own shame, and live
wholly upon the righteousness of another. Proud nature had as live be damned as
deny it self in such appoint as this is; this makes Faith so exceeding
difficult, because it involves such deep points of self-denial in it; to give
up all to Christ, to draw all from Christ, and to be willing to part with all
for Christ, what Will can be brought to a deliberate consent to such things as
these, unless an omnipotent Power bow it? It Is natural to Men rather to eat a
brown crust, or wear a course ragged garment which they can call their own,
than to feed upon the richest dainties, or wear the costliest garments which
they must receive as an alms or gift from another. Oh, how hard is it to subdue
this pride of the Heart, even after light and conviction is come into the Soul,
to convince Men of their undone condition, and the absolute necessity of an
other and higher righteousness than their own? When Souls are in a treaty with
Christ, and the match is almost made; this is the sin that makes the last
opposition. Feign would they come to Christ, ten thousand Worlds for a Christ;
but yet they think they must not approach him without some qualifications which
are yet wanting. But Soul, if ever Christ and thou conclude the match, thou
must deny Self even in this, the most refined form and interest of it, and come
as Abraham did, naked and empty handed to him that justifies the ungodly. Down
with this House-Idol thy self, thy righteous self, trimmed up like another Agag
with such specious pretenses of humility.

Fourth Bar.
The fourth Bar forbiding Christ's entrance into the Soul is custom in sin. Sin
has so fixed it self, by long continuance in the Soul, the Soul is so settled
and confirmed in its course, that all arguments and persuasions to change our
way are swept away by the power of custom, as straws and feathers are by the
rapid course of a mighty torrent, Ier. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to
do evil. Soap and Nitre may as soon make a Blackmoor white, or fetch the spots
out of the Leopards skin (which are not accidental, but connate) as the
reasonings of Men can prevail to remove the mighty power of customary sin.
Physicians find it a hard thing to Cure a Cakexia or ill habit of Body; It Is a
grave and serious note of Seneca, A teneris assuescere, multum est. It Is a
great matter to be accustomed this way or that from our childhood; every
repeated act of sin confirms and strenghtens the habit; and hence it is that we
see so few Conversions in old Age. It was a wonder in the Primitive times that
Marcus Caius Victorius embraced Christianity in the sixtieth year of his age;
take an habituated Drunkard, a self-righteous Moralist, lay before them the
necessity of a change, and you shall find it as easy to stop the course of a
River with the breath of your Mouth, as to stop them in an accustomed course of
sinning. That Is the fourth Bar to Christ.

Fifth Bar.
The Fifth Bar opposing and resisting Christ's entrance into the Soul is the sin
of Presumption; this is the sin that parts Christ and thousands of Souls in the
World; presuming, they hope, and hoping, they perish; when Men presume their
condition is safe already, their Souls never make out after a Savior. This was
the ruin of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 17. Because thou say, I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. This damning
presumption is discovered in three things, (1) Many think they have that grace
which they have not, mistaking the Similar for the saving Works of the Spirit;
a fatal mistake never rectified with many thousands till it be too late. (2)
They presume to find that mercy in God, which they will never find; for all the
saving mercies of God are dispensed to Men through Christ in the way of
Regeneration and Faith, Jude verse. 21. (3) They presume upon that time for
Repentance and Faith hereafter, which their Eyes shall never see. And thus
presumption locks up the Heart against Christ, and leaves sinners perishing in
the presence of a Savior. They make a bridge of their own shadow and so perish
in the Waters.

Sixth Bar.
The Sixth and last sin barring up the Heart against Christ, is a strong
prejudice against holiness, and the strict duties of Religion. Thus in the very
infancy of Christianity the World was scared and driven off from Religion by
the common prejudices that lay upon the Professors of it, Acts, 28. 22. As
concerning this Sect we know that every where it is spoken against.

Thus Justin Martyr complains, that Christians were every where condemned (...)
by common same; and upon this account Christ pronounces a woe upon the World
because of offenses, Matthew. 18. 7. Alas! it will be the ruin of Thousands;
some have sucked in such prejudicate Opinions and vile Notions of Religion, and
its Professors, as makes them irreconcilable enemies to it. Satan has dressed it
up in their fancies in such an odious form and representation that makes them
loath both name and thing. These prejudices are drawn from various things;
sometimes from the necessary duties of Christianity, which are laid as crimes
upon the people of God, Psalm. 69. 10. When I wept and chastned my Soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach. Sometimes the groundless and malicious
slanders and inventions of the enemies of Christianity, are the occasions of
real prejudices to the World, Ier. 18. 18. Come let us devise devices against
Jeremiah, and let us smite him with the Tongue. Sometimes the innocent and
serious Professors of godliness are censured and condemned for hypocritical
professors sakes, who never heartily espoused Religion. And lastly, the ways of
holiness suffer for the slips and infirmities of weak Christians; who commonly
give too many occasions to disgust the World against the ways of God.

By these things multitudes are kept off from attendance upon the means of
Grace, and multitudes more have their Hearts shut up from receiving any saving
benefit under them.

These are the common Bars and Locks by which the strong Man armed secures his
possession in the Souls of sinners; and these Bars are too strong for any power
beneath the Almighty power and Arm of God to remove or break; it is said, Acts
14. 27. That the Lord opened a door of Faith to the Gentiles: The Arm of the
Lord must be revealed or none will open to Christ by Faith, Isa. 53. 1.

1. The iron Bar of the Law, that thundering terrible Law, cannot force open
the Heart of an unbeliever; all the dreadful curses flying out of its fiery
mouth, make no more impression than a Tennis ball against a wall of Marble,
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. You read of them that hear the words of this Curse, yet bless
themselves in their Heart, saying, they shall have peace though they walk in
the imagination of their Hearts, to add Drunkenness to Thirst.

They play with Hell and Eternal Torments, rush into iniquity as the Horse
rusheth into the Battle, act as men in love with their own Death, as those that
are at an agreement with Hell. Oh the besotting, hardening, infatuating power of
sin.

2. The Golden Key of free Grace cannot in it self remove these Bars, and open
men's Hearts to Christ, Matthew. 11. 17. We have piped unto you, but ye have not
danced. The melodious and delicious Airs of Grace, Mercy, Peace and Pardon,
affect not the dead Hearts of unbelievers: Like deaf Adders they stop their
Ears at the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. These Gospel
melodies only dispose them to a more quiet sleep in sin.

3. No works of Providence are in themselves sufficient to open the Hearts of
Men to Christ. 1. The Judgments of God cannot do it; thousands have been made
sick with smiteing, that yet cannot be made sick for sin. I have consumed them,
but they refused to receive correction; they have made their Faces harder then
a Rock, they have refused to return, Jer. 5. 3. Messengers of Judgment are
abroad, smiting some in their Estates, scattering in one day the labor of many
years; and therein giving a warning blow at the Conscience to make sure of
Christ, and the World to come, since their comfort and happiness is scattered
in this World. Some are smitten in their dearest relations, Death knocks at
their doors and carries out the delight of their Eyes, and with the same
admonishes their Souls to place their happiness in more durable comforts: Some
are smitten in their Bodies with Diseases, giving warning of the near approach
of their latter end, and bidding them prepare for another habitation; but all
in vain. 2ly, No mercies of God are in themselves sufficient to open the
obstinate Hearts of sinners to Christ. God has heapt up mercies by multitudes
upon many of you, all these mercies of God lead you to repentance, Romans 2. 4,
5. They take you in a friendly way by the Hand, and thus talk with you, Ah,
sinner! how can thou grieve! and dishonor that God that thus feeds,
clotheth and comfort thee on every side? Do you thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise? Yet all will not do, neither Judgments nor Mercies
can affright or allure the carnal Heart to Jesus Christ. It Is his Spirit, his
Almighty power alone that opens these everlasting Gates, and makes these strong
Bars give way and fly at his voice.

I. Inference.
Behold here the dismal state of nature, the woeful condition of all
unregenerate Souls; Christ the Redeemer shut out, Sin and Satan shut in. This
is the horrid state of nature shut up in unbelief, Romans 4. 32. Ah, Lord, what a
condition is this! We should certainly account it an unspeakable misery to be
shut into a House haunted by the Devil, where we should be continually scared
and frighted with dreadful noises and apparitions; but alas, what is an
apparition of the Devil without us, to the inhabitation of the Devil within us?
Nay what is the possession of a Body, to Satan's possession of the Soul? Yet
this is the very case of the unregenerate, Luke 11. 21. The strong Man armed
keeps the Palace, till Christ dispossess him by Sovereign victorious Grace.
Poor wretch, can thou start at a supposed vision of a Spirit, and not tremble
to think that thy Soul is the habitation of Devils? There is a twofold misery
lying upon all Christless unregenerated persons; Satan is 1. Their Ruler in
this World. 2. Their Tormenter in that to come.


1. He is their Ruler in this World, the Spirit that now works in the
Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 3. Look as the holy Spirit of God dwells
and rules in sanctified Souls, walks in them as in hallowed Temples, guiding
and comforting the Souls of the Saints; so Satan dwells in unregenerate Hearts,
actuating their lusts, inflaming them with his temptations, using their
faculties and members as instruments of unrighteousness. And then

2ly, He will be their Tormenter in the World to come: He that Tempts now, will
Torment then, Matthew. 25. 41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Flee therefore and escape for your
lives, sleep not quietly another Night in so dismal and dreadful estate. If the
Son make you free, then are you free indeed.

II. Inference.
What a glorious and admirable effect of Sovereign omnipotent grace is the
effectual conversion of a sinner unto God!

If every Heart by nature be secured for Satan under so many Locks and Bars,
then the opening of any Heart to Christ is deservedly mavelous in our Eyes:
You all acknowledge that the opening of the Graves at the Resurrection will be
a glorious display of Almighty power, and so it will; it will be a wonderful
thing to behold the Graves opened and the dead raised at the voice of the
Archangel and the trump of God; but yet give me leave to say, That the opening
of thy Heart, poor sinner, to receive Christ, is a more glorious work than that
of raising the dead: It is therefore deservedly put into the first rank of the
great mysteries of godliness, that Christ is believed on in the World, 1 Timothy
3. 16. He that well views and considers Christ, may justly wonder that all the
Hearts in the enlightened World do not stand wide open to embrace him; and he
that shall consider the frame and temper of the natural Heart, and how strongly
Satan has entrenched and fortified himself in it, may justly wonder to hear of
a work of Conversion in an age. Oh Brethren consider the marvels of Conversion,
the wonderful works of God upon the Soul that opens unto Christ by Faith.

1. There Is a new Eye created in the mind, The Son of God is come and has
given us an understanding that we may know him that is true, 1 John 5. 20. Oh
that Eye! That precious Eye of Faith which shows the Soul as it were a new
World, a World of new and ravishing objects, Ephesians. 5. 8. All the Angels in
Heaven, Ministers, and Libraries upon Earth, cannot create such an Eye, give
such an Illumination; it is only he that commanded the light to shine out of the
darkness, that thus shines into our Hearts to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

2ly, And what a glorious supernatural Work is the conviction of the Conscience
by the powerful stroke of the saving beams of light upon it? Now the
Conscience, that lay in a dead sleep, begins to startle and look about it with
fear and horror. Life and sense is got into it, and now it cries, ah, sick,
sick, sick at the Heart for sin, sick for a Savior.

3ly, And no less marvelous an effect of the Almighty power is the bowing of
the stuborn Will so efficaciously, so congruously, and so determinately and
fixedly to the Lord Jesus.

The Will is efficaciously determined so as no power of Hell or Nature can
resist or frustrate, that Mighty power which works effectually in all them
that believe, 1 These. 2. 13. Yet it works not by way of compulsion, but in a
way congruous and agreeable to the nature of the Will, Hosea 11. 4. I drew them
with the cords of a Man, with the bands of love. Satan bids for the Soul,
Christ infinitely outbids all his offers; Eternal, Spiritual, and unsearchable
Riches, instead of sensitive, perishing enjoyments, which determine the choice
of the Will in its own natural method, by the sight of the excelling glory of
Spiritual things. And thus the mighty supernatural power of God opens that
Heart which Satan had secured so many ways against Christ.

III. Inference.
Hence it also follows, that Man has no free will of his own to supernatural
good. The Will cannot by its own power open it self to receive Christ by faith.
When it does open to him, it is not virtute innata, sed illata, not by its
natural power, but by the power of God upon it. The admirers of Nature talk
much of the Sovereignty, Virginity, and Liberty of the Will, as if it alone had
escaped the fall, and that no more but a moral swasion is needed to open it to
Christ; that is, that God need do no more to save Men than the Devil does to
damn them. But if ever God make you sensible what the work of ^aving Conversion
is, you will quickly find that your Will is lame, its freedom to Spiritual
things gone; you will cry out of a wounded Will, as well as of a dark Head, and
a hard Heart. You will quickly find, That it is God alone that works in you
both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. That the birth of
the new Creature is not of the Will of Man, but of God, John 1. 13.

IV. Inference.
Learn hence the necessity of Conversion in order to Salvation. Christ and
Heaven are shut up against you till your hearts be savingly opened unto him.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, you must be born again, John 3. 5. O sinner,
that hard Heart of thine must be humbled; thy stubborn and refractory Will must
be bowed; all the powers of thy Soul must be unlockt, and opened unto Christ;
he must come into thy Soul, or thou can never see the face of God in peace.
It is Christ in you that is the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. Till thy Heart be
opened, Christ with all the hopes of glory stand without thee. And if hopes
from the death of Christ without us, without the application of his person, be
enough to save Men, then why are any damned? Consult 1 Cor. 1. 30. Adams sin
damns none but only such as are in him, and Christ's righteousness saves none
but those only that are by faith in him; the eternal purposes of the Father,
the meritorious death of the Son, puts no Man into the state of Salvation and
happiness till both be brought home by the Spirits powerful application in the
work of saving conversion. It Is good news, good indeed, that Christ died for
sinners; it is good news that Christ is brought to our very doors in the tenders
of the Gospel, and that the Spirit knocks at the door of our Hearts by many
convictions and persuasions to open to him and enjoy the unspeakable benefits
of his death: these things bring us nigh to Christ, the next door to Salvation,
and yet all this may be eventually but a dreadful aggravation of our damnation,
and will certainly be so to them whose Hearts are but almost opened to Christ.

V. Inference.
See hence the necessity of fervent prayer to accompany the preaching of the
Gospel. Without the Spirit and power of God accompanying the Word, no Heart can
ever be opened to Christ: Alas, such Bars as these are too strong for the
breath of Man to break. Let Ministers pray, and the People pray, that the
Gospel may be preached with the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
It greatly concerns us that preach the Gospel to wrestle with God upon our
knees to accompany us in the dispensation of it unto the People; to steep that
seed we sow among you in tears and prayers before you hear it; and I beseech
you Brethren let us not strive alone, join your cries to Heaven with ours, for
the blessing of the Spirit upon the Word. How does Paul beg of the People as a
beggar would beg for an alms at the door, for their assistance in Prayer, Romans
15. 30. I beseech you brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ sake, and for the love
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me.

For want of such wrestlings with God in prayer, there is so little efficacy in
Ordinances. Martha told her Savior, John 11. 21. Lord if thou had been here
my brother had not died; and I may tell you that if the Spirit had been here
your Souls had not remained dead under the Word as they do this day. Oh when
the Sabbath draws near, let fervent cries ascend from every Family to Heaven,
Lord pour out thy Spirit with thy Word; make it mighty through thy Power to
open these Gates of Iron, and break asunder these Bars of Brass.

Second Use of Exhortation.
Seeing the Case stands thus, that all Hearts by nature are barred and shut up
against Christ; let every Soul do what it can, and strive to its uttermost to
get the Heart and Will opened to Christ: Strive to enter in at the straight
gate; Christ is at the Door, Oh strive with your selves, as well as with God,
now to get it opened; now that Salvation is come so near to your Souls.

Object. Object.
But have you not told us that no sinner can open his own Heart, nor bow his
own Will to Christ?

Answ. Answ.
True he cannot convert himself, but yet he may do many things in order to it,
and which have a remote tendency toward it, which he does not do; and so he
perishes not, though he cannot, but because he will not.

Diverse things may be done by poor sinners with their own Hearts, which are not
done; and though in themselves they are insufficient, yet being the way and
method in and by which the Spirit of God usually works, we are bound to do
them. As for Example, (1.) Though it be not in your power to open your Hearts
to Christ* yet it is in your power to forbear the external acts of sin, which
fasten your Hearts the more against Christ: Who forces thine Hands to steal,
thy Tongue to swear or lie, who forces the cup of excess down thy Throat?
(2ly.) Though you cannot open your Hearts under the Word, yet it is in your
power to wait and attend upon the external Duties and Ordinances of the Gospel:
Why cannot those Feet carry thee to the Assemblies of the Saints, as well as to
an Alehouse? (3ly.) And though you cannot let the Word effectually into your
Hearts, yet certainly you can apply your minds with more attention and
consideration to it than you do: Who forces thine Eyes to wander, or closes
them with sleep, when the awful matters of eternal Life and Death, are founding
in thine Ears? (4ly.) Though you cannot open your Hearts to embrace Christ, yet
certainly you can reflect upon your selves when the obvious characters of a
Christless state are plainly held forth before your Eyes; God has given you a
self-reflecting power; The spirit of a Man knows the things of a Man, 1 Cor.
2. 11. When you hear of Convictions of sin, compunctions of Heart for sin, deep
concernments of the Soul about its eternal state, hungerings and thirstings
after Christ, restless and anxious Days and Nights about Salvation, others have
felt; you can certainly turn in upon your selves, and examine whether ever it
were so with you; and if not, methinks it were not hard to aggravate your own
misery to take your poor Souls aside, and bemoan them, saying, Ah my poor Soul,
can thou endure everlasting burnings? What will become of thee if Christ pass
thee by, and his Spirit strive no more with thee? Why cannot you throw your
selves at the Feet of God, and cry for mercy? Prayer is a part of natural
Worship, distress usually puts Men upon it that yet have no Grace, Jonah 1. 5.
Do but this toward the opening and saving of your own Souls, which though it
be not in it self sufficient, nor puts God under any meritorious obligation or
necessity, to add the rest; yet it puts you into the way of the Spirit: And is
not thy Soul sinner worth as much as this comes too? Have you not taken a great
deal more pains than this for the trifles of this World? And will it not be a
dreadful aggravation of sin and misery to all eternity that you perished so
easily? Don't you see many striving round about you for Christ and Salvation,
whilst you sit still with folded Arms as if you had nothing to do for another
World? The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force, Matthew. 11. 12.

Why should other Men's Souls be dearer to them than yours unto you? What
discouragements have you, which other Men have not? Or what encouragements have
they, which you have not? Say not, Object,
we have no assurance our pains shall prosper, or our strivings be made
effectual to Conversion; if there were any promise in the Gospel that such
endeavors should be seconded from Heaven, and made available to Salvation;
then we would strive as long as breath and life should last; but all this may
be to no purpose, we may be Christ-less, and hope-less when all is done.

But yet remember it is possible God may bless these weak endeavors and come
in by his Almighty Spirit with them: Sol.
Nay, it is highly probable that he will do so, and is a strong probability
nothing with you? Do you use to do no actions about your civil callings without
an assurance of success? When the Merchant adventures his Life or Estate at Sea
is he sure of a good return? Or does he not adventure upon the mere hopes and
probabilities of a gainful voyage? When the Husbandman plows his Lands, empties
both his bags and purse upon it, is he sure of a good harvest? May not a blast
come that shall defeat all his hopes? Yet he plowe^h and sows in hope; and
ordinarily God makes him partaker of his hope; but without such industry his
expectations would be vain. Away then with vain excuses, up and be doing in the
use of all appointed means, and the Lord be with you.

Third Use for Trial.
Before I dismiss this Point let us try our selves by it, whether God have
opened our Hearts to Christ; broken these Bars of Ignorance, Unbelief, Custom,
Prejudice, etc. and the Will stand wide open to receive Christ Jesus the Lord.

This is a solemn Use, the consequence of it great; Oh, that our faithfulness
and seriousness in the trial might be answerable. Try your selves by these
following marks,

I. Mark.
If your Eyes be not opened to see sin in its vileness, and Christ in his
glory, suitableness, and necessity; then sure your Hearts were never yet
effectually opened by the Gospel. I confess Men's Eyes may be opened to see sin,
and yet their Hearts at the same time shut up by unbelief against Christ; but
no Man's Heart can be opened to Christ whilst his Eyes are shut, John 6. 40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him may have everlasting life. The work of Faith is always wrought
in the light of Conviction; the cure of the Heart begins at the Eye of the
Mind, Acts 26. 18. To open their Eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God. God opens Men's Hearts by shining into them, 2
Cor. 4. 6. If therefore any Man's Eyes be still blinded with Ignorance,
Prejudice, etc. so that he apprehends not his own guilt and misery, nor sees
the worth and necessity of a Savior; that Man's Heart is still under Satan's
Lock and Bar, sin is shut in and Christ is shut out of that Man's Soul.

II. Mark.
No Heart opens to Christ by Faith till it be first pricked and wounded by
Compunction and Humiliation; this Heart-wounding work is always antecedent to
the work of Faith. I doubt not but your thoughts fore-run my Discourse to that
famous Scripture, Acts 2. 37. where Peter preaching to those that had crucified
Christ, and bringing up his Discourse close to their Consciences, in the
application of that Sermon, convincing them not only what an horrid and
atrocious crime the crucifying the Son of God was in it self; but also charging
it home upon them, Whom you have taken, and with wicked Hands have crucified
and slain: When they heard this, they were pricked at the Heart; and cried out,
Men and Brethren what shall we do? Upon this outcry three thousand Souls opened
in one hour to Christ* Now consider whether your Hearts have been thus pricked
and wounded? Has sorrow for sin pierced thy Soul? Vain sinner, that frothy
Heart of thine must be made to bleed, under Compunctions for sin, or there will
be no room for Christ in it. Come Souls, it is in vain to flatter your selves in
your own Eyes; reflect upon the frames of your Hearts, call back the days that
are past, and say, When was the Time, and where was the Place when thou layest
at the Foot of God sobbing and mourning upon the account of thy Sins? Did ever
God hear such a cry as this from thy Soul? Ah, Lord my Soul is distressed, I
roll hither and thither for ease and comfort, but find none: O the
insupportable weight of guilt! Oh the bitterness of sin! My Soul fails under
it, Lord undertake for me. I do not say, The degrees of Compunction and
Humiliation are equal in all Converts, neither their sins nor abilities to bear
sorrows for them are equal; but this I say, Thy Heart must ache for sin, or it
will never open to Christ; he binds up none but broken Hearts, Isa. 61. 1.

III. Mark.
If Christ be come into thy Heart, then the love and delight of every sin is
gone out of thy Heart. Christ and the love of sin cannot dwell together; what
Christ said to the Soldiers that apprehended him, in the Garden, the like he
says to every Soul that comes to apprehend him by Faith, If you seek me, let
these go their way; away with the sin thou most delightest in, Christ cannot
come in till these be gone, Isa. 55. 6, 7, 8. Seek ye the Lord while he may be
found, call ye upon him while he is near; let the wicked forsake his way and
the unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Here be the
terms of your Acceptance and Salvation plainly laid down, forsake thy ways and
thoughts; the way notes the external acts of sin, and the thoughts the internal
acts; both of contrivance, and delight in sin, both these must be forsaken; and
that is not all, for this makes up but a negative holiness, Let him return to
the Lord and he will have mercy. It is in vain for Men to make the door of
Salvation wider than God has made it; we cannot bring down Christ's terms lower
than he has set them; if we will not come up to them, Christ and we must part.
And this makes the great struggle, the sharp debate, in the Souls of Converts.
Oh, it is hard to give up pleasant and profitable lusts; but away they must go, a
Bill of Divorce must be signed for them, or you cannot be espoused to the Lord
Jesus. This will be found to be a harder tug than to part with all externals
for Christ sake.

IV. Mark.
No Heart can open truly to Christ that is not made willing upon due
deliberation to receive him, with his cross of sufferings, and his yoke of
obedience, Matthew. 16. 24. Matthew. 11. 29.

An exception against either of these is an effectual Bar to thy Union with
Christ; he looks upon that Soul as not worthy of him, that puts in such an
exception, Matthew. 10. 38. If thou judge not Christ worth all sufferings, all
losses, all reproaches, he judges thee unworthy to bear the name of his
Disciple. So for the duties of Obedience, called his yoke, he that will not
receive Christ's yoke, can never receive his Person, nor any benefit by his
Blood.

V. Mark.
Every Heart that opens sincerely, and Evangelically to Christ, opens to him in
deep humility and sense of its emptiness and unworthiness; all
self-righteousness is given up as dung and dross; thus Abraham came unto him,
as to one that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. Now unto him that works
not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted
for righteousness. Yea, here is the true way of Justification indeed; where the
imputed righteousness of Christ comes, all self-righteousness vanishes before
it. By him that works not, understand not an idle, lazy believer, that takes
no care of the duties of obedience; no, no, an idle Faith can never be a saving
Faith; but the meaning is, he works not in a Law sense, to the ends and
intentions of the first Covenant; to make up a righteousness to himself by his
own working, to cover himself-with a robe of righteousness of his own spinning,
and weaving; a home-made Cloth; no, not a rag of that. Thou must receive Christ
into an empty, naked, unworthy Soul, or not receive him at all. Blessed Paul
heartily rejected all his own righteousness, cast down that House-Idol to the
ground, that he might be found in the imputed righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3.
8. cast that Idol out of door, it stands in the way of a better righteousness.
There be diverse ways wherein sinners maintain their own righteousness to their
own ruin; there is a gross and more refined self-righteousness; the one more
palpable and easily liable to conviction, the other much harder to be
discovered and cured. Ask some Men upon what their hopes of Salvation are
grounded? And they will tell you, they are just in their dealings with Men, and
constant in their prayers to God, that is all, and therefore they doubt not of
their Salvation: Thus they substitute a righteousness of their own in the room
of Christ's blood, and are their own destroyers by seeking this way to be their
own Saviors: But then there is a more refined way of self-righteousness, dressed
up with such pretenses of humility, that Men are hardly to be convinced of it.
I pity many poor Souls upon this account, who stand off from Christ, dare not
believe, because they want such and such qualifications to fit them for Christ.
O says one, could I find so much brokenness of Heart for sin, so much
reformation and power over corruptions, then I could come to Christ; the
meaning of which is this, if I could bring a price in my Hand to purchase him,
then I should be in couraged to go unto him. Here now lies horrible pride
covered over with a vail of great humility: Poor sinner either (...) naked and
empty-handed, according to Isa. 55. 1. Romans 4. 5. or expect a repulse; for
Christ is not the Sale, but the Gift of God.

VI. Mark.
Lastly, Whatever Soul opens savingly to Christ, it opens finally and
everlastingly to him; the Heart once opened to Christ, must stand open for ever
to him, never to shut out Christ any more: And here is a very observable
difference betwixt a Man that comes to Christ in a sudden fright of
Conscience, and parts with him again when that fright is over; and a Man that
receives Christ not to sojourn, but to dwell in his Heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3.
17. when Christ comes into the Heart, he says, Here will I dwell for ever; and
Lord, says the Soul, So I receive thee; this is the day of union, O let me
never know a day of separation; let it never be in the power of Life or Death,
Angels, Principalities, or Powers, things present or to come, to make a
separation between thee and me. Soul, says Christ, thou shall be mine whilst I
am in Heaven; and Lord, says the Soul, I will be thine whilst I am on Earth. I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee says Christ; Oh my Lord, says the
Soul, hold me fast in thy Hand, that I may never leave nor forsake thee; my
Estate, Liberty, and Life, may and must go; but it is in the fixed purpose of
my Heart never, never, to let thee go. The espousals betwixt Christ and the
Soul are for ever, Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea for
ever; and here lies another great difference betwixt the Hipocrite that takes
Christ with a politic reserve, that will venture with Christ at Sea no farther
than he can see the shore; and the upright Heart that imbarks it self with
Christ without reserves, come what will; that says to him, as Ittai to David,
when persuaded to go back in a time of danger; nay, says he, where my Lord
Jesus Christ is, whether it be in Liberty or in Prison, in Life or in Death,
there also will I be. Flesh may persuade to a retreat, nay says the Soul, I
cannot retreat; but wherever the truths of Christ, the interest and glory of
Christ are, there also must I be; for upon these terms I first received him,
and opened the door of my Heart to him. These things are no surprises to me,
Christ and I have debated them long ago; he dealt fairly with me, and I must
deal faithfully with him.

Now Brethren, view over these six Trials; Have your Eyes been opened to see
sin in its vileness, Christ in his beauty and necessity? Have your Hearts been
pricked and wounded with compunction and sorrow for sin? Are the loves and
delights of sin gone out of your Souls? Have you no exceptions either to the
cross or yoke of Christ? Have you given up all your own righteousness, whether
gross or refined, for dung and dross, and received Christ for ever? Then thy
Heart is savingly opened to him.

Fourth Use.
The last Use that closes this Point will be Consolation, to all those whose
Hearts the Lord has thus opened to receive Christ at his knocks and calls of
the Gospel.

Has God indeed opened any of your Hearts, and made you sincerely willing to
receive Christ; then there are ten sweet Consolations like so many boxes of
precious ointment to be poured forth in the close of this discourse upon every
such Soul. And

I. Consolation.
The first shall be this, the opening of any Man's Heart to receive Christ, is a
clear solid Scripture evidence of the Lords eternal love to, and setting apart
that Man for himself from all eternity. I do not say that every Man whose Heart
is opened by Faith, is thereupon immediately assured and satisfied that God
has chosen him to Salvation; but whether he apprehend it or no, the thing in
it self is certain and real, consult 1. These. 1. 4, 5. Knowing brethren,
beloved, your election of God, for our Gospel came not to you in word only, but
also in power and in the Holy Ghost, etc. Their election of God was the thing
to be proved; but alas, might they say, who can know that but God alone? It is
among the Divine secrets; yes says the Apostle, we know it, and by this we
know it, for our Gospel came not unto you in an empty sound, but in mighty
efficacy, effectually opening your Hearts to believe. A more clear and certain
evidence of your Election cannot be given in this World; look again into Romans
8. 30. Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

There are two great and ravishing Truths cleared in this Scripture; the one is
this, That the whole number of the called upon Earth is taken out of such as
were predestined to Life before the World was. The other is this, That as the
whole number of the glorified Saints in Heaven, is made up of Souls called and
justified upon Earth: so the called Soul, that is, the Soul that savingly opens
to Christ by Faith, may from that work of the Spirit upon him, solidly reason
backward to Gods electing love, before all time; and forward, to his
glorification with God, when time shall be no more.

Oh, how strong is the Consolation flowing out of this glorious work of the
Spirit upon our Hearts. That Is one thing.

II. Consolation.
The opening of the Heart to receive Christ is the peculiar effect of the
Divine and Almighty Power of God; the Arm of an Angel is too weak to break
those strong bars before mentioned. Therefore the exceeding greatness of his
Power is applied unto this work of believing, Ephesians. 1. 19. And what is the
exceeding greatness of his Power toward us, who believe, according to the
working of his mighty Power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from
the dead. Here is Power, the Power of God, the greatness of his Power, the
exceeding greatness of his Power, the very same Power which wrought in Christ
when he raised him from the dead; and all this no more than needs to make the
Heart of Man open by Faith to receive Christ; the only Key that fits the cross
Wards of Man's Will, and effectually opens his Heart, is in the Hand of Christ,
Revel. 3. 7. He has the key of David, he ope^^th and no Man shuts.

How long have some of you ^at under able Ministers, searching Sermons, and
ro^^ing Providence, yet all to no purpose, till this Almighty Power came with
the Word and then the work was done. The people shall be willing in the day of
thy power, Psalm. 110. 3. What a glorious Power was that which opened Christ
grave, when he lay in the Heart of the Earth, with a mighty Stone rouled upon
his Sepulcher? And how mighty a Power is that which breaks asunder all those
Bars which kept thy Soul in the State of sin and death? None feel this Power
but those only whom God intends for Salvation; and having once wrought this,
it is engaged to go through with all the rest which yet remains to be done,
to perfect thy Salvation.

III. Consolation.
The opening of thy Heart to Christ is not only an effect of Almighty Power,
but such an effect of it, without which all that Christ had done and suffered
had been of no avail to thy Salvation; neither the eternal Decrees of God, nor
the meritorious sufferings of Christ, are effectual to any Man's Salvation,
until this work of the Spirit be wronght upon his Heart. The offering up of
Christ is in its kind and place ^ufficient to purchase our Redemption, but it
is the receiving of Christ by Faith that brings home Salvation to our Souls;
where there be many con-causes to produce one effect, that effect is not
produced until the last cause have wrought. Thus it is here, the moving cause,
viz. the freegrace of God has wrought, and the meritorious cause, the death of
Christ has also wrought; but still the Heart even of an elect Man remains
under guilt and condemnation, until the Spirit, who is the applying cause, have
also wrought this blessed effect we now speak of. It is Christ in us ( i. e.)
in union with our Souls which is to us the hope of glory, 1 Col. 27. 1 Cor. 1.
30. Behold then, the last stroke given in this opening of the Heart by Faith;
herein electing Love has brought home Christ with all the purchases and
benefits of his death into the actual possession of thy Soul.

Oh, how transporting and ravishing a consideration is this!

IV. Consolation.
In this work the opening of the Heart by Faith, the great design and main
intention of the Gospel is also answered and accomplished. You behold in the
Church a glorious frame of Ordinances set up by Divine Institution, Ministers
appointed to preach Sermons, Sacraments, Prayers, Singing, variety of
Ordinances set up, excellent gifts given to Men as the fruit of Christ's
ascension into Heaven. Now what was the design of God in the institution of all
these things, but that by them as instruments in his Hand, our ignorant, dead,
unbelieving Hearts might be opened unto Christ, in acts of Repentance and
Faith, and built up to a perfect Man? Ministers are sent to open your Eyes,
turn you from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, Acts 26.
18. They are not sent by Christ into this World to get a living, to drive so
poor a Trade as that for themselves, but to bring you to Faith, 1 Cor. 3. 5.
When Gods elect are thus brought in and built up in Christ, you shall see this
glorious frame of Ordinances taken down; there will be no more Preaching nor
Hearing, the end of all these things being accomplished, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Then
comes the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, etc. Now the consideration of the accomplishment of the great and
principal design of the Gospel, thus far upon thy Heart, is matter of
transporting joy; Ministers may and must dye, Ordinances may be removed, but
this blessed effect of them upon thy Soul shall never dye. God will perfect
what he has begun; that is the Fourth Consolation.

V. Consolation.
And then Fifthly, That day wherein thy Heart is savingly opened to receive
Christ, that very day is Salvation come to thy Soul. When Zacheus his Heart was
opened to Christ, he tells him, Luke 19. 9. This day is Salvation come to thy
House. Salvation was come into the World before thou wast born, yea Salvation
was come to thy doors in the tenders of the Gospel before, but it never came
into thy Soul till the day wherein thy Heart opened to Christ by Faith; and is
not this matter of singular consolation? If Salvation be not, what is? No
wonder that the Eunuch went home rejoicing when he had received Christ by
Faith, Acts 8. 39. That the Iaylor rejoiced with all his House, Acts 16. 34.
Neither blame, nor wonder at Men for rejoicing, for it is the day of their
Salvation, It Is true, their Salvation is not finished that day, there be many
things yet to be done and suffered by them before the completing of it; but it
is begun that day, the foundation is laid in the Soul that day, and the
Top-stone shall be set up with shouting in due time, crying Grace, Grace, unto
it.

VI. Consolation.
The opening of a sinners Heart to Christ makes joy in Heaven; a triumph in the
City of our God above, Luke 15. 7. I say unto you likewise that joy shall be in
Heaven over one sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine just
persons which need no repentance.

As when a young Prince is born, all the Kingdom rejoices, the Conduits run
with Wine, all demonstrations of joy and thankfulness in every City and Town;
it is much more so in Heaven, when a Soul is born to Christ under the Gospel;
it is a satisfaction to the Heart of the Lord Jesus who now beholds more of the
travel of his Soul, and to all the Angels and Saints that another Soul is
espoused to him.

Beloved, when the Gospel is effectually brought home by the Spirit to the
Heart of a sinner, and wounds him for sin, sends him home crying, oh sick,
sick; sick for sin, and sick for Christ; the news thereof is presently in
Heaven, and sets the whole City of God a rejoicing. Christ never rejoiced over
thee before, thou have wounded him and grieved him a thosand times, but he
never rejoiced in thee till now; and that which gives joy to Christ may well be
matter of Joy to thee; that is the Sixth Consolation.

VII. Consolation.
And then Seventhly, That day thy Heart is unlockt, unbarr'd, and savingly
opened by Faith, that very day an intimate, spiritual, and ever lasting union
is made betwixt Christ and thy Soul; from that day Christ is thine and thou art
his. Christ is a great and glorious person, but how great and glorious soever
he be, the small and feeble Arms of thy Faith may surround and embrace him; and
thou may say with the Church, My beloved is mine and I am his; for mark what
he faith in the Text, If any Man open to me I will come in to him. That Soul
shall be my habitation, there will I dwell for ever, that Christ may dwell in
your Hearts by Faith; what Soul feels not it self advanced by this union with
the Son of God? Hereby the Believer becomes a Member of his Body, Flesh and
Bones; this is an honor bestowed upon thy Soul above and beyond all that
honor that ever God bestowed upon any Angel in Heaven; to them Christ is an
Head by way of Dominion, but to thee by way of vital influence. Angels are as
the Barons and Nobles of his Kingdom, but the Believer his Spouse, and all the
Angels of Heaven ministering Spirits unto such. That Is the seventh Consolation.

VIII. Consolation.
And then in the Eighth place, The opening of thy Heart to Christ brings thee
not only into union with his Person, but into a state of sweet, Soul enriching,
communion with him. So he speaks in the Text, If any Man open the door, I
will sup with him and he with me. Poor Soul, thou have lived many years in the
World and never had any communion with God till this day. Christ and thy Soul
have been strangers till now. It Is true, thou have had communion with
Ordinances, and communion with Saints, but for communion with Christ thou
could know nothing of it till thou receivedst him into thy Soul by Faith. Now
thou may say, Truly my fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John 1. 3.

And thenceforth, thy communion with Men is pleasant and desirable.

IX. Consolation.
The opening of a Man's Soul to Christ by Faith is a special and Peculiar mercy
which falls to the share but of a very few. God has done that for thee which
he has denied to Millions; Who has believed our report, and to whom is the
Arm of the Lord revealed, (i. e.) to how small a remnant in the World, Isa. 53.
1. And the Apostle puts the work of Faith among the great mysteries of
Godliness; among the wonders of Religion, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World.

The found of the Gospel is gone forth into the World; Many are called, but few
are chosen: There were many Widows in Israel, in the days of Elias, but to none
of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a City of Sidon, unto a Woman that
was a Widow, Luke 4. 25, 26. To allude to this, there were many hundreds that
sat under the same Sermon, which opened thy Heart to Christ, but it may be unto
none of them was the Spirit of God sent that day, to open their Hearts by
Faith, but unto thee; thou will freely acknowledge thy self as unlikely and
unworthy as the vilest sinner there. Oh, astonishing mercy!

X. Consolation.
And then lastly, In the same day thy Heart opens by Faith to Christ, all the
treasures of Christ are unlockt and opened to thee. In the same hour God turns
the key of Regeneration to open thy Soul, the key of Free Grace is also turned
to open unto thee the unsearchable riches of Christ: then the righteousness of
Christ becomes thine to Justify thee, the wisdom of Christ to guide thee, the
holiness of Christ to sanctify thee; in a word, he is that day, made of God
unto thee, wisdom and righteousness, Sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.
30. All is yours, for you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. ult. And
thus I have shown you some of those great things God does for those Souls that
will but do this one thing for him, Viz. open their Hearts to receive Christ
upon the tenders and terms of the Gospel.

SERMON IV.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold I [stand] at the door and knock, etc
THE verb (...) here rendered I stand, is of the praeter tense, and would
strictly be rendered I have stood, but being joined with a verb of the present
tense, is here rendered I do stand, a frequent Hebraism in Scripture; and it
notes the continued patience and long suffering of Christ. I have stood and
still do stand, exercising wonderful patience toward obstinate sinners. Which
gives us this fourth Observation,

IV. DOCT.
That great and admirable is the patience of Christ in waiting upon trifling
and obstinate sinners.

Thus Wisdom ( i. e.) Christ expresses himself, Prove. 1. 24. I have called and
ye refused, I have stretched out my Hand and no Man regarded. Here you have not
only Christ's ^arnest calls, but suitable gestures also, to gain attention. The
stretching out of the Hand was a signal given to procure attention, Acts 21.
40. yet none regards; and this the Lord does not once or twice, but all the day
long, Isa. 65. 2. showing forth all longsuffering, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 1. 16. In the opening of this Point I will show you, 1. What Divine
Patience is. 2. Wherein it is evidenced. 3. Why it is exercised to wards
sinners.


First, Of the nature of Divine Patience, it is an ability in God not only to
delay the execution of his wrath for a time, toward some, but to delay it in
order to the eternal Salvation of others. Let me speak to the parts of this
description of Divine Patience.

1. It is an ability or power in God, not the effect of Impotence, or want of
opportunity: All sinners are continually within the reach of the Arm of his
Justice, and he can strike when and where he will. Esan had a revengeful mind
against Jacob, but wanted opportunity, and therefore was forced to delay the
execution of his conceived wrath, until the days for mourning for his Father
were come; and then faith he, I will slay my Brother Jacob, Genesis 27. 41. But in
God it is a glorious effect of power, Nahum 1. 3. The Lord is slow to anger,
and great in power.

The greatness of his patience flows from the greatness of his power: so the
Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath and to make
his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted
or made up to destruction. And therefore when Moses prays for the exercise of
Divine Patience toward the provoking Israelites, he does it in this form,
Numb. 14. 17, 18. And now I beseech thee let the power of my Lord be great,
according as thou have spoken, saying, The Lord is long-suffering, etc. He
could exercise this Almighty power upon thee, and crush thee by it as a Moth is
crushed; but behold he exercises it upon himself in stopping the propensions of
his own Justice, which daily solicit him to cut thee off; it is the power of God
over his wrath, bridling, and restraining it from day to day.

2. This Patience is exercised toward such as perish, in a temporary delay of
their damnation; and though this be but a mere suspension of his wrath for a
time, yet it is a glorious act of Patience in him; as that forecited Text, Romans
9. 22. shows; is it nothing for a sinner condemned, as soon as born, to be
reprieved so many years out of Hell? Thou have been provoking him daily and
hourly, to cut thee off and send thee to thy own place; and yet to be on this
side the ever lasting burnings, this is wholly owing to the riches of his
forbearance. Ah, how is God to be admired in this his glorious power over his
own wrath! When we look abroad into the World, and see every where sinners ripe
for destruction, daring the God of Heaven to his face, yet forborne, how
admirable is this Power of God!

3. God does not only exercise this Power in a temporary suspension of his
wrath against some, who alas, must feel it at last; Isa. 48. 8, 9.
but he delays the execution of his wrath in a design of mercy toward others,
that they may never feel it. Thus he bears with his own Elect, all the years of
their lives wherein they lay in the state of Nature, and went on in a course of
rebellion against God; and this long-suffering of God toward them proves their
Salvation, as you have it in 2 Pet. 3. 15. And account that the long-suffering
of our Lord is Salvation. What Is the meaning of that? Ah! Christian, thou may
easily know the meaning of it, without turning over many Commentaries, thou art
now in Christ, safely escaped out of the danger of wrath to come; but thou
owe this thy Salvation to the patience and long-suffering of God toward
thee. For what if he had cut thee off in the days of thy ignorance, and
rebellion against him (and thou know thou did give him Millions of
provocations so to do,) Where had thou now been? Thou had never seen
Christ, nor the least dawning hope of Salvation by him. Remember, how often you
lay in those days upon beds of sickness, upon the brink of the grave; what was
it that saved thee from eternal wrath but this admirable Patience of Christ?
Well therefore may the Apostle say, Account the long-suffering of God to be
Salvation.

This Patience of God seems to be a branch springing out of his mercy and
goodness; only it differs from mercy in this, that Man as miserable is the
object of Mercy; but Man as criminal is the object of Patience. Thus briefly of
the Nature of Divine Patience, a power of God over his own wrath, not only to
suspend it for a time toward them that perish; but to delay the execution of
it, in a design of Salvation toward others.

Secondly, Next we come to show the various evidences of this Divine Patience,
or wherein it appears in its glorious manifestations toward provoking sinners;
and there are seven full evidences and discoveries of it, which should make the
Hearts of sinners melt within them whilst they are sounding in their Ears. Ah,
methinks such things as these should melt down your hard Hearts before the Lord.

I. Evidence.
And the first Evidence of the riches of his Patience shall be taken from the
multitude of sins that Men and Women are guilty of before him, the least of
which is a burden too heavy for any creature to bear; the Psalmist faith, Psalm.
40. 12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about. It was true, as applied to
the person of David; and though it be there applied to the person of Christ,
yet not one of them were his own sins, but ours; called his, by Gods reckoning
or imputing them to him. Men can number vast Sums, Millions of Millions, but no
Man can number his own sins, they pass all account. There is not a member of
the Body though never so small but has been the instrument of innumerable
evils. For instance, the Tongue, the Apostle tells us, is a World of iniquity,
James 3. 6. and if there be a World of sin in one member, what then are the
sins of all? How many idle, frothy, vain words has thy Tongue uttered? And yet
for them Christ says, Men shall give an account in the day of Judgment, Matthew.
12. 36. And what have the sins of thy thoughts been, The thought of foolishness
is sin, says Solomon, Prove. 24. 9. O who can understand his errors? Yet the
Patience of God has not cracked and broken under such innumerable evils. O
glorious Patience! Well may it be ushered in in the Text with a term of
admiration, Behold, I stand.

II. Evidence.
The second Evidence of the Divine Patience, shall be taken from the heinous
nature of some sins above others, whereby sinners fly, as it were, in the very
Face of God; and yet he bears with much long-suffering, lets not loose his Hand
to cut them off. All sins are not of one size, some have a slighter tincture,
and some a deeper, called upon that account, Scarlet and Crimson sins, Isa. 1.
18. double dyed abominations, sins in Grain; such are sins against knowledge,
sins committed after Convictions and Covenants, and rebukes of Providence. I do
not only speak of outward gross acts of sin, for as the Schoolmen well
determine, though outward sins are sins of greater infamy, yet inward sins may
be sins of greater guilt: Even those sins that never took air to defame thee in
the World; but whatever they be (Reader) whether outward or inward, thy
Conscience is privy to them, and thy Soul may stand amazed at the Patience of
God in forbearing thee all this while under such Provocations, and horrid
Rebellions against him; especially considering how many there be this day in
Hell that never provoked God by sinning with such a high Hand as thou have done.

III. Evidence.
Thirdly, It is yet a greater Evidence of the Patience of God in bearing with,
and forbearing us, under the guilt of that special sin, viz. The slighting and
neglecting of Jesus Christ: Here Is a sin that goes to the very Heart of Jesus
Christ, he can bear any other sin rather than that; and yet this has Christ
born from every Soul of you, You are the Men and Women that have sputned at the
yearning bowels of his Mercies, slighted his Grace, trampled his precious Blood
under Foot, and yet has he forborne you unto this day; read Matthew. 22. 5 and
let thy Conscience answer, whether thou art not equally deep in the guilt of
making light of Christ with those wretches upon whom it is there charged?
Christ has suffered the wrath of God in thy room, brought home Salvation in
Gospel offers to thy door; and then to be slighted! no Patience but his own
could bear it. Every Sermon and Prayer you have fat under, with a dead Heart;
every motion of his Spirit which you have quenched, what is this but the making
light of Christ, and the great Salvation? Here the deepest project of infinite
Wisdom, and the richest gift of free grace, wherein God commends his love to
Men, are vilely undervalued as small things; and thus have you done days
without number; and yet his Hand is not stretched out, to cut thee off in thy
Rebellion; Who is a God like unto thee! What Patience like the Patience of
Christ!

IV. Evidence.
Fourthly, The length of time, the Patience of Christ has endured thee, speaks
the perfection and riches of his Patience toward thee.

Consider sinner, what Age thou art of, how many Years thou can Number, and
that all this has been a time of Patience, for thou wast a transgressor from
the Womb, Isa. 48. 8, 9. yet for his Name sake has he deferred his anger, and
has not cut thee off. How soon did the wrath of God break forth upon the
Angels when they had sinned in Heaven? And how long has it born with thee,
whilst thou have been provoking him on Earth? Was there ever Patience like the
Patience of God! Many thousands have been sent away to Hell fince thy day, but
thou art yet spared; Oh that the long-suffering of God might be Salvation to
thee!

V. Evidence.
Fifthly, It Is a great Evidence of the power of Divine Patience that may be
drawn from the grievousness of our sins to God, during the whole time of his
forbearance: It Is true there is no proper passion in the Divine Nature; no real
perturbation, his anger is a mild and holy flame, yet the contrariety of sin to
the holiness of his Nature is what makes his patience miraculous in the Eyes of
Men: The Scripture speaking in a condescending Language to the understanding of
the creature, represents God as wounded to the Heart by the sins of Men; so in
Ezekiel. 6. 9. I am broken with their whorish Heart which has departed from me;
and Amos 2. 13. Behold I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is
full of sheaves, when the Axel-tree is ready to crack under the load; and 2 Chronicles. 36. 16 it is said, The wrath of the Lord arose against his people till
there was no remedy; his Patience would bear no longer, and therefore when he
executes his wrath upon provoking sinners, that execution is represented in the
nature of an ease or relief to his burdened Patience and Justice, Isa. I. 24.
Ah, says he, I will ease me of my enemies, and avenge me of my adversaries.
Yet observe, it comes in with an (ah) with a kind of regret and reluctance; so
in Isa. 1^. 25. Yet a very little while and the indignation shall cease, and my
anger in their destruction. God could have given ease and rest this way, to his
anger long ago, but he chooses rather still to bear with thee, than on these
terms to ease himself of thee.

VI. Evidence.
Sixthly, The vast expenses of his riches and bounty upon us, during the whole
time of his for bearance and patience toward us, speaks him unconceivable and
infinite in his long-suffering toward us, Romans 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, and forbearance and long-suffering, not knowing that
the goodness of God leads thee to repentance? q. d. Vile sinner, can thou
compute the treasures of bounty and goodness, thou have been riotously spending
and wasting all this while? Do thou know what vast sums Christ has spent
upon thee to preserve thee so long out of Hell? There be two Treasures spending
upon sinners all the time of Gods forbearance of them; there is the precious
Treasure of thy Time wasted, and the invaluable streams of Gospel Grace running
all this while at the waste Spout; thy Time is precious, the Whole of thy Time,
which is betwixt thee and Eternity, is but little, and the most thereof has
been wasted in sin, and cast away upon vanity; but that is not all, the
Treasures of Gospel Grace have been wasting all this while upon thee: In Zach.
4. 12. it is compared to Golden Oil, maintaining the Lamps of Ordinances; so it
is set forth to us in that stately Emblem, Who would maintain a Lamp with
Golden Oil for wanton Children to play by? yet this has God done while thy
soul has dallied and trifled with him. The Witnesses or Ministers of Christ,
in Rev. 11. 3, 4. are compared to those Olive Trees that drop their precious
Oil, their Gifts, Graces, yea and their natural Spirits with them, into this
Lamp to keep it burning; all this while the Blood of Christ has been running
in vain, the Ministers of Christ preaching and beseeching in vain, the Spirit
of Christ striving with you in vain. You burn away Golden Oil, and yet your
Lamp is not gone out. Oh, Marvelous Patience! Oh the riches of Gods Forbearance!

VII. Evidence.
Lastly, The riches of Divine Patience toward you, are greatly heightened and
aggravated by the quick dispatch the Lord has made of other sinners, whilst he
has spared and pashover you. This comparative consideration calls upon you in
the Apostles language, Romans 11. 22. Behold the goodness and severity of God, on
them which felt severity, but toward thee, goodness; if thou continue in his
goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off. Some sinners have been cut off
in the beginning of their days, many in the very acts of sin, and those not
greater than thy sins; they are gone to their own place, and thou still left
for a Monument of the Patience and Forbearance of God. The sin of Achan was not
a greater sin, than thy Coveteousness, and the Earthliness of thy Heart is: The
sin of Nadab and Abihu in offering up strange fire, than thy superstition, and
offering up uncommanded Services to God; yet the Hand of God fell upon them,
and smote them dead in the place; in the day and place wherein they sinned they
perished; they were taken away in their iniquities, but thou reserved. Oh, that
it might be for an instance and example of the riches of Divine Patience, which
may at last lead thee to repentance.

Thus I have given you seven Evidences of the wonderful Patience of Christ, who
has stood, and still does stand at the door and knock. Next we will enquire
into the grounds and reasons of this marvelous Patience of Christ, this
astonishing long-suffering of God toward sinners; and there are diverse obvious
reasons of the long-suffering of God toward Men.

First, 1. Reas.
The exercise of his Patience is a standing testimony of his reconcilable and
merciful nature toward sinful Man. This he showed forth in his Patience toward
Paul; a great example of his merciful Nature for a pattern to them that should
hereafter believe on him, 1 Timothy 1. 16. The long-suffering of God is a special
part of his manifestative glory; and therefore when Moses desired a sight of
his glory, Exodus 34. 6. he proclaims his Name, The Lord, the Lord God merciful
and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth. He would have
poor sinners look toward him as an atoneable Deity, a God willing to be
reconciled, a God that retains not his anger for ever; but if poor sinners
will take hold of his strength, Isa. 27. 4.
and make peace with him, they may have peace. This long-suffering is an
attribute very expressive of the Divine Nature; he is willing sinners should
know whatever their provocations have been, there is room for pardon and peace,
if they will yet come in to accept the terms. This patience is a Diadem
belonging to the Imperial Crown of Heaven; the Lord glories in it as what is
peculiar to himself, Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of my anger,
for I am God, and not Man. q. d. Had I been as Man, the holiest, meekest, and
mortifiedst man upon Earth, I had consumed them long ago; but I am god, and not
Man, my Patience is above all created Patience; no Husband can bear with his
Wife, no Parent with his Child, as God has born with you; that is one reason of
Christ's waiting upon trifling sinners, to give proof of his gracious, merciful,
and reconcilable nature toward the wrost of sinners.

Secondly, 2. Reas.
The Lord exercises this admirable Patience toward sinners with design thereby
to lead them to repentance; that is the direct aim and intention of it. The Lord
desires and delights to see ingenuous relentings and brokenness of Heart for
sin, and there is nothing like his Forbearance and Patience promotes such an
Evangelical Repentance. All the terrors of the Law will not break the Heart of
a sinner, as the Patience and Long-suffering of God will do; therefore it is
said, Romans 2. 4. That the Goodness, Forbearance and Long-suffering of God leads
Men to Repentance; these are fitted to work upon all these principles of
humanity, which incline Men to Repentance; Reason, Conscience, Gratitude, feel
the influences of the goodness of God herein, and melt under it; Saul's Heart
relented in this case, 1 Samuel 24. 17. Is this thy voice my Son David? and Saul
lift up his voice and wept: And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than
I, for thou have rewarded me good, where as I have rewarded thee evil. Thus the
Goodness and Forbearance of God, does as it were take sinner by the Hand, leads
him into a corner, and says, Come, let thou and I talk together; thus and thus
Vile have thou been, and thus and thus Long-suffering and Merciful have I been
to thee; thy Heart has been full of sin, the Heart of thy God has been gull
of pity and mercy. This puts the sinner into Tears, breaks his Heart in pieces;
if any thing in the World will melt a hard Heart, this will do it. Oh, how good
has God been to me! How have I tried his Patience to the uttermost, and still
he waits to be gracious, and is exalted that he may have compassion; the Sobs
and Tears, the ingenuous Thaws and Relentings of a sinners Heart under the
apprehensions of the sparing Mercy and Goodness of God is the Music of Heaven.

Thirdly, 3. Reas.
The Lord excercises this long-suffering toward sinners to clear his Justice
in the damnation of all the obstinate refusers of Chirst and Marcy. Christ
waits at our doors now, that he may be clear in his sentence against us
hereafter. This Patience of Christ takes away all Apologies and Pleas out of
the Mouths of impenitent sinners; the more Christ's Patience has been, the
less defense or plea they will have for themselves.

Think with thy self sinner, what will thou answer in the great day, when
Christ shall say, Did not I stand at thy door from day to day, from Sabbath to
Sabbath, from year to year, calling, woing, persuading thee to be reconciled,
and accept Pardon and Mercy in the proper season of them, and thou would not?
Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to repent, and she repented not. Well, the Lord
gives you time now, a space of repentance, such a space as millions of Souls
gone out of Time into a miserable Eternity never had, With whomsoever Christ
has been quick and severe, to be sure he has not been so with you. This time
of Christ's Patience will be evidence enough to clear Christ and condemn you:
Men and Angels shall applaud the sentence as dreadful as it is, and say,
Righteous art thou, O Lord, in Judging thus.

Fourthly, 4. Reas.
The Lord draws forth and exercises his admirable Patience toward sinners for
the continuation and propagation of the Church. The Church must be continued
and propagated from Age to Age, and if God should be quick in cutting off
sinners* as soon as ever they provoke him, whence shoul the elect of God rise
in this World? There are thousands of God's Elect in the Loins of God's
Enemies. Many that will heartily embrace Christ must rise from such as reject
him.

Now if God should cut off these in the beginning of their provocations, how
should the Church be continued? Where had good Abijah and Hezekiah been, if
wicked Jeroboam and Ahaz had been cut off in their first transgressions? The
Lord suffers many a wicked Parent to stand for a time under his Patience,
because Children are to spring from them who will obey and embrace brace that
Christ whom their wicked Parents rejected: Yea, the Wicked do not only
propagate the Church, but are useful to preserve and defend it; as the useless
chass is a defense to the Wheat, Rev. 12. 16. The Earth shall help the Woman.

Fifthly, 5. Reas.
To Conclude, the Lord excerciseth this long-suffering toward sinners in a
gracious condescension to the Prayers of his People. Were it not that the Lord
had left a small remnant, we had been as Sodom, we had been like unto Gomorah,
Isa. 1. 9.

The Prayers and Intercessions of the Saints are a skreen betwixt wicked Men
and the wrath of God for a time, Job 22. 30. The innocent preserve the Island.
The World stands by the Prayers of the Saints; what multitudes of rebellious,
Christ-despising sinners swarm this day in every part of this Nation? Such as
declare by their open practice they will not have Christ to reign over them:
Who contemn his offers, despise his Messengers; but blessed be God, yea and let
them bless him too, that there are others mourning to the Lord for them,
beseeching his forbearance toward them. Little do the wicked know how much
they are beholding to the Prayers of the Saints. These and such like Reasons
prevail with the Lord Jesus to stand in waiting, patient posture, at the doors
of sinners. Ah. how loath is he to give them up! We now proceed to the Uses of
this Point, by way of 1. Information. 2. Exhortation. 3. Consolation.


I. Use.
And first, this Point will be very fruitful for Information of our
Understandings in diverse great and useful Points, both Doctrinal and Practical,
wherein every Soul among you is deeply concerned; and therefore I beseech you
let them be heard and pondred with an answerable attention and seriousness of
Spirit; and the first Inference shall be this,

I. Inference.
If the Lord Jesus do exercise such admirable Patience toward sinners, Then
hou much better is it for poor sinners to be in the Hands of Christ, than in
the Hand of the best and holiest Man in the World? O sinner, it is better for
thee to fall into the Hands of the Meek and Merciful Jesus, than into the Hand
of the dearest Friend thou have upon Earth; no Creature can bear what Christ
hears; no Patience like the Patience of Christ; it is said of Moses, Numb. 11. 12
Now the Man Moses was meek above all the Men upon the face of the Earth. There
was never such a Man born into the World, for Patience, Meekness, and
Long-suffering, as Moses was; and yet for all that, this mirror of Meekness
could not bear the Provocations of Israel; You Rebels, says he, must I draw
Water for you out of the Rock? Thus was his Spirit russled with the
provocations of Israel, and this lost him the Land of Canaan. Jonah was a good
Man, a Prophet of the Lord, yet because the Lord would not be so quick and
severe with Niniveh, as Jonah would have had him, In what uncomly Language does
his angry Soul return upon his God? Jonah 4. 2. O Lord, says he, was not this
my saying when I was yet in my Country? Therefore I sled before unto Tarshish,
for I knew thou were a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil; therefore now, O Lord, take I beseech
thee my life from me, for it is better for me to dye than to live. q. d. Ah,
Lord, I knew it would come to this, I knew thy gracious nature, how inclinable
thou art to mercy, and that upon the first appearance of their repentance, thou
would repent of the evil, and so free grace would make me as a liar among
them.

Nay, give me leave to speak a higher word than all this, and let it not seem
strange that the Patience of the glorified Saints in Heaven is nothing to the
Patience of Christ toward provoking sinners upon Earth. Those glorified Souls
that be above, though they have Patience, among other Graces, perfected in its
kind, yet still it is but Created, finite Patience, and it cannot bear what
Christ's Patience bears; take an instance of it out of Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. I saw
under the Altar the Souls of those that were slain for the Word of God, and for
the testimony which the held; and they cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, O Lord, holy and true, Do thou not judge and avenge our Blood on them
that dwell on the Earth? And it was said unto them, That they Should rest for a
little season. Here you see glorified Souls less able to bear the slow pace of
Justice toward their Enemies, than Christ was. It Is true, here was no sinful
impatience, but yet a patience short of Christ's infinite Patience. Ah, if you
were to depend upon the Patience of any creature in Heaven or Earth, you had
worn it out long ago. I will not execute the fierceness of my anger, for I am
God and not Man. Ah, it is well we have to do with a God; if a Man find his
enemy will he let him go well away? 1 Samuel 24. 19. No, no, he will reckon
before he part with him. Sinner, the Lord finds thee daily in thy sins, and yet
lets thee go; yet beware thou try not his Patience too far, lest vengeance
overtake thee at last, and pay the justice of God with all the arrearages due
to his Patience.

II. Inference.
Hence it follows, that convinced and broken hearted sinners need not be
discouraged in going to Jesus Christ for mircy, seeing he exercises such
wonderful Patince toward obstinate and refusing sinners.

This inference breaths pure Gospel; it is a Cordial to cheer the Heart that is
moving toward Christ, with fear and trembling. It Is a great artifice of the
Devil to daunt and discourage courage poor convinced sinners, by telling them
there is no hope of mercy for them* that they shall find the Arms of Mercy
closed, the Bowels of Compassion shut up; that the Time of Mercy is now past,
they come too late. O how busy is Satan with such suggestions as these in many
of your Souls? But I am come to tell you this day that these are but the
artifices of the Enemy; you are going to the Fountain of Mercy, Patience,
Goodness and Long-suffering; go on, and you shall find abundantly more than you
expect. He will not cast off a Soul that comes Mourning and Panting toward
him, and is willing to subscribe the Gospel articles of Reconciliation: No, he
will not shut out such a Soul whatever its rebellions and provocations have
been. Sinner, thou art going to the meek and merciful Jesus, Matthew. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy-laden and I will give you rest;
take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. You are going
to Meekness and Mercy it self; he is the Lamb of God, that is his name; go on
then poor trembling sinner, don't stand any longer at shall I? Shall I? with
Christ; but make a bold but necessary adventure of Faith; try him once, and
then report what you find im to be: Certainly if he exercises such Patience
toward the Vessels of wrath, whilst they are sitting to destruction; as he
does Romans 9. 22 he will not want Patience for a Yessel of Mercy, preparing by
Humiliation and Faith for Christ and Glory. Does he forbear those that stand
out in defiance, and will he fall upon those that are mourning to him upon the
Knee of submission? Shall a damnede wretch, that is preparing for Hell find so
much forbearance, and a poor broken hearted sinner none? It cannot be. If Jesus
Christ forbear thee when thy Heart was as hard as a Rock and could not yield
one Tear, one Sigh for sin, will he execute his Wrath upon thee, will he show
thee no Mercy, when thy Heart is broken all to pieces with sorrow, and filled
with loathing and detestation against sin and thy self for sin? Did he forbear
thee when sin was thy delight? And will he destroy thee now it is thy burden?
It cannot be.

Moreover, if the Lord Jesus had not a mind to show Mercy to thy poor Soul:
Now, now, that thine Eyes are opened and thy heart touched to the quick, why
has he forborne the execution of his wrath so long? He might have taken his own
time to cut you off when he would, he might have made any day the execution
day: But sure among all the days of thy life, the day of thy Humiliation, the
day of thy Faith, is not like to prove that day.

Again, as great and vile sinners as thy self have adventured upon the Grace of
Christ, and sound it infinitely beyond their expectation. These the Lord Jesus
has set forth as encouraging examples to all the broken hearted sinners that
are coming after; that they seeing how it has fared with their forerunners to
Christ, might be encouraged to come on with the more confidence, 1 Timothy, 1. 16.
But I obtained mercy, that in me first Christ might show forth all
long-suffering for a pattern for them that should hereafter believe on him to
life everlasting. Well then, shut your Ears against all the whispers of Satan,
entertain no evil reports of Christ; the Devil loves to draw a false picture of
Christ, and represent him in the most discouraging form to poor trembling
sinners, but you will not find him so. What can Christ say more to convince and
satisfy Souls than he has done? He has left the bosom of the Father, he has
taken union with thy Nature, he has poured out his Soul unto Death; he has
told us, Those that come unto him, he will in no wise cast out. Thousands are
gone before us in the paths of Repentance and Faith, and found it according to
his Word; you have been spared all your Life, to this day of Mercy, O do not
stand off now upon such weak objections.

III. Inference.
The long-suffering of Christ toward Sinners, instructs and teaches his
Ministers to imitate their Lord in a Christ-like Patience and Long-suffering.
Christ is our pattern of Patience, if he wait, much more may we; we think it
much to stand from Sabbath to Sabbath, Woing, Pleading and Inviting, and are
apt to be discouraged when we see no fruit follw. The want of success is apt to
cast us under Ieremiahs temptation, To speak no more in his Name; and to lament
with Isaiah, That we have labored in vain; it is a hard case to Study, Pray and
Preach, and see all our labors return in vain. It Is not so much the expending
as the returning of our labors upon us in vain, that discourageth our Hearts.
Ministers would not dye so fast, Mr. Lockier in Colos.
says one of them, nor be grayheaded so soon, did they see the fruit of their
labors upon their people. But let us look to our pattern in the Text, Behold I
stand at the door and knock. If the Master wait, let not the Servants be weary;
The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be patient toward all; wasting,
if at any time, God will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 4. 24.

Though the beginnings be small, our latterend may greatly increase; though we
now fish with Angles, and take but now one, and then another; the time may
come, and we hope is at the door, when we shall spread our Nets, and enclose
multitudes. Aretius a pious Divine comforted himself thus, under the
insuccessfulness of his Labors, Dabit posterior aetas tractabiliores fortasse
animas, mitiora pectora quam nostra habent tempora. Future days will afford
more tractable Spirits, and easier tempers of Mind, than our present times
afford. Beside, the fruit of our labors may spring up to a blessed harvest
when we are gone, John 4. 37. One Man sows and another reapeth; but if not,
our reward will not be measured by the success, but the sincerity of our
designs and labors. Our zeal for conversion of Souls to Christ will be
accepted, but our discouragement in his service will certainly displease him.
If Israel be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord.
However, let this be a caution to you, that hear us, that you cast not our
Souls under such discouragements. If I may speak, the sense of others, from my
own experience, then I can assure you, that the fixedness of your Hearts in the
ways of sin, and your untractableness to the calls of God, are a greater burden
and discouragement to us than all the sufferings we have met withal from the
World; yet are we contented to Pray in hope, and Preach in hope, encouraging
our selves (the Lord grant it be not without ground) that a crop shall yet
spring up, which shall make the Harvest-men laugh.

IV. Inference.
From the Patience and Long-suffering of Christ, we may learn the invaluable
preciousness of Souls, and the high esteem Christ has for them.

Though your Souls be cheap in your own Eyes, and you are contented to sell
them for a trifle, for a little sensual pleasure and ease; some of you will
hazard them for a Shilling, yet certainly Jesus Christ has an high asteem of
them, else he would never stand knocking with such importunity, and waiting
with such wonderful patience, for the Salvation of them. Christ knows their
worth though you do not, he accounts, and so should you, one of your Souls more
worth than the whole World, Matthew. 16. 26. The Soul of the poorest Child, or
meanest Servant, that hears me this day, is of greater value in Christ's Eye
than the whole World; and he has given three great evidences of it, (1.) That
he thought it worth his Heart Blood to redeem and save it, 1 Pet. 1. 19. You
were not redeemed with Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of the Son
of God. Had they not been precious in his Eyes he would never have shed his
most precious Blood to ransom them. (2.) Were they not highly valuable in his
Eyes he would never wait with such unwearied Patience to save them as he does.
He has born Thousands of repulses, and unreasonable denials from you: Sinner,
Christ has knocked at thy door in many a Sermon, in many a Prayer, in many a
sickness, in all which thou have put him off, denied him or delayed him; yet
still he continues knocking and waiting. Thou could not have made the poorest
Beggar in the World wait at thy door, so long as thy Redeemer has been made to
wait, and yet he is not gone. At this day his voice sounds in thine ears,
Behold I stand at the door and knock. Here Is clear demonstration of the
preciousness of thy Soul in the Redeemer's Eyes. And then Lastly, When Christ
ends the Treaty, and gives up the Souls of Men for lost, and unperswadable,
with what regret and sorrow does he part with them! Never did one Friend part
from another with such demonstrations of sorrow as Christ parts with the
Souls of sinners. The Bowels of his compassion roll together; for the knows
what is coming upon them, and what that eternal misery is into which their
wilful rejection of him will cast them: In Luke 19. 22. you find the Redeemers
tears wept over obstinate Ierusalend, And when he came nigh to the City, he
wept over it, and said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou had known at least
in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace; but now they are did from
thine Eyes. Like unto this is that expression, Isa. 1. 24. Ah, I will ease me
of mine enemies, etc. Though it be an ease to his Justice, yet he cannot give
them up without an ah, an interjection of sorrow; so in Hosea 11. 8. How shall
I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Judah? I must do it, but how
shall I go about it? All these expressions show the great value God has for
your Souls; and did you know it also, certainly you would not make Christ wait
one hour longer.

V. Inference.
Hence it follows, That greater is the sin, and severer will be the
condemnation of them that perish under the Gospel, than of all other People in
the World. Let me speak freely to you that hear me this day, Jesus Christ has
spent more of the riches of his Patience upon you in one year, yea, in this
very day, than he has spent upon the heathen World in all the days of their
lives; they never heard of Christ, and the great Salvation; they have had no
calls to Faith and Repentance, as you have had; don't think God has dealt at
this rate with other Nations. You have his Sabbaths, Ministers, Calls, he has
not dealt so with other Nations; and as for these things they have not known
them, Psalm. 147. 19. God has dealt in a peculiar way with us, and these
special favors will make dreadful accounts: He told the Jews among whom he had
preached and wrought his Miracles, It would be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorah, in the day of Judgment, than for them; and in his Name I will tell you
this day, that Barbarous Indians and Americans will have a milder Hell than
you; Mitius ardent, and as the Lord told Ezechiel chap. 3. 5, 6. Thou art not
sent to a People of a strange Speech, and of an hard Language, whose words thou
can not understand; surely had I sent thee to them, they would have harkned
unto thee; but the house of Israel will not harken unto thee, for they will not
harken unto me: For all the house of Israel are impudent and hard hearted.

Ah, Brethren it is a sad Truth that the Ministers of Christ have found more
fruit of their Labors among the Salvage Americans, than in England, a People
born and bred up under the Gospel. Had heathenish People your Sabbaths, your
Ministers and Bibles, they would not deal by Christ as you have done: But look
you to it, for certainly the severity of his Justice will at last recompense
the expense of his Patience: There are two Glasses turned up this day, and both
almost run down; the Glass of the Gospel running down on Earth, and the Glass
of Christ's Patience running down in Heaven. Be sure of it, that for every sand
of Mercy, every drop of Love that runs down in vain in this World, a drop of
wrath runs into the vial of wrath which is fitting in Heaven.

VI. Inference.
If Christ have exercised such admirable Patience, and Long-suffering toward
you, before he could gain entrance into your Hearts; then you have all the
reason in the World to exercise your Patience for Christ, and account all
long-suffering to be your unquestionable duty. Christ was not weary in waiting
upon you, be not you weary in waiting upon him or for him. Now there are three
things wherein the People of God will have much occasion to exercise their
Patience with respect to Christ, (1.) You will need a great deal of Patience to
wait for the returns and answers of your Prayers; you knock and wait, at the
door of Mercy, and no answer comes; hereupon discouragement and weariness
seizes your Spirits. Possibly some of you have Prayers many years agone upon
the file in Heaven, some upon Spiritual accounts, and some upon Temporal; and
because the answer is not dispatched, your Eyes are ready to fail with waiting,
for the Lord may bear long with his own Elect, Luke 18. 7. The seed of Prayer
lies under the clods, and will at last spring up, for he never said to the seed
of Jacob, Seek me in vain; none seek God in vain but those that seek him
vainly. Now you should not be too quick and short breathed in waithing upon
God, for the returns of Prayer, considering how long you made Christ wait upon
you.

(2.) You will have occasion to exercise your Patience in bearing the burden of
reproaches, and sufferings for Christ; For to you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1. 29.
Sufferings you see are the Gifts of Christ, the Comforts of sufferings is his
Gift, and so are the abilities to suffer-also; and that which will increase
your suffering-ability, will be the confideration of Christ's long-suffering
toward you, and the hard things he endured for you and from you.

(3.) You will have occasion to exercise your Patience for the day of your
complete Redemption and Salvation. If you love Christ fervently, the time of
your separation from him will be born difficultly; vehement love needs the
allay of Patience, 2 These. 3. 5. The Lord direct your Hearts into the love of
God, and into the patient waiting for Christ. Others need much Patience to dye,
but such will need as much Patience to live; but whatever the exercises of your
Patience shall be, whether in waiting for the returns of your Prayers, in
bearing the cross and sufferings of Christ, or in waiting for the day of your
complete Redemption and enjoyment of Christ: This single consideration, that
Christ stood and waited so long upon you, is enough to fortisie your Patience
against all the difficulties it shall encounter

VII. Inference.
Lastly, If Christ thus patiently wait upon trifling and obstinate sinners,
then let no godly person be discouraged because their unregenerate Relations
have not yet made their first step toward Christ in the way of Repentance and
saving Faith.

It may be you have laid up a great stock of Prayers for them, the believing
Husband has prayed for his unbelieving Wife, and the believing Wife for her
unbelieving Husband; godly Parents for their ungodly Children, and the gracious
Child for his ungodly Parents; and yet no returns of Prayer appear. Many cries
are gone up to Heaven like that of Abraham, Genesis 17. 18. O that Ishmael might
live before thee. Well, be not discouraged, Christ is contented to wait, and
therefore well may you. Those cries of Parents, Lord my poor Child is in the
state of Nature, look in mercy upon him, open his Eyes, break his Heart for
sin, draw his Will to Christ; these cries may not be lost, though the fruit of
them yet appear not; consider how long Christ waited upon you. There be three
things that encourage hope, (1.) That your Hearts and theirs were of the same
natural complexion and temper; and the same power which opened your Hearts can
open theirs; thy understanding was once as dark, thy Heart as hard, and thy
Will as inflexible as thy carnal Relations now are. The same Hand tha opened
thy Heart, can open theirs. Don't think Christ had an easier task to win thy
Heart, than he will have to win theirs. Almighty Power wrought upon you, and
the same Power can work effectually upon them; the Lord's Hand is not shortened.
(2ly.) You have reason to wait, for as much as it is probable you your selves
have put stumbling blocks into the way of their Souls to Christ, and hindered
the returns of your own Prayers for the conversion of your carnal Relatives. Oh
Christians, there is more due to them than your Prayers, Prayers must be backed
with examples; had they not only heard your cries to God for them, but seen
your suitable encouraging pattern set before them also; you and yours might
have rejoiced together long ago. But (3ly.) consider that God many times makes
the fruit of such Prayers to spring up after those that sowed them are dead and
gone. The Lord may give life to your Prayers when you are dead: Certainly your
Prayers dye not with you. It Is the opinion of some that Paul's conversion was
the return of Stephen's Prayer, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Stephen
died, but his Prayers lived, and were answered upon one that stood by and
consented to his death: But however it be, wait on; if your Prayers come not
into their bosoms, they will certainly return into your own. Here Is duty
discharged, love to Christ and their Souls manifested; which will be your
comfort howsoever God disposes the event.

II. Use.
Secondly, The Doctrine of Christ's Patience puts a great and serious
Exhortation into my Mouth this day, to press one of the greatest Duties upon
you that ever I pressed in the whole course of my Ministry among you: And could
I deliver this Exhortation to you upon my Knees, with Tears of Blood mingled
with my words, might that prevail, I would surely do it. My Exhortation is, to
all that are in an unregenerate state, that they presume not to try the
Patience of Christ any longer. If you have any regard to your eternal
Happiness, exercise not his Patience beyond this hour. Oh that this hour might
put an end to Christ's waiting, and your danger! Hitherto you have wearied Men,
but will you weary God also? Christ has called, but you have resused; he has
stretched out his Hands but you have not regarded. Your thoughts have been
wandering after vanity, whilst the voice of the Gospel has been sounding in
your Ears; some of you have been sottish and incapable to apprehend spiritual
Truths; others of you sensual, given up to the pleasures of the World, and
abandoning all serious thoughts about the World to come. Some of you have been
buried alive in the cares of the World, and others settled upon a dead formality
in Religion; and to this day Christ has called upon you in vain. Now that
which I exhort you to, is that you venture not to try the Patience of Christ
one day longer; if you have any regard to the everlasting happiness of your
Souls, come not under the guilt and danger of one denial or delay more; if you
ask me why? Why may we not venture a little longer? Christ has born all this
while, and will he not bear a little longer? May we not take a little more
pleasure in sin? May we not hazard one Sermon, or Sabbath more, and yet not
perish? I answer, No. If your Souls be precious in your Eyes let there be no
more denials nor delays to Christ's suit. For (1.) how patient and
long-suffering soever Christ has been, yet there will be an end of the day of
his Patience; a time when he will wait no longer, when his Spirit shall strive
no more with you. There is a knock of Christ at the Heart, which will be the
last knock that ever he will give; and after that no more knocks. A time when
the Master of the house will rise up and the door be shut. You have had to do
with a meek and patient Christ hitherto; but believe it sinners, there is a day
called, the day of the wrath of the Lamb, and that day is dreadful, Rev. 6. 16.
where you find sinners, crying to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them,
and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. O if his wrath be once kindled though
but a little, blessed are they that trust in him, that have finished their
agreement with him. The day of Christ's Patience toward Jerusalem was a long
day, but it had an end, Matthew. 23. 37. and it ended in their desolation;
therefore try the Patience of Christ no further; you know not the limits of it,
it may end with your next refusal, and then where are you? (2ly.) The longer
Christ has exercised his Patience already toward you, the more terribly will
he avenge the abuse of it in Hell upon you. It Is past doubt with me that there
are different degrees of Torment in Hell; the Scriptures are plainly and
clearly for it. Now among all the aggravations of the Torments of Hell, none
can be greater than the reflections of damned Souls upon the abused Patience
and Grace of Christ. Those that had the best means, the loudest calls, and the
longest day under the Gospel, will certainly have the hottest place in Hell, if
the goodness and long-suffering of Christ do not now lead them to Repentance;
the cries of such Souls will be heard above the cries of all the other
miserable wretches that are cast away. 'Twill be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah, than for Capernaum, Matthew. 11. 23.

Oh, Friends, you little know the smart reflections of Conscience in Hell, upon
such hours as you now enjoy; such wooing, charming voices and allurements, to
Christ as you now hear. There are many thousands of Souls in Hell, that came
thither out of the dark heathenish parts of the World, where they never heard
of Christ; but your misery will be far beyond theirs; your reflections more
sharp and bitter: Therefore delay no longer, lest you perish with peculiar
aggravations of misery. (3ly.) Try the Patience of Christ no further, I beseech
you, for as much as you see every day the Patience of Christ ending toward
others. Patience coming down, and Justice ascending the Stage, to triumph over
the abusers of Mercy. You don't only read in Scripture of the finishing and
ending of God's Patience with Men, but you may see it every day with your own
Eyes. If you look into Scripture, You may find the Patience of God ended
toward multitudes of Sinners, who possibly had the same presumptions, and vain
hopes for the continuance of it that you now have: If you look into 1 Pet. 3.
19, 20. you shall there find that Christ went and preached to the Spirits in
prison, which sometimes were disobedient; when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah. The meaning of it is this, that in the days before
the Flood, Christ by his Spirit strove with disobedient and rebellious sinners,
in the Ministry of Noah, who then were living Men and Women, as now we are, but
now are Spirits in prison, ( i. e.) damned Souls in Hell, for their
disobedience: And truly, Brethren, you may frequently behold the glass of
Patience run down, the very last sand in it spent upon others. Whenever you see
a wicked Christless Man or Woman dye, you see the end of God's Patience with
that Man or Woman, and all this for a warning to you, that you adventure not to
trifle and dally with it as they did. (4ly.) Lastly, Do not try God's Patience
any longer (if you love your Souls) for this Reason, because when Men grow
bold, and encourage themselves in sin, upon the account of God's forbearance
and long-suffering toward them; there cannot be a more certain sign that his
Patience is very near its end toward that Soul. It Is time for God to put an
end to his Patience when it is made an encouragement to sin. God cannot suffer
so vile an abuse of his glorious Patience, nor endure to see it turned into
wantonness: This quickly brings up sin to its finishing act and perfection, and
then Patience is just upon finishing also. That Patience is thus abused,
appears from Eccles. 8. 11. and when it is so abused look for a sudden change.
O, therefore, beware of provoking God, for now the day of Patience is certainly
near its end with such sinners, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26. Because I have called^ and
ye refused, I have stre^ched out my Hand and no Man regarded: But ye have set
at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at
your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. When your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind. Ah, when sinners scolt
and mock at the threatenings of God, and bear themselves up, upon his Patience,
as that which will never crack under them; then look out for a whirlwind, a
sudden Tempest of wrath which shall hurry such Souls into Hell. Then misery
comes like a storm blowing furiously from all quarters. Well, the Heavens are
yet clear over you, but a storm is nigh, and may be certainly presaged from
such vite abuses of the glorious Patience of Christ toward you. That Is the
first Exhortation, try not the Patience of Christ by any further delays

II. Exhortation.
Secondly, Admire Christ's Patience and forbearance of you until now, that he
has not cut you off in your sin, but lengthned out his Patience unto this day,
and brought about your Salvation by his long-suffering toward you. Here now I
must change my voice and turn it unto those whose Hearts the Lord has opened:
Stand amazed at the riches of his Grace toward you and see that you account
this long-suffering of God to be your Salvation; for in plain Truth it is so:
your Salvation was bound up in Christ's forbearance; if Christ had not born as
he did, you had not been where you are. I could heartily wish that all the time
you can redeem from the necessary employments you have in the World, may now be
spent in an humble, thankful admiration of this admirable Grace and Patience of
Christ, and answerable duties to the intentions and ends thereof. To this end I
shall subjoyn diverse weighty Considerations, which, methinks, should melt every
Heart wherein the lest dram of saving Grace is found.

Bethink your selves of the great and manifold provocations you have given the*
1. Consid.
Lord to put an end to all further Patience toward you; not only in the days
of your vanity and unregeneracy, but enen since your reconciliation to him. Do
you not believe thousands of sinners are now in the depths of Hell, who never
provoked the Lord at an higher rate than you have done? Were you not herded
once among the vilest of sinners, 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you; as
vile as the vilest among them; yet you are washed in the Blood of Christ, and
your companions roaring in the lowest Hell; or if your lives were more clean,
sure your Hearts and Natures were as filthy as theirs. And certainly your sins
since the time of Reconciliation have had special aggravations in them, enough
to put an end to all further mercies toward you. Light and Love have
aggravated these sins, and yet the Lord will not cast you off.

How often have you been upon the very brink of Hell, 2. Consid.
in the days of your unregeneracy? Every sickness, and every danger of life
which you escaped in those days, was a marvelous escape from the everlasting
wrath of God. Had thy Disease prevailed one degree further, thou had been
past hope; and out of the reach of Mercies Arm now. Doubtless some of you can
remember when in such and such a Disease you were like a Ship riding in a
furious storm by one Cable, and two or three of the strands of that Cable were
snapt asunder. So it has been with you, the thread of life how weak soever,
has held till the bonds of union betwixt Christ and your Souls are fastened,
and the eternal hazard over. This is admirable Grace.

How often has Death come up into your Windows, entered into your Houses, 3.
Consid.
fetched off your nearest Relations; but had no commission to carry you out with
them; because the Lord had a design of Mercy upon your Souls.

This cannot but affect a gracious Heart, that God should smite so near, and
yet spare you.

Lastly, 4. Consid.
This is affecting, yea very transporting; that God has not only given you
time beyond others, but in that time the precious opportunities and means of
your Salvation, both external and internal; there is the very marrow and kernel
of the Mercy; had God lengthned out his Patience for a while, but given you no
means of Salvation; or afforded you the means, but denied you the blessing and
efficacy of them; at the most it could have been but a reprieve from Hell: but
for the Lord to give you the Gospel, and with the Gospel to send down his
Spirit, to persuade and open thy Heart to Christ; here is the riches of his
goodness as well as forbearance.

III. Exhortation.
This Doctrine of the Patience of Christ exhorts all that have felt it, to
exercise a Christ-like Patience toward others; as you have found the benefit
of Divine Patience your selves, see that you exercise the meekness and
long-suffering of Christians toward those that have wronged and injured you.
Who should show Patience more than those that have found it? Don't be severe,
short and quick with others who have lived your selves so many years upon the
long-suffering of God. We are poor short-spirited Creatures, quick to revenge
injuries, but oh, had God been so to us, miserable had our condition been.
Christ has made this duty the very scope of that excellent parable, Matthew. 18.
from the 25 verse onward, where the King takes an account of his Servants,
reckoning with them one by one, and amongst them finds one which owed him Ten
thousand Talents, and having not to pay, commands him his Wife and Children,
and all he had to be sold, and payment to be made; but the Servant falling
down, and begging Patience, his Lord was moved with compassion, and loosed him,
and not only forbore but forgave the debt; one would think the Heart of this
Man should have been a fountain of compassion toward others; but see the deep
corruption of Nature, the same Servant finding one of his fellow servants which
owed him but an Hundred pence, laid Hands on him and took him by the Throat.
Alas, the wrongs done to us are but trif^les, compared with our injuries done
to God; where others have wronged you once, you have wronged God a thousand
times. Methinks the Patience of Christ toward you should melt your Hearts into
an ingenuous easiness to forgive others; especially considering that an
unforgiving Spirit is a dreadful sign of an unforgiven person.

IV. Exhortation.
Burden not the Patience of Christ after your admission of him, and
reconciliation to him; let it suffice that you tried his Patience long enough
before, give him no new exercises now he is come to dwell in and with you for
ever. There be two ways wherein God's own People do greatly provoke him after
their Reconciliation. 1. By slugishness to Duty. 2. By sinning against Light.


1. By slugishness and deadness of Spirit in the ways of Duty and Obedience;
turning a deaf ear to the calls and motions of Christ's Spirit exciting them to
the sweet and pleasant Duties of Religion. We have a sad instance of this in
the Spouse, Cant. 5. 2, 3. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying,
Open to me my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my Undefiled; for my Head is filled
with dew, and my Locks with the drops of the night. One would think that Christ
might have opened the Heart of his own Spouse with less solicitation, and
importunate Arguments than he here uses; what Wife could shut the door upon
her own dear Husband, and bar him out of his own house? And yet see the lazy
excuse she makes, verse. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I
have washed my Feet, how shall I defile them?

Oh, the slugishness of Flesh, even in Regenerate persons! Those that have
opened the door to Christ by Regeneration, even they do often shut the door
against Christ in the hours and seasons of Communion with him. Strange, that
such a suitor as Christ should be put by, moving and calling to such heavenly
pleasant exercises as Communion with him is; but flesh will be flesh even in
the most Spiritual Christians; little do we know what a grief this is to
Christ, and loss to us.

2ly. Many grieve Christ's Spirit, and sorely try his Patience, even after
Reconciliation, by sinning against Light and Love; that caution, Ephesians. 4. 30.
is not without weighty cause, and grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by which
you are sealed to the day of Redemption.

Do we thus requite the Lord? is this the return we will make him for all his
admirable kindness and unparalled Love toward us? Certainly, Christ can put
up a thousand injuries from his Enemies, easier than such affronts from his own
People; did you not promise him better obedience? Did you not engage to more
holiness and watchfulness, in the day that you sued out your pardon, and made
up your peace with him? Are all those Vows and Covenants forgotten? If you have
forgotten them God has not.

V. Exhortation.
Improve the time that remains in this World with double diligence, because you
made Christ wait so long, and cast a way so great a part of your life, before
you opened your Hearts to rereceive him. The morning of your life which was
certainly the freshest and freest part of it, was no better than time lost with
many of us; all the days of your unregeneracy Christ was shut out, and vanity
shut into your Hearts: You never began to live till Christ gave you life, and
that was late in the day with many of you. How should this provoke to
extraordinary diligence in those few remains of time we have yet to enjoy? It
was Austin's lamentation, O Lord, it repents me, says he, that I loved thee so
late. This consideration excited Paul to extraordinary diligence for Christ. It
made him fly up and down the World, as a Seraphim, in a flame of holy zeal for
Christ. Those that have much to write, and are almost come to the end of their
paper, had need write close. Friends, you have something to do for God upon
Earth, which you cannot do for him in Heaven, Isa. 38. 18, 19. You that have
carnal Relations have something to do for them here, which you cannot do in
Heaven. You can now Counsel, Exhort, and Pray, in order to their Conversion and
Salvation; but when you are gone down to the Grave, these opportunities of
service are cut off.

VI. Exhortation.
Let us all be ashamed and humbled for the baseness of our Hearts and Natures,
which made Christ wait at the door so long, before we opened to him. O what
wretched Hearts have we! That were no more affected with the groans of Christ's
Heart, than with the groans of a Beast, no nor so much neither, if that Beast
were our own. Oh, the vileness of Nature to make the Prince of the King's of
the Earth bringing Pardon and Salvation with him, to stand so long unanswered;
let who will cry up the goodness of Nature, I am sure we have reason to look
upon the vileness of it with amazement and horror. You could not have found in
your Hearts to have made the poorest beggar wait so long at your door, as you
have made Christ to wait upon you.

VII. Exhortation.
Seventhly, and Lastly, Let us all bless and admire the Lord Jesus for the
continuation of his Patience, not to our selves only, but to that whole sinful
Nation in which we live. We thought the Treaty of Peace had been ended with us;
many good Men looking upon the iniquities and abominations of these times,
considering the vanities and backsliding of Professors, the Heaven-daring
provocations of this Atheistical age, concluded in their own Hearts, that God
would make England another Shiloh. Many faithful Ministers of Christ said
within themselves God has no more Work for us to do, and we shall have no more
opportunities to work for God. When lo, beyond the thoughts of all Hearts, the
merciful and long-suffering Redeemer makes one return more to these Nations,
renews the Treaty, and with compassions rolled together, speaks to us this day,
as to Ephraim of old, How shall I deliver thee? Look upon this day, this
unexpected day of Mercy, as the fruit and acquisition of the intercession of
your great Advocate in Heaven, answerable to that Luke 13. 7, 8, 9. Well God
has put us upon one Trial more, if now we bring forth fruit, well, if not the
ax lies at the root of the Tree. Once more, Christ knocks at our doors, the
voice of the Bridegroom is heard; those sweet voices, Come unto me, Open to me;
your opening to Christ now, will be unto you as the Valley of Achor, for a door
of hope. But what if all this should be turned into wantonness and formality?
what if your obstinacy and infidelity should wear out the remains of that
little strength and time left you, and that former Labors and Sorrows have
left your Ministers? Then actum est de nobis, we are gone for ever; then
farewell Gospel, Ministers, Reformation, and all, because we knew not the time
of our Visitation. What was the dismal doom of God upon the fruitless Vineyard?
Isa. 5. 5. I will take away the hedge thereof and it shall be eaten up; and
break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; I will also command
the Clouds that they rain not upon it. The hedge, and the wall are the
Spiritual and Providential presence of God; these are the defense and safety of
his People; the Clouds, and the Rain are the sweet influences of Gospel
Ordinances. If the hedge be broken down, God's pleasant Plants will soon be
eaten up; and if the Clouds rain not upon them, their Root will be rottenness,
and their Blossom will go up as dust. Our Churches will soon become as the
Mountains of Gilboa; therefore see that you know and improve the time of your
Visitation.

III. Use of Consolation.
I shall wind up this Fourth Doctrine, in two or three words of Consolation, to
those that have answered, and are now preparing to answer the design and end of
Jesus Christ in all his Patience toward them, by the compliance of their
Hearts with his great design and end therein. O blessed be God, and let his
high-praises be for ever in our Mouths, that at last Christ is like to obtain
his end upon some of us, and that all do not receive the Grace of God in vain.
And there be three Considerations able to wind up your Hearts to the height of
Praise, if the Lord have now made them indeed willing to open to the Lord Jesus.

I. Consideration.
The Faith and Obedience of your Hearts makes it evident, that the Lords
waiting upon you hitherto, has been in pursuance of his design of Electing
Love. What was the reason God would not take you away by death, though you
passed so often upon the very brink of it, in the days of your unregeneracy?
And what think you was the very reason of the revocation of your
Gospel-liberties when they were quite out of sight, and almost out of hope; why
surely this was the reason, that you, and such as you are, might be brought to
Christ at last. Therefore, though the Lord let you run on so long in sin, yet
still he continued your Life, and the means of your Salvation, because he had a
design of Mercy and Grace upon you. And now the time of Mercy, even the set
time is come, Praise ye the Lord.

II. Consideration.
You now also see the Sovereignty and freeness of Divine Grace in your
vocation; your Hearts resisted all along the most powerful means, and
importunate calls of Christ; and would have resisted still, had not Free and
Sovereign Grace over-poured them when the time of Love was come. Ah, it was not
the tractableness of thine own Will, the easy temper of thy Heart to be
wrought upon, the Lord let thee stand long enough in the state of Nature to
discover that; there was nothing in Nature but obstinacy and enmity. Thou did
hear as many powerful Sermons, melting Prayers; and did see as many awakning
Providence before thy Heart was opened to Christ, as thou have since; yet thy
Heart never opened till now; and why did it open now? Because now the Spirit of
God joined himself to the Word; victorious Grace went forth in the Word to
break the hardness and conquer the rebellions of thy Heart. The Gospel was now
preached (as the Apostle speaks) 1 Pet. 1. 12. With the Holy Ghost sent down
from Heaven, which things (says he) the Angels desire to look into. Ah,
Friends, it is a glorious sight worthy of Angelical observation and admiration
to behold the effects of the Gospel preached, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven, to see when the Spirit comes along with the Word, the blind Eyes of
sinners opened, and they brought into a new World of ravishing objects; to
behold Fountains of Tears flowing for sin, out of Hearts lately as hard as the
Rocks; to see all the Bars of Ignorance, Prejudice, Custom, and Unbelief, fly
open at the voice of the Gospel; to see Rebels against Christ laying down their
Arms at his Feet, come upon the Knee of submission, crying, Lord I will rebel
no more; to see the proud Heart centered and wrapped up in its own righteousness,
now striping it self naked, loading it self with all shame and reproach; and
made willing that its own shame should go to the Redeemer's glory. These, I
say, are sights which Angels desire to look into.

Certainly your Hearts were more tender, and your Wills more apt to yield and
bend in the days of your youth, than they were now when sin had so hardened
them, and long continued custom riveted and fixed them; yet then they did not,
and now they do yield to the calls and invitations of the Gospel. Ascribe all
to Sovereign Grace, and say, Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Name give the
glory. The observation and experience of our own Hearts will furnish us with
arguments enough to resist all ^emptations of self-glorying and conceit.

Certainly you were born not of Flesh, nor of Blood, nor of the will of Man,
but of God.

III. Consideration.
Lastly, This is a comfortable Consideration, that he that waited upon you so
long, and won your Hearts at last, will not forsake you, now that has gained
you at the expense of so much pains and patience. Poor Souls, I question not
but there are many fears and jealousies within you, that all this will come to
nothing, and you shall perish at last. Diverse things foment these Jealousies
within your Hearts; the weakness of your own Graces, which alas, are but in
their infancy: the sense you have of your own corruptions, and the great
strength they still retain. The subtilty of Satan, who imploys all his policies
to reduce you; sometimes roaring after his escaped prey with hideous
injections, which make your Souls to tremble; sometimes the discourageing
apprehensions of the difficulties of Religion; how far the spirituality of
active obedience, and the difficulty of passive obedience is above your
strength; sometimes feeling within your selves sad alterations, by the hidings
of God's face, and with-drawment of sweet and sensible Communion with him.
These, and such like things as these, cause many a qualm to come over your
Hearts; but cheer up, Christ will not lose at last what he pursued so long; he
that waited so many years for thy Soul, will never cast it away now he has
seated himself in the possession of it.

SERMON V.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door [and knock,] etc.
IN the former Point we have seen the Redeemers posture, a posture of
condescending humility, rather the posture of a Servant than the Lord of all.
Behold I stand at the door; we now come to consider his action, or motion for
entrance, I stand and knock; this metaphorical action of knocking signifies
nothing else but the motions made by Christ for entrance into the Souls of
sinners; and affords us this fifth Observation.

V. DOCT.
That every conviction of Conscience and motion upon the Affections of sinners,
is a knock of Christ from Heaven for entrance into their Souls.

This action of knocking is ascribed sometimes to the Soul, and is expressive
of its desires to come into the gracious Presence and Communion of God; so
Matthew. 7. 7. To him that knocks it shall be opened (i. e.) to him that seeks by
importunate Prayer, Fellowship and Communion with the Lord; but here it is
applied to Christ, and is expressive of his importunate desire to come into
union and communion with the Souls of sinners. Here I shall open to you the
following particulars, 1. What are the doors of the Soul at which Christ
knocks? 2. What his knocking at these doors implies. 3. By what instruments he
knocks at them. 4. In what manner he performs this action.


First, What are the doors of the Soul at which Christ knocks? You all know
that the term Christ here uses cannot be proper, but metaphorical; it is a
Figurative speech, the door is that part which is introductive into the House,
and whatsoever is introductive into the Soul, that is the door of the Soul. Now
in the Soul of Man there are many powers and faculties that have this use, and
are of an introductive nature to let things into the Soul of Man. Some are more
outward, as we may speak comparatively, and some more inward, as the doors of
our houses are.

Christ knocks orderly at them all, one after another, for the operations of
the Spirit disturb not the order of Nature.

1. The first door that opens and lets into the Soul is the Understanding;
nothing passes into the Soul, but it must first come through this door of the
Understanding; nothing can touch the Heart or move the affections, but what
has first touched the Understanding. Hence we read so often in Scripture of the
opening of the Understanding; that being as it were the fore-door of the Soul.

2ly. Within this is the Royal-gate of the Soul, viz. The will of Man, that
noble and imperial Power; many things may pass into the Mind or Understanding
of a Man, and yet be able to get no further, the door of the Will may be shut
against them. There were many precious Truths of God let into the
Understandings of the Heathens by the light of Nature, but could never get
further, their Hearts and Wills were locked and shut up against them; as you may
see, Romans 1. 18. They held the Truths of God in Unrighteousness; that is, they
bound and imprisoned those common notices the Law of Nature impressed upon their
Minds concerning the Being and Nature of God, and the duties of both Tables.
These Truths could get no further into their Souls, and which is of sad and
dreadful consideration, Christ himself stands betwixt these two doors in the
Souls of many persons; he is got into their Understandings and Consciences,
they are convinced of the possibility and necessity of obtaining Jesus Christ,
but still the door of their Will is barred against him, which drew from him
that sad complaint, John 5. 40. You will not come unto me that you might have
life. When this door of the Will is once effectually opened, then all the inner
doors of the affections are quickly set open to receive and welcome him.
Desires, joy, delight, and all the rest stand open to him. These are the doors
at which the Redeemer knocks.

Secondly, Next we must consider what is meant by Christ's knocking at these
doors, and what that action implies. In the general, knocking is nothing else
but an action significative, of the desires of one that is without to come in;
it is a sign appointed to that end: And what is Christ's knocking but a
signification to the Soul of his earnest desires to come into it; a notice
given to the Soul of Christ's willingness to possess it for his own habitation?
And it is as much as if Christ should say, Soul, thou art the House that was
built by my Hand, purchased and redeemed by my Blood; I have an unquestionable
right to it, and now demand entrance. More particularly, there are diverse great
things implied in this gracious act of Christ's knocking at the door of the
Soul.

1. It implies the special favor and distinguishing grace and goodness of
Jesus Christ, that he will stand and knock at our doors, when he passes by so
great a part of the World, never giving one such knock or call at other Men's
doors; it is certainly a most glorious and admirable condescension and favor
of Heaven, and wherever it is successful, it speaks a Man highly favored of
God. Oh that when Christ passes by the Souls of Thousands, and Millions, that
would certainly afford him as comfortable an habitation as our Souls can do,
and will not give one effectual knock, or call at their doors all the days of
their life; that he will please to turn aside to thy Soul, and wait, and knock
there for entrance; I say, here is one of the greatest acts of favor that can
be shown to the Soul of a sinner. How many Souls be there in the World equal in
natural Dignity to yours, and of sweeter natural Tempers, whom yet the Lord
Jesus lets alone in the quiet possession of Satan, Luke 11. 21. There is a deep
silence and stilness in their Consciences, no stirrings nor disturbances by
Convictions, but through a dreadful Judgment of God are left in a deep sleep;
and if their Consciences at any time begin to grumble, how soon are they hushed
and quieted again by Satan? What the condition of the World was in former Ages,
we may see in Acts 14. 16. Who in times past suffered all Nations to walk in
their own ways. O it is the greatest Mercy in the World for the sleepy
Conscience of a sinner to be roused by Convictions, because it is introductive
to all other Spiritual Mercies. I confess this act of Grace is little
apprehended by the Sons and Daughters of Men; much rather would poor sinners be
let alone than be thus disturbed by troublesome convictions; and when Christ
disturbs their rest, how do they startle at the knocks of his Word and Spirit?
How angry be they that they cannot be let alone to enjoy their quiet sleep in
sin till the flames of Hell awaken them? Mr. Fenner, that great and eminent
Instrument of God in this Work, tells us, in one of his Sermons, how it fared
with a certain Man that came to hear him Preach: It seems the Word had got
entrance into his Conscience, and gave it a terrible Allarum, and as he was
going home, some that followed him, heard him thus blaming and bemoaning
himself, O what a fool, what a beast was I to come under this Sermon to day? I
shall never have peace and quietness any more. And what is the reason that
smooth and general Preaching is so much applauded and affected in the World;
And close convincing Doctrine so much shunned and hated; but this, that sinners
are very loath to be disquieted and have their Consciences thoroughly awakned.
Well, whatever your apprehensions be, certainly it is an unspeakable Mercy for
Christ to knock and disquiet the Souls of sinners by his calls. That Is the
first thing.

2ly. The next thing implied in this action of Christ is this, That the first
motions toward the recovery and Salvation of sinners begin not in themselves,
but in Christ. We never knock at Heavens door by Prayer till Christ has first
knocked at our doors by his Spirit: Did not Christ move first, there would be no
motions after him in our Hearts; we move toward him, because he has first
moved upon our Souls. Christ might sit long enough unsought and undesired, did
he not make the first motion. All our motions are secondary and consequential
motions, Isa. 65. 1. I am found of them that sought me not. As we love him
because he first loved us, so we seek after him, because he first sought us.
Alas, poor sinners are as well satisfied as any people in the World can be, to
lie fast asleep in the Devil's Arms. When the Spirit of God goes forth with the
Word of Conviction, he finds the Souls of Men in the very same posture which
the Angels, that had surveyed the World, reported the whole Earth to be in,
Zach. 1. 11. Behold all the Earth sits still, and is at rest. Every Man
settled and satisfied in his own way; what a strange stilness, and midnight
silence is there amongst sinners? Not a sigh, not a cry to be heard for sin: So
the Psalmist, Psalm. 14. 2. represents the case of sinners, The Lord looked down
from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek God. They are all gone aside, etc. There is one thing that
is admirably strange in this case, that even those Men and Women whose Rattles
of earthly pleasures and delights, which brought them into this sleep and
security, are taken away from them by the Hand of Providence, I mean their
Estates, Health, Children, etc. yet they awake not; there are no stirrings
after God. O what a dead sleep has sin cast the Souls of sinners into! You
have a notable Scripture to this purpose, in Job 35. 9. 10. they are the words
of Elihu, concerning Men and Women under grievous oppression; persons squeezed
and ground by the cruel Hands of wicked Men, by reason of the multitude of
oppressions they make the oppressed to cry; they cry out by reason of the Arm
of the Mighty, but none says, where is God my Maker who gives songs in the
night? i. e. Succor, Comfort and Refreshment to the afflicted.

Here are Men turned out of their Estates, thrown into Prisons, cast upon all
extremities and miseries, and what do these poor creatures do? Why (says he)
they cry by reason of their oppression. O my Father, or my Mother, my Wife, my
Child, my Estate, my Liberty, but none says where is my God? O my sin, or my
misery by reason of sin; where is he that gives Songs in the night? The People
of God when they lie musing upon their beds under affliction, they have their
Songs in the Night, in the midst of the multitude of their troubled thoughts
within them, the Comforts of God delight their Souls. Those are their Songs in
the Night, but no such word or thought in carnal Men; how plain is it, that all
the first motions of Salvation have their first spring and rise in God, and not
in us. That Is the Second thing implied in Christ's knocking.

Thirdly, Christ knocking at the door of the Heart, implies the method of the
Spirit in Conversion; to be congruous and agreeable to the nature of Man's
Soul; mark Christ's expression in the Text, he does not say, Behold I come to
the door and break it open by violence; no, Christ makes no forcible Entries
whether sinners will or no; he will come in by consent of the Will or not at
all. I stand and knock, if any Man open the door, I will come in to him. There
is a great difference between a friendly admission by consent, and a forcible
entrance; in a forcible entrance bars of Iron are brought to break open the
door; but in a friendly admission one knocks and the other opens: Forcible
actions are unsuitable to the nature of the Will, whose motions are free and
spontaneous; therefore it is said, Psalm. 110. 3. The people shall be willing in
the day of thy power. It Is true, the Power of God is upon the Will of Man in
the day of his Conversion, or else it would never open to Christ; but yet that
Power of God does not act against the freedom of Man's Will, by co-action and
force; no, but of unwilling he makes it willing; taking away the obstinacy and
reluctance of the Will by the efficacy of his Grace, which some Divines call
victrix delectatio, a sweet and pleasant victory; and so the door of the Will
still opens freely, Hosea 11. 4. I drew them with the cords of a Man, with the
bands of Love. I drew them, there is Almighty Power; but how did this Power draw
them? With the cords of a Man, i. e. with rational arguments, convincing the
Judgment. Beasts are driven and forced, but Men are drawn by reason, and will
not move without it if they act like themselves; it must be confessed, that
when the day of God's Power is come, for the bringing home of a poor sinner to
Christ, he cannot resist the Power of God's Spirit that draws him effectually;
Every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me; yet still
the Soul comes freely by the consent of his Will; for this is the method of
Christ in drawing Souls to him. There is in the day of a sinners Conversion a
kid, an offer made for the Will both by Satan and Christ. Satan bids Riches,
Honors, and Pleasures, with ease and quietness to the flesh in the enjoyment
of them; abide where thou art says Satan, remain with me and thou shall escape
all the Persecutions, losses and troubles of the World, which Conscience
entangles other Men in; thou shall draw thy life through peace and pleasure to
thy dying day. O says the flesh this is a good motion, what can be better for
me? But then says Christ, do thou not consider that all these enjoyments
will quickly be at an end, and what shall become of thee then? Behold I offer
thee the free, full, and final pardon of thy sins; Peace and reconciliation
with God, treasures in Heaven, all these shall be thine, with Troubles,
Reproaches and Persecutions in this World. The Understanding and Conscience of
a sinner being convinced of the vanity of earthly things, and the indispensable
necessity of pardon and peace with God: I say, when a convinced Judgment has
duly balanced these things, and laid them before the Will, and the Spirit of
God put forth his Power in the renovation of it; it moves toward Christ
freely, and yet cannot according to its natural order act otherwise than it
does. And doubtless this is the true meaning of that expression, so often
mistaken and abused, in Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come in. What! by forcing
Men against the light of their Consciences? No, no, to the shame of many
Protestants let us hear the Gloss of Stella a Popish Commentator upon the
place. Christ (says he) compels Men to come in by showing to their Will such
an excelling good, as it cannot but embrace; for volunt as nature aliter fertur
in bonum. The Will is naturally carried to the choice of the best good. And
thus the Spirit works upon the Soul harmoniously and agreeably to its own
Nature. That Is the Third thing implied in Christ's knocking.

Fouthly, Christ's knocking at the door of the Soul, manifestly implies the
immediate access of the Spirit of God unto the Soul of Man; that he can come to
the very innermost door of the Soul at his pleasure, and make what impressions
upon it he pleases. As for other instruments used in this Work, they have no
such privilege or Power; Ministers can but knock at the external door of the
senses. Thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers, we can see their persons and hear
their voices; we can reason with sinners and plead with their Souls; but awaken
them we cannot, open their Hearts we cannot. We can only lodge our message in
their Ears, and leave it to the Spirit of God to make it effectual. This is a
Royalty belonging unto the Spirit of God, incommunicable to Angels or Men. If
an Angel from Heaven were the Preacher, he could not give one immediate stroke
to the Conscience, much less can Man; we have no dominion over your
Consciences: The keys of the doors of your Souls hang not at our girdles, but
are in the Hands of Christ, Revel. 3. 7. He has the key of David, he opens
and no Man shuts; and he shuts and no Man opens. The Consciences and
all the faculties lie naked and open to the stroke of God's Spirit; he can
wound them and heal them, and make what impressions he pleases upon them.
Learn hence what need there is both for Ministers and People before they enter
upon the solemn Ordinances of God, to lift up their Hearts by Prayer for the
blessing and Power of the Spirit upon them. Lord send forth thy Spirit, pour it
forth upon, and with thy Word. Ah, how many Sermons have we Preached and you
heard, and yet there is no opening? These are the four things implied in
Christ's knocking at the door, viz. Condescending Grace; All first motions
begin in God; The motions of his Spirit are congruous and agreeable to the
nature of the Soul; And that his Spirit can have immedate access to the
innermost faculties and Powers of the Soul at his pleasure. Now in the next
place let us consider,

Thirdly, By what Instruments Christ knocks at the Doors, that is, the
Judgment, Conscience and Will of a sinner. And these are two, viz.

By 1. His Word. 2. His Providence.

Here my Work will be to show you how the Spirit of God makes use both of the
Word and Works of God, to rouse and open the Consciences and Hearts of Sinners.
These are the two Hammers or instruments of the Spirit by which he knocks at
the door of the Heart.

1. The Word, written or preached, but especially preached; to this Christ
gives the preference, to all other instruments employed about this Work; and
answerably the Word is called God's Hammer, Ier. 23. 29. Is not my Word like
fire, and as the Hammer which breaks the rocks in pieces? By this Hammer
Christ raps at the door of a sinners Soul, to give warning that he is there.
The Spirit of God can open the Heart immediately if he pleases; but he will
honor his Word in this Work. And therefore, when Lydias Heart was to be
opened, Paul, the great Gospel Preacher, must be invited even by an Angel to
come over to Macedonia, and assist in that blessed Work, Acts 16. 9. Lydia was
to be converted, her Heart must be opened to Christ; the Angel could not do it,
but calls for the help of the Apostle, Gods appointed Instrument to carry on
that Work. I have made thee (says God to Paul) a Minister and a witness to
open their Eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God, Acts 26. 18. Now, there be three ways in which the Spirit uses
the Word as his Hammer in knocking at the door of the Soul.

1. He knocks by the particular convictions of of the Word upon the Conscience;
this knock by conviction rings and sounds through all the rooms and chambers of
the Soul; particular and effectual conviction wounds to the very center of the
Soul. Ah, when the Word shall come whom by the Spirits particular application,
like that of Nathans to David, Thou art the Man; then all the powers of the
Soul are rouzed and allarmed; now it pierces as a two-edged Sword, Heb. 4. 12.
divides the Soul and Spirit, the superior and inferior Faculties of it: Cuts
down by the backbone, lays open the secret guilt, and innermost thoughts of a
Man's Heart, before which the sinner cannot stand. The secrets of his Heart are
made manifest and falling down on his Face, he must acknowledge that God is in
the Word, of a Truth, 1 Cor. 14. 24. O these convictions of the Word, are such
a rap, such a knock at the door of the Conscience as will never be forgotten;
no not in Heaven, to all Eternity.

2ly. Christ knocks in the Word by its terrible comminations and awful
threatenings, menacing the Soul that opens not, with eternal ruin; these are
dreadful knocks; O sinner, says Christ, will thou not open? Shall all the
tenders of my Grace made to thee be in vain? Know then that this thy obstinacy
shall be thy damnation. Thus the Word denounces ruin in the name of the great
and terrible God to all wilful impenitents and obstinate unbelievers, John 3.
36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abides on him. O dreadful sound, like unto which is that, John 8. 24. If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. q. d. Thy Mittimu^ for
Hell shall be made and signed; will you not come to me that you might have
life? then I will foretell what death you shall dye, you shall even dye in your
sins. Oh, it were better for thee to dye like a Dog in a ditch, than to dye in
thy sins. These are loud knocks of the Word, terrible sounds, yet no more than
needs to startle the drousie Consciences of sinners. And then,

3ly. The Spirit knocks by the gracious invitations of the Word, the sweet
allurements and gracious insinuations of it; and without this no Heart would
ever open to Christ. It is not frost and snow, storms and thunder, but the
gentle distilling dews, and cherishing Sunbeams, that make the flowers open in
the Spring. The terrors of the Law may be preparative, but the grace of the
Gospel is that which effectually opens the sinners Heart. The obdurate flint
will sooner fly when smitten upon the soft pillow, than upon the anvil. Now the
Gospel abounds with alluring invitations to draw the Will and open the Heart of
a sinner; such is that, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden; and I will give you rest. O what a charming voice is here! He that
considers it may well wonder what Heart in the World can resist it; like unto
this is that in Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters; and he that has no money let him come; yea, let him come and buy Wine
and Milk without money and without price. q. d. Come sinner, come; though thou
have no qualifications, no worthiness, nor righteousness of thy own; though
thou be but a heap of sin and vileness, yet come; my grace is a gift, not a
sale; and such is that in John 7. 37. In the last day, the great day of the
feast, Jesus stood up and cried, If any Man thirst, let him come to me and
drink. q. d. My grace is no sealed Fountain, it is free and open to the greatest
of sinners, if they thirst, they are invited to come and drink. This is that
Oil of Gospel grace which makes the Key turn so pleasantly and effectually
amongst all the cross wards of Man's Will. And thus you see how the Word
preached becomes an instrument in the Spirit's Hand, to open the door of a
sinners Heart, at which it knocks by its mighty Convictions, dreadful Threats,
and gracious Invitations.

Secondly, We next come to the Second Hammer by which the Spirit knocks at the
sinners Heart, and that is the providential Works of God. These in subserviency
to the Word, are of excellent use to awaken sinners, and make them open their
Hearts to Christ. God has magnified his Word above all his Name; yet there are
some of the providential Works of God greatly serviceable in this case; the
Word sanctifies Providence, and Providence assist the Word, and make it work.
Now there are two sorts of Providential Dispensations which the Lord Jesus
makes use of to gain entrance for him into the Hearts of Men.

Viz.
1. Judgments. 2. Mercies.
1. Judgments and Afflictions, the Word of God many times works not till some
stroke of God come to quicken and assist it; thus did the Lord open the Heart
of that Monster of wickedness Manasseh, the Word would not work alone, but a
smart rod quickened its operation, 2 Chronicles. 33. 10, 11, 12. And the Lord spoke
to Manasseh, and to his people; but they would not hearken. Wherefore the Lord
brought upon them the Captains of the host of the King of Assyria, which took
Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to
Babylon. And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers.

Thus the Heart of this Man relented under the Word assisted by the Rod. Ah,
it is good that God take such a course with some sinners, else the Word would do
them no good; and to this purpose is that in Job 36. 8, 9, 10. And if they be
bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction; then he shows them their
work and their transgression, that they have exceeded; and opens their Ears
to discipline. This is that rough course, the obstinacy of Men's Hearts makes
necessary for their recovery; and therefore it is very observable that some
words of God have lain dead in some sinners Hearts for years together, and at
last have begun to work under some smart and close Rod. Alas, while all things
are pleasant and prosperous about us, the Word has but little operation and
effect, Ier. 22. 21, 22. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou said I
will not hear: this has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not
my voice. The wind shall eat up all thy pastures, and thy lovers shall go into
captivity; surely then shall thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy
wickedness. q. d. Your Eyes are so dazzled with the beautiful Flowers, and your
Ears so charmed with the Siren Songs and Lullabies of earthly delights, that my
Word can take no place upon you. Let an East Wind blow, and wither up these
Flowers; then the Word shall work and Conscience rescent the concernments of
Eternity; this course God is feign to take with many of you; here you sit from
Sabbath to Sabbath under the Word, and nothing takes place upon your Hearts.
Will you not hear the voice of my Word? go Death, says God, and smite that
Man's Child dead, I will try what that will do; go Poverty, and blast his
Estate, and see what that will do; go Sickness, and smite his Body, and shake
him over the Graves mouth, I will see what that will do. Thus God sends to
sinners, as Absalom sent to Ioab, who refused to come near him, till he set
fire to his field of Corn, and then away comes Ioab, 2 Samuel 14. 29, 30, 31. And
thus the Lord opened the Heart of the Iaylor, by putting him into a fright, a
panick fear of Death, Acts 16. 27. And thus does the Lord devise means to bring
back his banished.

II. As God makes use of the Hammer of Judgments, so he makes use also of
Mercies to make way for Christ into the Hearts of Men. Every Mercy is a call, a
knock of God, and truly if there be any ingenuity left unextinguished in the
Heart, one would think Mercy should prevail more than all the Judgments in the
World, Romans 2. 4. Know thou not that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? q. d. Do thou not see the Hand of Mercy stretched out to lead
thee into a corner, there to mourn over thy sins committed against so gracious
and merciful a God? By every Mercy you receive, Christ does as it were ^ee you
to open your Hearts to him; they are so many gifts sent from Heaven to make way
for Christ into your Hearts. It would be an endless task to enumerate all the
Mercies bestowed to this end upon the unregenerate; but surely this is the
errand of them all; and the Lord takes it very ill when his end is not answered
in them; hence is that complaint, Ier. 5. 24. Neither say they in their Heart,
Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives us rain, both the former and the
latter in his season. Some of you have been marvelously preserved in times of
common Contagion and Death, when thousands have fallen at your righthand and
left: then have you been preserved or recovered, according to that, Exodus 15.
26. I will put none of those Diseases upon thee, for I am the Lord that heals
thee. I am Jehovah Rophe, the Lord the Physician; many of you have been at the
Graves mouth, in many Diseases; others upon the Deeps, yet the Hand of Mercy
pulled you back and suffered you not to drop into the Grave and Hell in the
same moment. O what a knock was here given by the Hand of Mercy at thy hard
Heart! Certainly if Men would but observe, they might see a strange, mavelous
working and moulding of things by the Hand of providence, for the production of
thousands of Mercies for them; and if Mercy would do the work, and win you over
to Christ, many rods had been spared, which your obstinacy has made necessary.
O ungrateful sinners! Does your Redeemer thus woo and fee you by so many gifts
of Mercy, and yet will you shut him out? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people and unwise? For which of all his benefits do your ungrateful Souls shut
the door upon him?

III. You see what Christ's knocking at the Soul of a sinner implies, and by
what instruments it is performed. In the last place, we will consider the
manner how this action is performed, in the Ten following Particulars, wherein
much of the mystery of Conversion will be opened; the Lord grant your
experience may answer them. We cannot indeed exactly describe and mark all the
footsteps of the Spirit in this Work upon the Souls of Men; yet these things
seem eminently observable.

1. The knocks of Christ at the sinners Heart are silent and secret to all
persons in the World except the Soul it self, at whose door he knocks; here be
many hundreds of you this day under the Word; if the Lord shall this day knock
by Conviction at any Man's Heart, none will hear that knock, but that Man only;
for it is a knock without sound or noise to any but the particular Soul
concerned in it. It was fore-prophesied of our Redeemer, and of this very act
of his, Isa. 4. 2. 2. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be
heard in the Street. The Kingdom of God comes not into the Souls of Men with
public observation; you read in 1 Cor. 2. 11. No Man knows the things of a
Man, saving the Spirit of a Man that is in him. None knows what Convictions
another Man's Conscience feels, until he himself shall discover them; you hear
the same sound of the Gospel, but you hear not the inward strokes it gives to
another Man's Conscience. Christ's approaches to the Soul make no noise; little
do we know what the Spirit of Christ whispers in the Ear of him that sits next
us. It Is said of the inward comforts of the Spirit, I will give him the hidden
Manna which no Man knows but he that eats of it. This is true also of inward
terrors and troubles. Christ's knocks by Conviction are but a secret whisper of
his Spirit in the Ear of a sinner, saying, Thou art the Man, this is thy case.
That is the first thing in the manner of Christ's knocking, it is a silent knock
without public sound.

2ly, These silent inward knocks of the Spirit of Christ, though they are heard
by none but the Soul it self, yet do they greatly differ as to the terror, or
mildness of them in different subjects. Some hear them with more terror and
astonishment, others in a mild and gentle manner, when the Lord knocked at the
Iaylors Conscience, Acts 16. 29, 30. it was a terrible stroke; he called for a
light, and sprang in like a Man distracted; and trembling and astonished fell
down at the Apostles feet, crying, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Here was a
terrible knock indeed, which almost affrighted his Soul out of his Body; it is
as if he had said, Tell me, for the Lord's sake, and tell me quickly, whether
there be any way of Salvation, and where it lies, for I am a lost Man, an
undone Soul. But when the Lord opened the Heart of Lydia, there were no such
terrors, the Lord spoke to her in a more mild and gentle voice; as you see
verse 14. the Spirit of God varies his method according to the temper of the
Soul he works on. Knotty pieces need greater wedges and harder blows to rive
them asunder; and as he directs his Ministers, Jude 22. to make a difference,
to deal tenderly and compassionately with some; but others, to save with fear;
so he himself observes like different methods.

3ly, Some knocks of Christ are succesful, and obtain the desired effect. He
knocks and the Soul opens; but others are insuccessful, he knocks once, and
again by Convictions, which may cause the Conscience for the present to startle
a little, but there is no opening to Christ by Faith. O friends this is of
dreadful consideration, Prove. 1. 24. I called, and you refused; I stretched out
my Hand, and no Man regarded. There Is a call without an answer, a knock, and no
opening; and these things are very common, especially among the unconverted,
that live under a lively Gospel rouzing Ministry; of this Christ complains,
Matthew. 11. 16, 17. Whereunto shall I liken this generation? They are like unto
Children sitting in the marketplace, and calling to their fellows, saying, We
have piped unto you, and you have not daunced: We have mourned unto you, but
you have not lamented. q. d. Neither the delicious airs and melody of Gospel
grace, nor the mournful and dreadful threats of damnation to unbelievers avail
any thing to open your Hearts to embrace me; no voices from mount Gerezim, or
mount Ebal will prevail with you. Ah, how many sad witnesses unto this truth
have I now before mine Eyes! But God forbid it should be thus all round. No,
no, there be some Souls who hear, and open; even every one that has heard and
learned of the Father, John 6. 45. When the Spirit of God puts forth his Power
with the Word, then, and not till then it becomes successful.

4ly, Sometimes Christ knocks with a thick succession of Convictions, a quick
repetition of his calls. Some men have had thousands of Convictions in a few
years; for in this case the Lord says, as it is Exodus 4. 8. If they will not
harken to the voice of the first sign, yet they may believe the voice of the
latter sign. And yet sometimes neither the former nor the latter avail any
thing. How often would I have gathered thy Children, and ye woul not, Matthew. 23.
37. How often? Intimating the many calls Christ gave Jerusalem to come unto
him, yet all in vain. Obstinate sinners, Christ has been knocking and calling
at some of your Consciences from your very Childhood; thousands of Convictions
have been tried upon some of you, and yet to this day your Souls are shut fast
against him. The Lord has waited from year to year for your answer, by this
signifying how loath he is to part with you; such a time thou wast upon a
sickbed nigh unto Death; at such a time under such a Sermon, and then Christ
knocked at thy Soul; if all this be in vain, so many Convictions as you have
stifled, so many fagots you carry with you to Hell to increase your flames and
torments; yet commonly those quick repetitions and redoublings of the strokes
of Convictions end well; and it is a good sign when one Conviction revives
another, and the Lord keeps the Soul still waking. But O take heed, and try not
his Patience too long, lest the next stroke be more dreadful than all the
former; not to open your Hearts, but smite dead your hopes for Heaven.

5ly, Sometimes Christ knocks intermittingly, knocking and stopping, a call and
silence, and that at a considerable time and distance; a conviction this day,
and it may be not another in many Months. There be some aged sinners that have
not had more than one or two remarkable rouzings of Conscience in fifty or
sixty years time, and then no more. Don't think that the Lord will make his
Spirit always strive with Men, Gen 6. 3. no, there is a time when God says to
the Word, convict the Conscience of that Man or Woman no more, not a stroke
more by way of Conviction, but henceforth be thou for Obduration, not to open
but to shut him up, Isa. 6. 10. Reader, bethink thy self, how long was it since
thy Conscience was rouzed and awakened? O says one, seven or ten years ago I
heard such a Sermon, which tore my Conscience to pieces, I fell under such a
sad providence which rouzed and awakened, all my fears, but since that time all
has been still and quiet; the Lord give a second awakning lest you awake with
the flames of God's wrath about you. I observe it is usual when God works upon
any very early, he knocks thus intermittingly; now the Conscience is active and
full of trouble, then the vanities of Youth extinguish these Convictions again;
but the Lord follows his design, and at last the Conviction settles and ends in
Conversion.

6ly, Christ sometimes knocks with both Hands at once, with the Word and with
the Rod together; the latter in subserviency to the former; and if ever the
Soul be like to open, it will open then, when Ordinances and Afflictions work
together: The Word smites the Conscience with Conviction, and at or about the
same time, providence smites the outward-man with some affliction, to make the
Word work effectually; or under some smart affliction, a suitable word is
seasonably directed to the Conscience, and thus Iuncta Iuvant, the one
assisteth the other, and both together produce the desired effect: Thus the
Lord wrought upon the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. 6. And ye became followers of
us, and of the Lord, having received the Word in much affliction. A Child dies,
an Estate is lost, or a Sickness seizes, at the time when Conscience is
prepared by a Conviction from the Word, or Afflictions have prepared it for the
Word. The Rod upon the Back, helps the Word to work upon the Heart; and if both
these working in fellowship will not do the work, there is little hope that any
thing will do it.

7ly, Every knock of Christ disturbs the sinful rest of the Soul; it rouzeth
guilt in the Conscience, and puts the inner-man into great distress and
trouble; before Christ comes and knocks at the door of the Heart all is still
and quiet within; the Soul is in a quiet sleep of sinful security, no fears, or
troubles molest its rest, Luke 11. 21. When a strongman armed keeps his
Palace, his goods are in peace: But when a stronger than he shall come upon
him, and overcome him, he takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted.
The armor which Satan puts into the Hands of sinners to defend themselves
against the Convictive strokes of the Word, are the general Mercy of God, the
outward Duties of Religion, partial Reformations, etc. But when Christ comes by
effectual Conviction, he disarms the sinner of all these pleas, and then the
Soul sees what broken Reeds it leaned upon. When the Commandment came, (says
Paul) sin revived, and I dyed, Romans 7. 9. i. e. all my vain hopes expired; no
artifice of Satan can any longer quiet the sinners Conscience; he apprehends
himself in a miserable condition, meditates an escape; farewell now to sound and
quiet sleep; no peace till out of danger.

8ly, Every effectual knock of Christ gives an allarm to Hell, and puts Satan
to all his shifts and arts to secure the possession of the convinced sinner.
The Devil is a jealous Spirit, and when his interest is in danger, he bestirs
himself to purpose; the time of Conviction is an hour of temptation. We wrestle
not with flesh and blood, (says the Apostle) but against Principalities,
against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against
Spiritual wickedness (or wicked Spirits) in high places, or about heavenlies,
Ephesians. 6. 12. The strife betwixt Satan and the Soul is now for no less than the
prize of eternal Life; it is now for all, or none; for life or death, for Heaven
or Hell; the powers of Hell are now all in Arms to destroy Convictions, and
secure the possession of the Soul against Christ; as when a Granado falls into
a Garrison, the first care of the Defendants is, to stifle and choke it before
it break. Whilst Christ is speaking by his Spirit in one Ear, the Devil is
whispering in the other; and the things he whispers to quench Convictions are
usually such as these; It is time enough yet, what need such have? Enjoy thy
pleasures a little longer, thou may come to Christ and be saved at last; if
that will not do, then he changes his voice, to what purpose will thou go to
Christ? It Is now too late; the time of Grace is over; had thou come to him in
thy youth, and obeyed his first call, it had been somewhat, but now it is ^o no
purpose: If this will not quiet the Soul, then he says, Thy sins are too great
to be pardoned, there is no hope for such a prodigious sinner as thou art. If
the Lord help the Soul to overcome this, by discovering to it the riches of
mercy, pardoning the greatest of sinners; then he represents the multitudes
which are in the same case with the convinced sinner; come, fear not, if it go
ill with thee, it will be as bad for millions of Men and Women; if thou go to
Hell, thousands will go with thee; but if the Soul be loath to be damned for
company, then he bids it look upon the train of troubles and afflictions that
come along with Christ, and will certainly follow him, if the door be opened to
let him in; if Christ come in reproaches, losses and sufferings will certainly
come in with him; troops of miseries and calamities follow him; himself has
told thee so, and art thou mad to ruin all thy comforts in the World, and
plunge thy self into a Sea of trouble, for what thine Eyes never saw? But if
the Soul reply, These are more tolerable than damnation; better my flesh
suffer for a time than my Soul be cast away for ever; then he represents the
insuperable difficulties of Religion; what a hard thing it is to be saved; how
many painful duties and acts of mortification the Soul must pass through. Thus
you see what an allarm Conviction gives to the powers of Hell.

9ly, Every effectual knock of Christ is followed on, and new Convictions
revive old, and former ones; and the Lord never leaves knocking till the door
be opened; if one Sermon will not do, another shall; if one wound be
plaistered, and healed by the art of Satan, a fresh wound shall be made; if a
former Conviction vanish, the next shall be sealed upon the Soul; and when the
Spirit of the Lord seals a Conviction upon the Conscience, raze it out who
can. And here is the difference betwixt special and common Convictions; common
Convictions come and go, they put the Soul in a fright for a day or a month,
and then trouble it no more for ever; but special Convictions will be
continued, one thing backs another, for Christ is in pursuit of the Soul, and
will give it chase till at last he overtake and come up with it.

10ly, In the last place, All the knocks of Christ cease and end when the
sinners day of grace is ended. This is of dreadful consideration, when the time
of Mercy is over, no more strivings of the Spirit with a Man after that. Christ
says to the drousie sinner, as he spoke to the drousie Disciples in the
Garden, Sleep on now, and take your rest. So here, I called thee in such a
Sermon, but thou heardest not; by such a providence, but thou obeyedst not;
sleep on now, and take thy rest: My people would not hearken to my voice, and
Israel would none of me; So I gave them up to their own Hearts lust, to walk in
their own counsels, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. q. d. I have done with them, the treaty
is ended, I will make no more essays toward their Conversion and Salvation. So
I gave them up. Methinks it sounds as much as this, Take him Sin, Take him
Devil, I will have no more to do with him. So Hosea 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to
idols, let him alone. His Heart is glued fast to sin, he is enamoured upon
other Lovers, let him a lone. O beloved, it is a dreadful thing for God to say,
let this Man alone in his formality, and that Man in his carnal security: Let
not this be misapplied by poor trembling Souls under Conviction. I know the
fear of this Judgment is upon their Hearts, nothing makes them tremble more
than lest the day of Grace be ended with them. But there is no ground for this
fear whilst the Spirit continues Convincing, and the Soul trembling, lest his
Convictions should prove ineffectual. Thus much of the nature, instruments, and
manner of Christ's knocking at the door of a sinners Heart. Our way is now
opened to a fruitful Application of this Point, which will wind up in diverse
necessary Uses.

I. Use for Information.
And first, The Point before us will be useful for Information, in the
following Inferences and Deductions.

I. Inference.
Into how deep a sleep has sin cast the Souls of sinners, that Christ must
stand so long, and give such loud repeated knocks, before it will awake and
open to him? There is the Spirit of a deep sleep fallen upon Men, like that
into which God cast Adam. God speaks once, yea twice, but Man regards it not;
it is the hardest thing in the World to rouse and awaken a Man out of his carnal
security. Look over Satan's Kingdom, and you shall find a general stilness and
quietness among his Subjects. There Is no trouble for Sin, no strivings after
Salvation, no cryings out, What shall we do to be saved? Go into the crowds of
carnal Men and Women, and you shall find them all intent and busy about other
matters. How long shall you be in their company, before you hear one groan for
sin? Or see one tear slide from their Eyes on that account? Oh, what a
marvelous thing is here! Do not their Consciences know the guilt that lies upon
them? Are they not aware of a day of reckoning which approaches? Yes, yes,
these things are not hid from their Consciences; What art then is used to keep
them so still and quiet? Why, there are diverse Rattles to still the Consciences
of sinners, and they do it effectually. There are five causes and occasions of
this wonderful stilness in the Souls of sinners.

1. Ignorance of the nature of regenerating Grace; taking that for regeneration
which is none of it; thus did the Jews, Ioh. 8. 55. confidently affirm God to
be their God, and yet they did not know him. How many proor ignorant creatures
think there is no need of any other Work of regeneration, but what passed upon
them in Baptism? They were born and Baptized Christians, and that is enough they
think to save them, Matthew. 3. 9. We have Abraham to our Father; they thought it
sufficient that Abraham's blood ran in their Veins, though there were not a
spark of Abraham's faith kindled in their Souls: the Lord forgive the sin of
those Men that lead poor Souls into such fatal mistakes. O if Men were but
aware of the necessity of a greater and further Work to pass upon their Souls
than their Baptism, common powerless profession, or the Similar Works which
appear upon formal Hypocrites, Heaven and Earth would ring with their cries.
But ignorance of the nature and necessity of special regenerating Grace, like a
Dose of Opium casts the Consciences of many into this deep sleep.

2ly. Freedom from grosser sins and pollutions of the World, stills and quiets
the Consciences of thousands; they have had a civil, sober and fair Education,
and though there be no Grace, and Regeneration; yet what Saints do they seem to
themselves being adorned with sobriety and civility! This stilled the
Conscience of the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. God I thank thee that I am not as
other Men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. Thus
like delicate Agag they spruce up themselves with moral homilitical virtues,
wherein many thousand Heathens were more gay than themselves; but Justice will
hew them to pieces as Agag was, for all their moral ornaments and endowments.

3ly, The strict performance of the external duties of Religion quiets the
Consciences of many; they question not but those that do so well shall fare
well, and that God will never damn Men and Women that keep their Church and say
their Prayers as they do. Thus the carnal Jews deluded themselves, crying, The
Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; as malefactors in some of our
Neighboring Kingdoms, fly to the Church from the Hand of Justice, so do these;
but God will pluck them from the Horns of the Altar and convince them that the
empty name of Religion is no security from damnation.

4ly, Many Consciences are stilled and quieted in a natural sinful state, by
misinterpreting the voices of Providence; it may be God prospers your Earthly
affairs; succeeds and smiles upon your undertakings; and this you conclude must
be a Token of his love and favor: But alas, this is a great mistake, the Lord
give you better evidences of his love than these; for who prosper more in the
World than wicked Men? And who are more crossed than the people of God? Read Job
21. and Psalm. 73. and compare both with Eccles. 9. 1. and you will quickly find
the vanity of all hopes built upon such a foundation.

However by such things as these are, the God of this World blinds the Eyes of
multitudes.

II. Inference.
If every conviction be a knock of Christ., how deeply are all Souls concerned
in the success and issue of them?

Conviction is an Embrio of the new Creature; if it go out its full time, and
come to a perfect new Birth, it brings forth Salvation to your Souls; if it
miscarry finally, you are finally lost. It is of infinite concernment therefore
to every Man and Woman to be tender over those Convictions their Consciences go
big with all. It Is true, Conviction and Conversion are two things; there may be
Conviction without Conversion, though there can be no Conversion without
Conviction. The blossoms upon the Trees in the Spring of the Year, cannot
properly be called Fruit, they are rather the rudiments of Fruit, or something
in order to Fruit: if they open kindly and knit or set firmly, perfect Fruit
follows them; but if a blast, or a frosty Morning kill them, no Fruit is to be
expected. Thus it is here, great care therefore ought to be taken about the
preservation and success of Convictions, both by 1. The Soul it self that is
under them, 2. And by all others that are concerned about them.


1. What care should the Soul it self have upon whom Convictions are wrought:
Have a care, Friends, how you quench them, divert or hinder the operations of
them; lest you hinder, as much as in you lies, the very conception of Christ in
your Soul by them. I remember it is said, in Exodus 21. 22. If M^n strive and
hurt a Woman with Child, and mischief follow; life shall be given for life. The
life of your Souls is bound up in the life of your Convictions. I know it is
hard for Men and Women to dwell with their own Convictions; guilt and wrath are
sad Subjects for Men's thoughts to dwell upon; but yet it is far better to dwell
with the thoughts of sin and wrath here, than to lie sweltering under them in
Hell for ever. You may be rid of your Convictions and your Salvation together;
be not too eager after peace, a good Trouble is better than a false Peace. And
upon the other side, beware that your Convictions and Troubles turn not into
discouragements to Faith; this will cross the proper intention of them: They
are Christ's knocks for entrance, and were never intended to be bars or
stumbling blocks in your way to him; not stops, but steps in your way to Christ.

2ly, Let all others that are concerned about convinced Souls beware what
Counsels they give, and what rules they prescribe; lest they render them
abortive, and destroy all in the bud. There are two errors, too commonly
committed, one in excess, persuading Souls under trouble of Conscience that
there is no coming for them to Christ, unless they be so and so prepared;
humbled, just at such a degree; this is dangerous counsel, it over-heats the
troubles of Conscience, and keeps the Soul from its proper present duty and
remedy. I am sure Paul and Silas took no such course with the convinced Jailer,
nor Peter with the three thousand wounded Consciences, Acts 2. Nor do I find
where God has stated the time and degree of Spiritual Troubles, so that there
must be no adresses to Christ in the way of Faith, until they have suffered
them so long, and to such an height: If they have imbittered sin to the Soul,
and made it see the necessity of a Savior; I think they cannot move too soon
after Christ in the way of Faith. Let not Men set bounds where God sets none.

There is another error committed in defect, when Promises and Comforts are
presently applied, before the nature of Faith is known, or one act of
recumbency put forth toward Christ: These hasty comforts come to nothing; they
will not, they cannot stand. It Is a dangerous thing to apply Gospel cordials,
and pour out the precious ointment of the Promises upon them that were never
Heart-sick for sin; When upon every slight trouble, which is but as an early
dew, the peculiar consolations of penitent and believing Souls are
hand-over-head applied to them: How many such unskilful Empericks are there in
every place? Such as the Prophet Jeremy complains of, They have healed the hurt
of the Daughter of my People slightly, crying, Peace, peace, where there is no
peace. Remember the foundation is now laying for Eternity, and that this is the
time of deep consideration; Men and Women must ponder the terms, and count the
cost, and deliberately accept and close with Christ, before the Consolations of
the Promises can be regularly administered to them.

III. Inference.
What a singular blessing is a rouzing faithful Ministry among the people? By
such a Ministry Christ knocks powerfully; this is one of the greatest blessings
God can bestow upon a people, next to the saving effects of it; when he sends
among them Powerful, Judicious, Preachers of the Gospel, under whose Ministry
their Consciences cannot sleep quietly. These are the proper Instruments Christ
knocks at Men's Hearts by: and as for those Prophets that sow pillows for
drowsy sinners to sleep quietly upon, the Lord owns them not for his, Lam. 2.
14. Thy Prophets (not mine but thine) have seen vain and foolish things for
thee, they have not discovered thine iniquity.

It Is true, those Ministers that give Men no rest nor quietness in their sins,
must expect but little rest and quietness themselves. What is it for Ministers
to preach home to the Consciences of others, but to pull down the rage of the
World upon their own Heads? But certainly you will have cause to bless God to
Eternity for casting your lot under such a Ministry, and the Lord accounts such
a mercy sufficient to recompense any outward affliction that lies upon you,
Isa. 30. 20. You fare richly under such Doctrine, though the Lord should feed
you with the bread of Affliction, and give you the waters of Adversity to
drink; this makes amends for all, Thine Eyes shall behold thy Teachers, and
they shall be driven no more into corners. O blessed be God that Englands
corners are this day emptied, that its Pulpits may be filled with laborious
faithful Ministers. O that the knocks of Christ might this day be heard in all
the Cities, Towns, and Villages of this Nation! the Kingdom of God is come nigh
unto us; this mercy is invaluable; pray that the Lord would continue it, and
make all your Ministers and Means, whether more public or private, successful.

IV. Inference.
And then Lastly, let all Men beware of those things that deafen their Ears,
and drown the sound of Christ's knocks and calls in the Gospel.

What pernicious Enemies to the Souls of Men are all those persons and things
that turn away Men's Ears from attending to the knocks and calls of Christ in
his Word? Such are (1.) Profane wicked Men, who like Elimas the Sorcerer, make
it their buisness by wicked insinuations, flouts and jeers, to turn away Men's
Ears from the Gospel, Acts 13. 10. O full of all subtilty, and all mischief,
thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness; will thou not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? All opposition of godliness has a spice
of Devilishness; and no Child more resembles his Father than a scoffing Enemy
resembles his Father the Devil. But blessed be God for that good Providence
which, in a great measure, has stopped the Mouths both of the Father and his
Children this day. (2.) Take heed of carnal and ungodly Relations which
discourage and threaten their Children, Servants, and all that depend on them,
from attending upon on the means, or giving way to the Convictions which God by
them has set on upon their Hearts. Cruel Parents, who had rather see their
Children turned into their Graves than turning to the ways of serious
godliness. O that any should dare to quench the beginnings of Spiritual life in
those to whom they were instruments to convey natural life. (3.) Take heed of
the World, its distracting cares and charming pleasures; What a din, what a
confused buz and noise do these things make in the Ears of Men! Mark 4. 19. The
cares of this World choke the Word and it becomes unfruitful. Tell not them of
getting Christ, they must study how to get bread. These are some of those
distracting and diverting sounds which drown the voice of Christ's knocks and
calls in the Gospel. As you value your Souls beware of them.

II. Use for Exhortation.
Christ is now come near us in the Gospel, Behold he stands at the door and
knocks: And I am here this day to demand your answer, and in his name I do
solemnly demand it; What shall I return to him that sent me? What say thou
sinner? Will thou open to Christ, or will thou shut him out; And with him thy
own Pardon, Peace and Salvation? Once more let me try the force of a few more
arguments upon your Hearts, and refute your vain pleas to the contrary;
methinks no Heart should be able to resist such Motives and rational
Persuasions as these following will be found to be.

First, You are in exream need of Christ; 1. Motive
you want him more than Bread or Breath; many things are convenient for your
Bodies, but Christ is the one thing necessary for your Souls, Luke 10. 9. One
thing is necessary. Necessity is an Engine that will open any thing in the
World that can be opened; necessity will make all fly before it. Now there is a
plain, present, absolute necessity lying upon every one of you to open your
Hearts to Christ, and that without delay. Necessity goes before the face of
Christ to open the way for him into the Heart; thou must have him, or be lost
for ever. Christ and Faith are not among the may bees, but the must bees, to
the happiness of thy Soul. A Man may be poor, and happy; reproached, and
blessed; but he cannot be Christless, and safe; nor Christless, and
comfortable; you must have Christ, or you cannot have life, John 3. 36. You
must have Christ or you can have no hope, Col. 1. 27. Christ and life, Christ
and hope go together; no Christ no life, no Christ no hope; sinner, thou must
have Christ, or thou can have no pardon; for Christ and pardon are undivided,
Ephesians. 1. 7. In a word, you must have Christ or you can have no Salvation, Acts
4. 12. Well then, if thou can have no life, nor hope; no pardon, nor
Salvation without Christ; then a plain necessity goes before Christ to open his
way into thine Heart; methinks, thou should now say, Then will I open to
Christ whatever the terms be. Come sufferings, losses, reproaches, yea death it
self, all is one; Christ I must have, and Christ I will have; necessity is
laid upon me, and my Heart is opened to Christ by it; woe to me for ever if I
miss of Christ.

Secondly, 2. Motive.
The Lord Jesus is this day come nigh to every one of your Souls. I may say to
you as Christ did to them, Luke 10. 9. The Kingdom of God is come nigh unto
you. The Lord grant he be not as nigh to some of you as ever he shall be; for
he must come nearer or else you are lost for ever. It is not Christ among you
in the Means of Grace, but Christ within you by the Work of Grace, which must
be unto you the hope of Glory, Colos. 1. 27. He is not only among you in
respect of external Means, but he is come into your Understandings and
Consciences. Yea, some motions of his you may feel upon your affections, there
wants but a little more to make you eternally Happy. O what would one effectual
touch upon your Wills be worth now! The Head-Work is done, but O that the
Heart-Work were done too. You are almost saved, but to be almost saved, is to
be wholly and eternally Lost, if it go no further. It Is a sad thing for a Man
that has one Foot in Heaven, to slide from thence into Hell. It Is sad to be
Shipwreckt at the Harbors mouth.

Thirdly, 3. Motive.
Jesus Christ has an unquestionable right to enter into and possess every one
of your Souls. Satan is but an Usurper, Christ is your lawful Owner and
Proprietor; thy Soul, sinner, has not so full a Title to thy Body, as Christ
has to thy Soul. Satan keeps Christ out of his right. Christ knocks at the
door of his own House; he built it and therefore may well claim admission into
it; it is his own Creature, Col. 1. 16. By him were all things made, whether
they be visible or invisible; Bodies or Souls. The invisible part, thy Soul, is
his Workmanship, a stately Structure of his own raising. He has also a right
by Redemption, Christ has bought thy Soul and that at the invaluable price of
his own Blood. Who then can dispute the right of Christ to enter in to his own
House? But alas! he comes to his own, but his own receive him not.

Fourthly, 4. Motive.
Open the door to Christ, for a train of blessings and mercies comes in with
him; a troop of privileges follow him: In the same day and hour that Christ
comes into thine Heart by a full consent and deliberate choice, a pardon comes
with him of all the sins that ever thou committedst in Thought, Word, or
Action. Will such a pardon be welcome to thy Soul? Then let Christ be welcome;
Ephesians. 1. 7.
for where Christ comes, pardon comes; if you open to Christ, you open to
peace; and who would shut the door of his Soul against Peace? If peace be
welcome, let Christ be welcome; for peace follows faith in Christ, Romans 5. 1:
Where Christ comes, liberty comes, John 8. 36. If the Son therefore shall make
you free, then are you free indeed. Are you in love with Bonds and Fetters?
Satan's Laws are written in Blood: Christ's yoke is easy, and his commands not
grievous. If you love liberty, love Christ. In a word, where Christ comes,
Salvation comes; for he is the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that
obey him. If therefore you love Pardon, Peace, Liberty, and Salvation, shut not
the door against Christ; for all these follow him wherever he goes.

Fifthly, 5. Motive.
Christ this day solemnly demands entrance into thy Soul, he begs thee to open
to him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. He commands thee to open to him, 1 John 3. 23. He
denounces eternal Damnation to those that refuse him entrance. Now consider
well, here is entrance demanded under pain of the eternal Wrath of God; this
demand is filed and recorded in Heaven, at your own peril be it if you shut the
door against him; only this I will say in my Redeemers behalf, if you refuse,
bear witness Heaven and Earth this day, that Christ solemnly demanded entrance
into thy Soul and was refused; bear witness, that the door was shut against the
only Redeemer, who entreated, commanded and threatened eternal Damnation to the
rejecters of him. O methinks that Scripture, Prove. 1. 24. 25. is able to strike
terror into the very center of that Soul that refuses the offers of Christ.

Sixthly, 6. Motive.
And so I have done my Masters errand; if you now refuse the knock of Christ at
your Hearts, he may never knock more; and where are you then? There is a knock
which will be the last knock, a call which will be his last call; and after
that no more knocks or calls, but an eternal Silence as to any overture of
Mercy or Grace.

But if I do open to Christ he will never come into such a filthy polluted
sinful Soul as mine is? 1. Obj.


Who says so? Answ.
Who dare affirm so impudent a falsehood in the very face of the Text? If any
Man open unto me, I will come in to him.

If I open to Christ, 2. Obj.
I must bid farewell to ease and rest in this World; reproaches, sufferings,
losses follow him.

If Christ, Answ.
Pardon, and Salvation, be not worth the enduring and suffering these small
things, sure thou valuest Christ and thy Soul at a low rate. Oh, who can
sufficiently bewail the ignorance and folly of Unbelievers, that will fell
their Souls and hopes of Heaven for such trifles! And if Christ and thy Soul
must part upon these terms, then hear me sinner, and let it sink into thy
Heart; thy Damnation will be both 1. Just and Righteous. 2. Unavoydable and
sure.


1. Thy Damnation will be Just; for thou had thy own choice, and deliberately
preferredst the insignificant trifles of this World before Christ and
Salvation. It was plainly told thee what the issue of thy rejecting Christ
would be, and yet after sufficient warning, thou adventuredst upon it; whatever
other sinners will plead I know not, but as for thee thou must be speechless,
Matthew. 22. 12. If thou dye Christless thou must appear at his Bar speechless;
and the day of Judgment will be the day of the revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5.

2ly, It will also be Unavoidable, for there is no other way to Salvation but
this, Acts 4. 12. No Christ, no Heaven; no Faith, no Christ; How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2. 3. Mercy it self cannot save
thee out of Christ, for all the saving Mercy of God is dispensed to Men through
him, Jude verse. 21. It Is to no purpose to cry Mercy, Lord, Mercy, when Christ,
in whom all the Mercies of God are dispensed to Men, is rejected by thee.

III. Use for Consolation.
This Point winds up in Consolation to all such, as hearing the knocks of
Christ, have opened, or are now resolved to open their Hearts unto him; and
that nothing henceforth shall keep Christ and their Souls asunder. To such I
shall address the following grounds of Comfort:

I. Consolation.
An opening Heart to Christ is a work wholly and altogether Supernatural; A
special work of the Spirit of God, never found upon any but an elect Soul.
There are common gifts of the Spirit, such as Knowledge, vanishing Convictions,
etc. but the opening of the Heart by Faith is the special, saving, and peculiar
work of the Spirit, John 6. 29. This is the work of God that ye believe. Yea it
is the effect of the Almighty Power of God, the exceeding greatness of his
Power is exerted in the work of Faith, Ephesians. 1. 19. it rises not out of Nature,
as common gifts do; but of this it is expressly said, Ephesians. 2. 8. It is not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. Where this work is effectually wrought, we
may reason as solidly, as comfortably from it; both backward, to the electing
love of God; and forward, to our eternal glorification with him, Romans 8. 30.

II. Consolation.
The opening of thy Heart to Christ by saving Faith, gives thee interest in
Christ the very same hour; the relation is then constituted, the conjugal tie
or bond is fastened betwixt him and thy Soul, John 1. 12. To as many as received
him to them gave he power (viz. right or privilege) to become the Sons of God,
even to as many as believed on his Name. You neither need nor may expect an
extraordinary messenger or voice from Heaven to tell you that Christ is yours
and you are his; you have a better foundation in this Word and Work of Faith;
for my part if God will give me the clear and satisfying experience of this
Work upon my Heart, I would never desire more satisfaction on this side Heaven.
I know not but the Devil may counterfeit an extraordinary voice, and cheat the
Soul by a lying Oracle; but if I really feel my Heart and Will sincerely
opening to Christ upon Gospel terms, I am sure there is no deceit in that.

III. Consolation.
The opening of thy Heart to Christ by Faith, is a good assurance that Heaven
shall be opened to thy Soul hereafter: Heaven is shut against none but those
that shut their Hearts against Christ by Unbelief. Will you bar Christ out of
your Souls by Ignorance and Unbelief, and then cry Lord open to us? No, God
will open to none but them that open to Christ. Et^rnity it self shall but
suffice to bless God for this opening act of Faith; He that believes shall be
saved, Mark 16. 16.

IV. Consolation.
The opening of thy Soul to Christ by Faith makes it Christ's habitation for
ever; in that hour outgoes sin and Satan, and incomes Christ and Grace: If any
Man open unto me I will come in to him, says the Text; of such a Soul Christ
says, as it was said of the Temple, Psalm 132. 13, 14. The Lord has desired
it for his Habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell for I have
desired it. Thy Soul now becomes an hallowed Temple to the Lord; as he has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people, 2 Cor. 6. 16. O what an Heaven upon Earth is here! Christ
dwelling in the Soul, is the glory of the Soul; as Gods dwelling in the Temple
was the glory of the Temple.

V. Consolation.
In a word, the op^^ing of the Heart to Christ is that work which answers the
great design of the Gospel. Wherefore has God set up Ordinances and Ministers,
yea wherefore is the Spirit sent forth, but to open the Hearts of sinners to
Christ by Faith? When this is done, the main end and intention of the Gospel is
attained and answered; the union is effected betwixt Christ and the Soul; it is
now put out of hazard. The whole Work of the Gospel after that is but to build
up, confirm, and comfort the Soul; ripen its implanted Graces, and make it meet
for glory.

And thus through the assistance of the Spirit I have finished the fifth
Observation, That every Conviction of Conscience, and motion upon the
Affections, is a knock or call of Christ for entrance into the sinners Heart.

SERMON VI.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, etc. [I stand and knock]
Here Is pains and patience, all means used by Christ to gain entrance into the
Souls of sinners. It speaks the earnestness of his suit, and vehemence of his
desire to be in union with the Souls of Men. The sixth Observation therefore
will be this,

VI. DOCT.
That Jesus Christ is an earnest suitor for union and communion with the Souls
of sinners.

This Point lies directly and fully in the very Eye and intention of the Text.
In the opening of it two things must be spoken to in the Doctrinal part, viz.
1. The demonstration of this Truth that he is so. 2. The marvelous and
admirable grace and condescension of Christ that he should be so.


First, For Demonstration of this Truth, That Christ is an earnest suitor for
union and communion with the Souls of sinners. I shall draw down the
Demonstration of this Truth from a view and consideration of the dispositions,
carriages, and actions of the Lord Jesus toward poor sinners from first to
last: And when you have compared them all together, and by them seen the temper
of his Heart, how great and clear a light will shine upon this Point! That his
Heart has still inclined toward union and communion with sinful Man will
evidently appear by considering him in a fourfold state, and time. 1. Before
his Incarnation. 2. In the days of his Flesh. 3. At his Death. And 4. At, and
since his Ascension into Heaven.


First, Consider him before his Incarnation, 1. Demonst.
and you will find too things in that state which plainly speak his desires
after union with us.

1. In the Covenant of Redemption he made with God concerning us before this
World had a being; for such Covenants and Promises did really pass betwixt him
and the Father before all time, or else I know not how to understand that
Scripture, Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the World began. To whom could that Promise be made, but unto
Christ, which bears date before the Creation? what else can this mean but the
Covenant of Redemption, made betwixt the Father and the Son; the terms whereof
are set down, in Isa. 53. 10, 11. where you find what Christ was to do, Viz. To
put his Soul an offering for sin? And what should be his reward for pouring out
his Soul unto Death, viz. To see his Seed, to see the travail of his Soul, even
a Church purchased with his own Blood? Whether this be not a great
demonstration of the propension and inclination of Christ's Heart and Desire
toward union and communion with poor sinners, let all Men judge. O what a
value did Christ set upon our Souls, that upon such costly terms he would
consent to redeem them? Unto this agreement God the Father held him, Romans 8.
32. God spared not his own Son. And this very covenant Christ pleaded with the
Father, John 17. 6. I have manifested thy Name to the Men which thou gave me
out of the World; thine they were, and thou gave them me. This plainly shows
the vehement desire of Christ's Heart to be in union with Men; according to
that, Prove. 8. 31. Rejoicing in the habitable parts of his Earth, and my
delights were with the Sons of Men. Blessed Jesus! nothing but the strength of
thine own desire and love could ever have drawn thee out of that Bosom of
delights to suffer so many things for the sake of poor sinners.

Secondly, 2. Demonst.
Let us consider Christ's temper and disposition toward union and communion
with sinners, within time; and every thing done by Christ carries and confirms
this Conclusion: 1. His Assumption of our Nature plainly speaks it. 2. His
whole Life upon Earth evidently discovers it. 3. His Doctrine is a clear proof
of it. 4. His Joy at the Conversion of Souls proves it. 5. His Sorrows for Men's
unbelief evidence it. 6. His indefatigable Labors plainly show it. 7. His
admirable Encouragements to coming sinners. 8. His dreadful Menaces to
obstinate sinners. 9. His sending and encouraging Ministers to draw and gather
the World to himself.


All these things which were transacted in the Life of Christ, plainly
demonstrate how greatly and earnestly his Heart did propend and incline toward
this desirable union with the Sons of Men.

1. Christ's Assumption of our Nature manifests his desire after union with
us. Herein he gave two incomparable proofs of his transcendent love to us, and
desire after us. 1. In passing by a more excellent Nature. 2. In marying our
Nature to himself.


1. He passed by a superior and more excellent Nature, Heb. 2. 16. Verily he
took not on him the Nature of Angels. Angels were excellent Creatures, but
behold, vessels of Gold cast into the fire, and Earthen potsherds fitted for
glory. It Is true, the Angels that kept their integrity are Members of Christ's
Kingdom; he is an Head to them by way of Dominion, but unto us by way of Vital
union. Christ takes the believer into a nearer union with himself than any
Angel in Heaven; but for the multitudes of apostate Angels, he never designed
their recovery, but left them, as they were before, bound in chains of darkness
unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude verse. 6. This preterition of Christ,
heightens his love to poor Man.

2ly, In marying our Nature to himself, and that after sin had blasted its
beauty, and let in so many direful calamities upon it, Romans 8. 3. He was found
in the likeness of sinful flesh. i. e. Flesh subject to weariness, pains and
death, which though there be no sin in them, yet are the effects and
consequences of sin: Such a Nature he assumed into a Personal union with
himself, not to experience any new pleasure in it, but to capacitate himself to
suffer and satisfy for us; and therein to give a convincing proof of the
strength of his love and vehemence of his desire to us. His personal union with
our Nature shows his desire after a mystical union with our Persons. He would
never have been the Son of Man, but to make us the Sons and Daughters of the
living God; He came in our likeness that we by Sanctification might be made in
his likeness: Behold how near Christ comes to us by his Incarnation! O what a
stoop did he make therein to recover us! Rather than lose us he was contented
to lose his manifestative glory for a time; for his Incarnation made him of no
reputation, Phil. 2. 7. Behold the desires of a Savior after union with
sinners!

II. The whole Life of Christ upon Earth, was an evident proof and
demonstration of the desiers of his Heart to be in union and communion with us,
John 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self. The Life of Christ was wholly
set apart for us; therefore it is said, Isa. 9. 6. Unto us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given. What was the errand and buisness upon which Christ came
into this World, but to seek and to save that which was lost?

All the Miracles he wrought on Earth were so many works of Mercy; he could
have wrought his Miracles to have destroyed and ruined such as received him
not; but his Almighty Power was employed to heal and save the Bodies of Men
that thereby he might win their Souls unto him, Acts 10. 38. God anointed Jesus
of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with Power; who went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the Devil: for God was with him. When the
Apostles desired a Commission from him to fetch fire from Heaven to destroy the
Samaritans, he rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are
of, for the Son of Man came not to destroy Men's lives, but to save them, Luke
9. 54, 55, 56. The whole Life of Christ in this World was nothing else but a
woing, drawing motive to the Hearts of sinners; he rejected not the vilest of
sinners, Luke 7. 39. He rejected none that came unto him; he would not have
little Children forbid to be brought unto him, Mark 10. 13. What his winning
carriage should be, was long before predicted by the Prophet, Isa. 42. 3. A
bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench.
Lentulus, the Proconsul, in his Epistle, ad S. P. Q. R. having Graphically
described the Person of Christ, gives this account of his carriage and
deportment; In his reproofs he was terrible, in his admonitions fair and
amiable, cheerful without levity; he was never seen to laugh, but often to
weep; his words grave, few, and modest, etc.

Christ was in the World as a lodestone drawing all Men to him; his deportment
was every way suitable to his Commission, which was to preach good tidings to
the Meek, to bind up the broken Hearted; to proclaim liberty to the captives,
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, Isa. 61. 1.

III. As his Life so his Doctrine was a woing and inviting Doctrine; a most
pathetical invitation unto sinners, Never Man spoke as he spoke; whenever he
opened his Lips, Heaven opened; the very Heart of God was opened in it to
sinners; the whole stream and current of his Doctrine was one continued powerful
persuasive to draw sinners to him. This was his Language, Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11. 28. In
the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood up and cried, If any Man
thirst, let him come to me and drink, John 7. 37. Himself resembles it to the
clucking of a Hen to gather her Chickins under her wings, Luke 13. 34. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as
a Hen does gather her brood under her wings! Certainly, the whole stream of the
Gospel is nothing else but the charming voice of the Heavenly Bridegroom.

IV. The Joy he always expressed for the success of the Gospel, speaks him to be
an earnest suitor for the Hearts of Sinners. It Is very remarkable that all the
Evangelists who have recorded the life of Christ, never mention one laugh or
smile that ever came from him. For he was a Man of sorrows, yet once you read
that he rejoiced in Spirit; and you shall see the occasion of it, in Luke 10.
21. In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit. And what was it that gladed his
Heart, but the report brought him by the Seventy, who returned with joy,
saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject to us through thy Name; and he said
unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from Heaven, verse. 17, 18. Satan's
Kingdom was going down in the World, and the mysteries of Salvation revealed
unto Babes; this made his holy Heart leap with Joy within him, to behold the
success of the Gospel, destroying Satan's Kingdom, and the poorest, meanest
among Men, enlightened and converted by it. This was a Cordial to his very Soul,
and speaks the earnestness of his desire after union and communion with sinners.

V. His Sorrows and Mournings upon the account of the obstinacy and unbelief of
sinners speaks the vehemence of his desire after union with them; it is said,
Mark 3. 5. When he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their Hearts, etc. You see from hence, that an hard Heart is a
grief to Jesus Christ; O how tenderly did Christ resent it, when Jerusalem
rejected him! It Is said, Luke 19. 41. That when Jesus came nigh to the City he
wept, over it. The Redeemers tears wept over obstinate Jerusalem, spoke the
zeal and servency of his affection to their Salvation; how loath is Christ to
give up sinners; what a mournful voice is that, in John 5. 40. And you will not
come unto me that you might have life. How feign would I give you life, but you
will rather dye than come unto me for it? what can Christ do more, to express
his willingness? All the sorrows that ever touched the Heart of Christ from Men
were upon this account, that they would not yield to his calls and invitations.

VI. This appears to be the great design of Christ, by the unwearied labors he
underwent Day and Night to accomplish it; many weary Journies Christ took, many
Sermons and Prayers he Preached and poured out, and all upon this design to
open the Hearts of sinners to him, and win the consent of their Wills to become
his; this was the Work which he preferred to his necessary food, John 4. 34. My
meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. q. d. My
bringing home the Elect of God, and saving them from wrath to come, it is more
to me than meat and drink; so vehement and intense were his desires after the
winning of sinners, that he would lose no occasion to accomplish it, If he were
never so weary with his travels and labors, yet if any occasion offered to
save a lost Soul, he would be sure to improve it; you have an instance of this,
in John 4. 6. Then comes he to a City of Samaria, called Sychar, etc. now
Jacobs well was there. Jesus therefore being wearied with his Journey, sat thus
on the well, etc. Christ was weary with his Journey and sat on the Well for a
little rest and refreshment, in the heat of the day; at the same time comes a
Woman of Samaria to draw water, a great sinner she was; Christ compassionately
beholding this miserable object, forgets his own weariness, presently falls a
Preaching Repentance to this sinner, and opens her Heart; a greater refreshment
to him than that Well could afford him, by giving him a seat to sit on, or
water to drink.

VII. The great and admirable Encouragements Christ always gave to coming and
willing Souls, plainly speaks the earnest desire of his Heart after union with
them; never were the like Encouragements given, that Christ gave, to draw the
Souls of Men to him. It Is remarkable in what general terms and forms of
expression he delivered them, that none might be discouraged; but come on in
hope toward him: Come unto me all ye that labor, Matthew. 11. 28. If any Man
thirst, John 7. 37. All along the terms of invitation are exceeding large,
which speak the desires of his Heart to be so also; and his practice was
answerable to his invitations; his mercies and compassions never failed when
the vilest of sinners came to him in the way of Repentance and Faith; you read,
in Luke 7. 41, 42. that when Christ sat at meat in the House of Simon the
Pharisee, there came in a poor convinced sinner who had guilt enough upon her,
to sink Ten thousand Souls to the bottom of Hell; this poor wretch comes with a
great deal of humility unto Christ; not presuming to come before his Face, but
falls down behind him, kisseth his Feet, washes them with Tears, wipes them
with the hair of her Head; all demonstrations of a broken Heart: And how did
the merciful Jesus welcome this poor sinner? Seals her pardon, commends the
fervor of her affection, and sends her away a joyful Soul; herein making good
that gracious promise, John 6. 37. He that comes unto me I will in no wise
cast out.

VIII. The dreadful Threatenings of Christ against all that refuse him, and shut
the doors of their Hearts against him, speak his vehement desires to prevent
the loss and ruin of Souls. The threats of Christ are not intended to
discourage any from coming to him, to fright away Souls from him; no, no,
that is not their intention; but to bring them under a blessed necessity of
compliance with his terms. O the dreadful threatenings which, like claps of
Thunder, brake from the Mouth of Christ against all that should refuse or delay
to come unto him. If you believe not, you shall dye in your sins: He that
believes not, shall not see life, John 3. 36. What a terrible Thunder clap is
that against all Unbelievers? So Mark 16. 16. He that believes not, shall be
damned. All these, and many more, are warning pieces shot off from Heaven to
prevent the ruin and damnation of Men; the very threatenings of the Gospel carry
a design of Mercy in them; damnation is threatened that it may be prevented.

IX. And then in the last place, herein appears the earnestness of Christ after
union with sinners, that when he could be no longer a Preacher to this World in
his own Person, he ordained a succession of Ministers in his Bodily absence
from us, to gather and build the Church, and to continue to the end of the
World; to carry on the suit that Christ had begun, as long as there was one
elect Soul in the World lying in the state of Sin and Nature.

Reader, Christ could not always abide here, he must dye, or we could not live;
he must rise again, or we could not be justified; our buisness called him to
another Place and State: Now when Christ was to ascend to Heaven what does he
do? Why, he chooses and calls Men, Men made of the same clay with our selves,
whose presence and appearance should not affright or discourage us; who should
treat with us in a familiar way about the great concerns of our Salvation in
his Name and stead, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We then are Ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. He
did not commissionate Angels to be his Legates; their presence would confound
and terrify us; but Men cast into the same mould with your selves, who may say
to you as Elihu said to Job, Job 33. 6, 7. Behold, I am according to thy wish
in Gods stead: I also am formed out of the clay. Behold, my terror shall not
make thee afraid, neither shall my Hand be heavy upon thee. Upon these
Commission Officers of Christ he poured forth excellent gifts in great
diversity, and useful variety, to fit the capacities and various dispositions
of Men's Souls; When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto Men; this
Ministerial Office is by him established in the Church, Till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect Man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
Unto these his Ministers he gives the highest encouragements to quicken them to
their labor; if one do but one part of the work, and another the other; one
sows, and another reapeth; he tells them both, He that reapeth receives
wages, and gathers fruit unto life eternal: that both he that sows, and he
that reapeth may rejoice togther, John 4. 36. He tells them, that every Soul
they win to him shall be as a Jewel in their Crown of glory, Dan. 12. 3. And
they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever. What is
Christ's intention in all these encouragements to his Ministers? Surely it is as
if he should say to his Servants, Study hard, Pray earnestly, Plead with
sinners affectionately; every Soul you win to me shall make an addition to your
glory in Heaven.

Weigh now the force of this second Demonstration from the Life of Christ; will
you have a proof of Christ's earnest suit to gain the Hearts of sinners? his
whole Life upon Earth was a great proof of it; his Doctrine, so full of
pathetical invitations, proves it; the Joy of his Heart at the success of the
Gospel; his Tears and Sorrows for the obstinacy of unbelievers; his Labors and
Travels to gather sinners to him; his admirable Encouragements put into general
invitations; his dreadful Threatenings to all that reject his motions; his
commissionating and qualifying, continuing and encouraging his Ministers to
carry on this suit in his Name: All these things make up a full Demonstration
that Jesus Christ is an earnest suitor for union and communion with the Soul of
sinners; which was the thing to be proved.

Thirdly, 3. (...).
The Death of Christ is the fullest Demonstration that ever was, or can be
given of his love to sinners, and desire after union and communion with him.
His Doctrine and Life discovered much, but his Death and Sufferings abundantly
more; in his Doctrine he spent his Breath, but upon the Cross he spent his
Blood. Here he comes a suiting to the Souls of sinners in his Scarlet robes,
his Red garments; garments dipped in his own Blood: You may now propound the same
admiring question the Church propounded, Isa. 63. 1, 2. Who is this that comes
from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his
apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? Wherefore art thou red in
thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the Wine-fat? Will thou know sinner why he comes to thee in Red garments? It is to give thee such
a Demonstration of his love as may draw forth all the love of thy Heart to him;
by this Blood he has bought and purchased thy Soul, for a Spouse for himself,
Acts 20. 28. Now there are two things in the Death of Christ evidential of the
fervency of his desires after us. 1. The greatness of the sufferings which he
endured. 2. The Use and End to which they were designed.


Both these show how the Heart of Christ is heated with the vehemence of his
own desires after union with our poor Souls.

1. The greatness of the sufferings of Christ discover the ardency of his
affection. Christ's sufferings are twofold.

1. External, in his Body. 2. Internal, in his Soul.
Both together making up the fullness of his Sufferings: When you shall hear
what Christ has endured in both kinds to purchase you to himself, then you may
guess what value he put upon you, what desire he has after you. Now (1.) as to
the external Sufferings of Christ in his Body they were exceeding great, for
the Death he died was not a Natural but a Violent Death; indeed he could not
dye a Natural Death, for there was no sin in his Nature to open a door to Death
that way: His Body was intended for a Sacrifice to God, and as a Sacrifice it
dyed; therefore it is said, 1 Pet. 3. 18. He was put to Death in the Flesh; his
Soul and Body were violently rent asunder in the fullness and perfection of his
strength and vigor; and this violent Death was also a cursed Death; He was
made a Curse for us, For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree, Gal. 3. 13. A ceremonial Curse was affixed to the Death of the Cross; He
that is hanged is accursed of God, says the Law: The intention of that Death
was to show the person that dyed, to be so vile, that he was not worthy to
touch Heaven or Earth, and therefore was hanged betwixt both. Moreover, this
violent Death Christ dyed was a most painful Death; full of Torture, and very
Slow and Lingering; the Cross was a Rack to the Body of Christ: I may tell all
my bones, says he, they look and stare upon me, Psalm. 22. 17. But yet (2.) the
Sufferings of his Body were but the Body of his Sufferings; it were the
Sufferings of his Soul, that were the very Soul of his Sufferings. These inward
Sufferings of Christ may likewise be considered two ways. (1.) In his bitter
propassions in the Garden; O what Agonies and Conflicts, what sharp Encounters
and Distresses did his Soul there meet with, from the Wrath of God there
endured for your sakes! Once and again he cried out Abba Father, all things are
possible, let this Cup pass; Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass;
thrice he returned to the same place rolling himself on the ground. The
Sufferings of his Soul cast his blessed Body into a bloody Agony. His sweat was
as it were great drops of Blood falling to the ground, Luke 22. 43, 44. (2.) In
the fullness of his Passions on the Cross, there was his blessed Soul for a time
deserted of the Father, as to any sensible communications of Joy and Comfort
from him; which occasioned that bitter outcry, Matthew. 27. 46. My God, my God,
why have thou for saken me? Never was there such a cry heard since the Heavens
were spread over the Earth; never had Christ seen one frown in his Fathers Face
from Eternity before this time; but now the smiling Face of God was hid, and a
strong impression of his Wrath made upon him. And now, Brethren, you see what
Christ has endured both in his Body and in his Soul, and all for the sake of
Sinners: What think you now, is not Christ an earnest Suitor? Does not all this
fully and plainly speak the ardours of his Love, the fervencies of his desires
after union and communion with us? If this do not, then nothing can demonstrate
Love and Desire. That Is the first thing the greatness of the Sufferings which
he endured.

Secondly, Let us next consider the Use and Intention of these Sufferings of
Christ, and how this also demonstrates the earnestness of his desires after
Conjugal union with us. Now there was a double Use and End of the Sufferings of
Christ. 1. To make us free, that we might be capable of Espousals. 2. To win
our Affections by the argument of his Sufferings.


I. One End of Christ's death was to purchase our Freedom, that we might be
capable of being Espoused to him; for you must know that we were not in a
capacity whilst under the curse of the Law, to be married unto Christ; the
Apostle, Romans 7. 2, 3, 4. compares the Law to a Husband, to whom the Wife is
bound as long as he lives, and not capable of a second marriage until her
Husband be dead. The Death of Christ was the Death of the Law, as a Covenant of
Works holding us under the bond of a Curse of it, and so it gave us a
manumission or freedom from that bond, and a capacity of espousals to Christ,
as verse. 4. Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead to the Law by the
Body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised
from the dead. A Slave to another is not capable of being disposed in marriage,
until made Free; you were in bondage to the Law, the slaves of of Sin and
Satan: Christ bought out your liberty (for his Blood is called a ransom, Matthew.
20. 28.) and so put you into a capacity of being espoused unto himself; here
you see Christ loved you not for any advantage he could have by you, for you
had nothing to bring him; nay, he must purchase you, and that with his own
Blood, before he can be united to you. O incomparable love! O fervent desires!

II. Another design and end of the Death of Christ was to win and gain our
Hearts and Affections to himself, by the argument of his Death; this himself
has declared to be the very end and intention of it, Ioh. 12. 32. And I if I
be lifted up from the Earth will draw all Men unto me; this, he said,
signifying what Death he should dye. Christ endured all that you have heard,
and infinitely more than the Tongue or Pen of Man can express; and all to draw
thy Soul and win thy consent to come unto him: the Lord Jesus by his sufferings
casts a threefold cord over the Souls of Sinners, to draw them to himself.

1. The Death of Christ obtains complete righteousness for guilty sinners; and
if any thing in the World will draw the Heart of a sinner, this will; the
anxious search, and enquiry of a convinced sinner, is after a perfect
righteousness to justify him before God. O that is it the sinner wants!
Conscience says, thou have broken all the Laws of God, and art therefore a Law
condemned wretch; the sentence of the Law casts thee for Hell; Now what would a
poor sinner give for a release from this sentence of the Law? O ten thousand
Worlds for a Pardon! Why here it is, says Christ, Come unto me and thou shall
receive a free, full, and final pardon; my Blood cleanses from all sin; my
righteousness answers all the demands of the Law. I have taken away the
Handwriting that was against thee, and nailed it to my Cross, Col. 2. 14. Come
unto me and take up thy Bonds, thy cancelled Bonds; come unto me and that
dreadful attribute of Divine Justice shall never scare or fright thy Conscience
any more; nay, thou shall build thy hope upon it; you read, Romans 3. 25. That
God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God: To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness; that he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. Here you see
the justification and pardon of a sinner built upon that very Attribute which
was so frightful and dreadful to him before. Well then, poor sinner, is there
guilt upon thy Conscience? And does thy Soul shake and quiver to think how it
shall stand before the Just and Terrible God in the great Day? Hearken to the
voice of Christ crucified, who calls thee to him to receive thy discharge,
which if thou refuse, the Law still stands in its full force and virtue against
thy Soul. This is one cord Christ casts from the Cross, over the Souls of
guilty sinners to draw them to him.

2ly, The Death of Christ purchases and procures perfect cleansing from the
filth and pollution of sin, to wash the defiled Souls of sinners from all their
uncleanness. For this is he that came by water and by blood; not by blood only,
but by water also, 1 John 5. 6. He comes by way of Sanctification as well as by
way of Justification. Lord, says a convinced sinner, what an unclean Nature,
Heart and Life have I? O I am nothing but a heap of uncleanness, an abhorence
to God and my self; how shall such an Heart as mine, such an Augean Stable be
cleansed? Come unto me, says Christ, I came by Water as well as Blood; in me
thou shall find a Fountain for Sanctification, as well as Justification; come
unto me, and my Spirit shall undertake the cleansing of thy Heart; he shall
take away the pollutions of sin perfectly, so that it shall be presented to God
without spot.

3ly, And lastly, The transcendent love of Christ shines out in its full
strength upon the Souls of sinners from the Cross; and there is nothing like
love to draw love; when Christ was lifted up upon the Cross, he gave such a
glorious demonstration of the strength of his love to sinners, as one would
think should draw love from the hardest Heart that ever lodged in a sinners
Breast. Herein is love (says the Apostle) not that we loved God, but that he
loved us; and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4. 10.
q. d. Here Is the triumph, the riches and glory of Divine Love, never was such
love manifested in the World. There Is much of Gods love in Temporal
Providence, but all is nothing to this, this is love in its highest Elevation;
Love in its Meridian Glory; before it was none like it, and after it shall none
appear like unto it. And thus you see Christ from the Cross casting forth a
threefold cord (which is not easily broken) to draw the Hearts of sinners to
him.

Fourthly, to Conclude, 4. Demonst*
What mighty Demonstrations of the desires of his Heart toward us, did our
Redeemer give at, and since his Ascension into Heaven? As the whole Life of
Christ upon Earth was a persuasive Argument to draw sinners to him, so his
Ascension to Heaven has many things in it which are mighty attractives to the
Hearts of Men. I will only mention two, 1. The gifts he bestowed at his
Ascension. 2. The ends and designs of his Ascension.


(1.) The gifts he bestowed on Men at his Ascension; for this very end and
purpose; whereof the Psalmist gives this account, Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have
ascended on high, thou have received gifts for Men; yea, for the rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell among them. He alludes to the Roman
Conquerors, who in the day of their triumph did Spargere missilia, scatter
their largesses among the people. Thus Christ at his Ascension shed forth the
gifts of the Spirit in various kinds, qualifying Men for the Work of the
Ministry; to enable them to plead with your Souls, and carry on his suit, when
he should be in Heaven. These gifts were extraordinary in the first Age; as the
gift of Tongues, and Miracles, etc. and ordinary, to continue to the end of the
World, Ephesians. 4. 8, 9. To some he gives depth of Learning and Judgment, to others
a mighty Pathos, a melting influence upon the Affections; but all designed to
win over your Hearts to Christ. This shows what care he took, and what
provision he answerably made, for the success of his great design, to draw the
Hearts of sinners to him.

(2ly,) The ends of his Ascension, as they are declared in Scripture, plainly
speak the vehemence of Christ's desire to draw Souls to him. Now the declared
ends of his Ascension were (1) to make way for the Spirits coming, to Convince,
Convert, and Comfort the Souls of all that come unto him, John 16. 7.
Nevertheless I tell yon the truth, It is expedient for you that I go away; for
if I go not away the Comforter will not come to you; but if I depart I will
send him unto you. And when he is come he will reprove the World of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment. Without the Conviction of these things no Man
can come to Christ; and no such Convictions can be wrought upon the Conscience
of any Man without the Spirit; and the Spirit could not come to effect these
things upon Men's Hearts if Christ had not ascended, John 7. 39. But this spoke
he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the Holy
Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Thus Christ
provided for the carrying on of his great design upon your Hearts when he was
entering into his own Glory: The thoughts of that Glory made him not to forget
his great design upon Earth. (2) Another end of Christ's Ascension was to make
Intercession with the Father for all and every Soul that should come unto him;
that their future sins might make no breach of the bond of the Covenant betwixt
God and them. A Privilege able to draw the Hearts of all sinners to him, 1 John
2. 1, 2. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not:
Mark it, the intercession of Christ must encourage and embolden no Man to sin;
that would be a vile abuse of the Grace of God. But if any Man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation
for our sins. i. e. If sin surprise and deceive any gracious Soul, the bent of
whose Heart is against it, let him not be discouraged he has a potent Advocate
ascended into the Heavens to continue the peace betwixt God and that Soul. O
what an encouragement is here to gain the consent of a sinners Heart to embrace
Jesus Christ! (3) Another declared end of Christ's Ascension was to lead
captivity captive, as in the forecited place, Psalm. 68. 17. that is, to
captivate and triumph over Satan as a conquered Enemy; who led us captive in
the days of our vanity: He conquered Satan upon the Cross, Col. 2. 15. but he
triumphed over him at his Ascension: And without such a conquest and triumph no
Soul could come to Christ. (4) In a word, Christ ascended into Heaven to
prepare Mansions of rest and glory for every Soul that should embrace him, in
the way of repentance and faith in this World, John 14. 2 In my Fathers house
are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you; I go to prepare a
place for you. q. d. It satisfies me not to enjoy my glory in Heaven alone, all
that come unto me by Faith shall be with me where I am; let them know for their
encouragement that the glory which God has given me, I have given them, John
17. 22. All these things loudly speak the fervent desires of Christ's Soul after
union and communion with poor Sinners; which was the thing to be demonstrated.

(2ly,) Having proved the Point that Christ is an earnest Suitor for union and
communion with the Souls of sinners; we next come to show the mavelous and
admirable Grace, and Condecension of Christ that it should be so. And this will
appear five ways, to the astonishment of every considering Soul.

1. Though Christ be thus intent and earnest in his suit for your consent, yet
he gains nothing by you when you do consent; the gain is to your selves, but
not to him; He is over all God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. above all
accessions from the Creature: What does the Sun gain by enlightening and
animating the lower World? Or what does a Fountain gain when Men drink and are
refreshed by its Waters? If any Soul that hears me, this day, should
presently resolve henceforth to break asunder all the ties and engagements
betwixt him and sin, to subscribe the Articles of the Gospel, to give away
himself Soul and Body to Christ, to live henceforth as an hallowed dedicated
Creature to the Lord Jesus; this indeed would turn to the infinite and
everlasting advantage of such a Soul, but yet Christ cannot be profited thereby.

2ly, And that which still increases the wonder is this, that though Christ
makes no gain or profit by our Conversion, yet has he impoverished himself to
gain such unprofitable Creatures as we are to him. He has made himself poor to
make us rich; so speaks the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 8. 9. For ye know the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. He expends his riches, makes
no advantage unto himself; his incarnation impoverished his reputation, Phil.
2. 7. How poor was Christ when he said, Psalm. 22. 6. But I am a worm, and no
man; a r^proach of Men and despised of the people? How poor in temporal
comforts, when he said, Matthew. 8. 20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of
the air have nests; but the Son of Man has not where to lay his Head. Yea, how
poor was he in Spiritual Comforts, when that astonishing outcry brake from him
upon the Cross, Matthew. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O let
it astonish us that Christ should earnestly desire union with our Souls upon
terms of such deep self-denial to himself.

3ly, Though Christ gain nothing by you, and impoverished himself for you; yet
does he endure many vile repulses, delays and denials of his Suit, and will not
leave it for all that. O astonishing grace! One would think that the least
delay, and much more a refusal of an overture from Christ, upon such terms as
you have heard, should make his indignation presently to smoke against such a
Soul; and that he should say, Thou have refused my offer, so full of
self-denying and condescending grace, never shall another offer be made to so
unworthy a Soul; and yet you see he is contented to wait as well as knock,
Behold I stand at the door and knock.

4ly, Herein the admirable Grace of this heavenly suitor appears, that Jesus
Christ passes by millions of Creatures of more excellent Gifts and
Temperaments, and never makes them one offer of himself; never turns aside to
give one knock at their door; but comes to thee the vilest and bafest of
Creatures, and will not be gone from thy door without his errands end.

Know thou not sinner, that among the unsanctified there are to be found
multitudes of Men and Women of more raised and excellent Parts, nimble Wits,
strong Memory, solid Judgments; yea, Men and Women of cleaner Conversations,
strict Morality, adorned with excellent homilitical Virtues, capable, if
called, to do him abundantly more service than thou can; yet these are past
by, and he becomes a Suitor to such a poor worthless thing as thou art; yea,
and rejoices in his choice, Matthew. 11. 24. I thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, because thou have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto babes. Here is the triumph of Free Grace.

5ly, And then in the last place, this justly increases the wonder, That ever
Jesus Christ should desire and delight to dwell in such an unclean Heart as
thine, which from the beginning has been the Seat and Throne of Satan, full of
all uncleanness and abominations. O that ever Christ should make an overture of
love to such a polluted Soul! That he should chose to erect his Throne where
Satan's seat was! Look into thine Heart sinner, and think what can Christ see
here to be desired? Thou know thy Heart has been a sink of sin, thy
Conscience, like the common shore, into which all the filth of thy life has
been cast; yet Christ passes by thee, as thou lie in thy blood and
filthyness, and casts love upon thee, and desire toward thee, as it is Ezekiel.
16. 6, 8. All these things put together make it justly admirable and
astonishing in our Eyes, that ever Jesus Christ, the Lord from Heaven, should
become an earnest Suitor for union and communion with the Souls of sinners.

I. Use for Information.
I. Inference.
If Christ be such an earnest Suitor for union and communion with the Souls of
sinners, then it follows, That sinners can justly charge their damnation upon
none but themselves. Your blood must be upon your own Heads; Salvation by
Christ is not only freely offered, but you are with great importunity persuaded
to accept it. Christ offers you life, you choose rather to dye than accept it
upon his terms; where now can your damnation be charged, but upon your own
wilful obstinacy, Hos. 13. 9. O Israel, thy destruction is of thy self. Thou
art the Author of thine own ruin, I would have gathered thy Children, says
Christ to Jerusalem, but thou would not; your ruin therefore lies upon your
selves, and upon none beside; indeed if the Ministers of Christ be negligent in
their duty, they may come in as accessories to your destruction; but that is a
poor relief to you; as for my self, I hope, I may with Paul take God to record,
this day, that I am free from the blood of all Men; now, consider what a dismal
aggravation of your destruction this will be, that you perished by your own
Hands; this cuts off all plea and apology.

II. Inference.
Hence it also follows that distressed sinners have no reason to question
Christ's willingness to receive them, when their Hearts are made willing to come
unto him. It were no less than a blasphemous imputation of insincerity to
Christ himself to question his willingness to receive brokenhearted sinners,
after so many protestations as he has made in the Gospel, of his zeal and
earnestness for their Salvation; that Scripture, John 6. 37. puts it out of
doubt, He that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out. I know guilt breeds
many fears and jealousies in the Hearts of sinners; will Christ ever accept,
and receive such a one as I? Try him Soul, he has said he will; let him have
but the deliberate consent of thy Heart to his terms, and then if thou be
rejected, thou will be the first Soul in the World that ever met with a repulse
from him.

III. Inference.
By Christ's earnest Suit for the Souls of sinners you may estimate the
invaluable worth and precious Nature of the Soul of Man. Were not the Soul a
Creature of great value, Jesus Christ would never be so deeply concerned about
the winning and saving of it. Sinners have a vile esteem of their own Souls,
they will sell them for naught, but Christ knows their true worth, and his
solicitude to save them is answerable to his estimation of them; he counts when
he has gained a Soul he has gained a Treasure. Therefore he pleads, woos, and
waits so earnestly and assiduously for the Salvation of them. Two things speak
the great value of the Soul of Man.

1. That it is a marriagable Creature to Christ now. 2. That it is capable of
Glory with Christ hereafter.
I. It is a marriagable Creature to Christ now, capable of espousals to the Son
of God; upon which account it is Christ so earnestly seeks its love, and sues
for its consent: Now this is a dignity beyond all other Creatures in Heaven or
Earth; no Angel in Heaven, no other Creature but the Soul of Man on Earth, is
capable of espousals unto Christ; it is a dignity above that of Angels, for
Christ took not on him their Nature, and the Hypostatical union is the ground
and foundation of the Mystical union. They are Members indeed of Christ's
Kingdom, and he is to them a Head of dominion; but this honor was never
conferred upon Angels to be Members of his Body, Flesh and Bones, as the Saints
are, Ephesians. 5. 30.

II. As the Soul is capable of espousals to Christ on Earth, so it is capable
of glory with Christ in Heaven, throughout eternity, John 17. 24. Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold the glory which thou have given me. It has a natural capacity of
enjoying eternal Blessedness, which the Souls of other Creatures have not. And
this will be the aggravation of Hell torments, that Men capable of the highest
happiness should as it were receive that capacity in vain; but that which
constitutes an actual right to the everlasting enjoyment of Christ in glory, is
the Souls espousals to him here in the way of Grace. Upon these two accounts it
is that Christ puts such a price upon them. Courts their love so passionately,
laments their loss so pathetically; and encourages his Ministers to all
diligence in persuading and woing them for him with such abundant rewards, Dan.
12. 3. Know then your own worth and dignity; neither pawn nor sell so precious
a thing as thy Soul, for any thing Satan can set before thee by way of exchange
for it; What shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul?

IV. Inference.
Is Christ such an earnest Suitor for union with sinners, then certainly they
are the enemies of Christ and the Souls of Men, that any way endeavor to
hinder or break off the match betwixt Christ and them.

Some there are that labor to create jealousies and beget distastes, and
prejudices in the Souls of Men against Christ and his ways; Men that bring up
an evil report upon Christ, and strict Religion; as that which will beggar them
and expose them to all the miseries of the World: Who, instigated by Satan,
whisper such stories into the Souls Ear whom Christ is woing for himself; that
the severity of Religion will certainly extinguish all their joys and
pleasures; they shall never laugh more, never be merry more. Beside, it will
expose all their comforts upon Earth to hazard, their Estates and Lives must
fall a prey to their Enemies; and this is the Estate which Christ will Jointer
them if they consent to his terms: And that this is no groundless jealousy of
their own, but that Christ himself has openly declared as much; That he that
will come after him, must hate Father and Mother, Wife and Children, yea, and
his own Life also. This is what they must expect as the fruit of their consent
to Christ's proposals. But O what will these Men have to answer, and how will
they stand before Christ another day, who are such professed enemies to his
Cross, and set themselves so directly in opposition to the great design Christ
is driving on in the World! Is it not enough that you will not enter your
selves, but you will hinder them that would? Matthew. 23. 13. Thus carnal Parents
discourage their Children, one Relation another. But to help Souls under this
discouragement, I will leave only this one Caveat with them, That such seeming
Friends are their real mortal Enemies, their Words are poison to your Souls:
Satan has feed them to do his Work; hired their Tongues for his Service: But
if the serious cares of Salvation and servent love of Christ be in thy Heart,
thou will resolve as Ierom did, If my Father who beg at me, and my Mother who
bare me, should hang-about my Neck with tears and entreaties, to keep me from
Christ, I would fling off my Father and tread upon my Mother that bear me, to
go to Christ.

To this Head also belong all those scandals and offenses which loose and
careless Professors cast in the way, to discourage others from coming unto
Christ; Woe to the World (says Christ) because of offenses, Matthew. 18. 7. Woe to
the World, this will be their ruin and undoing; by this means such prejudices
will be begotten in their Souls against Christ and Religion, as they will never
be able to free themselves from; But woe to them by by whom such offense comes;
it were better a millstone were hanged about their Necks and they cast into the
bottom of the Sea. Christians look carefully to your Conversations, for besides
the evil effects of sin upon your selves, you see the mischievous effects of it
upon others; and thus we may sense those words, Cant. 2. 7. I charge you, O ye
Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, that ye
stir not up nor awake my love till he please. Roes, and Hinds, are timorous
Creatures, the least crack of a stick will startle and fright them away; such
are comers on toward Christ, young beginners in the ways of Religion; how small
a matter may damp and discourage them? O friends, you have sins enough of your
own, bring not the sin and ruin of other Men upon your account also.

V. Inference.
To Conclude, How great is the blindness and ignorance of sinners, that need so
much entreaty and importunity to be made happy? It Is your ignorance, sinners,
that makes all the Gospel importunity necessary; did you know your own misery,
and see Christ in his necessity, suitableness, and excellency, all these
persuasions might be spared; nay, you your selves would become importunate
Suitors for Christ; you would not need to be twice offered; there is a
Conscience in every Man and Woman set there on purpose by the Lord to give them
an Allarm; but the Allarm goes not off for want of a spring, to wi^, the
knowledge of our sin and misery. Ah Soul, did thou but know who it is that
Suits for thy love, what the benefits of union with Christ are? thou would
answer his first call in such Language as this. Lord Jesus, write down thine
own terms; be they what they will, I am ready to subscribe them with the
fullest consent of Heart and Will; and then how soon would the match be made
betwixt Christ and you! Yea, you would watch for and hang on half a word of
encouragement from Christ's Mouth, as Benhadads Servants did on that word of
Ahab, my brother Benhadad, 1 Kings 20. 32, 33. There is no need of Rhetoric to
persuade a condemned Malefactor to accept his pardon; an hungry Man to sit down
at a full Table; but alas, sin is not felt, Christ is not known, therefore the
one is not bewailed, nor the other desired.

II. Use.
In the next place, the Point naturally leads us to a Use of Exhortation, to
persuade sinners to embrace Christ's motion; subscribe his terms, and huckle no
more with him, but end the treaty in a cordial present consent; and so close up
the match betwixt him and your own Souls; how long sinner will thou be at shall
I, shall I? And thy Will hang undetermined betwixt Christ and sin? Bivious and
unresolved in so great and deep a concernment? O that Christ's next overture
might bring the matter to an Issue; why will you trifle and dally with him at
this rate? There is indeed a Treaty on foot betwixt Christ and you, but you may
perish for all that; there is no conclusion or agreement made, Christ and you
may yet part. The Lord help you therefore to ponder, and deliberate with all
speed and seriousness the terms propounded by Christ in the Gospel; to count
the cost, and yet not always to be deliberating neither, but to bring matters
to an Issue, and that with all the convenient speed you can; in order whereunto
lay two things before you, weigh and seriously ponder them, 1. What are the
advantages you will gain by Christ? 2. What is the most you can lose by your
consent to his terms? and then bring your thoughts to an Issue.


I. Ponder well the advantages you will gain by Christ; these are so great and
manifold that it is impossible for me to enumerate or value them, it shall
suffice in this place to show you one of those bunches of the Grapes of Eshcol;
that by it you may estimate the riches and fertility of that good Land, settled
upon you by Christ as a Dowry or Jointure; and these are four, 1. The payment
of all your debts to the Law* 2. An Honor above Angels. 3. An eternal
inheritance in Heaven. 4. A glorious and joyful presentation of you to the
Father in the great day, by Christ as his Spouse and Wife.


1. The same day and hour you give your cordial consent to take Christ upon
Gospel terms, that is to say, Christ with his yoke of obedience, and Christ
with his Cross of Sufferings, all your debts to the Law are discharged and
paid; what have you been doing ever since you came into the World but running
upon score to God, deeper, and deeper every day? O what a vast sum owe thou
to his Justice? And not able to pay one farthing. If thou consent not to
Christ's offer, the Bailiff and Executioner, Death and the Devil, will shortly
be upon thy back, and hurry thee away to that prison from whence thou shall not
come out until thou have paid the last farthing, Matthew. 5. 25, 26. If thou
consent to Christ's terms thy debts are paid upon thy marriage day; thy bonds
cancelled, and thy discharge in Heaven sealed, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ; and the reason is given, verse.
4. in this, That the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us that believe.
But how in us? Certainly the meaning is not that the To credere, the act of
Faith does, as it is, a work of ours, satisfy the demand of the Law, and
fulfill its righteousness; no, but it apprehends the righteousness of Christ,
applies it, and makes it ours, and so the righteousuess of the Law is fulfilled
in us that believe. Is it an ease, is it a comfort to be out of debt? Then
embrace the offer of Christ, for after thy espousals to him, the Law cannot
touch thee by any act of condemnation; it goes to the Husband Christ, thou art
discharged. Well then, resolve what to do; shall the debt run on and increase
till Justice come to levy it upon you in Hell Torments? Or will you accept of
Christ and the riches of righteousness that are in him, and so be fully and
finally acquitted from all your debts at once, and so be able to lie down in
peace, and enjoy your lives without slavish fear? He that ows nothing, fears no
Bailiffs, but may (as we use to say) whet his Knife upon the Counter threshold.

2ly, Your consent to Christ's terms will advance you to an Honor above and
beyond the Honor of Angels: It Is said, That the Children of the Resurrection
shall be equal unto Angels; and it is most sure that in some respect their
union with Christ advances them far above Angels; for the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 1. 14. They are ministering Spirits sent forth for the good of them that
shall be he^rs of Salvation. As the great Peers and Nobles in a Kingdom, count
it no dishonor to perform their service to the Heir apparent. The Ministry of
Angels is a mystery which we little understand, but by it we receive great and
manifold advantages, and it certainly puts a great deal of Honor upon all the
Members of Christ.

3ly, Christ will not only pay all your debts, and exalt you to a dignity above
Angels; but in that day wherein you cordially consent to his terms, he will
entitle you to the most glorious inheritance purchased by his Blood; You shall
be heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8* 17. O what an inducement
is here to close the match betwixt Christ and our Souls! If I consent to take
Christ upon Gospel terms, I shall thereby be entitled to all the glory that is
in Heaven; it shall be mine as truly as it is Christ's: It Is true, the glory of
Christ will in some respects far surpass the glory of the Saints; he will shine
among them as the Sun compared with the Stars; but yet the glory which God gave
him, that is, the communicable glory, shall be truly theirs as it is his, John
17. 22. The glory which thou gave me, I have given them. Tell my Brethren
(says he) John 20. 17. I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; to my God,
and your God. This you shall gain also by closing this Treaty with an hearty
consent to Christ's terms and proposals.

4ly, If you will consider and consent you shall be presented by him to the
Father, pure and spotless, with exceeding joy and gladness in the great day.
This will be such a presentation of your persons to God, as will make your
Hearts leap for joy, to read what the Scriptures speak about it. This methinks
should induce every Soul, without further delay, to present himself, Soul and
Body, cheerfully and willingly to Jesus Christ. For (1.) Christ will bring you
in the great day to his Father, in the shining beauty of perfect holiness, not
a spot or wrinkle upon your Souls, Ephesians. 5. 27. The Blood of Christ perfectly
washes off every spot of guilt, for then the Spirit of Christ has perfectly
cleansed the Soul from all the desilement and filth of sin; so that it shall
come to God a pure and beautiful Creature out of Christ's Hand. (2.) This
presentation will be made with greatest honor and solemnity; we little think
in what state and triumph Christ intends to bring the poorest believer to his
Father, Psalm. 45. 14, 15. With joy and gladness shall they be brought, etc. So
Jude verse. 24. They shall be presented faultless, before the presence of his
glory with exceeding joy. Joy running over; Joy upon all Hands; God himself
will rejoice that ever he created such a Soul, as has sincerely bestowed it
self upon Christ. Jesus Christ will rejoice that ever he shed his Blood for
that Soul, that now places his sole righteousness therein; the Holy Spirit will
rejoice, that ever he came with a commission from the Father, and the Son, to
draw such a Soul to Christ, who has obeyed his voice; the Angels will rejoice
with joy unspeakable, Luke 15. 10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels
of God over one sinner that repents. If the consent of any of your Souls
shall be this day gained to Christ, if the Word you have heard this day shall
send any poor Soul hence to his Closet, or into a Corner, there to make his
Covenant with Christ, (for that is the way of making up the match with Christ)
in that hour the news of it will be in Heaven, and excite joy among the Angels
of God; lay these and many other Privileges together, which I want time to
mention, but the Scriptures will abundantly furnish you with them; and then
consider what a rich bargain, what an advantageous match Jesus Christ is for
your Souls.

II. Upon the other-side cast up the account what you may lose by your consent
to be Christ's; and whether those losses be sufficient to balance or
preponderate the gain that comes by such a consent; that so your choice of
Christ may be a deliberate and full choice, and you may never repent afterward
of the choice you have made: It is a rule in the Civil Law, Non consentit qui
non sentit; he cannot consent, that does not think, understand, and deliberate;
and this is the reason of so much flinching from Christ, and shameful apostasy
in times of Persecution; Men did not think of such sufferings and losses, they
are mere surprisals to them; to forelay all such occasions of offense; our Lord
deals heartily and openly with us, and tells us before Hand what are the worst
things that may besal us for his sake, John 16. 1, 2. These things have I
spoken unto you, that you should not be offended; they shall put you out of the
Synagogues. Yea, the time comes that whosoever kills you will think he does
God service. But, verse. 4. he adds, These things I have told you, that when the
time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of them. q. d. Remember your
selves in times of Persecution, that all these things were propounded,
considered, and consented to; they were the very terms you subscribed to me;
had you not liked them, you might at the everlasting damage and ruin of your
immortal Souls have refused and rejected them. Now, the things you are to
balance with the gain of Christ, must by you be'sorted into two Ranks. 1.
Things that must be parted with. 2. Things that may be parted with for Christ.


I. The things that you must part with, viz. your Lusts, and all the vicions
pleasures you have had in them; how much profit or pleasure soever they have
brought you in, away they must go; they must be devoted to destruction, and
mortification, or you can have no interest in Christ: You must shake Hands for
ever with all your sinful courses and companions, Romans 6. 16. His Servants you
are to whom you obey. Be they as pleasant and profitable, as your right Hand or
Eye, they must be plucked out, and cut off, Matthew. 5. 29, 30. Does this sound
harsh and unpleasant to your Ears? Does this cause the demur? O consider, what
it is to part with sin; it is but to part with the Disease of your Souls, and
the instruments of your everlasting ruin; which of you would not be glad to
part with a Fever, the Stone, or Dropsy? What is Passion, but the Fever of the
Soul? What is a hard Heart, but a Stone? What is Covetousness, and
Earthlymindedness, but the insatiable Dropsy of the Soul? Now if Men would be
glad to be rid of such dreadful Diseases in their Bodies, and be restored to
Soundness, Ease and Health; how much more should you be glad to be rid of your
Corruptions, and have the rectitude, ease and pleasure of your Soul restored
again? Yea, instead of those impure, vicious, brutish pleasures you have taken
in sin; you shall enjoy the pure, divine, suitable, and everlasting pleasures
of holiness. Consider now, and accordingly make your choice, whether you will
take the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, in exchange for the
everlasting joys which are at Gods right Hand for ever.

II. There are other things which you may be called to part with, and give up
for Christ; it is uncertain whether God may actually call you to part with your
Liberties, Estates, Relations, and Lives for Christ. Many are never actually
called forth to such sufferings; but because many are, and every one of you may
be so called, you must reallize them, ponder them, and subscribe those very
terms, making full account of these things as if they were now before you, Luke
9. 23. For so Christ has propounded them; but then with all, weigh these
troubles with the gain and advantages you shall have by them, and not singly
and alone by themselves; for so Christ has presented them to you, Matthew. 19.
28. And every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Name sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting Life.

Now, if you think such gainful troubles, such Soul-enriching losses, be worth
accepting for Christ's sake; then close the match with Christ, and bring the
matter to a conclusion: Do not befool your selves with a fond and groundless
presumption that these things will never befall you. I fear many flatter
themselves with such vain hopes; the Lord knows how soon these suppositions, at
a distance, may be turned into realities before your Eyes: You have much reason
to expect them, and much more to embrace them, when ever Christ shall call you
to them. This is the great Work you have now to do; and really you cannot
safely demur any longer; this matter must come to a conclusion, and the sooner
the better. For you know (1.) that your Lives are immediately uncertain, and it
is an unaccountable madness to let the great concern of your Salvation lie one
day or night at hazard; your breath is continually coming and going, and that
which is going, must at last be gone, James 4. 14. You Souls hang over
everlasting dangers by the single thread of that feeble breath which plays in
your Nostrils, and every Disease, like the flame of a Candle, held under that
thread; and can it either be safe or comfortable, to delay so great a Work as
this, upon which all your expectations and eternal Blessedness depends? (2.)
Not only your Lives are hazardous and uncertain, but the enjoyment of the
Gospel, and all the opportunities and means of your Conversion, are as
uncertain as they. It Is true, and to the glory of God be it acknowledged, we
now enjoy the freedom and fullness of Gospel mercies; but where has God made
any such settlement of these blessings upon you as puts the enjoyment of them
out of hazard? The rain is over, but yet the clouds may return after the rain;
we are upon our good behavior, if it bring forth the fruits of your
Conversion, well, if not, the Ax lies at the root of the trees, Matthew. 3. 10.
And if God remove the Gospel from among us, (as our delays and triflings
provoke him to do) then the Treaty is ended, and there is little probability
that any thing further will be done betwixt Christ and you, Luke 13. 25. (3.)
Bring this matter to an issue, with all due speed, because you are not capable
to give one sound reason for a moments delay of so great and weighty a
concernment; can you be safe too soon? Can you be happy too soon? Certainly you
cannot be out of the danger of Hell too soon; and therefore why should not your
close with Christ upon the terms propounded, be your very next work? For
certainly if the buisness, the main work and buisness of every Man's life, be to
fly from the wrath to come, as indeed it is, Mat. 3. 7. and to fly for refuge
to Jesus Christ, as indeed it is, Heb. 6. 18. Then certainly, all delays are
highly dangerous in such a buisness as this; the Manslayer, when flying to the
refuge City before the avenger of Blood, when his Heart was hot within him, did
not think he could recover the City too soon; and now set all your own reason
to work upon this matter; put the case as really it is, I am fleeing from wrath
to come; the Justice of God, and curses of the Law are closely pursuing me; is
it reasonable that I now sit down in the way to gather flowers or play with
trifles? For such are all our other concernments in this World compared with
our Salvation. (4.) Bring this Treaty to an issue with all due speed, because
most Souls that perish, perish by delays; Men think they have time enough
before them, and that to morrow will be as to day, and so Satan gets part by
part, what he had not confidence to demand in the whole lump. Most that perish
under the Gospel, had convictions upon their Consciences, and vain purposes in
their Hearts; but not (...) them to a speedy execution, that was their undoing,
James 1. 24. He beholds himself and goes his way, and straight way
forgets what manner of person he was. It is an allusion to a Man that looks
in the morning into a Glass, where he discerns a spot upon his Face, and
resolves with himself, anon to wash it off; but some diversion or other falls
in, other matters take up his thoughts, and so the spot remains all day, and he
carries it with him to bed at night. O these delays are the undoing of
millions. (5.) Delay not to close this Treaty with Christ, because all delay
increases the difficulty, and the longer you neglect, the more will your Hearts
be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. Continuance in sin, and
quenching of convictions, do sensibly harden the Heart, and stiffen the Will:
Under the first convictions the Heart is tender, the affections flowing, O if
this advantage were apprehended, and pursued, how soon might the work come to a
comfortable conclusion! but after a while those Soul-affecting words, Sin,
Christ, Heaven, Hell, Death, and Eternity will become words of a common sound.
(6.) And lastly, Beware of delays in this matter because you can never expect a
fitter, and fairer opportunity and season for the dispatch of this great
concernment than by the special indulgence of Heaven you enjoy this day, 2 Cor.
6. 1, 2. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation. You have now
the Wind and Tide with you, if you will not weigh Anchor now, you may lie
Windbound to your dying day; what advantages can you reasonably expect, which
God has not furnished you with at this day? You have the means of Grace among
you, you have liberty and freedom to attend on those means without fear. Say
not, I have such, or such troubles and encumbrances in the World; for you must
never expect to be without them, except you only shall find the World another
thing than all others find it; have you health? O what a precious season and
advantage is that! Art thou sick? O what a spur is that! What is to be done
must be done quickly.

III. Use for Direction.
But it may be some Souls will plead ignorance that they know not how to manage
and transact so great a concernment with Christ, and therefore set not about
it; and it is very likely there may be much truth in that plea. For the help,
and assistance of such Souls, I will gather up the sum of what has been, and
ought to be further spoken about this matter, in the following Directions; so
that nothing but your unwillingness, and slothfulness, shall remain to hinder
you.

I. Direction.
First, If ever you bring the Treaty betwixt Christ and your Souls to an happy
issue and conclusion, you must, as before was noted, sit down and count the
cost, Luke 14. 28. 'twill be in vain else to engage your selves in the
profession of Religion; it is not Christ's design to draw you under a rash
inconsiderate engagement, and so to reap more dishonor by your apostasy and
hypocrisy than ever he shall have glory by your Profession. No, he would have
you to foresee and seriously bethink your selves of all the outward troubles
and inconveniences you may afterward meet with for his sake. You are to
embark your selves with Christ and abide with him in storms, as well as halcyon
days; you must follow the Lamb whether soever he goes, Rev. 14. 4. There Is no
retreating after engagement to Christ; If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have
no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38. It Is eternal death by that martial Law of
Heaven to run from Christ's colors in the day of battle. Well then, retire thy
self into the innermost closet of thy Soul; sit quiet and patiently there till
thou have debated this matter fully with thine own thoughts; and have balanced
the good and the evil, the profits and losses of Religion; for want of this the
Church is filled with hypocrites, and Hell with inconsiderate and rash
Professors; the more we deliberate, the better we shall conclude.

II. Direction.
Secondly, Having debated the matter over and over in thy most sedate and
serious thoughts, let not Satan discourage thee from casting thy Soul at
Christ's Feet with an hearty consent to all his terms, for want of such and such
qualifications as thou can not find in thine own Soul: It Is usual for Satan
to suggest at this time, the want of greater sorrow and humiliation for sin;
that the Soul has not layen long enough under the humbling work of the Law;
that the aggravations of its sins have been such, that there is no hope of
acceptance; free thy Soul from these snares of Satan, by the consideration of
this unquestionable truth; That Christ expects from thee no more humiliation
than what produces such a hearty deliberate consent, as thy Will is now to
give; and such a consent once gained, no aggravation of sin is pleadable
against the duty of believing.

III. Direction.
Thirdly, Distrust not the sincerity of Christ in those gracious offers he
makes unto coming Souls. Be satisfied, he speaks his very Heart in them to
thee; the Devil labors to sow jealousies and beget suspicions in the Hearts of
poor convinced sinners, that they will not find such a welcome entertainment
with Christ as he seems to promise them, in those encouraging Scriptures,
Matthew. 11. 28, 29. John 6. 37. But that something else lies hid in those
Scriptures, as a mystery which they understand not; and so by shaking the
assenting act, labors to hinder the accepting act of Faith; this is a case as
common as it is sad; the Lord help poor Souls to avoid this snare, lest in
stead of honoring Christ by a resolved adherence to him, they make him a liar
and impute insincerity to the God of truth. For he that believes not, has
made him a liar.

IV. Direction.
Fourthly, Look up to God for power to enable you to come to Christ in this
supernatural and difficult work of Faith. Don't think Faith is of the growth of
thine own Heart; No Man can come unto me, says Christ, except my Father, which
has sent me, draw him. There is a legal Spirit working under Evangelical
pretenses in many Souls; they look within them to find that which is quite
above them; the Apostle points you to the fountain of Faith, in Ephesians. 2. 8. It
is not of your selves, it is the gift of God. It Is one of the greatest
difficulties in the World to believe: For if the power of God must be owned as
the cause of every new degree of Faith, in the greatest believers in the World,
as is plain, Luke 17. 5. The Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our Faith.
How much more is the production of Faith it self, and the first vital act
thereof, to be ascribed to the Almighty Power of God?

V. Direction.
Fifthly, Keeping thine Eye of Expectation upon that Almighty Power, pray and
plead with the Lord assiduously, and importunately for the exerting of that
Power upon thy Soul; and give not over thy Suit till thou feel that Power
coming upon thee: The time of believing is a time of earnest pleading, thine
own danger and necessity; and the Spirit of the Lord improving them, will
abundantly furnish thee with Pleas, and Arguments to enforce this Suit. Such as
these, (1.) Lord, I have thy call and invitation, yea, I have thy command to
encourage me to believe; it is not presumption therefore in thy poor Creature
to come after thou have invited and commanded me; had thou not encouraged me,
I durst not have moved toward thee; Lord, whose Word is it, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. is
it not thine own? This makes my Faith an act of obedience. (2.) Yea, Lord, I
have thy promise as well as thy command, made upon no other condition but my
coming to thee; blessed Jesus, have not thou said, John 6. 37. Him that comes
unto me I will in no wise cast out? An invitation is much, but thy promise is
more. (3.) O my God I have not only thy command making it my duty to believe,
and thy promise to encourage me to that duty, but I have the examples of other
sinners that came unto thee long ago, and thou did not reject them; nor do I
abuse those examples in drawing encouragement from them, for it was thy very
design in recording them, that they might be so many patterns to all that
should hereafter believe on thee, 1 Timothy 1. 16. (4.) O my God I am shut up
under a plain necessity, I have no other way to take, thus stands the case with
me, I am beaten off from all other refuges, there is no help for me in Angels
nor Men, in duties or self-righteousness, in thee only my Soul can find rest. I
am shut up to thee as to the only door of hope, Gal. 3. 23. here I must speed
or perish; my Soul is burdened and wearied, I know not how to dispose of it,
but into thy Hands; nor where to lay the burden of my guilt but upon thee; if I
miss here, I am gone for ever. (5.) Lord I am willing to renounce and abandon
all other hopes, refuges and righteousness, and to stick to, and rely upon thee
only. Duties cannot justify me, tears cannot wash me, reformation cannot save
me; nothing but thy righteousness can answer my end: I come to thee a poor
naked Creature, saying as the Church, Hos. 14. 3. Asshur shall not save us,
etc. for in thee do the fatherless find mercy. Thus plead it with God, and
still remember you are pleading for Life, yea, for your eternal Life.

VI. Direction.
Sixthly, Labor to make a resolved adventure upon Christ amidst all those
encouragements, let the issue be what it will; resolve to venture though you
have not the least degree of assurance that you shall be accepted and pardoned.
This is that brave and noble act of Faith which carries the Soul to Christ,
much as Hester came to the King, Yet will I go in to the King, and if I perish,
I. perish, Hest. 4. 16. It pities me to think how the saving act of Faith is
grosely mistaken in the World; the generality think it is enough for them to
believe that Christ died for sinners, and therefore for them as well as any
other; but you see Faith is another matter: O there are great difficulties and
mighty wrestlings in the Work of Believing; it is a great matter for a poor
convinced sinner, in the face of so much guilt and vi^e^ess, and amidst such
manifold damps and discouragements from Satan, to cast and adventure himself
upon Christ, and that upon such self-denying terms; but the pinch of necessity
will bring the Soul to this, for now it reasons with it self as the Lepers did,
2 Kings 7. 4, 5. If we go to the Camp of the Assyrians we can but dye, and if
we abide here we must certainly dye; thus here, if I sit still in the state of
Nature and still continue demurring and delaying, my damnation is unavoidable,
to Hell I must go* and if I cast my self upon Christ, I can but be rejected;
but he has said, He will not cast out those that come unto him; in this way of
Faith there is a possibility of Salvation, yea, there dawns from it a strong
probability; this therefore is my only way, To him I will go, and if I perish,
I perish.

VII. Direction.
Seventhly, Never measure the grace of God, nor the mercy of Christ, by the
rule of your own narrow conceptions and apprehensions of him; but believe them
to be far greater than your contracted and narrow understanding represents them
to you: Our casting of the pardoning power and mercy of God into the mould of
our own thoughts, disfigures and alters them, so that they look not like
themselves, but with a very discouraging aspect upon our Souls; by this Satan
keeps off many a Soul from coming to Christ; the Lord knows how to forgive
thee, though thou scarce know how to forgive thy self, for the injuries thou
have done against him; that is a very considerable Scripture to this purpose, in
Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9. Let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous Man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the Heavens are
higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts
than your thoughts. Man lies under a double misery, one by reason of
Affliction, another by reason of Transgression; concerning both these, Gods
thoughts are not as ours, but far above what we can think; either (1.) with
simple cogitation (i. e.) we cannot think such thoughts to others, under misery
in themselves, or under transgression against us, as God does toward as. Or
(2.) by way of reflexive comprehension, (i. e.) we cannot conceive what those
thoughts of God are toward us, when we are under misery or sin just as he
thinks them; still his thoughts will be above ours, as the Heavens are above
the Earth; such is the altitude of Heaven above the Earth, that the vast body
of the whole Earth is but a small inconsiderable point to it; the highest
Cedars, Mountains, Clouds, cannot reach it; Gods thoughts are infinite, ours
finite; his thoughts are continued, ours interrupted and at a stand; his are
immutable, ours changable; his are intuitive, ours discursive: therefore never
measure his by your own; the thoughts of pardoning Grace in him, are rich,
plenteous, and glorious; but when our unbelieving Hearts have practiced upon
them, they are quite another thing. Thou say how can such a Wretch as I
obtain mercy? Thou know not, but the Lord knows. O if we could take in
such a proper Idea, and apprehension of the mercy and goodness of God, as he
has given of them himself, in Exodus 34. 6, 7. this would bring you to Christ
with much encouragement.

VIII. Direction.
Eighthly, Be not discouraged in the work of Faith, though no peace or comfort
should come in by the first act of it: Nay, though there should be an increase
of trouble for the present; the first saving act of Faith certainly puts you
into a state of peace, but it may not presently produce the sense of peace; you
may after you have believed and really closed with Christ, meet with some
discouragements, which may make you question whether Christ have received you
or no? Whether he have any love for your Souls or no? Yet held on, whether
comfort come or come not; though Christ and comfort are inseparable, yet Christ
and the sense of comfort are not so; think not that all your troubles shall be
over as soon as ever you believe, because it is said, Heb. 4. 3. We which have
believed do enter into rest: That Scripture speaks of a state of rest, and not
of the present or continued sense of rest; the Woman of Canaan, in Matthew. 15.
26, 27. did really believe in Christ, yet met with sore trials under the first
act of her Faith; yet this took her not off from the work of Faith, but rather
quickened and inflamed her the more; she was glad of a word from Christ, and she
expected deeds. O but the words were discourageing, It is not meet to take the
Childrens bread and give it to Dogs; yet this beats not off her Faith, the Dog
belongs to the Family, and crumbs to the Dog. O Woman, says Christ, great is
thy Faith. If you resolve for Christ, you must not be discouraged; a resolute
Faith overcomes all difficulties. You pray, you believe, and yet no comfort;
well, the vision of Peace is for an appointed time, at the end it will speak
and not lie.

IX. Direction.
Ninthly, In your treating with Christ have a care of all secret reserves, that
will spoil the bargain betwixt Christ and you; If I regard iniquity in my
Heart, God will not hear my prayer, says David: If there be but a reserve of
one lust, that reserve will break off the Treaty; be honest with Christ, and
say not of any sin, the Lord be merciful to me in this; and be sure there be no
secret purpose or reserve in thy Heart for a retreat in time of danger; but
imbark thy self with Christ for Storms and Tempests, Troubles and Afflictions,
as well as Peace and Prosper^ty. Christ bestows himself wholly upon you, and he
expects the same from you; give up all, or you will get nothing from him

X. Direction.
Tenthly, Close up your Treaty with Christ by a solemn Covenant with him;
engage your selves to be the Lords, Isa. 44. 5.
One shall say I am the Lords, and another shall subscribe with his Hand to the
Holy One of Israel. Here you have two things to do, (1.) To give your selves up
to Christ, according to that expression, 2 Cor. 8. 5. You gave your selves to
the Lord: Make over Soul and Body, Time and Talents, henceforth to be dedicated
things to his Service. (2.) Take Christ in both his Natures, and in all his
Offices to be yours; and to this Covenant you are to stand to the last breath,
whatever times or troubles shall come, this consent of thy Heart to be Christ's,
this choice of thy Will in taking him for thine, is but the echo of Christ's
choice of thee, and I would rather have such an evidence of my interest in him,
than a voice from Heaven to assure me that Christ is mine.

SERMON VII.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, [if any Man] hear my
voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me.
If any Man. THIS expression extends the gracious offer of Christ, (...)
Qualiscunque fuerit peccator, Hypocrita, qui diu obstitit Evangelio.
and brings it home to every hearer. It Is a Proclamation with a Si quis, If any
Man, as if Christ should say, I will have this offer of my Grace to go round to
every particular person; if thou, or thou, or thou, the greatest, the vilest of
sinners, of what quality or condition soever, old or young, profane or
hypocritical, wilt hear my voice and open to me, I will come in to their Souls:
And hereby all objections are obviated; as for Example, I am the greatest of
sinners, says one; I have been a self couzening hypocrite, says another; I
have resisted Grace too long, and doubt the time of Mercy is past, says a
third: the ground of all these, and a thousand more objections, is taken away
by the gracious extent of Christ's offer in the Text: For who is he that can
limit where Christ does not? This gives us a Seventh profitable and comfortable
Observation, which is this,

VII. DOCT.
That Jesus Christ will not refuse to come in to the Soul of the vilest sinner,
7. Doct.
when once it is made heartily willing to open to him.
If any Man open, I will come in to him. It is not unworthiness, but
unwillingness that Bars any Man from Christ: thousands have mist of Christ by
their unwillingness, but Christ never put off one Soul upon account of its
unworthiness; Christ is not the Sale, but the Gift of God; you come not to make
a bargain, but to receive a free gift: Faith is a marriage with Christ, wherein
nothing but your Hearty consent is expected; so runs the strain of the whole
Scriptures, Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
and he that has no money, (i. e. no merit, no worthiness of his own) let him
come. Behold the free grace of Christ to the vilest and unworthiest of sinners,
so Revel. 22. 17. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him
(...), and take the water of Life freely; and in the very phrase of my Text he
speaks again, John 7. 37. If any Man thirst, let him come to me and drink. It Is
very observable, throughout the whole Gospel, that Christ never made any
objection against any Soul that came to him upon the account of its sinfulness
and unworthiness; but all the complaints of Christ are still upon the account
of their unwillingness; so in his complaint over Jerusalem, Luke 13. 34. I
would, but you would not; so again, John 5. 40. You will not come unto me, that
you might have life. The complaint is still upon their unwillingness. In the
stating of this Point, I shall Doctrinally discourse these two things, 1. What
it is to be truly willing to receive Jesus Christ. 2. How it appears that they
who are so, shall certainly be received and graciously accepted of him.


First, What it is to be truly willing to receive Jesus Christ. For this is
meant by opening to him; now this implies and involves in it many great and
weighty things.

1. It implies and necessarily includes the right understanding and true
apprehension of Gospel Terms and Articles: these must be known, pondered and
duly considered, before the Will can savingly open in an act of consent to
Christ's offer. I desire this may be especially observed, because multitudes are
mistaken and deceived about this thing; he that does not consider does not
consent; you must exercise your understandings upon the Terms and Articles of
Christianity, or else your consent is rash, blindfold and unstable, this in
Luke 14. 31. is called consulting; the consent of Faith is the result of many
previous consultations and debates in the mind; the Soul that comes to Christ
must take up Religion in his most sedate and serious thoughts; turn both sides
of it, the dark as well as the bright side of Religion to the Eye of his mind;
balance all the conveniences and inconveniences, losses as well as gains. If
I open to Christ, this I shall gain, but that I must lose; I cannot separate
Christ from sufferings, Christ will separate me from my sins; if I seek him, I
must let them go; if I profess Christ, providence will one time or other bring
me to this Dilemma, either Christ or Earthly comforts must go; it is necessary
therefore that I now propound to my self what providence may, one time or
other, propound to me; he has set down his terms, Matthew. 16. 24. If any Man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.
This self-denial deserves serious consideration; for Christ extends it to
natural Self, righteous Self, and civil Self; and requires that I give up my
Life, my Liberty, my Estate and Relations, my own Righteousness, as hard to be
parted with as any of the former. I must take up my Cross, that is, the
sufferings and troubles God shall appoint for me, and which I cannot avoid or
escape without sin; and I must follow Christ, follow him whither soever he
goes. I know not what Religion may cost me before I dye; all this it has cost
others; and there is no bringing down Christ's terms lower than he has laid
them. I must come up to them, they will not come down to me; if I like them not
as Christ has left them, the Treaty between him and me is ended, Matthew. 10.
37, 38. He that loves Father or Mother, more than me, is not worthy of me: And
he that loves Son or Daughter, more than me, is not worthy of me: And he that
takes not his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me. Where by
worthiness we are not to understand the meritoriousness of these Acts; but the
necessary qualification of the Will, and due qualification of a comer unto
Christ; these previous consultations, and debates in the Mind, prepare and
enable the Will to make a serious and well advised choice of of Christ; and for
want of this there are such swarms of Hypocrites and Apostates in the World.

2ly, It implies such a sense of misery in us, and of the necessity and
excellency of Christ, as determines the Will to the choice of him,
notwithstanding all those difficuties and troubles which have fallen, or can
fall under consideration and debate in the Mind; when the Soul sees that in
Christ which preponderates all sufferings, all losses, all reproaches, etc. and
then determins I will have Christ though I sacrifice all that is dear to me in
the World for him; this is to be truly willing to open to Christ. It Is true,
the enjoyments of this World are understood by Christians as much as other Men;
they have a feeling sense of the sweetness and comfort of Earthly enjoyments;
their Souls have as much affection to the Body as other Men; they understand
the charming language of the World, and their dear Relations in it as well as
others; only they see a greater necessity of Christ, and a greater worth in
Christ, than they do in these things; you read, Lam. 1. 11. that in the famine
of Jerusalem they gave their pleasant things, for meat to relieve their Soul;
Jewels, Bracelets, Gold, Silver, any thing for Bread; they understood the worth
of those things, knew the price and cost of them; but away they go to preserve
Life. So it is here, no earthly enjoyment of what value soever it be, has such
an excellency in it, such an absolute necessity of enjoying it as Christ has.

But, O says the poor Soul, Object.
who can do this? I am willing to have Christ, and to come up to every term he
has laid down in the Gospel; I am willing to part with every sin, and to
endure any suffering for Christ; but, Oh, I tremble to think, if it should come
to a Prison, to a Stake, to an actual separation from all the Comforts and
Relations I have in the World, what I shall do for strength to go through such
hard and difficult work as this? Here Is the great rub in the way of many Souls,
they find a willingness, but fear the want of strength.

Ans. How or where you shall find strength to endure and suffer these things
for Christ, Sol.
is not the question now before you. God will take care for that, and it shall
be given you in that hour, and so others have found, who have had the very same
fears you have. I say, the question is not whether you be able, but whether you
be heartily willing. Christ asks but your Will, he will provide Ability; the
greatest Believer in the World cannot say I am able, to suffer this or that for
Christ; but the least Believer in the World must say I am willing, the Lord
assisting me, to endure and suffer all things for his sake; and this is the
Second thing included in opening to Christ.

3ly, The Third thing which perfects, and consummates the whole act, is an
entire choice of of Jesus Christ upon all those terms prescribed by him; the
entireness of the choice, without halfing or dividing, excepting or reserving,
makes the consent full and effectual. There is a twofold consent of the Will to
Christ. (1.) One partial, and with exception. (2.) The other entire, and
without any reservation.


I. There is a partial consent which is always hypocritical, defective, lame,
and ineffectual; thus the hypocrite consents to the offer of Christ, he is
really willing to have the pardons of Christ, and the glory purchased by
Christ; but to part with his beloved lusts, and to give up his earthly
enjoyments, that his Will cannot consent to.

II. There is a full and entire consent of the Will, called, a believing with
all the Heart, Acts 8. 37. Now this integrity and fullness of the Wills choice,
is that which closes the match betwixt Christ and the Soul, and frees a Man
from the danger of hypocrisy. And there are three things which make the
consent to, and choice of Christ, complete and full.

1. When we give up all we are and have, to him. 2. When we derive and draw all
we want, from him. 3. When we are ready to deny any thing for his sake.
1. We do then heartily consent to be Christ's, when we give up all we are and
have, to him; so that after this choice of Christ we look upon our selves
thenceforth as none of our own; but bought with a price, to glorify God in our
Body and Soul, which are his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Soul and Body is all that we
are, and both these parts of our selves do now pass, by an act of our own
consent, into the Redeemers right; we are not to have the dispose of them, that
belongs to him that purchased them: You know in all purchases property is
altered; you did live as your own, followed your own Wills, Lusts, Passions;
were under the dominion and at the beck of every Lust; but now the case is
altered, Titus 3. 3. We our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures: So many Lusts, so many Lords; but
now the case is altered, we have given our selves to Christ, no more to be
swayed this way or that, against his Word, and the voice of our own Conscience:
Thus our Souls and Bodies are his, hallowed, dedicated things to Christ;
Temples for God to dwell in, and then all other things follow of course; if I
am the Lords, then my time, my talents, and all that I have is his.

2ly, As we must give up all to Christ, so we must derive and draw all we want
from him; else your choice of Christ is not entire and full: God has stored up
in Christ all that you want, a suitable and full supply for every need; and
made it all communicable to you, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Who of God is made unto us,
wisdom and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. All the believers
fresh springs are in Christ: Have I any difficult buisness to do that requires
counsel? Then I must repair to Christ the Fountain of Wisdom: Am I under any
guilt? Then I must repair to Christ for righteousness: Is my Soul defiled by
corruption? Then must I go to Christ for Sanctification: Do I groan under
troubles of Soul or Body, temptations, afflictions? etc. then must I relieve my
self by the Faith and Hope of that complete Redemption, and final deliverance
procured by Christ from all these: if you consent to be Christ's you must not
look for Justification, partly upon his Righteousness, and partly upon your own
Graces and Duties; but must make mention of his Righteousness, even of his
only. If there be but one Conduit in a Town, and not a drop of Water to be had
elsewhere, then all the Inhabitants of that Town repair thither for Water. In
the whole City of God there is but one Conduit, one Fountain, and that is
Christ; there is not a drop of Righteousness, Holiness, Strength, or Comfort to
be had else where: Then do we fetch all from Christ, when we live upon him, as
the new born Infant does upon the Mothers Breast.

3ly, Then is our consent to, and choice of Christ entire and full, when we are
ready to deny, give up, and part with any thing we have for his sake; reckoning
nothing to be lost to us, which goes to the glory of Christ; how dear soever
our Liberties, Estates, or Lives are to us, if the Lord have need of them, we
must let them go; thus you read, Rev. 12. 11. They loved not their lives unto
the death. These three things show saving Faith to be another manner of thing
than the World generally understands it to be; and it is impossible for any
Man's Will to open to, and receive Christ upon terms of such deep self-denial as
these; until there be, 1. A Conviction of our sin and misery. 2. A Discovery of
Christ in his glory and necessity. 3. The drawing Power of the Spirit upon the
Soul.


1. Conviction of our sin and misery makes these terms of Religion acceptable;
poor sinners stand huckling with Christ, excepting and objecting against his
terms until the Lord have shaken them by Conviction over Hell, made them to see
the dreadful danger they are in; and then the next cry is, Men and Brethren
what shall we do, Acts 2. 37. q. d. Prescribe any means, impose upon us the
greatest difficulties, we are willing to comply with them.

2ly, Nor will Souls ever comply with these terms of the Gospel until a
discovery have been made to them of Jesus Christ in his glory and necessity;
when a Man feels his wants, and sees a complete remedy, his Will then complies
and bows, readily and freely; the convinced sinner sees a full and suitable
supply in Christ for all his wants; a complete Savior in whom there is nothing
defective, but in all respects according to the wish of a sinners heart, 1 Cor.
1. 24.

3ly, To all this must be superadded the powerful drawings of the Spirit; in
the virtue whereof the Will comes home to Christ, John 6. 44. No Man can come
unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him. When these things are
past upon the Soul, then it hears Christ's voice, his powerful call, which
breaks asunder all the ties and bonds betwixt a Man and his Lusts; a Man and
his Earthly enjoyments; and without these things the Will is unperswadable to
comply with the difficulties and severities of Religion. This is the first
thing, what the opening of the door, or consent of the Will to receive Christ
is.

Secondly, The next thing to be opened in its order, is, How it appears that
Jesus Christ will not refuse to come into the Soul of any sinner, be his sins
or unworthiness never so great; when once he is made heartily willing thus to
embrace and receive Christ upon his own terms? O sinner, what good tidings are
these to thy Soul, that Christ will not disdain to be in union and communion
with thee, as vile as thou art, if thy Will thus stand open to him! The tidings
are sweet, and I hope thou will find them as sure, and certain, as they are
sweet and comfortable; when thou shall have seriously perused and pondered the
following Evidences.

I. Evidence.
The truth of this sweet assertion clearly evidenceth it self from the form and
manner of Gospel invitations; they are designedly put into large, general,
free, and most extensive terms, to assure sinners that Christ will not be shy
of the worst sinner in the World, thus made willing to embrace him; they are so
framed on purpose to anticipate or take away all objections from sinners. No
other condition is put in the Gospel, but this only, Art thou heartily willing
to take Christ upon his own terms? The offers of Christ are extended to all
that thirst and desire after him, John 7. 37. To the greatest of sinners, upon
this only condition, that they be willing and obedient, Isa. 1. 18, 19. Go
Preach the Gospel to every Creature: He that believes shall be saved, Mark 16.
15, 16. It Is extended to all Nations, For in Christ Jesus there is neither
Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond or
Free, Col. 3. 11. If there be any poor Soul of any quality or condition
whatsoever, under the cope of Heaven, whose Will is wrought up to an hearty
compliance with the terms of the Gospel, Christ will not be shy of coming into
that Soul, though it have been never so vile and abominable; the Heart of a
Mary Magdalen, which had been an Habitation of Devils; the Soul of a Saul, a
Bloody raging Persecutor, will make as delightful Habitations for Christ, as
the Soul of the most civilized person in the World, when once the Will is thus
opened.

II. Evidence.
The truth of this assertion further appears, from the encouraging Promises
made by Christ unto all who are thus made willing to come unto him: All the
Promises, with one Mouth, assure the willing sinner of a welcome with Christ; so
does that glorious Promise to which so many thousand Souls have been beholding,
for encouragement and help, at their first coming to Christ, John 6. 37, 38.
All that the Father has given me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me,
I will in no wise cast out. For I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own
will, but the will of him that sent me. Note here, (1.) That this is not a
Promise made to them that are already in Christ, that they shall never be cast
out by Apostasy, or final desertion; but it is a Promise made to coming Souls,
to such as are moving toward Christ under great discouragements, fears, and
tremblings; when a poor sinner looks to Christ, sees his fullness and
suitableness; and feels the pinching need and want of him; Oh, says he, that I
had an interest in him, though I should beg my Bread in desolate places! But
looking into his own Heart, and seeing such an heap of guilt and unworthiness
there, then, says he, how can I think that ever Jesus Christ will come into
such a Heart as this? These are the persons upon whom this Promise casts an
encouraging aspect. (2.) And because the fears of such poor Creatures are
double to the fears that others have, Christ has put a double negative into
this Promise, for the Souls encouragement; I will not, not, in no case, or at
any Hand cast out, such a Soul as this. (3.) And to put all out of doubt, he
does not only assure the Soul that he will not, but condescends to gives it the
reason why he will not cast it out; for, says he, verse. 38. I came down from
Heaven not to do mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me. As if he
should say, This was the very errand upon which I came from Heaven; it was my
great business to receive all that were made willing to embrace me; for this I
had my Fathers Commission, Isa. 61. 1. To preach good tidings to the meek* and
to bind up the broaken Hearted; and to comfort all them that mourn. I cannot be
faithful to the trust committed to me by my Father, should I shut the door upon
such Souls: How can Christ comfort the Soul that mourns, but by opening his
Arms of mercy to receive it? If Christ should say to a convinced mourning
sinner, hold thy peace Soul, I will give thee Riches, Honors, and Pleasures in
the World; but as for me thou can not have union with me; I say, this would
never comfort the Heart of a convinced sinner; it is Christ, and none but Christ
can quiet it. Like unto this is that Testimony and Promise, made on purpose,
for the encouragement of willing Souls, Acts 10. 43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins. This you see is a truth confirmed by the Testimony
of all the Prophets, who foretold what his gracious readiness to receive poor
broken Hearted sinners should be; and sure they neither did, nor could conspire
to deceive the World: These gracious Assurances and Promises cut off all pleas
against Faith, from the greatness of sin; and why should we except, where God
has not excepted? Had Christ said, all sinners of such a size and degree may
come unto me, but let all others stand back, the case had been otherwise; but
this Promise assures us, all that are sincerely willing shall be truly welcome
to Jesus Christ. Moreover, these universal Promises take away all fear and
doubt of presumption in coming to Christ. That Is the case of many a poor Soul;
I am afraid, I am running out of despair into presumption; I doubt I am an
unbidden, and therefore shall be an unwelcom guest to Christ. All this is
prevented and cut off by those sweet universal Terms, inserted on purpose, in
these Promises for our encouragement. That Is the Second Evidence of this Truth.

III. Evidence.
The willingness of Christ to receive the willing Soul, how many, and great,
soever its sins and unworthiness be, appears from the actual grants of Pardon
and Mercy, even to the vilest sinners that ever were upon the Earth, when they
thus came unto him. Here you see how the Waters of Free Grace rise higher and
higher; an Invitation is much, a Promise of welcome is more; but the actual
grants of Mercy is most satisfying of all. Come on poor trembling Soul, don't be
discouraged, stretch out the small weak Arms of thy Faith to that great and
gracious Redeemer; open thy Heart wide to receive him, he will not refuse to
come in; he has sealed thousands of pardons to as vile Wretches as thy self;
he never yet shut the door of Mercy upon a willing, hungering Soul. It is a
great matter to have the Way beaten, and the Ice broken before thee, in thy way
to Christ. If thou were the first sinner that had cast his Soul upon Christ, I
confess I should want this encouragement I am now giving thee; but when so many
have gone before thee, and all found a welcome beyond their expectation, What
encouragement does this breath into thy trembling discouraged Heart, to go on
and venture thy self upon Christ as they did? what an Example have we in
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. from verse. 3. to 12. An Idolater, one that used
Enchantments and Divinations, familiar Spirits, shed innocent Blood in the
Streets of Jerusalem? a Man might rake the World, and hardly bring ^o sight a
viler Wretch, a greater Monster in sin and wickedness; yet his Heart being
broken, and his Will bowed, this Man found Mercy. How great a sinner was Mary,
that came to Christ in the House of Simon the Pharisee, Luke 7. 39. So
notorious a sinner, that Simon took offense at Christ, for suffering so vile
Wretch to come into his presence. If this Man were a Prophet, says he, he
would have known who, and what manner of Woman this is that touches him; for
she is a sinner. Yet Mary's Heart being broken for sin, and made willing to
accept of a Savior; what a gracious demonstration of welcome did Christ give
her, and to all other sinners a singular encouragement in her Example? Once
more, you have an eminent Example of the abundant welcome of another sinner to
Christ, who owned himself for the greatest of Sinners, a Persecuter, a
Blasphemer* Injurious; but, says he, I obtained Mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 16. And the
Example of his gracious Entertainment with Christ, is recorded on purpose for
an encouragement unto all that should hereafter believe. How many thousands are
there now in Hell that never stood guilty of greater enormeties than the
Corinthians did; Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Thieves, Covetous,
Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, such were some of them; yet Sanctified,
Washed, Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
If ever Christ would have shut the door of Mercy upon any; if ever he would
have been coy and shy of coming into any Souls, certainly these were the Souls
he would have disdained to come near. O what a demonstration is here of that
comfortable Point before us! That Christ will not refuse to come into the Soul
of the vilest Sinner when ones it is made Heartily willing to open to him.

IV. Evidence.
A further Evidence of this comfortable Truth shall be taken from the Scripture
resemblances of the abundant Grace of God, and riches of Mercy in Christ
toward all broken Hearted and willing Sinners. There are some chosen
resemblances and excellent Emblems, which bring down the Grace of God before
the very Eyes of Men; amongst which I will single out three glorious
Resemblances of Free Grace, chosen by his Wisdom, on purpose for the
encouragement of poor drooping Sinners. A Resemblance from the Heavens, a
Resemblance from the Sun, and a Resemblance from the Sea; all such as the
Wisdom of Men and Angels could never have chosen for such a purpose as this is.

I. A Resemblance from the Heavens, those vast extended Heavens that cover and
compass this Earth; what an inconsiderable spot is the whole Terrestrial Globe,
to those high and all-surrounding Heavens? and yet these Heavens are not at so
vast a distance above the Earth, as the pardoning Grace of God is above the
guilt, yea, and the very thoughts of poor Sinners. For of the pardoning Grace
of God to penitent and willing Souls, that precious Scripture speaks, Isa. 55.
8, 9. Let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts;
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. O says the Soul, I cannot think God will
ever have Mercy on such a Wretch as I, why says he, verse. 8. My thoughts are
not your thoughts, and it is well they are not; but as the Heavens are higher
than the Earth, so are my thoughts higher than your thoughts. You cannot take
the height, nor sound the depth of my pardoning Grace. That Is one Emblem, from
the unconceivable height of the Heavens above the Earth.

II. Another is taken from the Sun in the Heavens, a Creature of admirable
Power and Virtue; you know that anon this part of the World will be the Throne
of Darkness, the Sable curtains of the Night will be spread over all the
beauties of this part of the Earth, and it may be in the Morning a thick Fog or
Mist will cover it; thick and dark Clouds may darken the Heavens, but behold
this glorious Creature the Sun chasing before him the darkness of the Night,
breaking up the Mists and Fogs of the Morning, scattering the dark and thick
Clouds of Heaven; they are all gone and there is no appearance of them. Just so
says God, shall it be with thy sins, and thy Cloudy fears arising out of sin,
Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy transgressions, and as a
Cloud thy sins. Thy Soul is beclouded, thy fears have bemisted thee; so that
thou can not see the grounds of thine encouragement; but my Grace shall arise
upon thee, like the Sun in the Heavens, and scatter all these dismal Clouds
both of guilt and fear, and make a clear Heaven over thee, and a clear Soul
within thee. Unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise
with healing under his wings, Mal. 4. 2.

III. Another Resemblance you have from the Sea, the great Abyss, that vast
Congregation of Waters, whose depth no line can fadom; Veer out as much Line as
you will, you cannot touch the bottom. To this unfathomable Ocean the pardoning
Grace of God is also resembled, Mich. 7. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy.
He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. If
the loftiest Pyramid, or highest Mountain were cast into the depth of the Sea,
it would never be seen more by the Eyes of Men. God has on purpose chosen this
Emblem of his Grace to obviate that common discouragement of Satan taken from
the greatness and aggravation of sin; and in that case thou art to make use of
them, and bless the Lord for them; he never designed them for encouragements to
sin, but for encouragements to repentance and Faith. That Is the Fourth Evidence
of the Truth before us.

V. Evidence.
The Truth of this Conclusion will also evidently appear, from the innate
characters and properties of the Grace and pardoning Mercy of God toward
penitent and hungring Sinners. Now there are three glorious Characters of
Divine Grace, which do all assure such sinners welcome to Christ, whatever they
have been or done; the Grace of God, shines forth in Scripture in three
illustrious Characters.

1. As superabounding Grace. 2. As Free Grace. 3. As Grace exercised with
delight.
First, It is superabounding Grace; Waters do not so abound in the Ocean, nor
Light in the Sun, as Grace and compassion do in the bowels of God toward
broken Hearted and hungry sinners, Isa. 55. 6. Let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
The compassions of our God inserted that word on purpose to relieve poor Souls
fainting under the sense of their abounding iniquities. Here Is abundant Pardon,
for abounding Guilt; and yet left a desponding sinner should not find enough
here to quiet his fears; the Lord goes yet farther in the expression of his
Grace, Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound. It
overflowed all the bounds, it rose quite above the high water Mark of sin and
guilt; but these overflowings of Grace run only through that channel of all
Grace, Jesus Christ, to broken Hearted and obedient Sinners.

Secondly, The Grace of God to such Souls is free, every way free; it is the
very design of the Gospel to exhibit it in this its glory. It costs you nothing
but acceptance, its free without merit, yea, free against merit; you can
deserve nothing of God, therefore his Grace is free without merit; yea, you
have deserved Hell, as often as you have sinned against him, and so it is free
against merit. If a pardon were to be purchased by us, we want a stock for such
a purchase; neither can we borrow from Men or Angels a sufficient sum for such
a purchase: Blessed be God, therefore, that it flows freely to us without money
and without price, Isa. 55. 2.

Thirdly, Grace glories in another property also; which is very encouraging to
the Soul of a drooping sinner, viz. that it is the darling attribute which God
greatly delights to exercise. The tender Mother draws not out her aching Breast,
with such delight to her hungry crying Child, as the Lord does his Mercy and
Compassion, to broken Hearted and hungry Sinners; in this attribute, and in
this property of it, his people therefore admire him, Mich. 7. 18. Who is a God
like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of
the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy. You cannot put Jesus Christ upon a more delightful
employment, than to bind up the Wounds, and set the broken Bones of poor
convinced humbled Sinners. Let every such Soul come to Christ and welcome, for
he greatly delights in such employments.

VI. Evidence.
Such sinners need not doubt a welcome reception with Christ; for should he
reject and turn back such as these, then none can have the benefit of his
Blood; and consequently it must be shed in vain, as Water spilt upon the
ground. The Blood of Christ is invaluably precious, and it cannot be lost; it
were a desperate impeachment of the Wisdom and Goodness of God to think so; yet
so it must be, if broken Hearted and willing Souls be rejected and turned back
from him. There are but two sorts of Sinners in all the World, viz. hardened and
broken Hearted Sinners; willing and unwilling Sinners. The whole World falls
into these two ranks; as for impenitent, hardened, and obstinate sinners, it is
certain they can have no benefit by the Blood of Christ; they shall dye in
their sins; the Gospel cuts them off (so continuing) from all expectation of
pardon and mercy. Now there is but one sort of Sinners more left in the World,
and they are convinced and humbled Sinners, who are made heartily willing to
receive Christ upon his own terms; who stretch forth the Hands of their desires
to him, and pant after an interest in him. Should Christ reject these also, who
then shall receive the benefit of his Blood? Did Christ dye in vain? Or can the
Counsels of Heaven prove abortive? No, no; fear not therefore, to go to Christ
thou broken Hearted Sinner, thou poor panting, longing Soul; fear not, he will
not cast thee out.

VII. Evidence.
Moreover, for the encouragement of all such Souls, mercy and pardon are
designed by, bestowed upon the greatest and vilest of sinners, to enhance and
raise the glory of Free Grace to the highest pitch. God picks out such Sinners
as you are, on purpose to illustrate the glory of his Grace in and upon you; he
knows you to whom so much is forgiven, you will love much, Luke 7. 47. You that
have done so much against his Name and Glory, will excel others in zeal and
obedience, 1 Cor. 15. 9, 10. You will go beyond others in service for God, as
you have done in sinning against him. All these things laid together make up a
full demonstration of the Point, That Jesus Christ will not refuse to come into
the Soul of the vilest Sinner, when once it is made heartily willing to open
unto him. Which was the thing to be proved; and now our way is open to the
Application of the Point, which will be exceeding useful for Information,
Exhortation and Consolation.

I. Use for Information.
Learn hence, ^* I^fer.
what an invaluable Mercy it is to enjoy the Gospel in its light and liberty,
which is so great a relief to the distressed Consciences of sinners.

Here only that Balm is to be found, that heals your spiritual Wounds. The
Gospel has been a low prized commodity in England, the Lord pardon the guilt
thereof to us. Ah, Brethren, if you were in the Heathen World, with your sick
and wounded Consciences, what would you do? There are no Bibles, Ministers, or
Promises; not a breath of Christ, or the Blood of sprinkling, which are the
true and proper remedies of sick Souls; that is a pitiful cry, Mich. 6. 6.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil?
Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression; the fruit of my Body for the
sin of my Soul? Behold here the anguish of a destressed, sin-burdened
Conscience; it would give up any thing in the World for peace and ease; they
would cast their Children, their dearest Children, their firstborn, into the
burning flames, if that might be an atonement for their ^ins. O the efficacy of
Conscience! And the misery of an unrelieved Conscience! But the Gospel which
you enjoy leads you to the Fountain of pardon and peace, I^a. 53. 5. By his
stripes we are healed. The voice of the Gospel is peace, peace to every one
that believes; a rational peace, founded upon the full satisfaction of Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness
of sins, according to the riches of his Grace. Here you see Justice and Mercy
kissing each other; God satisfied, and the Sinner justified; for Conscience
demands as much to satisfy it, as God demands to satisfy him; if God be
satisfied, Conscience is satisfied. O blessed are the people that hear this
joyful sound, Psalm. 89. 15. And doubtless it is a joyful sound to every
convinced humbled Soul; Beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of them that
bring good tidings, that publish peace. It is a Gospel worthy of all
acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15. it brings with it a fullness of blessings among the
People. O England! O Dartmouth! Provoke not thy God to extinguish this blessed
light. Great is our wantonness, and ominous is our barrenness and ingratitude;
Yet a little while the light is with you, walk whilst ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness knows not whither he
goes, John 12. 35. Should God blow out this light, whither will you go? Who
shall pour in Balm to your distressed bleeding Consciences'

II. Inference.
Hence in like manner it follows, II. Infer.
that the greatness, heinousness of past sins is no bar to believing and
accepting Christ upon Gospel terms. Let no sinner be dismayed by the atrocity,
and heynousness of sins past, from coming unto Jesus Christ for remission and
peace. I am awar what mischievous use Satan makes of former sins, to discourage
Souls from the work of Faith, by heaping them together, he raises up a
Mountain betwixt Christ and the distressed Soul; but behold this day Christ
leaping over these Mountains, and skiping over these Hills. Could this
objection be rouled out of the way, sinners would go on in hope; but certainly
if God have given thee a broken Heart, and a willing Mind, the greatness of thy
sin need not discourage thee from believing. For (1.) thou have sufficient
encouragement, from the sufficiency of the causes of pardon, whatever thy
particular enormities have been; there is a sufficiency in the impulsive cause,
the Free Grace and Mercy of God, Exodus 34. 6, 7. Micah 7. 18, 19. Isa. 55. 7,
8, 9. It is well there is Mercy enough in God to heal and cover all, and there
is no less sufficiency in the meritorious cause of pardon, the Blood of Jesus
Christ, which takes away all sin, 1 John 1. 7. 1 John 29. And it must needs be
so, because it is Divine Blood, Acts 20. 28. Neither is there any defect in the
applying cause, the Spirit of God, who has already begun to work upon thy
Heart, and is able to break it and bow it, and bring it home fully to Christ;
and to complete the work of Faith upon thee with power; thou complainest, thou
can not mourn, nor believe as thou would; but he wants no ability to supply
all the defects of thy repentance and faith. Well then, if the mercy of God be
sufficient to pardon the sin of a Creature; if the Blood of Christ, the
Treasures and Revenues of a King be able to pay the debts of a Beggar; if the
Spirit of God, who works by an Almighty Power, be able to convince thee of
righteousness, as well as sin, John 16. 9. I say, if all the three causes of
forgiveness be sufficient, every one in its kind; the first to move; the second
to purchase; and the third to apply; what hinders but thy trembling Conscience
should go to Christ; and thy discouraged Soul move onward, with hope, in the
way of believing, whatever thy former enormities have been? (2.) If God raises
glory to his Name, out of the greatness of the sins he pardons, then the
greatness of sin can be no discouragement to believing; but so God does, he
raises the glory of his Name from the multitude and magnitude of the sins he
pardons, Ier. 33. 8, 9. I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby
they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby
they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me: And it shall
be to me a name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all the Nations of the
Earth; which shall hear all the good I do unto them. And they shall fear and
tremble for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity that I procure unto
it. As a cure performed upon a Man laboring under a desperate Disease; it
magnifies the Physician, and spreads his Name far and near. The Devil envies
God this glory, and thy Soul this comfort; and therefore scares thee off from
Christ, by the aggravations of thy sins. David was willing to give God the
glory of pardoning his great iniquities, and with that very argument moves him
for a pardon, Psalm. 25. 11. Pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. You see
there are strange ways of arguing in Scripture, which are not in use among Men;
this is one, Lord pardon my sin, for it is great; he does not say, Lord pardon
it, for it is but a small offense; no, but pardon it, because it is great; and
the greater it is, the greater Glory will thou have in pardoning it: And then
there is another way of arguing for pardon in Scripture, which is peculiar; and
that is to argue from former pardons unto new pardons; when Men beg their
pardon one of another, they use to say, I never wronged you before, and
therefore forgive me now; but here it is quite otherwise; Lord thou have signed
thousand of pardons heretofore, therefore pardon me again; such is that plea,
Numb. 14. 19. Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according to
the greatness of thy mercy; and as thou have forgiven them from Egypt even
until now. (3.) As great sins, as those that now stare in the Face of thy
Conscience, have been actually forgiven to Men, upon their humiliation and
closing with Christ. Poor sinners, under trouble of Conscience, are apt to
think, there is no sin like theirs. God forbid I should diminish and extenuate
sin, but certain I am that Free Grace has pardoned as great Sinners as thou
art, upon their repentance and faith: What think you, had you had a Hand in
putting Christ to Death, would not that sin have been as dreadful as any that
now discourages you? Yea, certainly, you would have thought that an
unpardonable sin; and yet behold that very sin was no bar to their pardon, when
once they were pricked at the Heart and made willing to come to Christ, Acts 2.
36, 37, 38. (4.) If it be the design and policy of Satan to object the
greatness of your sins, to prevent the pardoning of them; then certainly it is
neither your duty nor interest to plead it to the same end the Devil does, to
lay a confederacy, and join with your mortal enemy in a plot against the honor
of Christ, and Salvation of your own Souls; take heed what you do, seal not
Satan's conclusions; do you think it is a small matter to be confederate with
the Devil? Certainly this is his design, he magnifies your sins, on purpose to
discourage you from faith; while you were secure and carnal, the Devil never
aggravated, but diminished your sins to you; but now the Lord has opened your
Eyes, and you are come near to the door of hope, mercy, and pardon; now he
magnifies them; hoping thereby to ham-string and lame thy faith, that it shall
not be able to carry thee to Christ. (5.) If thy sin be really unpardonable,
then God has somewhere excepted it in the Gospel grant. He has somewhere
said, The Man that has committed this sin, or continued so many years in sin,
shall never be forgiven: but now in the whole Gospel there is but one sin that
is absolutely excepted from the possibility of pardon, and that such a sin as
thy sorrows and desires after Christ, do fully acquit, and clear thee from the
guilt of; this sin indeed is excepted, Matthew. 12. 31. But the sin against the
Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven. This is that which the Scripture calls a
sin unto death. Let Apostate Professors, transformed into Persecutors,
Scoffers, and Haters of godliness and the Professors of it, look to themselves;
the dreadful symptoms of this sin seem to appear upon such. But the humbled,
thirsty Soul after Christ, stands clear of the guilt of that sin. (5.) If there
were no forgiveness with God for great sinners, then great sinners had never
been invited to come to Christ. The invitations of the Gospel are no mockeries,
but things of most awful solemnity. Now such sinners are called and invited
under the encouragement of a pardon; consult Isa. 1. from verse. 10. to 17. and
see the horrid aggravations of that peoples sins; and yet at verse. 17, 18. you
may read the gracious invitations of God, with conditional promises of a
plenary remission; so in Ier. 3. from 1. to 13. what a sad Catalogue of sins,
with their horrid aggravations, do you find there? and yet it said, verse. 12.
Go and proclaim these words toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding
Israel, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful.
(6.) If thy sins had not been capable of remission, God would never have given
thee conviction and compunction for sin; nor have drawn forth the desires of
thy Heart in this manner after Christ. He has tact remission to repentance,
Acts 5. 31. a blessing to gracious desires and hungerings, Matthew. 5. 6. There
is therefore hope that when God has given the one, he will not long withhold
the other. This very wounding of thy Heart by compunction, and drawing forth
thy Will by inclination, show that remission is not only possible, but even at
the door. (7.) And lastly, Let this be thine encouragement, (whatever Satan, or
thine own Heart, suggests to discourage thee) that great Sinners are moving in
the way of repentance and faith, to a great Savior, who has merit enough in
his Blood, and mercy enough in his Bowels, to save to the uttermost all that
come unto God by him, Heb. 7. 25. The Lord open to the Eyes of your Faith, that
rich Exchequer of Free Grace, Exodus 34. 6, 7. and give you a sight of that
plenteous Redemption, and forgiveness that is with God, Psalm. 130. 4, 7. that
you may not at once cast reproach upon the most glorious Attribute of God;
impeach the precious Blood of Christ, and stab your own Soul with a death-wound
of desperation; which is that the Devil designs, and the whole strain of the
Gospel designs to prevent.

III. Inference.
If the vilest of sinners stand as fair for pardon and mercy upon their closing
with Christ by faith, III. Infer.
as the least of sinners do; then certainly the pardon and salvation of sinners
is not built upon any righteousness in themselves, but purely and only upon the
Free Grace of God in Jesus Christ. Don't think God has set the Blood of Christ
to sale, and that those only are capable of the benefits of it, who have lived
the strictest and soberest lives. No, no; though sobriety, morality, and
strictness in Religious Duties be things commanded, and commended in the
Gospel; yet no Man by these things can purchase a pardon for the least sin,
Romans 11. 6. And if by grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise grace is no
more grace; but if it be of works, then is it no more grace; otherwise work is
no more work. See how these exclude one another, thus Titus 3. 5. Not by works
of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us. No
Man can satisfy God by any thing himself can do or suffer; not by doing, for
all we do is mixed with sin, Job 14. 4. and that which is sinful can be no
atonement for sin; all we do or can do, is due debt to God, Luke 17. 10. and
one debt cannot satisfy for another. Nor yet by suffering, for the sufferings
awarded by the Law are everlasting; and to be ever satisfying, is never to
satisfy: So then by the works of the Law shall no flesh living be justified in
his sight. The Saints in all generations have fled to mercy for remission,
Psalm. 130. ult. the two debtors, Luke 7. 43, 44, 45. though there were a vast
difference in the debts; yet of the lesser, as well as of the greater, its said
they had nothing to pay; nothing but the satisfaction of Christ can quit your
scores with God.

IV. Inference.
If the grace of Christ be thus free to the greatest of sinners, IV. Infer.
then it is both our sin and folly to stand off from Christ, and draw back from
believing, for want of such and such qualifications, which we yet find not to
be wro^ght in our Hearts. Poor convinced Souls think, O if they had more
humility, tenderness, love to God, spirituality of mind, this would ^e some
encouragment to believe* but because they have no such ornaments to dress up
their Souls withal, they are not fit to go to Christ. Now to remove this great
mistake, let two things be considered.

1. That such a conceit as this crosses the very stream of the Covenant of
Grace, where nothing is sold, but all freely given; this is the very Spirit of
the Covenant of Works, fain we would find something in our selves to bring to
God, to Procure his favor and acceptance; but the Gospel tells us we must come
naked, and empty handed; to be justified freely by his grace, Romans 2. 24. We
must be justified as Abraham was; who believed in him that justifies the
ungodly, Romans 4. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. The meaning is,
to him that works not in a law sense, to procure pardon and acceptance by and
for working. Go then poor sinner unto God through Christ, and tell him thou
have nothing to bring him; thou come not to bring but to receive. Lord, I am
a vile sinner, I have nothing to plead but thy mercy, and Christ's merit. This
is the Spirit of the Gospel.

2ly, By standing off from Faith for want of these qualifications, you invert
the settled order of the Gospel; by putting consequents in the place of
antecedents, and antecedents in the places of consequents; it is as if a Man
should say, If I were cured of such and such Diseases, then I would go to the
Physician; alas, could you otherwise procure the healing of your corruptions,
or the gracious qualifications you speak of, you would have no need to go to
Christ at all; nothing is required of us in our coming to Christ, but such a
sense of, and sorrow for ^in, as makes us heartily willing to accept Christ,
and subscribe the terms on which he is offered in the Gospel.

V. Inference.
Behold the admirable condescension of Christ, V. Infer.
that he will come into the Heart of the vilest sinner, and not disdain to take
his abode in that Soul which has been the seat of Satan, where he has ruled,
and every unclean lust has been harbored!

There are two things wherein the admirable condescension of Christ appears.
(1.) In taking union with our Nature after sin had blasted the beauty of it;
this was a marvelous stoop indeed, and justly admired by the Apostle, Phil. 2.
7. He made himself of no reputation, and was made in the likeness of Men. Yea,
God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. But (2ly,)
it is justly admirable in our Eyes, that Christ should also take union with our
persons; and take his habitation and abode in our Hearts, after Satan and sin
had so long inhabited and defiled them; that he should accept those Members as
instruments of his service; that very Tongue to praise him that had blasphemed
him, etc. yet so he is willing to do, and commands us to deliver them up to
him, Rom, 6. 19. As ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and
to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness. One would have thought Jesus Christ should have
said, Vile wretch, Satan has had the use and service of thy Soul and Body from
thy beginning to this day; thy Memory has been his Storehouse, thy Mouth his
Shop, thy Will his Throne, and all thy Members his Tools and Instruments to sin
against me; thou have been a Creature dedicated to Satan, and to him thou shall
go. No, but the merciful Lord declares his willingness, if thou will open thy
Soul to receive him, to cleanse it by his Spirit, and make it his Temple to
dwell in. O admirable grace!

VI. Inference.
Lastly, VI. Infer.
How just and inevitable will their damnation be, who consent not to the
necessary and reasonable terms of the Gospel, which is the only point on which
Christ and their Souls part for ever?

The terms required by the Gospel are every way equal and reasonable; if a
gracious Prince will bestow a Pardon upon a Traitor upon this condition, that
he lay down his Arms, acknowledge his Of^ence, and list himself in his Princes
Service, and he shall refuse so to do, how just and unpitied will his
destruction be? and what else does God require of thee, but only this, Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55. 7. And as the damnation of such is just, so it
will be inevitable; for if there be no way to glory but by Christ, as you know
there is not, Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other. And if there
be no way to Christ but by our accepting him upon these very terms; as it
plainly appears, from Luke 14. 26. there is not: what then remains but
inevitable damnation to all that come not up to the terms of the Gospel? If you
think not Christ a good bargain with all the sufferings, losses and reproaches
that attend him; your Mouths will be stopped, no plea will be left you in the
great Day. You refused a fair offer when it was seasonably and graciously made
you by the Gospel, and now you must expect no more such offers to Eternity; thy
Blood sinner, be upon thine own Head; the freeness and Importunity of the
tenders of Grace, will then only seem to illustrate and clear the righteousness
of God in thy condemnation.

II. Use for Exhortation.
In the next place, The point naturally leads me to a vehement persuasive unto
all sinners of what rank or size soever they be, to hearken to the voice of
Christ, who takes them all within the compass of his gracious invitation in the
Text, saying, If any Man open I will come in. Let all sorts of sinners bless
God for the extensiveness of this invitation, and that they find themselves by
it as yet within the reach and compass of the Arms of a merciful Redeemer. And
that there is nothing wanting to secure their Salvation, but the hearty consent
of their Wills to the reasonable and necessary terms of the Gospel. Look over
the whole Book of God, and you shall there find but one case absolutely
excepted from the possibility of forgiveness; but one wound absolutely
incurable, of which Christ speaks, Matthew. 12. 31, 32. And what may be the
reason that this only i^ an incurable wound? certainly it cannot be, because
the malignity of this sin exceeds the meritorious and pardoning virtue of the
Blood of Christ; but rather because there is no sacrifice appointed by the Lord
for it. God never designed that the Blood of Christ should be an expiatory
Sacrifice for that sin; as the Apostle plainly speaks, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7. All
other sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven unto Men, says Christ, that is,
they are capable of forgiveness upon sincere and actual repentance and faith;
yea, they have been actually pardoned unto many; now the greater any Man's sins
has been, the greater need he has to hasten to Christ for pardon: There are
some of you greater sinners than others; for though no sin be venial, light and
trivial in it self; yet compared one with another, there is a vast difference
found betwixt them in the weight and aggravations of them. Now I will labor to
show you by what rules Men are to estimate the greatness and aggravation of
sin; and then to convince you that the greatest of sinners stand yet fair for
mercy, as well as the lesser; and sometimes much fairer: Publicans and Harlots
go into the Kingdom of God before you, says Christ, Matthew. 21. 31. Now the
rules to estimate the aggravations and greatness of sin by, are these,

(1.) There be sins of infirmity, committed out of weakness, and there are
crying sins in the Ears of the Lord; of the former sort, sins of infirmity, you
read Gal. 6. 1. where it is called an overtaking in a fault; here is no
premeditation, nor deliberate consent, but a surprise; these go not to the
account of gross and heinous enormities, called in Scripture crying sins, such
as are the sin of oppression, Hab. 2. 10, 11. The stones shall cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. The meaning is, that the
injustice and oppression which Men have used in raising their own Houses, shall
cry in the Ears of the Lord for vengance. The Stone in the Wall shall say, I
was dug out of the Quarry, hewn, and laid here, by the unrewarded labors
of the poor Mason; and the Timber out of the Beam shall say, I was hewn,
squared and placed here, by the unrewarded Hands of the poor Carpenter. This is
a crying sin; so also is the sin of Murder, when our Hands have been defiled
with innocent Blood; this makes a dismal cry in Heaven, Genesis 4. 10. The voice
of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. A sin that makes an
horrid outcry in both Worlds at once; in Heaven, and in the sinners Conscience.
Such also is the sin of unnatural lusts; the sin of Sodom made a cry which came
up to Heaven, Genesis 18. 20. Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and
their sin is very grievous. Compare these sins with the sins of common
infirmity, which come by way of involuntary surprise, and what vast odds will
be found in the weight and aggravations of them?

(2ly,) You find in Scripture a great difference put betwixt sins committed
against the clear shining light of Knowledge in the sinners Conscience, and
sins of Ignorance which are committed for want of Knowledge: Christ himself
puts a great difference betwixt them, Luke 12. 47, 48. and so does the Apostle,
James 4. 17. To him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin.
Sin with a witness.

(3ly,) There are single acts of sin, and continued or repeated acts of sin.
Sins committed after Conviction, Promises, and Resolutions. Now there is not so
much of guilt in a single act of sin, as there is in a repeated and continued
course of sin, called Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Adding of drunkenness to thirst, and Isa.
30. 1. Adding sin to sin. For as it is in numbering, so it is in sinning; if the
first figure be one, the second is ten, the third an hundred, the fourth a
thousand; and every addition makes a greater multiplication. O what a dreadful
reckoning will here be for the Consciences of poor sinners!

(4ly,) Contrivers and studiers of sin are always in Scripture placed in the
first rank of sinners. The best servant God has in the World may be surprised
by the deceitfulness of sin, against the gracious bent and resolution of his
Soul; but the contrivance and plotting of sin is quite another thing; therefore
it is said of the wicked, Job 15. 35. They conceive mischief, and bring forth
vanity, and their belly prepares deceit. That is, sin like the Foetus in the
Womb, has its time of conception, growth, and birth; and all this by the
deliberate consent of the naughty Heart, and Will, which fosters and cherishes
it.

(5ly,) There are ringleaders in sin, and single personal sins which spread no
farther than our selves; a ringleader in sin is in Scripture reckoned amongst
the greatest of sinners; so Revel. 2. 14. Thou have them that held the Doctrine
of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the Children of
Israel; thus Jeroboam the son of Nebat made Israel to sin. There is the same
difference betwixt these and single personal sins, as there is betwixt a chain
shot, and a single bullet: Mind this, you that have induced others to sin by
your counsel or example.

(6ly,) There are sins in which men glory and take pleasure, and sins for which
men groan and mourn. Now the more pleasure any man takes in sin, the greater
does the sin arise in its aggravation. We read of some, Job 20. 12. in whose
mouths wickedness is sweet, and they hide it under their tongue: that is, they
draw a great deal of contemplative delight before and after the commission of
sin, as well as in the commission of it. It Is bad enough to sin and sigh, to
sin and weep; but to sin and boast, to sin and make a mock of sin, what a
prodigious way of sinning is this? O Sinner, what an heart have thou, that
can play and sport with that which grieves God, crucified Christ, and with
without deep and sound Repentance will damn thine own Soul!

(7ly,) The more Bonds of Restraint any man breaks asunder to commit sin, the
greater, and more aggravated always that sin is in the sight of God. There be
some persons upon whom God has laid more bonds of restraint to keep back their
souls from iniquity, than he has upon others. The more mercies he has
bestowed upon you, the more restraints from sin. So many mercies, so many ties,
Ier. 2. 5, 6. especially spiritual mercies; as light in your minds, pardons
sealed to your consciences, love manifested to your souls. Such also are your
own Vows, Promises and Resolutions; Ier. 2. 20. Thou said, I will no more
transgress. Did not thou promise me, says God, more care and circumspection
for time to come? And such are all the Examples and Warnings God has given us,
by his Judgments upon others, 1 Cor. 10. 11. These things put an Accent upon
sin, and make it out of measure sinful.

And now my Friends, what have have I been driving at all this while, in
opening the greatness and aggravations of sin? The design of all this is to
show you the indispensible need of Repentance and Faith to carry you to Christ.

But I am the person upon whom these crying aggravated sins are found. Object.
you tell me of going to Christ; alas, there is no hope of mercy for such a
wretch as I am. There it sticks. Poor sinners think it is to no purpose, they
had as good go on in sin, for they conclude there is no hope for them.

Come sinners, give me leave to tell you, you have a Text before you, that the
clears the way of your duty and salvation at once. Answ.
If any man, be he what he will, be his sins never so great, yet if he hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come into him, says Christ. There is mercy in
Jesus Christ for thee who art guilty of crying sins: For thee, that have added
sinned against light and knowledge; For thee, that have drunkenness to thirst:
For thee, that have contrived sin with deliberation: For thee, that have
induced others to sin by counsel or example: For thee, that have taken pleasure
in iniquity, and made a sport of sin: Yea, and for thee also, that have broken
asunder the bonds of mercies, vows and warnings, provided thou will now hear
the voice of Christ, and thy Will open to him with an hearty firm consent, Isa.
55. 4. You are great and heinous sinners, but I show this day a Great and
Almighty Savior: One that is able to save to the utmost all that come unto God
by him. Hebr. 7. 25. There is a Sacrifice laid out and appointed for these
sins. O bless God for that. They are no where excepted from the possibility of
forgiveness. Nothing but the impenitency of thy heart, and obstinacy of thy
Will, can bar thee from a full and final pardon. Jesus Christ can save thee to
the uttermost. Say not within thy self, Can the virtue of his Blood extend it
self to the remission of this or that sin? He can save to the uttermost. Look
round about thee to the uttermost Horizon of all thy guilt, and Christ can save
thee to the uttermost, that the Eye of thy Conscience can discern, yea and
beyond it too; but then thou must come unto him. You speak of the greatness of
sin, and you have cause to have sad thoughts about it; but in the mean time you
consider not, that your Unbelief, by which you stand off from Christ your only
Remedy, is certainly the greatest of all the sins that ever you stood guilty of
against the Lord. This is the sin that binds the guilt of all your other sins
upon you. Let me therefore address my self, (1) To you who cry out of the
greatness of sin, and that discourages you from going to Christ: (2) To lesser
sinners, who because they are clear of great Enormities, see not their need of
Christ.

1. This Exhortation speaks to you whose Consciences are ^eared with the
horrid and hideous aggravations of your sins, by reason whereof your own
misgiving hearts, assisted by the policy of Satan, discourage you from all
Attempts to gain Christ and Pardon in the way of Repentance and Faith. Let me
at this time hint three or four Considerations to you by way of Encouragement.

(1) The sparing goodness of God till now, gives some encouragement that God
may have a reserve of mercy for so great and vile a sinner as thou art. O what
a mercy is it that thy life has been spared hitherto! Many of thy Companions
in sin are beyond hope and mercy, whilst thou art left. I confess this is no
sure sign of Gods gracious intention to thee, unless the goodness and
forbearance of God did lead thee to Repentance; then the gracious intention of
God in prolonging thy life would evidently appear. But however, it is in it
self a very great mercy, because without it no spiritual mercy could be
expected.

(2ly,) It Is matter of encouragement and hope, That though your Disease be
dreadful, yet it is not desperate and incurable. The Text takes it within the
compass of mercy: O bless God for that, If any man, etc.

(3ly,) As great sinners as you have been have found mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 16. and
God would have it to be recorded for your encouragement. If now the Lord shall
make thy heart to break, and thy Will to bow, whatever thy sins have been,
they shall not bar thee from mercy and forgiveness. But if thou resolve to go
on in sin, or sit down desponding or discouraged, and wilt not come in at the
Invitation and Call of Christ, then thy wound is incurable indeed; and there is
but one way with thee, thy Mittimus is already made for Hell; and that
Scripture in 1 Cor. 6. 9. will tell thee whither thou art going. But God forbid
that this should be the Issue of Christ's gracious invitations to thee, and
forbearance of thee. Seeing mercy is tendered to any man that will accept it
upon Christ's terms, exclude not thy self when he has not excluded thee.

2. I will close up this Use of Exhortation to another sort of persons who are
not of the notorious, infamous rank of profane Sinners, but their lives have
been drawn more smoothly through a course of Civility. These have as great need
to be pressed to Repentance and Faith as the most notorious Sinners in the world.
These are a Generation that bless themselves in their own eyes, and thank God
with the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. That they are not as other men. They
acknowledge Conversion to be the duty of the profane; that such Sinners as I
last dealt with, stand in apparent need of it: But as for themselves, they
scarce know where to find matter for Repentance, nor do they feel any need of
Christ. Now I would lay three Considerations before such persons, to convince
them that their Case is as sad and hazardous, yea, and in some respect more
hazardous than the state of the most notorious Sinners in the world; and that a
Change must also pass upon them, or else it had been good for them they had
never been born.

I. Consideration. Let the civilized part of the world lay this thought close
to their hearts, That though their sins be not so gross and horrid to
appearance as other men's are, yet continued in, they will prove as mortal and
destructive, as those greater Abominations of other men. No sin absolutely
considered is small. Every sin is mortal and damning without Christ; Romans 6.
ult. The wages of sin is death. It Is no great odds, if a man be killed, whether
it were by a broad Sword, or by a small Penknife. The least sin violates the
whole Law, James 2. 10. He that offends in one point is guilty of all. The
least transgression of the Law, pulls down the guilt and curse of the whole Law
upon the Sinners head. And this is your misery that are out of Christ, and
stand under the rigorous terms of the first Covenant. Moreover, the Law of God
is violated grossly, and externally, or spiritually, and more internally. Thus
every unchaste thought is Adultery: And the very inward burnings of Malice and
Anger in the heart is Murder. Now if the Lord shall bring the spiritual sense
of the Law home to your Consciences, as he did to Paul's, Romans 7. 9. You will
certainly give up that plea, that you have not so much need of conversion as
other Sinners have. There are sins of greater infamy, and sins of deeper guilt.
There may be more guilt in those sins that are stifled in thy heart, and never
defamed thee, than there may be in some sins that make a louder noise in the
world.

II. Consideration. You are guilty of one sin (how civil and blameless soever
your lives are) which is certainly more great and heinous than any outward act
of sin can ordinarily be, and that is, your trusting to your own Righteousness,
as the Pharisees did, Luke 18. 9. He spoke this Parable unto certain which
trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others. Here Is an
Idol of Jealousy set up in the room of Christ: It Is true, this sin makes not
so loud a noise in the world, raises not such a dust, as the sins of profane
ones do. But certainly it is as abominable in the eyes of God, as the sins that
stink so much in the nostrils of Nature. Civilized persons thus trusting to
their own civility, and neglecting Jesus Christ, will be one day put into the
Van of that wretched Crew that are going to Hell; a portion with unbelievers,
as the Scripture speaks.

III. Consideration. Lastly, It has been always found a more rare and
difficult thing, to convince and bring home to Christ the civilized part of the
world, than it is to convince and work upon the profane part of it, Matthew. 21.
31. Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you. Publicans were
reckoned the vilest sort of men, and Harlots the worst sort of women; yet
either of these were easier to be brought to Christ, than self-righteous
Pharisees. Well then, away with your vain and idle pretensions, that your Case
is safer and better than others. By what has been said, it evidently appears
that you stand in as much need of Christ as the most infamous Sinners in the
world do.

III. Use.
This point winds up in encouragement to every willing and obedient soul whom
the Lord shall persuade to comply with the Call of the Gospel, whatever his
former Rebellions have been. There are some whose hearts the Lord has touched
with a deep sense of their sin and misery, and of the all-sufficient remedy
that is in Christ; but the sense of former rebellions appalls and daunts them,
they cannot hope for acceptance with him. Here Is good news for such souls;
Christ is at the door, and former Rebellions are no bar to him, provided there
be now a hearty compliance with his voice, I will come in to him. A glorious
promise, comprising five inestimable benefits or mercies in it. (1.) This is
the most glorious work of God that ever was wrought, or can be wrought in this
world, upon the heart of a poor sinner, to open it by Repentance and Faith, and
put Christ into the full possession of it.

The power of all the Angels in Heaven, Ministers on Earth, Duties and
Ordinances cannot effect this; this is the peculiar work of God, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus. Look, as it was the mavelous work of God
to unite our Nature unto Christ by an Hypostatical Union; so it is no less a
mavelous work of God to unite our persons to Christ by a Mystical Union, to
prepare the soul as an habitation for Christ, and give him the possession of
it. (2.) This Coming of Christ into the Soul is the very foundation of all our
Hopes for Glory; till this be done, we are without hope. But in the same hour
Christ comes in to the Soul, a solid Foundation of the hopes of Glory is laid
in that Soul, Col. 1. 27. Which is Christ in you the hope of Glory. I know the
unregenerate World is full of hope, but their hopes are built upon that Sand.
Union with Christ is the steady foundation on which the hopes of Heaven are
laid. (3.) I will come in to him, that is, to dwell in his soul for ever, never
to leave him more: Therefore ( Ephesians. 3. 17.) he is said to dwell in our hearts
by faith; not sojourn for a night, but abide there for ever: Nothing can
separate Christ and that Soul, Romans 8. 35. Thy Soul shall never be an
habitation for Satan any more. When Christ comes in, he says, as of the
Temple, Here will I dwell for ever. (4.) This Coming in of Christ intitles the
Soul to all Spiritual Privileges; 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has
life: and 1 Cor. 3. ult. All is yours, for ye are Christ's. (5.) This is the
highest honor that ever God put upon a Creature. I will come in to him. O how
should the Soul feel it self advanced by such an honor as this! What, to be
the living Temple of Jesus Christ! for Christ to dwell and walk in thy Soul! as
it is 2 Cor. 6. 16. I tell you this is an honor beyond and above the honor
done to Angels.

And how near art thou to all these blessed Privileges in the day that thy
heart is wounded for sin, thy thoughts become solicitous about union with
Christ, and thy Will begins to bow, and yield, after a serious debate of the
terms of the Gospel in thy most solemn thoughts! Now is the door half-open, and
Christ ready to make his first entrance into thy Soul. God forbid any thing
should now hinder the completing of so great a Work.

SERMON VIII.
Revel. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any Man [hear my
voice] and open the door, I will come into him, and will sup with him, and he
with me.
IN the former Sermon Christ's free and general invitation to sinners has been
considered; in the next place, we are to take into consideration the principal
means or instrument by which the Heart of a sinner is opened to receive Christ;
and that is not by the native power of his own Will, nor by the alone efficacy
of the Gospel preached, but by the voice of Jesus Christ, which opens the Will,
and makes the persuasions of the Gospel effectual. If any Man hear my voice.

Hearing is either External, or Internal; for the Soul has its Ears, as well
as the Body. He that has an Ear let him hear, what the Spirit says unto the
Churches, Rev. 2. 17. ( i. e.) He that has a Spiritual Ear, to perceive and
judge the voice of the Spirit by; and it is a sore Judgment when God denies
such an Ear to the Soul, Isa. 6. 9. Go tell this people, hear ye indeed, but
understand not. Spiritual hearing is the Work of the inner Man. And though we
have many Auditors, yet in this sense no more hearers than believers; words of
sense do in Scripture connote affections. This hearing of Christ's voice implies
not only the receiving of the sound of the Gospel into the external organ; but
it notes the work of the understanding, which by the Ear tries words, as the
Mouth tastes meat, Job 12. 11. And the work of the affections; which receive
the truth in love, 2 These. 2. 10. It also implies the obedience of the Soul to
what we hear. We cannot be said in this sense to hear, what we obey not. Our
minds may be delighted with the pleasant air and melody of the Gospel, and yet
it is all one as if we heard it not, when obedience does not follow hearing,
Ezekiel. 33. 32. Thou art unto them a very lovely son, etc. for they hear thy
words, but they do them not; but in this place it especially signifies the
vital sound of Christ's efficacious internal voice, which is the principle of
Spiritual Life to the Souls of dead sinners; according to that expression of
Christ, John 5. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you the hour is coming, and now
is; when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live.

From hence the Eighth Observation will be this,

VIII. DOCT.
That no Man's Will savingly and effectually opens to receive Christ, 8. Doct.
till the Spiritual quickening Voice of Christ be first heard by the Soul.

Now touching this Almighty Spiritual voice of Christ, by which the Hearts of
sinners are effectually opened; Six things must be opened in order.

1. The diverse sorts and kinds of Christ's voice. 2. The general Nature of this
internal voice. 3. The innate characters and special properties of it. 4. The
objects to whom it is directed. 5. The motives inducing Christ to speak to one,
and not to another. 6. The special effects wrought and sealed by it upon every
Soul that hears it.
First, We will speak of the diverse sorts and kinds of Christ's voices. I am
here only concerned about two, viz.

1. His External. 2. His Internal voice.
1. There is an External voice of Christ, which we may call his Ministerial
voice in the Preaching of the Gospel; the Scriptures are his Word, and
Ministers his Mouth, Ier. 15. 19. He that hears them, hears Christ.

2ly, There is also an Internal energetical voice of Christ, consisting not in
sound, but power: And betwixt these two, there are two remarkable differences.
(1.) The External or Ministerial voice of Christ, is but the Organ or
Instrument of conveying his Internal and Efficacious voice to the Soul; in the
former he speaks to the Ear, and in, or by that ^ound conveys his Spiritual
voice to the Heart. (2ly,) The External voice is evermore ineffectual and
successless, when it is not animated by this Internal Spiritual voice; it was
mavelous to see the walls of Jericho falling to the ground at the sound of
Rams-horns; there was certainly more than the force of an external blast, to
produce such an effect; but more mavelous it is, to see at the sound of the
Gospel, not only the weapons of iniquity falling out of sinners Hands, but the
very enmity it self out of their Hearts. Here you see is a voice in a voice, an
Internal efficacy in the External sound; without which the Gospel makes no
saving impression.

Secondly, This Spiritual voice of Christ must be considered in its general
Nature, which implies two things in it, 1. Almighty Efficacy, 2. Great Facilty.


I. Almighty Efficacy, to quicken and open the Heart with a word. O what manner
of voice is this, which carries such a vital power along with it! In all the
mighty works of Christ, his power was still put forth in some voice, as at the
Resurrection of Lazarus, John 11. 43. He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come
forth; and he that was dead came forth. So in the curing of the deaf Man, Mark
7. 34. He says unto him Ephphathai, and straight way his Ears were opened.
Thus in the exerting of his Almighty glorious power in quickening, a Soul
Spiritually dead, and opening the Heart that was locked up by ignorance and
unbelief; an Internal Almighty Efficacy passes from Christ, along with the
voice of the Gospel, to effect this glorious work upon the Soul; an Emblem
where of we have in Ezekiel. 37. 9, 10. Then said he unto me, Prophecy unto the
wind, prophecy, Son of Man to the wind, says the Lord God; Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breath upon these slain, that they may live. So I
prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived
and stood up upon their Feet, an exceeding great Army. The animating vital
breath which quickened the dead, came in or with the four winds of Heaven; as
this Almighty power of Christ does with the sound of the Gospel; and before it
the Heart opens, the Will bows, Psalm. 110. 3. Man can no longer oppose the
power of God; Man and Man stand upon equal ground; the power of Man can repel
the power of a fellow creature; but when the power of Christ comes along with
the voice of Man, there is no more power to resist. Clamor hic est pulsatio;
significant cogitata a Deo injecta, ad monendam peccatoris conscientiam;id Deus
aliquandiu facit, non semper.
This voice of Christ then, of which the Text speaks, Pools Synops. in loc.
is an Almighty impression made upon the Soul of a sinner from Heaven; which is
to that Soul in stead of a voice; and as fully expressive of Gods mind
concerning it, as any Articulate voice in the World can be. It is a beam of
light shining immediately from the Spirit, into the Soul of a sinner; as
plainly and evidently discovering both its danger and duty, as if a voice from
Heaven had declared them* thus it is said, Isa. 8. 11. The Lord spoke to Isaiah
with a strong Hand, that is, by a mighty impression upon the Prophets Spirit,
which was as a voice to him; thus here, the Lord not only directs a suitable
word to a sinners condition; but also impresses it with such a strong Hand upon
his Heart, as leaves no doubt behind it, but that it was the Lord himself that
spoke to his Soul; this is Christ's way of speaking by his Spirit, to the inner
Spiritual Ear of the Soul; not by Oraculous voices, which I take to be but the
suppositions of an overtroubled fancy; but by an efficacious impression upon
the Heart. As to Oraculous voices, we may sooner meet Satanical delusions, than
Divine illuminations in that way. The Learned Gerson speaks of a good Man who
being in Prayer seemed to hear such a voice as this; I am come in person to
visit thee, for thou art worthy; but he justly suspecting a delusion of Satan,
shut his Eyes and said, Nolo hic videre Christum, etc. I will not see Christ
here, it shall suffice me to see him in glory. I am sure Christ's voice in the
written Word is more sure than a voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. l. 1. 9. This inward
Spiritual impression is Christ's effectual call from Heaven; and it is a voice
sine strepitu Syllabarum, without sound or syllable.

II. As this voice of Christ implies Almighty efficacy, so it implies in like
manner the facility of conversion unto Christ; he can do it easily with a word
of his Mouth; as in the bodily cures performed by him in the days of his flesh,
how suddenly and easily did Christ effect them? Speak the word only, said the
Centurion, and my servant shall be healed. Thus let the Spirit but speak
internally to the deadest Soul and it lives. Elijah did but cast his mantle
upon Elisha, as he was plowing in the Field, and he presently entreats the
Prophet to give him leave to go home and bid his friends farewell, and he would
follow him; thus it is here, let a beam of saving light shine from the Spirit
into a Man's Heart, let an effectual impression be made upon his Soul, and he is
presently made willing to quit and give up his dearest lusts and interests, and
to embrace Christ upon the severest terms of the Gospel. Conversion is too
difficult a work for Angels or Men to effect in their own strength; but Christ
can do it with a word. And thus much of the general nature of Christ's Spiritual
Internal voice; but all this gives us but a remote imperfect knowledge of it:
Therefore

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to open the innate characters and special
properties of this Internal Spiritual voice of Christ, which must be heard, or
there can be no opening the door of the Heart to receive him.

I. Character.
And the first Character is this, It is a secret and a still voice; whereby
somewhat is as it were whispered into the Ear of the Soul, making a particular
application of what is spoken Externally to the Ear, much like that of Nathan
to David, Thou art the Man. This still voice sounds throughout the whole Soul,
yet none hear it but the Soul concerned in it; it is said, 1 Samuel 9. 15. The
Lord told Samuel in his Ear, the night before, etc. That is, he whispered the
secret into the Prophets mind; so the Spirit of Christ whispers a word into the
Ear of a sinner which makes his Heart to tremble; after this manner, This is
thy very state and condition; this is thy sin, which is now opened by the
Gospel in thine Ears. This is a voice without sound or noise to any others, but
very intelligible to the Soul unto whom it is ^poken. You read in 1 Kings 19.
11, 12. when Elijah stood upon the Mount before the Lord, there came a great
and strong wind which rent the Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks before
the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake,
but the Lord was not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but
the Lord was not in the fire; and after the fire a still small voice; And it
was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, etc. So
it is here. Dreadful things are thundered against men by the voice of the Law,
the Terrors of the Lord are made known, Hell and Damnation are set before the
eyes of Sinners; but until the Lord come in the still voice of his Spirit, and
apply those things to the Conscience, the Sinner never covers his face with
shame and confusion, nor goes aside to mourn and lament his misery. This voice
of God sounds to the very Center of the Soul. As for the outward voice of the
Gospel alone, it signifies little, in hearing men hear not, Matthew. 13. 13. They
have the voice of Man, but not the voice of God: They hear the sound, but feel
not the power of the Word. What is spoken externally, dies in the ear that
hears it: But this still voice of the Spirit by secret passages makes its way
to the heart, and none knows what God speaks but the Soul to whom he speaks.
That is the first Character.

II. Character.
The internal spiritnal voice of Christ is a personal and particular voice,
speaking distinctly, and particularly to the case and state of the Soul, as if
it were by name. Ministers do and must speak in general; they draw the Bow of
the Gospel at an adventure, not knowing to whom God will direct the Arrow; but
the Spirit guides it to the Mark. He applies general Truths unto particular
persons, so as the Soul to whom he directs it, is fully convinced and satisfied
the Lord intends and means it, in such a convictive and threatening Expression.
O, says the Soul, has the Lord singled me out in special? this is my very
state and case. You read John 10. 5. that Christ calls his sheep by name. How
does he call them by name? but by speaking directly and particularly to their
Condition and Case, as if he called them by their particular Names. He does not
now in an extraordinary way, as of old, call Samuel, Samuel; or Saul, Saul; but
he sends a Beam of convincing light into the Conscience, plainly discovering
this or that to be our sin, danger, or duty; and so as to the effect, it is all
one as if God named him: And truly, till it comes to this, the Word has no
saving operation upon the Soul. A man may hear ten thousand general Truths,
assent to them, and never be the better for them. How still and quiet was
David's Conscience, till Nathan struck the nail upon the head, by an home
personal application, and then his Conscience startled? Thus God singles out
one man or woman from among a thousand in the Congregation, speaks to the
heart, rips up the secure Conscience; the rest hear the same words, but feel
not the same efficacy. And truly, it is a choice mercy when God shall please
thus to single out one person from among many after this manner to speak to his
heart. As Christ said in Luke 4. 25, 26. Many widows were in Israel in the days
of Elias, etc. but to none of them was Elias sent save unto Sarepta a City of
Sydon, unto a woman that was a widow; so here, Multitudes sat with you under
the same Prayer or Sermon, but unto none of them at that time was the Spirit
sent, to make a particular convictive application thereof, but unto thee. In
this the peculiar goodness of God shines out, and should for ever be admired in
the eyes of that Soul.

III. Character.
Thirdly, This spiritual internal voice of Christ is distinguishable by the
Soul that hears it from all other voices, John 10. 4. The Sheep know his voice.
As in the style of the Scriptures, there is a weight and majesty which
distinguishes it from all human composures; so in this voice of Christ, there
is a Majesty, a peculiar Efficacy, a divine and awful Authority, by which the
Soul distinguishes it from all human voices. It was said of Christ in the days
of his flesh, John 7. 46. Never man spoke like this man. The same may we say of
his spiritual voice, the Soul never heard such a voice before; it seals the
truth upon the heart so firmly, that no Objections are left against it. It was
not so when we heard the voice of man. And there are two things in this inward
voice of Christ, which apparently difference it from all human voices. (1.) A
mavelous light comes into the Soul with it, which discovers all the secrets
of the heart. God shines into the heart the same time he speaks unto it, 2 Cor.
4. 6. and now the secrets of the heart are manifest, and God is acknowledged to
be in that Word of Truth, 1 Cor. 14. 25.

(2ly,) A mavelous Power accompanies this voice, to make a deep and firm
impression of what is spoken upon the Soul: and this Power is an innate
Character of the voice of God, whereby the Soul receives it as his, with much
assurance, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Our Gospel came not to you in
Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost; and in much Assurance.
They could not be more certain of any thing in the world, than they were of
this, That it was the Lord that spoke to them in that Word. It Is true, at the
first instant the Soul may be amazed, and at a loss, as Peter when he was
delivered out of Prison, Acts 12* 11. thought at first he had seen a Vision;
but when he was come to himself, Now, said he, I know of a surety that the Lord
has sent his Angel, etc. Thus it is with the Soul, it is amazed, and doubts
what manner of Call or Power this is; sure it is, it never heard such a voice,
nor ever felt any thing like this before: But the matter is quickly cleared up
when the Soul has reflected duly upon it, and finds (as it quickly does) such
a wonderful change of the frame and temper of the heart following upon it. I
now speak not of those into whom Grace is distilled in the way of godly
Education in their tender years, but of adult persons, and especially such as
have been grosser Sinners.

IV. Character.
This spiritual internal voice of Christ is a surprising voice, altogether
unexpected by the Soul that hears it; I am found of them that sought me not,
Isai. 65. 1. Little do we foresee the designs God has upon us in bringing us
to such a place, and under such a Sermon, at such, or such a time; even as
little as Saul thought of a Kingdom when he was seeking his Fathers Asses. It Is
much with us as it was with the Apostles when Christ called them; little did
Matthew think when he sat at the Receipt of Customs, or Saul think when
posting unto Damascus upon the Devils errand, that Christ and Salvation had
then been so near them. Some have come to scoff and deride the Messengers and
Truths of God; others to gratify their curiosity, and many in a customary
course, not knowing where else with peace to themselves, or reputation with
others, to spend that hour: But God's thoughts were not theirs; the time of
mercy was now come, and whatever sinful or low ends brought them thither, the
Lord's design was then and there to manifest himself to them. It is with such
Souls, in some respect, as it was with the Spouse, Cant. 6. 12. to whose
expression I may here allude, Or ever I was aware my Soul made me as the
Chariots of Aminadab. I went to the Congregation for Company, I was fitting
under the Word with a careless wandering heart, as at other times; when lo,
above all the thoughts of my heart, an Arrow of Conviction was suddenly shot
into my Conscience, which so startled, wounded, and disquieted it, as it is now
beyond the power of any but Christ himself to settle and satisfy it.

V. Character.
Fifthly, This spiritual internal voice of Christ is energetical, great and
mighty in power, piercing the heart, cleaving as it were the very reins; full
of efficacy to the Soul that hears it. The power of God comes along with this
voice of God. You read Hebr. 4. 12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged Sword; piercing even to the dividing asunder of the
Soul and Spirit, of the Joints and Marrow. Now this efficacy is not inherent in
the Word it self, it works not thus as a natural Agent, then all would feel
this power that come within the sound of it. No, this comes from the Spirit of
Christ, speaking in it to the Sinners Conscience; when it is the administration
of the Spirit, then it becomes thus efficacious. You read in Psalm 29. from v.
3. to 10. of the wonderful efficacy of God's providential voice; the voice of
the Lord is powerful; The voice of the Lord is full of majesty; it breaks the
Cedars, divides the flames of fire, shakes the wilderness, makes the Hynds to
calve. This the providential voice of God in the winds, thunders, and
lightnings can do; but alas, what is this to the efficacy of his spiritual
voice? What is the breaking of the Cedars of Lebanon to the breaking of the
heart of a Sinner? what is the shaking of the Trees in the wilderness, to the
fears of wrath to come, which shake the Souls of convinced Sinners, and make
their very hearts to tremble? Acts 16. 30. What is the dividing of the flames
of fire, to the dividing of a Soul from its beloved Lusts? The weapons of our
warfare (says the Apostle) are mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Here be the glorious effects of this
voice, which plainly discover from whom it comes. The voice of God is no less
to be admired in its magni^icent effects, in the new Creation, than in the
first Creation, with which the Apostles compares it 2 Cor. 4. 6. God that
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts. It
was mavelous to see, at the word of Christ, Lazarus, that was dead in his
Grave, to come forth bound in his Grave-cloths; and no less to see a Soul dead
in sin, bound in the bonds of corruption, at a word of Christ to arise, and
come forth with spiritual life, John 5. 25. The dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live.

VI. Character.
This spiritual voice of Christ is so convictive to the Conscience of a Sinner,
that it puts a final end to all shifts and evasions. Whilst Man only spoke, the
Soul had a thousand shifts to evade and put off what was spoken; but now all
Disputes and Debates are at an end. No more Subterfuges and cunning Evasions
now. The Spirit, when he comes, he shall convince the World of sin, John 16.
8. The word signifies to convince by demonstration; and that is, to show a
thing to be impossible to be otherwise than we represent it to be. Formerly
when the Terrors of God were threatened against sin, the shuffling heart was
wont to say, This concerns me no more than others; if it go ill with me, it
will go ill with thousands as well as me. It Is true, this is my Evil, and who
is without them? I have some evils in me, but yet I have some good too. But no
sooner does the Spirit speak conviction to the Conscience, but all these pleas
are out of doors. It may be the state of the Sinner's Soul was doubtful to him
before, but it is not so now. It had some fears of Hell, but balanced with
some vain hopes of Heaven. But now the Debate is ended, the great Question
determined, Whatever I am, or have, whatever Duties I have done, and whatsoever
sins I have avoided, I see I am not regenerated, I am in my natural Christless
state, and except I be changed I must be damned. This was the effect of Christ's
convictive voice unto Paul, Romans 7. 9. I was alive without the Law once, but
when the Commandment came, sin revived and I died. He had read the Law many a
time, and had the litteral knowledge of it; but under these things his vain
hopes lived and flourished, until the spiritual sense of the Law came home to
his heart by the teaching and voice of the Spirit, and then his vain hopes gave
up the ghost, and his sin and guilt stared in the face of his Conscience.

VII. Character.
The voice of Christ whereof we now speak is generally and ordinarily conveyed
to the Souls of men through the Word preached, which is the chosen Organ or
Instrument of its Conveyance. We cannot absolutely and universally affirm that
Christ always speaks to men this way, but certainly this is his standing and
ordinary course, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Our Gospel came not to you in word only, but in
power, and in the Holy Ghost. Our Gospel, because preached and ministered by us;
but had that been all, it had come to you in word only, as it does to many
thousand others in the world, who hear and feel nothing in it more than what is
human; but unto you it came in power, and in the Holy Ghost; that is, our words
were the Vehicle or Organ through which the vital power of the Spirit was
conveyed into your Souls. Providence have their voices, as well as the Word;
and sometimes the voice of Christ has accompanied the voice of Providence, to
the conversion of men's Souls; but this is more rare and unusual: The
established and ordinary way of Christ's speaking to the hearts of Sinners is
by the Word, and especially the Word preached, which upon that very account and
consideration, as it is the Organ of conveying the voice and power of Christ to
the Soul, is therefore called the power of God to salvation, Romans 1. 16. This
Instrument the Lord generally (...) and honors for the conveyance of spi^itual
life into the Souls of men, though it be despised and contemned in the world.
The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us
which are saved it is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. i. e. the chosen
Instrument by which the saving power of God communicates it self to the Souls
of men: And although God may exert his saving power through Providence, yet we
seldom or never find he does so where the Word may be had, but is despised and
neglected. And truly herein God consults our peace and satisfaction; for
suppose he should make use of another medium, as a voice from Heaven, etc. and
after Calling, (which is an usual case) the called Soul should question all,
and say, How do I know b^t all this may be a Delusion? may not Satan impose
upon poor Mortals; and this voice from Heaven be a counterfeit voice? my
Eternal estate depends upon it, and I had need to be sure it was the very voice
of God himself. In such a case as this it would be hard to give such clear
distinguishing Characters as might be to the satisfaction of the Soul, and
clearly difference the one from the other. But now when God makes the Word his
Instrument in this matter, it yield abundantly more satisfaction, we have a
more sure Word of Prophecy, surer than a voice from Heaven, 2 P^t. 1. 19. And
though Paul was converted by a voice from Heaven, yet the Lord sends him to
A^anias to preach the Gospel to him, Acts 9. 17. The Lord will honor his Word.
Providence may make way, and prepare the heart, but the Word is the Instrument
by which the Lord puts forth his power ordinarily to salvation.

VIII. Character.
The voice of Christ leaves abiding effects and lasting impressions upon the
Soul that hears it. The words of men are scattered into the wind, but the
effects of Christ's voice are durable and lasting things; Psalm. 119. 93. I will
never forget thy Word, for by it thou have quickened me. How many hundred
Sermons have we heard, and all those excellent Truths vanished away as a Dream?
Oh, but if ever thou heardest Christ speaking to thy heart in any Sermon, or
Prayer; to be sure that will stick by thee for ever: His words are sealed upon
the Soul for ever, they are written in the heart, Ier. 31. 33. What Job wished
concerning his words, that is really performed in the words of Christ, they are
written as in the Rock for ever. We have slippery Memories, but the weakest
Memory will and must retain the words of Christ, spoken to the heart by his
Spirit, for they are sealed upon it. Job 33. 16. He seals their instructions,
and this secures them. Thus you have the innate Characters of Christ's voice.

Fourthly, I shall next speak unto the personal Objects unto whom Christ
ordinarily directs this his internal, efficacious, and saving Voice or Call.
And although it be true that the Spirit of Christ is a free Agent, acting with
the greatest liberty, and calls whom he will, according to that, John 3. 8.
The wind blows where it lists. And it is true de facto, That Christ has
made some of all sorts and ranks of men to hear his voice; yet if we consider
the way he commonly takes, we shall find that it is very rare and seldom that
Christ directs this saving voice or call of his to the great and wise of this
world, 1 Cor. 1. 26. You see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. He says not any,
but not many. Some Christ does call, Lest (as one notes) the world should think
that Christians were deceived through their simplicity and weakness. One rich
Joseph of Arimathea; one honorable Ni^odemus, but not many. Men of the
greatest fame and renown in the world have been the greatest and fiercest
Enemies against Christ. Gallen the chief Physician, Porphyry the chief
Aristotelian, Plotinus the chief Platonist, Lybanus and Lucian the chief
Orators, were all the professed Enemies of Christ. Two things make a man great
in the eye of the world; The external endowments of Providence, heaping up
Riches and Honors upon the outward man; and internal gifts and endowments of
the mind, adorning the inward man, as strong Reason, sharpness of Wit, etc.
when both these meet (as many times they do) in one and the same person, they
make him great in the eye of the world, and usually in his own eyes too; yea,
too great to stoop to the simplicity of the Gospel, and the humbling
self-denying terms thereof. These the Lord usually passes by, and directs his
voice to the poor; the poor receive the Gospel: God has chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, James 2. 5. And this
choice of God Christ blesses him for, Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee, O father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes;even so Father, for so it seems
good in thy sight. And indeed the wisdom of God deserves our admiration in this
dispensation. For (1.) hereby the freeness of his Grace is vindicated. None can
now pretend that any earthly excellency commends any man to God, or that the
favor of Heaven is engaged by the same motives that the respects of this world
are: For now you see the truth of that Scripture, Job 34. 19. before your eyes,
He accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the
poor, for they are all the work of his hands. Earthly Riches and Honors, as
empty things as they are, yet are too much idolized by men: What would they be,
could they procure our favor and acceptance with the Lord? (2ly,) By such a
choice as this the Lord plainly shows us, That Religion needs not worldly props
to support it. As at first it was spread by the power of God in the world by
poor contemptible men, so it is still upheld without human policy or riches.
The church is called the Congregation of the poor, Psalm. 74. 20. The Lord will
have us know that he is able to maintain and carry on his counsels in the world
without the wealth of rich men, the authority of great men, or the policies of
wise men; he needs them not. (3ly,) By this choice he pours contempt upon those
things which are most admired among men: So he tells us, 1 Cor. 1. 27. God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to confound the things that are mighty. And certainly,
shame and confusion of face will cover the great ones of this world, in the
world to come: when they shall see those poor Christians, whom they contemned
and scorned upon earth, as not worthy to come into their presence, to be so
infinitely preferred before them in the favor of God. In a word, this
efficacious spiritual voice of Christ is directed but to a few, even of the
many that sit within the sound and call of the Gospel, Matthew. 22. 14. Many are
called, but few are chosen. Christ's flock is a little flock. There be many
Birds of prey, to one Bird of Paradise: Many common Pebles, to one Saphir or
Diamond. It Is not for us to dispute the Reason, but to adore the Sovereignty of
God in this matter. And of those few whom he calls, the greatest part are of
the lower rank and order of men. The glitter and dazel of this world blinds the
eyes of the greatest. Extremity of pinching wants, diverts the mind of the very
lowest; but betwixt these two extremes there is a third sort of persons whom
the Lord most usually calls.

Fifthly, If it be queried why the voice and call of Christ should be directed
to this person rather than to that? Certainly it is not from any dignity or
excellency outward, or inward, that Christ sees in one above another; for all
are shut up under the same common sin and misery of the fall; and therefore the
Apostle told the Ephesians, who had heard and answered the voice of Christ;
That they were by nature children of wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. If it
were not so, Man would have something to glory in before God; but Christ
resolves this whole dispensation into its proper cause, the good pleasure of
the Divine Will, Matthew. 11. 26. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. This good pleasure of the Will of God sometimes orders those to hear the
voice of his Son, that seem to stand at a far greater distance and
improbability to hear it than others do. It Is said of the Ephesians, that they
were a far off, Ephesians. 2. 13. yet they heard the voice of Christ; when that
discreet Scribe, Mark 12. 34. who was not far from the Kingdom of God, and
Agrippa, Acts 26. 28. who almost or within a very little was persuaded to be a
Christian, never heard it; therefore it is said, Matthew. 8. 11, 12. Many shall
come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; but the children of the Kingdom shall be cast
out into outer darkness. O marvelous dispensation! Many a poor Soul under the
greatest disadvantages, a poor Servant that has but little time and multitudes
of encumbrances, yet such a one is often called effectually by this voice of
Christ; when those that enjoy multitudes of opportunities and have abundance of
time lying upon their Hands, which they know not what to do with; who have the
choicest Books at command, yet hear nothing; feel nothing amidst all these
advantages to any purpose; all this is wholly to be resolved into the good
pleasure of the Will of God.

Sixthly, In the next place, let us view the effects of this voice of Christ
upon the Souls of Men, and we shall find diverse remarkable effects wrought upon
the Heart by it.

I. Effect.
And the first Effect of the voice of Christ, is Conviction upon the
Conscience; Conviction both of sin and misery, John 16. 9. The Spirit when he
comes, shall convince the World of sin. This is a voice of terror, it strikes
dead the vain hopes of a sinner, Romans 7. 9. Now the Soul that was before secure
and quiet, becomes the seat of trouble and anxiety. It Is true, there was a
general Conviction of sin before, they knew that all are sinners; that they
denied not; but alas, this general Conviction is quite another thing to what
the Soul feels now; now it can shift and wave the matter no longer. This voice
of Christ shows them their iniquities, and how they have exceeded, as the
expression is, Job 36. 8, 9. exceeded in number, and exceeded in heinousness of
aggravation: A general Conviction of sin, affects a Man no more than the sight
of a painted Lion upon a Sign-post; but when a particular Conviction is set on
upon the Conscience by this special inward voice of Christ; sm is now like a
living Lion meeting a Man in the way, and roaring dreadfully upon him. This is
the first Effect of Christ's voice, and is introductive unto the

II. Effect.
Which is, humiliation, and contrition of Heart for sin; those threats of
Scripture against sin and sinners, which were wont to be slighted, are now
trembled at; those Jews, Acts 2. 37. to whose Hearts Christ spoke in Peter's
Sermon, as soon as ever they heard his voice, sounding Conviction in their
Consciences, they were presently pricked at the Heart; no Sword, or Poyniard
can make such a wound, and put a poor creature into such pain as a sight of sin
will do; therefore Zach. 12. 10. they are said to mourn for Christ as for an
only Son. Now this is the glorious prerogative of Jesus Christ, to be able to
reach and wound the Heart with a word: The voice of Man cannot do it; but the
Spirit of a Man lies naked and open both to be wounded and healed by a word
from the Mouth of Christ. No sooner has a poor sinner heard the awful voice of
Conviction spoken to his Conscience by the Lord Jesus, but he feels himself
sick at Heart; home he goes from that Sermon, by which Christ spoke effectual
Conviction to him, crying, O sick, sick; my Soul is distressed, because of sin.
There is indeed a great difference in the depth and degrees of this contrition
and humiliation; it soaks deeper into some Hearts than others, and holds them
longer under it; but certain it is, whoever has heard the convincing voice of
Christ; he feels so much sorrow for sin as for ever separates him from the love
of it.

III. Effect.
Thirdly, This voice of Christ rouzes and awakens the careless and sluggish
mind, to the greatest solicitude and thoughtfulness after deliverance, and
escape from the danger that hangs over it, Acts 16. 30. Trembling and
astonished, he cried out, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? All the powers of
the Soul run into solicitude and care about deliverance. You shall generally
observe in convinced and humbled sinners, three evident signs of extraordinary
solicitude about Salvation. (1.) There is a strong intention of their minds and
thoughts, they stand night and day like a Bow at the full bent; their thoughts
are still poring upon this matter; their sleep departs, for their sin and
danger is ever before them. (2ly,) It appears by their searching
inquisitiveness about the way of escape; the question they still carry with
them from company to company, where they meet with any whom they judge able to
resolve or direct them, is this; What course shall I take? What shall I do? Is
there any hope for such a one as I? Did you ever know a Soul in my condition?
(3ly,) It appears by the little notice they take at this time of their outward
troubles and afflictions; which it may be are strong and sharp enough to
overwhelm them at another time; but now they take little notice of them. Sin
lies so heavy, that it makes heavy afflictions lie light.

IV. Effect.
A fourth Effect of the voice of Christ, is encouragement and hope, putting the
Soul upon the use of means in order to the attainment of Christ and Salvation;
for it is an inviting as well as a convicting voice; and this is a remarkable
difference betwixt the voice of Christ and the voice of Satan; with respect to
sin. Satan labors to cut off all hope, and strike the Soul dead under despair
of mercy; as well knowing that if he can cut off hope, all emotions and
endeavors of the Soul after Christ are effectually stopped, and at a dead stand;
but how much convincing terrors soever there are in the voice of Christ, there
is always something left behind it upon the Heart to breed and support hope.
And truly the Soul amidst these sad circumstances has great need of some
encouragement; accordingly, the Lord usually after sharp convictions, sets on
upon the Soul such a word as that, John 6. 37. Him that comes to me I will in
no wise cast out; for I came down from Heaven not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me. Wherein Christ offers the most rational satisfaction,
and greatest encouragement imaginable; that a poor convinced sinner, if he be
made willing, shall certainly find an hearty welcome and acceptance with
Christ. For mark how he argues it on purpose for the satisfaction of such
Souls; I came not down from Heaven to do mine own Will, but the Will of him
that sent me. The force of the encouragement lies here, I and my Father are
one; one in Will, and one in Design; our Wills never did, nor possibly can jar
and clash one with another; that would be utterly repugnant to the perfect
unity that is betwixt us. Now, says he, I came down from Heaven not only to do
my own Will (which must necessarily be supposed to be intently set, and
strongly inclined to receive and save all convinced and willing sinners, this
being the very end of my Incarnation and Death) but also to do the Will of my
Father; who has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, and anointed me to
preach good tidings to the meek, Isa. 61. 1. and therefore no such Soul can
rationally doubt of a welcome reception with me. And because the fears and
jealousies of a convinced Conscience are great and many, and the Devil sets in
with them to aggravate them beyond the hopes of mercy; therefore it is usual
with the Lord, at such a time as this, to direct the convinced and trembling
sinner to such a Scripture as that, Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, etc. Making the fullness
of Christ's saving power to shine with a cheerful beam into the dark and
distressed Soul of a sinnner, from such a word as that.

V. Effect.
A fifth Effect or consequent of Christ's powerful voice, is an attractive
efficacy, or sweet allicion of the Soul to Christ, by that power and efficacy
which it communicates to the Soul, John 6. 44, 45. No Man can come to me except
the Father, which has sent me, draw him. Every Man therefore that has heard
and learned of the Father comes unto me. Mark it, this voice speedily puts the
Soul into motion after Christ; coming follows hearing: When once the Soul has
heard the voice of God, away it comes from all the engagements in the World;
all bonds and ties betwixt the Soul and sin break asunder and give way; nothing
can hold it from Christ. There is a strange restlesness in the Spirit of Man,
nothing but Christ can center and quiet it.

VI. Effect.
And then lastly, The last Effect of Christ's voice or call is sweet rest and
consolation to the inner Man. When once the Soul is come home to Christ by the
efficacy of this heavenly call or voice, it enters into peace, Heb. 4. 3. We
which have believed do enter into rest; not only shall, but do enter into rest.
As the first Effect of Christ's voice was terror and great trouble to the Soul,
so the last Effect is peace; it puts the Soul into the most excellent position
in the World, for comfort and joy; it never stood upon such ground before; for
this vocation, stands betwixt predestination, and glorification, Romans 8. 30.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. See here
into what a blessed Mount of vision the voice of Christ calls the Souls of
sinners? where let the Soul look backward, or forward, from eternity to
eternity, there is nothing but a vision of peace before its Eyes. This call of
God points it backward to Gods eternal choice, which by this very call it is
now manifest he made of that Soul before the World was; and it also points
forward, to that eternal glory unto which God is leading it. These are the
Effects of this Almighty voice of Christ, and these the special instructions
sealed by it upon the Hearts of Men.

But now, this voice of Christ is not heard at all times, but in some special
season or hour, as Christ calls it, John 5. 25. The hour comes when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God. And elsewhere, by the Apostle, it is
called, the accepted Time, the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. And the
conjunction of the Spirit of Christ with the Word, Ordinances, or Providence
of God; but especially the Word, makes this blessed hour. The Word alone,
though never so excellently preached, conduces no more to the Conviction and
Salvation of a sinner, than the Waters of Bethesda did, when the Angel came not
down to trouble them, John 5. 4. But when the Lord pours out his Spirit with
the Word, according to that promise, Prove. 1. 23. I will pour out my Spirit
upon you, and make known my Words unto you; then Christ speaks to the Heart;
this great conjunction of the Word and Spirit makes that blessed nick, and
season of Salvation. The time of love, the time of life. Now the voice of
Christ is heard with effect; the Ordinances impregnated with convincing and
converting efficacy. There was an abundant effusion of the Spirit in the first
Age of Christianity, and then the voice of Christ was heard by multitudes of
Souls at once: There has since been a restraint of the Spirit, comparatively
speaking, whereas three thousand Souls were then converted at one Sermon;
possibly, three thousand Sermons have since been preached, and not one Soul
effectually called. This has made the Church like a Wilderness, a Land of
drouth; and so it is like to remain, until the Spirit be poured upon us from on
high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field; according to that promise, Isa.
32. 15. And such a time we expect, Lord hasten it; when the waters of the
Ordinances shall be healed, and every thing that lives, which moves,
whithersoever the River shall come, shall live. And fishers shall stand upon it
from Engedi, even unto Eneglaim, they shall be a place to spread forth nets,
their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great Sea,
exceeding many, Ezekiel. 47. 9, 10. Then Ministers shall no longer fish with
Angles, catching now one, then another; but shall spread forth their nets, and
enclose whole shoals, multitudes of Converts; in the mean time there are some
signal periods, and happy seasons, wherein Christ utters his Almighty voice
in the World; but that season is utterly unforeknown to Man; we cannot say when
it will come, but are to wait for it, as the Man did at the pool of Bethesda.
Ministers must preach in hope, wait in hope, if at any time God will give the
people repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. We are often mistaken in our conjectures, when
we have made the best preparations, and find a more than ordinary enlargedness
of Spirit, we are apt to conclude certainly this is the blessed hour wherein
Christ will speak to the Heart as we do to the Ear; but we oft-times find our
selves mistaken, yet we must wait in hope, and so must our people. Such a happy
time may come, and when it does, it will be a day for ever to be remembered;
because then the first actual application of Christ will be made to your Souls;
without which all that the Father had done in Election, and the Son in his
meritorious Redemption, had been of no benefit or advantage to your Souls: And
therefore you shall find that this work of the Spirit stands betwixt both those
works, and makes them both effectual to our Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 2. This is
that blessed hour upon which your eternal blessedness depends; eternity will be
taken up in blessing God for this hour; it will be celebrated for ever in your
praises in the World to come. O what an influence has this hour into all
eternity! The hearing of this voice of Christ, effectually opens the Cabinet
counsels of Heaven, and brings to light the eternal counsels of God concerning
you, 1 These. 1. 4, 5. Knowing brethren, beloved, your election of God: for our
Gospel came not to you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost.
This gives greater assurance of the eternal love of God to a Man's Soul, than
the sweetest smile of providence, or any oraculous voice from Heaven can do.
This is the time of life, the day of your Spiritual Resurrection, John 5. 25. A
greater and more glorious Resurrection by far than that of your bodies at the
last day; ^o much greater as the value of your Souls is above your Bodies. As
also, because the blessedness of your Corporeal Resurrection depends upon this
your Spiritual Resurrection by the voice of Christ. Dreadful will the voice of
Christ be at the Resurrection of your Bodies, except you first hear this vital
voice of Christ quickening your Souls on Earth with spiritual life. To conclude,
this is the great Era or head of account from which you are to reckon and date
all your spiritual sanctified mercies; for as the Lord said unto the Jews, Hag.
2. 19. From henceforth will I bless you. So says the Lord to you, from this
hour wherein you have heard and obeyed the voice of Christ, will I bless you
for ever, with all Spiritual blessings in heavenly places in him.

I. Use for Lamentation.
This Point presents us with abundant matter of Lamentation and mourning over
the greatest part of those that sit under the sound of the Gospel; but yet as
Christ speaks of the Jews, John ^. 37. who have not heard the voice of God at
any time; the Ministerial voice of Christ they hear daily; but this Efficacious
Internal voice, which makes the Ministerial voice, the Word of Life and Power,
they have not heard. The Gospel, to the most of our hearers, is but an empty
sound; this is a sad symptom, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost; in whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of
them that believe not, etc. This hiding of the Gospel is not opposed to the
external administration of it, nor yet to the understanding of the true sense
and meaning of the truths delivered by it; but only to that internal efficacy
which is here called the hearing of Christ's voice. Our people are generally
well satisfied when they have heard a Sermon, much more if they can remember
something of it; though the Lord has not spoken one truth they have heard,
home to their Hearts. Now this is a sad case, and God grant it be not that very
judgment threatened, Isa. 6. 9. Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye
indeed, but perceive not. So that hearing the mere voice of Man, without
feeling the power of God, is all one as if we heard not. Reflect sadly upon
this, you that sit as unconcerned under the Word as the Seats you sit upon. God
speaks once, yea, twice, but man perceives it not. Well, the eternal Decrees
and Counsels of God are now executing upon the Souls of Men under the Gospel.
As many as are ordained to eternal Life, shall believe and feel the power of
Gods truths upon their Hearts, Acts 13. 48. And methinks it should be of a
startling consideration, when you shall see others struck to the Heart, cast
into fears and tremblings, by the same Word that does not in the least touch
your Hearts. It may be you think this is but fancy and melancholy; that very
thought is an artifice of Satan to blind your Eyes. I am sure Christ makes
another use of it, when he told the secure and self-righteous Jews, Matthew. 21.
32. John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not;
but the Publicans and Harlots believed him: and ye when ye had seen it,
repented not afterward that ye might believe him. q. d. What shift did you make
to quiet your Consciences, when you saw other poor sinners so humbled, and
bronght to Faith under John's Ministry? It Is strange there should be no
reflections in your Consciences upon your own state and condition; but thus it
must be, one shall be taken, and another left; to some it shall be the savor
of life unto life, and to others the savor of death unto death. O who can look
over so great a part of a Congregation, without melting bowels of compassion?
Considering that unto this day the Lord has not given them Eyes to see, nor
Ears to hear: They have heard multitudes of Sermons; they have heard also what
effects they have had upon other Men's Hearts, but none upon theirs. O that such
poor Souls would cry to the Lord Jesus, in such Language as that, Cant. 8. 13.
The companions hearken to thy voice, cause me to hear it. Lord let me not sit
under the Word any longer, deaf to the voice of thy Spirit in it. Open and
unstop the Ears of my Soul, that I may hear thy voice and feel thy power;
otherwise, the external ministerial voice will be ineffectual to my Salvation.
'Twill be but a Rattle to still and quiet my Conscience for a little while, and
a dreadful aggravation of my misery in the issue.

II. Use of Information.
Secondly, The Point before us presents five other Truths with equal clearness
to ous Eyes.

I. Inference.
In the first Place, hence it follows, That we have this day before our Eyes a
great Seal and confirmation of the truth of the Scriptures. No miracles can
seal it firmer than the events of it do, which are visible to all that will
observe them. What you read in the Word, you may see every day fulfilled before
your Eyes; you read, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. We are unto God a sweet savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are the
savor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life. And
again, Acts 28. 24. it is observed, that when Paul in his lodgings had
expounded and testified the Kingdom of God to the people, and per^wading them
to believe from morning till-evening; it is observed, I say, that some believed
(...) things that were spoken, and some believed not. Here you see the
different, yea, contrary events of the preaching of the Gospel, according to
the Scripture account of it; it quickens some, and kills others; it brings some
to Faith, and leaves others still fixed in unbelief. Compare this account with
what is daily before your Eyes; do you not see Souls differently influenced to
contrary effects under the same word? One melting and tender, another hardened,
and wholly unconcerned? Tell me, you that are apt to ascribe all to nature, how
comes it to pass that men exercising reason alike, men that have the same
inbred fears and hopes of things eternal, who have the same passions and
affections, and are in the self same condition and state with others; yet one
Man's Heart shall be wounded and go away trembling from under the self same
word, which affects the other no more than if it had been preached among the
Tombs to the dead that lie there? Say not, some have more courage than others,
or clearer understandings, for it is most certain the Word has convinced as
rational and courageous persons as those upon whom it has had no such effect.
I doubt not but the Jailer that was cast into such tremblings and astonishment,
Acts 16. 30. was as stout and rugged a person as any to whom Paul usually
preached; his very office bespake him such a Man; wonder not what it is that
makes Men fright at such a sound, which you hear as well as they, but it.
affects you not: The Lord speaks in that voice to their Hearts, but not to
yours; and so it must be according to the account the Scripture gives us of the
contrary events of the Gospel upon them that hear it; which is, I say, a fair
and firm Seal of the truth of the Scriptures, and highly worth the due
observation of all Men.

II. Inference.
What dignity has God stamped on Gospel Ordinances, in making them the organs
and mediums through and by which Christ speaks life to dead Souls! This greatly
exalts the dignity of the Gospel, and deservedly endears it to all our Souls. I
deny not but God can convey Spiritual life immediately without them; but though
he has not tied up himself, yet he has tied us up to a diligent and constant
attendance upon them; and that with the deepest respect and reverence to them,
Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Behold, how
the sin is graduated, and aggravated to the hight of sinfulness. The contempt
of the Gospel runs much higher than Men are aware of. We think it no great
matter to neglect or contemn a messenger of Jesus Christ; but that contempt
flies in the very face and authority of Christ, who gave them their
Commissions; yea, in the very face of God the Father, who gave Christ his
Commission. Christ speaks in and by his Ministers, they are as his mouth, Ier.
15. 19. Moreover, the sin sticks at our own Souls, and we injure them as well
as Christ: For the Word preached is his appointed Instrument to convey
spiritual life, the best of Blessings to our Souls. Upon which account it is
called the Word of life, Phil. 2. 16. and the power of God to salvation, Romans
1. 16. We then militate against our life and salvation when we despise and
neglect the Ordinances of God. It Is good for men to lie under them, and
continually wait on them; who knows when the Spirit of God will breathe life to
your Souls through them? What if yet you have found no such benefit from them?
the very next opportunity may be the time of life, the appointed season of your
salvation. Bring your carnal Relations to them, as they did their sick and
diseased Friends in the days when Christ was on Earth, laying them in the way
he was to pass. Christ will honor his Ordinances; see that dou don't despise
them. I think no Age was ever deeper drencht in the guilt of this sin than the
present Age is.

III. Inference.
What a fearful Judgment is the removing the Gospel from a Nation, seeing it is
in and by the Gospel Christ speaks life to the Souls of men!

The Spirit of God and the Word of God, usually come and go together: when
therefore these are gone, no more Conversions are to be expected. Dreadful is
the case of that people, Prove. 29. 18. Where no Vision is the people perish.
Those are direful Menaces, Isa. 8. 16. Bind up the Law, seal up the Testimony
among my Disciples. And Rev. 2. 5. I will remove thy Candlestick out of its
place. Better the Sun were taken out of the Heavens, than the Gospel out of the
Church. O England! provoke not thy God to execute upon thee the Judgment here
threatened. Think not God has made such a Settlement of the Gospel, that it
shall never be removed, however you use it. Your advocate in Heaven has
obtained it for you for a time upon trial; if you bring forth fruit well, you
and the Generations to come shall be happy in it: if not, this blessed Tree
which has brought forth so many Mercies to you and yours, must and will be cut
down, Luke 13. 8. yea, and even now is the ax laid at the root of the Tree,
Matthew. 3. 10. It Is an allusion to a Carpenter that throws down the Ax and Saws
at the root of the Tree he intends to cut down. The only ground of hope which
remains with us this day, is, that there are some Buds appearing, some Fruits
putting forth, and if there be a blessing in the Bud, the Lord will spare it,
according to Isa. 65. 8. But these hopes are balanced with many sad symptoms,
which may make us tremble to think what God is about to do with such a sinful
Nation.

IV. Inference.
Those that have heard Christ's voice and call in the Gospel, have no reason to
be discouraged from going to Christ in the way of Faith. Christ's Call is a
sufficient warrant to believe. Many poor Souls are staggered in their work of
Faith, by the fear of Presumption; an ugly Objection which they know not how to
clear themselves of: But certainly, this above all Considerations in the world
enervates this Objection of Presumption. Then men presume when they act without
a Call or Warrant; but if Christ have spoken to your hearts by the voice of his
Spirit, you have the best warrant in the world to go to him. What though you
know not the Issue? yet your Obedience is due to his Call. By faith Abraham,
when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an
Inheritance, obeyed, and he went out not knowing whither he went, Heb^. 11. 8.
So must you. It is not necessary to your going to Christ, that you must be
ascertained before hand what the Event and Issue thereof shall be: Your
believing is an act of Obedience to the voice of Christ that calls you. When
therefore Satan shall object, What, such a wretched Soul as thou go to Christ!
can thou imagine to find entertainment with him whom thou have so abused and
deeply wronged? Thy answer should be ready, It Is true, I have been a vile
wretch, and have deeply wronged the Lord Jesus; but Christ has spoken to my
heart, he has called me, and therefore it can be no presumption in me to go at
his Call; but contrariwise it would be flat Rebellion against his Sovereign
Command to refuse to believe, and come unto him; yea, it would be a greater sin
than any of my former sins have been. Beside, had the Lord Jesus no intention
of mercy (as thou maliciously insinuatest) toward my Soul, he would never have
spoken to my heart by conviction and persuasion, as he has done.

V. Inference.
If no Soul can open to Christ until it hear his powerful spiritual voice, then
the change made upon men by conversion is wholly supernatural.

The rise of Faith is from this power of Christ, not from the nature of Man,
John 1. 13. Proud Nature arrogates this power and honor to it self, but
without any ground; for though some things may be done by men in their natural
state, which have a remote tendency to conversion and spiritual life, yet it
can never open to Christ savingly without a power communicated from himself.
There is a total impotence in Nature to produce such an effect as this. The
Scripture speaks it roundly; telling us, The Natural man cannot (of himself)
know the things that are of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Cannot believe; for Faith is not
of our selves, it is the gift of God, John 6. 44. Cannot obey, Romans 8. 7. The
carnal Mind is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Cannot
speak a good word, Matthew. 12. 34. Cannot think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
What a poor impotent thing then is the Natural man? who can neither believe,
nor obey, speak a good word, or think a good thought by any natural power of
his own.

Say not it is against Reason for God to require men to do what they cannot, and
then damn them for not doing it. For (1.) though man has lost his ability to
obey, yet God has not lost his right to command: for at that rate any man
might shake off the yoke of God's Sovereignty by disabling himself through his
own sin, for the duties of Obedience. (2.) Though man has not a sufficient.
power, yet there is in him an intolerable pride, which puffs him up with a
conceit that he has what he has not, and can do what he cannot The Command is
therefore of great use to check this pride, and convince man of his impotency,
Rev. 3. 17. (3.) Every man can do more than he does toward his own Conversion.
And therefore it is good for men to be urged by the Commands to all those
Duties, in the use and observance whereof Christ ordinarily comes into the Soul
by a supernatural power.

II. Use for Exhortation.
This Point gives a loud Call to all that are within the sound of the Gospel,
especially to such as begin to feel some power accompanying the Word to their
hearts, diligently to hearken to the voice of Christ, and obey his first Call
without further delay, Rev. 2. 7. He that has an ear to hear let him hear.
It Is a dreadful and dangerous thing to turn away the Ear from him that speaks
from Heaven, Hebr. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if
they escaped not that refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. See that ye refuse
not; the Caution implies the Matter to be very weighty, and a neglect or
refusal in this matter to be highly dangerous. Turn not away your Ear, be not
guilty of the least aversation, slight, or neglect in so great and important a
Concern. And truly this Caution is no more than needs; for Satan is never more
busy with the Souls of men, than when Christ gives them their first Call to
himself.

O what a thick succession of Discouragements do impetuously assault the Soul
at this time! Art thou young? then he insinuates that it is too soon for thee
to mind the serious things of Religion. This will extinguish all thy pleasure
in a dull melancholy; thou may have time enough hereafter to mind these
matters. This Temptation Augustine confesses kept him off many years from
Christ. But certainly, if thou art old enough to be damned, thou art not too
young to mind Christ and Salvation. There are Graves just of thy length, and
abundance of young Sprigs, as well as old Loggs, burning in Hell flames.
Besides, all those godly young ones which turned to the Lord betime, as Josiah,
Abijah, Timothy, and many more, will be your Judges, and condemn you in the
great day. Never any repented that they opened to Christ too soon: Thousands
have repented that they kept him out so long. Art thou old? then he scares thee
with the manifold sins of thy youth, and rouls them as blocks in thy way to
Christ. And whether young or old, he will be sure to present the Sufferings,
Reproaches, and Persecutions of Godliness to discourage thee from harkening to
the voice of Christ. But what are the Sufferings of Christ here, to those
Sufferings from Christ hereafter? what are the pains of Mortification, to the
pains of Damnation? Besides, all the Promises of Christ, promises of strength,
comfort, success, etc. go along with the Command of Christ to believe, and
shall surely be performed to the obedient Soul. See therefore that thou refuse
not his voice.

III. Use for Trial.
But you will say, All that hear this spiritual voice of Christ are said to
live, John 5. 25. Now I am much in the dark, whether ever this vital voice of
Christ has founded unto my Soul. Alas, I feel little, if any thing, of the
spiritual life in my Soul. Quest.
I am dead and dark. By what means does the Life of Christ discover it self in
the Souls of Men?

I Answer, Answ.
There are diverse Signs of spiritual life, and blessed is the Soul that finds
them.

First, 1. Sign.
There is a spiritual sense and feeling flowing from, and accompanying the
spiritual life. I speak not only of the sense and feeling of comfort; for many
a Soul that is in Christ, feels little of that; but certainly there is a sense
and feeling of the burthensomness of sin, Romans 7. 24. And it is well that we can
feel that; for there are Multitudes in the world that are past feeling, Is^ 6.
9. 10. It Is a sign Christ has spoken to thy heart, if sorrows for sin begin to
load it.

Secondly, 2. Sign.
Spiritual Motions toward Christ are a sign of spiritual life; at least that
God is about that quickening work of Faith upon thy Soul, John 6. 45. Every man
that bath beard and learned of the Father comes unto me. The effectual voice
of God sets the Soul in motion toward Christ; the Will is moving after him;
the Desires are panting for him. The voice of God makes the Soul that hears it,
restless. As for others, their Wills are fixed, there is no moving of them,
John 5. 40. Now consider how it is with thee, Reader: Art thou one that art
weighing and pondering the terms of the Gospel? struggling through
discouragements and temptations to come to Christ upon his own terms, lifting
up thy heart to him for power to believe, crying with the Sponse, Draw me, I
will run after thee? This is a comfortable sign Christ has spoken to thy heart.

Thirdly, 3. Sign.
A Spirit of Prayer is an Evidence of spiritual life, as the effect of Christ's
voice to thy Soul. As Soon as ever Christ had spoken effectually unto Paul's
heart, the first effect that appeared in him as a sign of spiritual life, was
Prayerbreath, Acts 9. 11. Behold, he prays. God has no still-^orn Children.
Measure thy self by this Rule: Time was when thou could say a Prayer, and
wast very well satisfied with it, whether thou had any Communion with God in
it, or no; but is it so still? Is there not an holy restlesness of spirit after
God since the time that his Word came home to thy heart? Surely thou eanst
remember when it was not with thee as it is now.

Fourthly, There is a spiritual relish, 4. Sign.
a divine gust resulting from the spiritual life, which is also evidential of
it; Omnis vita gustu ducitur. If God have spoken life to thy Soul, there will
be in it an agreeable pleasure and delight in spiritual things, Psalm. 63. 5. My
Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, etc. Now thy thoughts can
feed with pleasure upon spiritual things, which they nauseated before.

Fifthly, Spiritual aversations, 5. Sign.
as well as spiritual inclinations, speak spiritual life. Every Creature has
an aversation to that which is noxious and destructive to it. Now there is
nothing so destructive and dangerous to the spiritual life as sin; that is the
deadly poison which the renewed Soul dreads, Psalm. 19. 13. Keep back thy
servant also from presumptuous sins. It cries out as a man that finds himself
upon the brink of a Pit, or edge of a Precipice; Keep back thy Servant. Such
aversations to sin and tremblings under temptations tending thereunto, are
comfortable Sign Christ has spoken life to thy Soul.

Lastly, Heavenly tendencies and propensions after God are an excellent Sign
thy Soul has heard his voice, and been quickened with spiritual life by it.
Sanctification is a Well of water springing up into everlasting life, John 4.
24. If thou have seen the beauty, felt the power, and heard the voice of
Christ, thy soul, like an uncentred Body, will be still propending,
gravitating, and inclining Christ-ward. When thou have once heard his effectual
Call, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me, thy Soul will be continually echoing with
the Spouse, Rev. 22. 17. Come Lord Jesus. The Spirit and the Bride say come,
and let him that hears, say Come. A sweeter Sign of thy hearing Christ's
voice can hardly be found in the Soul of man, than restless longing to be with
Christ in a state of perfect freedom from sin, and full fruition of the beloved
and blessed Jesus.

SERMON IX.
Revel. 3. 20. -- If any Man hear my voice [and open the door,]
THE powerful voice of Christ is the Key that opens the door of the Soul to
receive him. The opening of the heart to receive Christ is the main design
aimed at in all the external and internal administrations of the Gospel and
Spirit.

The Gospel has two great Designs and Intentions. One is, To open the heart of
God to men, and to show them the everlasting counsels of Grace and Peace which
were hid in God from Ages and Generations past; that all men may now see what
God had been designing and contriving for their happiness in Christ before the
world was; Ephesians. 3. 9. To make all men see what is the fellowship of the
Mystery which from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, who created
all things by Jesus Christ, to the intent that now unto the Principalities and
Powers in heavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of
God. The next Intention and Aim of the Gospel is to set open the heart of man
to receive Jesus Christ, without which all the glorious discoveries of the
eternal Counsels and gracious Contrivances of God for and about us, would
signify nothing to our real advantage. Christ standing, knocking, and speaking
by his Spirit (of which we have before treated) receive their Success, and
attain their End, when the heart opens it self by Faith to receive him, and not
till then. Hence note,

IX. DOCT.
That the opening of the heart to receive Christ by Faith, 9. Doct.
is the great design and aim of the Gospel.

This is the Mark to which all the Arrows in the Gospel Quiver are levelled;
the Center unto which those blessed Lines are drawn, John 20. 31. These things
are written that you might believe, and believing might have life through his
Name. All those precious Truths that are written in the Scriptures are to bring
you to Faith. The great aim of the Spirit in his Illuminations, Convictions,
Humiliations, etc. are the very same thing, John 6. 29. This is the work of
God, that you believe. It Is not only Opus Deo dignum, a work worthy of such an
Author, but it is that on which God's eye is fixed in his workings upon us; the
end and aim of his work.

Great persons have great designs. This is the glorious project of the great
God, and every Person in the Godhead is engaged and concerned in it. (1.) The
Father has his hand in this work, and such a hand as without it no heart could
ever open or move in the least toward Christ, John 6. 44. No man can come unto
me (says Christ) except my Father, which has sent me, draw him. None but he
that raised up Christ from the dead, can raise up a dead heart unto saving
Faith in him. (2.) The sons hand is in this work, he is not only the Object but
the Author of our Faith, 1 John 5. 20. We know that the son of God is come, and
has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true, and we are in
him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and
eternal life. (3) And then for the Spirit, he comes from Heaven designedly and
expressly to convince Sinners of their need of Christ, and beget Faith in them,
John 16. 9. So that this appears to be the great design of Heaven, the drist
and level both of the Word and Works of God. Touching this design of the
Gospel, I shall here speak, endeavoring to open this great and glorious
project of Heaven in the ensuing Properties of it; which are 1. The Greatness
of it. 2. The Difficulty of it. 3. The Instruments employed in it. 4. The Scope
and aim of it. And


First, Of the Greatness of this design of God; we little understand what a
mavelous thing is done in the Earth, when the heart of a Sinner is brought to
close with Christ by Faith. It would transport us with admiration, did we
thoroughly consider it. Well may the Apostle place it in the first rank of all
the glorious and wonderful works of God, as he does 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the
mystery of godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World. Observe
with what works of wonder Faith is here ranked and associated. It is an
astonishing work of God that ever God should be manifested in flesh, that he
that thunders in the Clouds should be heard crying in a Cradle; that he who is
over all, God blessed for ever, should become a man. It is astonishing, that
when he was taken down dead from the Cross, laid in the Sepulcher, and the
Stone sealed upon it; he should rise on the third day from the dead by his own
power. That ever the Gospel should be preached to such a miserable and sorlorn
people as the Gentiles were, the scorn and contempt of the Jews. And no less
mavelous is it to see the hearts of such poor Creatures glued so fast to
Idolatry; so perfectly dead in sin, to open to Christ upon such self-denying
terms, as to let go all they had in the world for a blessed Inheritance which
they never saw. And were not this a mavelous work of God indeed, there would
never be such joy and triumph in Heaven among the holy Angels, as there is upon
the opening of every Sinners heart to Christ, Luke 15. 7. the whole City of God
is moved with it. Heaven rings again with the joyful tidings; as soon as ever
the Will begins to bow and open to Christ, the news is quickly in Heaven, and
all the Angels of God rejoice at the tidings. As when a young Prince is born,
the Conduits run with Wine, there is Joy in every City throughout the Kingdom:
So also there is in Heaven when Christ has gotten a new habitation in the Soul
of any Sinner upon Earth. Moreover, the greatness of this design appears from
the great Rewards promised by the Lord to every Servant of his who has but the
least hand to help it on. God would never reward the Instruments so richly, if
the success of the work were not of great value in his eyes. The Ministers of
Christ may be ill rewarded by men, perfecuted and reproached for their labor;
but God will bountifully repay their pains and faithfulness, Dan. 12. 3. They
that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the Stars, and as the
brightness of the firmament for ever and ever. All these things be speak it a
very great and important design upon which the heart of God is much set.

Secondly, And then in the next place, as it is an exceeding great and
important design and work of God, so it is a very hard and difficult work in it
self; a work whose difficulties surmounts the abilities of Angels. It is
certainly a work carried on by the mighty power of God, through the greatest
oppositions imaginable. And therefore it is noted, Rev. 3. 7. that it is the
peculiar Prerogative of Jesus Christ, who only has the Key of the house of
David, to open the heart of a Sinner by Faith. Men think it is an easy thing
to believe; but if you consult the Scriptures, you will quickly be informed how
grossly you mistake the nature of this work. In Col. 2. 12. the believing Soul
is said to rise with Christ, through the faith of the operation of God, who
raised him from the dead. In the Resurrection of Christ, there was a glorious
operation of the power of God indeed; you know it astonished the world to hear
of it. The very same power that wrought that, must also be put sorth to work
this, or else it would never be wrought. So again, Ephesians. 2. 8. By Grace are ye
saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God; not of
your selves. You are no more able to believe in Christ, than you were to raise
him from the dead: No more able to come one step toward him by Faith in your
own power, than Lazarus was able to unbind himself in the Grave, and come
forth. Yea, in Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20. the work of believing is ascribed unto the
exceeding greatness of the power of God, Nothing but power can do it; no other
power but the Almighty power of God can do it: It exceeds the power of
Ministers, yea of Angels. Three things will evince the difficulty of this work,
Viz. 1. The Nature of it. 2. The Subject of it. 3. The Enemies of it.


First, The Nature of the work of Faith which is wholly supernatural; it is no
less than the gaining over the hearty and full consent of the Will to take
Jesus Christ with his yoke of Obedience, Matthew. 11. 29. and with his Cross of
Sufferings, Matthew. 16. 24. And how far these will carry a man into outward
dangers, losses, torments, and sufferings, who can tell? and all this upon the
account of an unseen happiness and glory; dearest Lusts and Corruptions must be
mortified, sweetest Pleasures and Profits in the World abandoned and forsaken,
all Reproaches, Losses, Pains and Penalties the Devil and the World can lay
upon us for Christ's sake, must be embraced and wellcomed; and can it be
supposed that any power beneath the Almighty Power of the Lord, any voice
except the efficacious voice of Christ, can prevail with the Will to give its
firm explicit consent to such difficult and self-denying terms as these?

Secondly, Consider the Subject wrought upon, viz. the dead, hard, obstinate
heart of a blind perverse sinner, an heart harder by Nature than the nether
Millstone. It is as easy to melt the most obdurate Rock into a sweet Syrup, as
it is to melt the heart of a Sinner into penitential forrows for sin. What! to
bring a dead heart to life. To make that man bitterly bewail the sins that were
his pleasure and delight, more than ever he bewailed the death of the nearest
and dearest Relation in the world! To make a proud heart renounce its own
self-righteousness, which it so dotes upon, and take all shame and reproach to
it self upon the account of sin! This is wonderful. You would think it a
strange thing to see the course of the Tide stopped with the breath of a man; but
O what a mavelous thing is here, that at the preaching of the Gospel by a
poor worm, the Lord should turn the Tide of the Will, and thus work about the
Soul to a ready compliance with his most self-denying terms and proposals!

Thirdly, And that which farther increases the difficulty of believing is the
fierce and obstinate opposition made by the Enemies of Faith: All the powers of
Hell and Earth, Devils and Men without us, are confederate and in league with
the Corruptions within us, to res^^t and hinder this work of believing. Never
is the Devil more busy than when Christ and the Soul are treating about Union.
Oh the Discouragements, Objections and Difficulties that are rolled into the
way of Faith! One while it is the highest Presumption; another while it is
impossible and utterly too late: Sometimes blasphemous injections, like fiery
Darts, are shot reeking hot out of Hell into the Soul: Otherwhile the
invincible difficulties of Religion are objected, all Losses, Torments, etc.
opposed unto this work: The Tempter casts himself into a thousand shapes to
hinder the Souls passage out of Nature unto Christ. Sometimes objecting the
greatness of sin, and sometimes the lapse and loss of the proper season and
opportunity of mercy, together with the want of due qualifications to come to
Christ. Thus, and many other ways, he endeavors to rap off the fingers of
Faith from taking hold of Christ. And as every Devil in Hell opposes this work,
so every Carnal interest we have in the world, is an Enemy to Faith. We have
Enemies enough within us, as well as without us, both conspiring together to
obstruct this work: All things increase the difficulty of believing.

Thirdly, We are next to speak of the instruments employed in this great
design; and these are 1. Principal, or 2. Subordinate.


(1.) The Principal instrument in whose efficacy the Heart is opened, is the
Spirit of God; without whom it is impossible the design should ever prosper;
neither Ordinances, Providence, or Ministers can successfully manage it
without him. If the Lord will make use of any Man for the Conversion and
Salvation of another Soul, he may rejoice in it; but withal must say as Peter
to the Jews, Acts 3. 12. Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own
power, or holiness we had made this man to walk? So may the ablest Minister in
the World say, when God blesses his labors to the conversion of any Soul; look
not upon me, as though by the strength of my reason, or power of my gifts, I
had opened thy Soul to Christ; this is the work of Gods Spirit, in whose hand I
am an instrument, 1 Cor. 3. 7. He that plants is nothing, and he that waters is
nothing. Nothing in himself, the very first stroke of conviction which is
introductive to the whole work of conversion is justly ascribed to the Spirit,
Job. 16. 9. The Spirit when be comes shall convince the world of sin. He is
the Lord of all sanctifying and gracious influences; Ordinances are but as the
sayls of a Ship, Ministers as the Seamen that manage those sayls; the Anchor
may be weighed, the sayls spread, but when all is done, there is no sailing,
till a gale come. We preach, and pray, and you hear; but there is no motion
Christward, until the Spirit of God (comparded to the wind, John 3. 8.) blow
upon them; till he illuminate the understanding with divine light, and bow the
Will by an Almighty power; there can be no Spiritual motion Heavenward. Now
the Spirit of the Lord is a free agent, tied to means, time or instruments; but
as at a certain time an Angel came down upon the waters of Bethesda and put a
healing virtue into them; so it is here: Therefore never come to any Gospel
Ordinance, without an Eye to the Spirit, on whom all their blessing and
efficacy depends. Oh, lift up your Hearts for his blessing upon the means, as
ever you expect saving benefits from them.

(2ly,) The Subordinate instrumental means by which this blessed design is
effectually managed in the World, is the Gospel Ministry, 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who then
is Paul, and who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed? This is the
ordinary stated method of begetting Faith, and though God has not tied himself
to this or that Minister, time, or place; yet he has tied us to a diligent and
constant attendance upon them, Romans 10. 14. How then shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? I confess it seems
a very unlikely means, a weak and foolish method, according to the dictate of
corrupt humane wisdom; yet by the foolishness of preaching, it pleases God to
save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. That which the wisdom of Man derides, God
makes effectual unto Salvation. And oh how many are there that will have cause
to bless God to all eternity for gifting and sending such Ministers among them,
whose Doctrine the Lord blessed unto the conversion of their Souls!

Fourthly, In the next place, let us consider the scope and intention of this
great design, wherein these instruments are employed: There are no great
designs in the World but aim at some end to be accomplished by them. Now there
are two things in the Eye and intention of this design, which are worthy of it;

(1.) The exaltation of his own grace, and the riches of his goodness before
Angels and Men to all eternity. The Name of God is never made so glorious in
this World, as it is by bringing over the Hearts of Men and Women to believe.
God reaps more glory from the faith of a poor creature that comes to Christ
empty and weary, than he does from the other works of his Hands: He has not
the like glory from the Sun, Moon, and Stars; as from such poor creatures,
whose Hearts open to Jesus Christ under the Gospel call. Thus they are fitted
to manifest the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. To the praise of the glory of
his grace, etc. God will have his rich and glorious grace praised and admired
by Angels and Men for evermore; and every converted Soul is as it were a
monument erected unto the praise of his grace. Heaven will ring with praises
for ever, that the great God would humble himself to come into the Heart of a
vile sinner, and dwell and walk therein, as the expression is, 2 Cor. 6. 16. O
this is admirable, that the high and lofty one, who inhabits eternity, will
take up his dwelling place in a poor contrite sinner, that trembles at his
Word, Isa. 57. 15.

(2ly,) The eternal Salvation and blessedness of the Soul so opened to Christ,
is also the design and aim of this work of opening the Heart, Luke 19. 9. When
the Soul of Zacheus was opened by faith, This day, says Christ, is salvation
come to this house. You do not only believe to the glory of God, but to the
Salvation of your own Souls, Heb. 10. 39. The opening of our Hearts to Christ
now, is in order to the opening of Heaven to us hereafter. This is both the
finis operis and operantis, the end of the work, and intention of the worker, 1
Cor. 1. 21. It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that
do believe. It presently puts them into a state of Salvation, though they be
not yet actually and completely saved. There is a necessary connection betwixt
Conversion and Salvation; though betwixt Conversion and complete Salvation
there may be many groaning hours, sick and sad days and nights; but full
deliverance from sin and misery is secured to the Soul in the work of Faith,
Col. 1. 27. Christ in you is the hope of glory.

Fifthly, Thus you see this great and glorious design projected and managed;
and that this is the very scope, aim, and intention of the whole Gospel, even
the opening the Hearts of sinners unto Christ by faith, will evidently appear
by considering the several parts of the Gospel which have a direct aspect upon
this design; and the declared end of the Spirit who is sent forth to make it
effectual to this very end and purpose.

(1.) To this the commands of the Gospel look; it lies full in the Eye of the
preceptive part of the Gospel, 1 Job. 3. 23. And this is his commandment, that
we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. And it is a very great
encouragement (if rightly considered) that faith is constituted a duty by a
plain Gospel precept; for this cuts off that vain pretense and plea of
presumption; What, such a vile wretch as thou (says Satan) presume to believe
in Christ! But this cuts off the plea. Here Is a command from the highest
Sovereignty, the contempt whereof Men shall answer at their utmost peril.

(2ly,) This also is the declared end and scope of the Gospel promises and
threatenings, whereby the Souls of sinners are assaulted on both sides: As for
Promises, how are all the sacred pages of the Bible adorned with them, as the
Firmament with radiant Stars! Amongst which that in the Text seems to excel in
glory, If any Man open to me, I will come in to him. Like unto which, is that
John 6. 35, 37. I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger; and he that believes on me shall never thirst; him that comes to me,
I will in no wise cast out. Such rich and excellent encouragements to faith had
never been put into the promises, but for faiths sake; and then for Gospel
threatenings, though they have a dreadful sound, yet they have a gracious
design; what a terrible thunderclap is that, John 3. 36. He that believes not
the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him? To which
another Threatening echoes with a like terrible voice, Mark 16. 16. He that
believes not shall be damned. There be dreadful things, you see, threatened in
the Gospel against unbelievers; but what is the intention of those threatenings,
but to scare Men out of their unbelief, and carnal security unto Christ? And
thus both the promises and the threatenings, though of far different natures,
conspire and meet in the self same design, even to open the Heart to Christ by
faith.

(3ly,) For the sake of this design all Gospel Ordinances and Officers are
instituted and appointed, maintained, and continued in the World unto this day:
Why did Christ at his Triumphant ascension shed forth such variety of gifts
upon Men, but that God might dwell among them? Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended
on high, thou have led captivity captive; thou have received gifts for Men;
yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them. The
whole frame of Gospel ordinances is declaredly set up for this purpose, to
bring Men to Christ, and build them up in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12:

(4ly,) All the Scripture records of converted sinners, whose Hearts God has
in any age opened, were made for this very purpose to encourage other Souls by
their examples to believe in, or open unto Christ as they did. For this purpose
that famous and memorable conversion of Paul was graciously recorded, 1 Timothy 1.
16. Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ
might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them that should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Never was any Man's Heart bolted
and made fast with stronger prejudices against Christ, than this Man's was; yet
the Spirit of the Lord opened it: O how flexible was his will! Lord what will thou have me to do? This gives great encouragement to other sinners to come in
to Christ as he did; and therefore when Men shall see other sinners receiving
Christ, and themselves continue still obstinate, and unbelieving; those very
examples which God has set before their Eyes put a dreadful aggravation upon
their unbelief; as you may see, Matthew. 21. 32. John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and harlots believed
him; and ye when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that you might believe
him. q. d. Though you saw Publicans, reputed the worst of Men, and Harlots, the
worst of Women, convinced, humbled and brought unto faith; yet these fights no
way affected your Souls; you never had one such reflection as this, Lord have
not I as much need to fly from the wrath to come, and mind the Salvation of my
own Soul as these? Will it not be a dreadful aggravation of my misery that such
as these should obtain Christ and Heaven, and I shut out?

(5ly,) To conclude, The opening of the Heart to Christ is the very end and
errand of the Spirit of God, upon whose concurrence and blessing the success of
all Ordinances depend; upon this design he is sent expressly from Heaven, to
open the understanding and consciences of sinners by conviction, John 16. 9.
For it is not in the power of the Word alone to produce this effect; thousands
of excellent Sermons may be preached, and not one Heart opened by conviction. He
is expressly sent to this end and purpose. What remains, is the Application of
this Point.

I. Use of Information.
If the opening of the Heart to Christ, be the great and direct intention and
end of the Gospel, I. Infer.
How are they deceived that bless themselves in the attainment of some lesser
ends and intentions of the Gospel, whilst the great end, (the effectual
persuasion of the Will to Christ) is not at all effected upon them! There are
some collateral strokes, some by effects, as I may call them, which the Gospel
has upon Men. It would pity a wise considerate Man to see how poor Souls hug
themselves with a conceited happiness in these lesser things, whilst they still
stick fast in the state of unregeneracy. I would seign undeceive such mistaken
wretches, who bow down under the power of self-deceit; and that in so great and
important a Point, in which their eternal Salvation is concorned. There be two
things which are excoeding apt to deceive Men in this matter, viz. 1. Partial
convictions on the Understanding. 2. Transe it motions upon the Affections.


In these two things multitudes deceive themselves, as if the whole design of
the Gospel were accomplished upon them therein. (1.) Partial Convictions upon
the Understanding; light and knowledge breaking into the mind, producing
orthodoxy of Judgment; this seems to be the effectual opening of the
Understanding to Christ, though alas, to this day they never saw sin in its
vileness, much less their own special sin; nor Christ in his suitableness and
necessity. People that live under the Gospel, can hardly avoid the improvement
of their Understandings by the light that shines upon them: Knowledge grows,
Parts thrive; these enable them to discourse and desend the Points of Religion
excellently. Yea, it may be from the strength of these Gifts, they can pray
with commendable variety and largeness of expression: these things beget
applause from Men, and confidence in your selves, whilst all the while, no
saving influences are shed down to quicken, change, and spiritualize the Heart.
(2.) There are transcient motions and touches of the Gospel upon the
affections, which give some Men their melting pangs and moods, now and then
under the Word, though it never settles into a spiritual frame, an habitual
heavenliness of temper; of such the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 5. And this is the
more dangerous, because they now seem to have attained all that is essential to
Religion, or necessary to Salvation. For when unto the light of their
understandings, there shall be added melting affections; Mr. Anthony Burges in
his Spiritual Refining.
a Man now seems to be complete in all that the Gospel requires unto the being
and constitution of a Christian, as a great Divine speaks; for thus poor Souls
are apt to reason; If I had only light in my mind, and never found any meltings
of my affections, I might suspect my self justly to be a hypocrite: but there
are times when my affections, as well as my understanding seem to feel the
power of the Gospel. And yet these things may be where the Heart never
effectually opens to Christ; all this may be but a morning dew, an early cloud
that vanishes away, as is plain in John's hearers, John 5. 35. and in Paul's
hearers, Gal. 41. 14, 15. For except the convictions upon the understanding be
particular, and effectual, and the motions upon the affections settled to a
heavenly habit and temper; the Man is but where he was before, as to the real
state and condition of his Soul. Were thy understanding so convinced of the
evil nature and dreadful consequences of sin, and thy Affections and Will
thereupon so effectually determined to choose and embrace the Lord Jesus upon a
considerate and thorough examination of his own Terms and Articles propounded
in the Gospel; then thou might conclude the great design of it were
accomplished upon thy Soul; but to rest in general convictions, and transient
affections without this, is but to mock and deceive thy own Soul. Alas, this
comes not home to the main end of the Gospel.

II. Inference.
Learn from hence, the prodigious stubornness and hardness of the Hearts of Men
living daily under the Gospel, 2. Infer.
which still resist it, though it bear upon them in part of it.

You have heard how all its commands, promises, threatenings and examples, bear
directly and jointly upon the Hearts of sinners, to get open the Will to
Christ. And yet how few are there comparatively that obey and answer this great
design of it! All these are like Heavens great Artillery planted against the
unbelief and stubornness of the Hearts of Men, to batter down their carnal
reasonings, overthrow their vain hopes, and open a fair passage for Christ into
their Soul, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare are niot carnal,
but mighty through God; to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. If a
mount be raised, and many Canon planted thereon, and all played against the
wall of a Fort, thousands of shots made, and yet no breach, not one stone moved
out of its place; you will say that is a strong Wall indeed. Beloved, God has
as I may say, raised a Mount in the Gospel, planted the great Ordinance of
Heaven upon it; discharged many dreadful vollies of threatenings, nay he has,
as it were, come under the walls of the unbelieving Soul, with terms of grace
and mercy, and yet no opening; O prodigious obstinacy! We have piped unto you,
but ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, but ye have not lamented,
Matthew. 11. 17. Neither the sweet Airs of Gospel Grace, nor the dreadful
thunders of the Law make any impression upon you. O what an obdurate Rock is
the Heart by nature! Certainly, every Christian may see enough in others, and
find enough in himself; without the help of other Books, to confute the
Arminian Doctrian which so extolls and flatters the nature of man. It is as
possible to make an impression with your finger upon a wall of brass, as for
the best Sermon in the world in its own strength, to make an effectual saving
impression upon a sinners Will.

III. Inference.
Is it the great design of the Gospel to open the hearts of men to Christ, then
wonder not that it meets with such strong and fierce opposition from Satan
wherever it is sincerely and powerfully preached. As for general and formal
preaching, which comes not to the quick, the Devil is not so much concerned
about it; he knows it will do him no great damage; nay, it fastens and secures
his interest in the Souls of men. But wherever the Gospel comes with spirit and
power, laying the Ax to the Root, showing men the vanity of their ungrounded
hopes, pressing the necessity of Regeneration and Faith, this preaching quickly
gives an alarm to Hell, and raises all manner of opposition against it. What is
it to preach the Gospel, said Luther, but to derive the rage and fury of the
whole world upon us? Satan is the God of this world, all men by Nature are his
born Subjects: No Prince on earth is more jealous of the revolt of his Subjects
than he; and its time for him to bestir himself when the Gospel comes to
dethrone him, as it does in the faithful preaching of it, John 12. 31. Now is
the Judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. Now
he falls as Lightning from Heaven, Luke 10. 18. Now Sinners are made sensible
of the cruel tyranny and bondage of Satan's Government, and of the glorious
liberty offered to them by Jesus Christ. Satan suspecting the Issue of these
things, bestirs himself to purpose. O what showers of Calumnies, and storms of
Persecution does he pour upon the Names and Persons of Christ's faithful
Ambassadors! certainly he owes Christ's Ministers a spite, and they shall
know and feel it, if ever he get them within the compass of his Chain. But let
this discourage none employed in this glorious design; the Lord is with them to
protect their persons, and reward their diligence.

IV. Inference.
If the opening of the heart be the main design of the Gospel, 4. Infer.
then Christ and Faith ought to be the principal Subjects that Ministers should
insist on among their people.

There are many other useful Doctrins, which may and ought to be opened and
pressed in their time and place. Moral duties, etc. have their excellencies; but
Christ and Faith are the great things we are to preach. Let men be once brought
to Christ, and the rest will follow; but to begin and end with Morality will
never make men Gospel Christians. Grace teaches Morality, Titus 2. 11. but
Morality without Grace saves no man. I doubt not but it has been a grand
Artifice of the Devil to confound Grace with Morality; and make men believe
that nothing more is required unto men's salvation but a civil sober
conversation in the world, and so lay by the principal part of the Gospel,
which opens and presses the necessity of Regeneration, Repentance, and Faith in
the Blood of Christ: Such preaching as this answers not the end and design of
Christ in the conversion of Souls; such toothless preaching disturbs not the
Consciences of men; the Lord help all his Ambassadors to mind the Example and
Charge of their Redeemer, and laying aside all carnal interest, to apply
themselves faithfully unto the Souls and Consciences of their hearers, not as
men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ.

II. Use of Conviction.
In the next place, This Doctrine is of excellent Use to convince men of the
dreadful damning nature of the sin of Unbelief: A sin which defeats and
frustrates the main design of the blessed Gospel of Christ on the Unbelievers
Soul.

This is the sin that keeps the heart fast shut against him. As Faith is the
radical Grace, so Unbelief is the radical Sin. What shall I say of it? it is
the Traitors Gate through which those Souls pass, that are to perish for ever.
The Gospel can do you no good, the Blood of Christ can yield you no saving
benefit, whilst your Souls remain under the dominion and power of this sin.
When we consider the mighty Arguments of the Gospel, we may wonder that all
that hear them are not immediately persuaded to Christ by them. And on the
other side, when we consider the mighty power of Unbelief, how strongly it
holds the Soul in bondage to sin; we may admire that any Soul is brought over
to Christ by the Gospel. It was not without cause that the Apostle puts faith
in Christ among the great Mysteries and Wonders of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Now the intrinsic evil and fearful consequences of this sin of Unbelief will
appear in these following particulars.

1. Unbelief fixes the guilt of all other sins on the person of the Unbeliever;
it binds them all fast upon his Soul, John 8. 24. For if ye believe not that I
am he, ye shall dye in your sins. Dye in thy sins man! it were better for thee
to dye in a Ditch. What more terrible can God threaten, or man feel? This is
the sin that makes the death of Christ of none effect to us, Gal. 5. 4. There
is indeed a sovereign virtue in the Blood of Christ to pardon sin, but thy Soul
cannot have the benefit of it while it remains under the dominion of this sin.
As it was said of the miraculous works of Christ, He could do no mighty works
there, because of their unbelief, Matthew. 13. 58. so none of his spiritual
works, no ordinances can do thy Soul good till the Lord break the power of this
sin, Hebr. 4. 2. The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed in
faith in them that heard it. If a man were dangerously sick, or wounded, the
richest Cordial or most sovereign Plaster in the world can never recover him,
unless received and applied. Unbelief spills the most sovereign Cordials of the
Gospel, as Water upon the ground. The greatest sins that ever thou committedst
might be pardoned, did not this sin lie in the way; were this gone, all the
rest were gone too; but whilst Unbelief remains, they also remain upon thee.

2ly, Of all the sins that are upon the Souls of men, this is the most
difficult sin to be removed and cured: Other sins lie more open to conviction,
but this has the most specious pretenses to countenance and defend it. Men
commit this sin out of a fear of sin. They will not believe, lest they should
presume. They dare not believe because they are not qualified. The strength of
other sins meets in this sin of Unbelief: it is the strongest Fort wherein
Satan trusts. Take an Adulterer, or a profane Swearer, and you have a fair
open way to convince him of his sin: show him the Command he has violated, and
he has nothing to say in his own defense: but the Unbeliever has a thousand
plausible defenses.

3ly, This is the great damning sin of the world. I do not say but all other
sins deserve damnation, (for the wages of sin is death) but this is the sin in
the virtue whereof other sins damn and ruin the Soul. This is the Condemnation,
John 3. 19. And as it is a damning sin, so it is a sin which damns with
aggravated damnation, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. O then let us mourn over, and tremble at
this dreadful sin, which opposes and so often frustrates the great design and
main end of the whole Gospel.

IV. Use for Exhortation.
Is it the main scope of the Gospel to bring men to Christ by Faith, then be
persuaded heartily to comply with this great design of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, Ministers, Ordinances, and Providence, in opening your hearts to
receive Christ this day by Faith unfeigned.

And oh that I could suitably press this great Point, which falls in so
directly with the main stream and scope of the whole Gospel: And oh, that
whilst I am pressing it, you would list up an hearty cry to Heaven, Lord give
me faith, whatever else thou deny me; open my heart to Christ under the Gospel
Calls. I do not only press you to a general and common assent to the Truths of
the Gospel, that Christ is come in the flesh, and laid down his life for
sinners; but unto an hearty Evangelical consent to receive him upon Gospel
terms; to close with him in all his Offices, subjecting heart and life unto his
Authority, living entirely upon him for righteousness, and to him by holiness.
The value of such a Faith as this, is above all estimation. For (1.) this is
the Grace which God has dignified, and crowned with Glory and Honor above all
its fellow Graces. Its singular Praises and Encomiums are in all the
Scriptures. This is called precious faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Soul enriching faith,
James 2. 5. That Is a miserable poor Soul indeed that is destitute of it,
whatever the Largesses of Providence have been to him. And he is truly rich, to
whom God has given Faith, whatever he has denied him of the comforts of this
life. This Christ calls the work of God, John 6. 29. This is the work of God
that you believe. Why? so are all other things that your eyes behold, they are
the works of God; the Earth, the Sea, the Sun, Moon and Stars, they are his
handiwork. True, they are so; but this is the work, the most eminent,
glorious, and admirable work of God, sine pari, excelling all his other works
which your eyes behold. And (2.) that which exalts and dignifies it, not only
above all the works of God's hands, but even above its fellow Graces, the works
of his Spirit, is that high Office unto which it is appointed in the
justification of a Sinner. God has singled out this Grace from among all the
other Graces, to be the instrument of receiving and applying the righteousness
of Christ for the justification of a guilty Soul, Romans 5. 1. You are never said
to be justified by love, hope, or desire, but by faith. It Is true, all other
Graces are supposed in the person justified, but none apprehends and applies
the righteousness of Christ for justification, but this only. And the
justifying act of faith being a receiving act, the Glory of God is therein
secured, therefore it is of Faith that it might be by Grace. (3.) The Grace of
Faith, which I am recommending to you this day, is not only the instrument of
your Justification, but it is also the bond of your union with Christ, Ephesians. 3.
17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. It Is the uniting Grace, the
Marriage Knot,'it is that which gives interest in, and title to the person and
benefits of Christ. The great thing upon which the eyes of all the awakened
world are intently and solicitously fixed. Whatever apprehensions you have of
an interest in Christ, and whatever his benefits be worth in your eyes; neither
himself, or them can ever be obtained without Faith. O Brethren, there is a day
coming, when they that now slight and neglect this interest and concern of
their Souls, would gladly part with ten thousand worlds for a good title to
Christ, could it be purchased therewith: But it is Faith, and nothing without
Faith, that intitles you to Christ, and to his benefits. (4.) That which should
yet more endear this Grace of Faith to you is this, that it is the hand which
receives your pardon from the hand of Christ, the Messenger that brings a
sealed Pardon to a trembling Sinner, Acts 10. 43. And by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the
Law of Moses. Cleared of all those sins from which the Law could never clear
them, nor any Repentance, Restitution, or Obedience of their own without Faith,
O what a welcome Messenger is Faith, and what joyful tidings does it bring! you
would say so, if ever you had felt the efficacy of the Law upon your
Consciences; if ever you had lain, as some sinners have, with a cold sweating
horror upon your panting bosoms, under the apprehensions of the wrath God.
This fruit of Faith is rather to be admired than expressed, Psalm. 32. 1. (5.)
Faith is not only the Messenger that brings you a Pardon from Heaven, but it
is, as I may say, that heavenly Herald that publishes Peace in the Soul of a
Sinner. O Peace, how sweet a word art thou! how welcome to a poor condemned
Sinner! Beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of them that publish peace.
Now it is faith that brings this blessed News, and publishes it in the Soul,
without which all the publishers of peace without us, can administer but little
support, Romans 5. 1. Faith brings the Soul out of the Storms and Tempests with
which it was tossed, into a sweet Rest and Calm, Hebr. 4. 3. We which have
believed do enter into Rest. Is the quiet Harbor welcome to poor weather-beaten
Seamen after they have past furious storms and many fears upon the raging Sea?
O how welcome then must Peace be to that Soul that has been tossed upon the
tempestuous Ocean of its own fears and terrors, blown up and incensed by the
terrible blasts of the Law and Conscience? It was a comfortable sight to Noah
and his Family to see an Olive leaf in the mouth of the Dove, by which they
knew the waters were abated. But oh, what is it to hear such a voice as this
from the mouth of Faith! Fury is not in me, says the Lord; his anger is turned
away, and he comfort thee. Fear not thou poor tempestuous Soul, the God of
Peace is thy God. (6.) Faith does not only bring the tempestuous Soul into a
Calm, but it is the Grace also which opens to the Soul a door of access into
the gracious presence of God; without it there is no coming to him acceptably,
Hebr. 11. 6. He that comes unto God must believe. This liberty and access to
God is indeed the purchase of the Blood of Christ; he procured it at a great
Sum; But Faith is the Grace that brings the Soul actually into the presence of
God, and there helps it to open and ease its griefs; and with liberty of Speech
to discover all its grievances, fears, and burdens to the Lord. And truly,
this world were not worth the living in, without such a blessed vent to our
troubles as this is. The Believer only has gotten the key that opens the door
of access unto God; if he have any sins, wants, burdens, affictions,
temptations, etc. here he can ease them. Ah Christian, the time may come when
thy heart may be filled with sorrows to the brim, and there may not be found a
person of thy acquaintance in all the world, to whom thou can turn to ease
thy sorrows, or give vent to thy troubles: Now blessed be God for Faith. O the
ease one act of Faith gives a troubled Soul, which is like Bottles full of new
Wine, and must either vent or break! well may it be said, The Just shall live
by Faith; how can we imagine we should live without it? Certainly our
Afflictions and Temptations would swallow us up, were it not for the sweet
assiduous reliefs that come in by Faith. (7.) And yet farther to inflame your
desires after Faith, this is the Grace that gives you the Soul reviving sights
of the invisible world, without which this world would be a dungeon to us, Heb.
11. 1. It Is not only the substance of things hoped for, but the evidence of
things not seen. O'tis a precious Eye, how transporting are those visions of
faith, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen we love, whom though now we see him
not, yet believing we rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory. We that
preach of Heaven to you, cannot show you the glorious person of Christ there;
nor the Thrones, Crowns, and Palms that are above; but faith can make these
things visible. That Is an Eye that can penetrate the Clouds, and show you him
that is invissible, Heb. 11. 27. (8.) The grace of faith, which I am
recommending to you this day, is instrumentally the livelihood of your Souls in
this World, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his faith. When God gives a Soul
faith, he gives it him for a livelihood, and expects he should keep house upon
it, while he is in this World; and God reckons he has made plentiful provision
for your Souls, when he has given them faith, and furnished out such variety
of precious promises for your faith to feed upon. Abraham, Moses, David, and
all the Saints kept house upon no other provision but what faith brought in,
and at what a high and excellent rate did they live? Here Man eats Angels
food. It Is a storehouse of Provision, it is a shop of Cordials, I had fainted,
unless I had believed, Psalm. 27. 13. A believer lives the highest life of all
Men upon earth; and as the believers Soul is daily fed by faith, so all the
other graces in his Soul are maintained and daily supported by the provisions
faith brings them in. The other graces (as one says) like the young birds in
the nest, live upon that provision this grace of faith gathers for them, and
puts into their mouths. Take away faith, and you quickly starve the Soul of a
Christian; will not all this engage your desires after faith? Why then (9.)
consider this is the grace whereby we dye safely, as well as live comfortably;
as you cannot live comfortably without it in this World, so neither can you dye
safely or comfortably without it when you go out of this World, Heb. 11. 13.
These all dyed in faith, not having received the promises; but having seen them
a far off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them. Mark here, how these
excellent persons died; they all died embracing the promises in the arms of
their faith. An allusion to two dear friends, hugging one another at their
parting. O precious promises, says the dying believer; of what unspeakable use
and benefit have you been to me all the days of my pilgrimage! You are they to
whom I was wont to turn in all my troubles and distresses; but I am now going
into the life of immediate Vision, farewell blessed Promises, Scriptures,
Ordinances and Communion of imperfect Saints; I shall walk no more by faith,
but by sight. (10.) In a word, and that a great word to; this is the grace that
saves you, Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace are you saved, through faith. Your salvation is
the fruit of free grace; but grace it self will not save you in any other
method, but that of believing. The grace of God runs down through the channel
of faith; faith is the grace that espouses your Souls to Christ here, and
accompanies it every step of the way until it come to his full enjoyment in
Heaven; and then is swallowed up in vision. It embarques you with Christ, and
Pilots you through the dangerous Seas, till you drop Anchor in the Haven of
everlasting rest and safety; where you receive the end of your faith, the
salvation of your Souls O then in consideration of the incomparable worth, and
absolute necessity of this precious grace; make it your great study, make it
your constant cry to Heaven night and day; Lord give me a believing Heart, an
opening Heart to Jesus Christ. If you fail of this, you come short of the great
end and design of the whole Gospel, which is to bring you to faith, and by
faith to Heaven.

SERMON X.
Revel. 3. 20. -- If any Man hear my voice, and open the door, [I will come in
to him, and sup with him.]
IN the former Sermons we have considered Christ's suit, for a sinners Heart; we
now come to the powerful Arguments and Motives used by him to obtain his suit,
which are two, 1. Union, I will come in to him, and sup with him. 2. Communion,
and he with me.


These are strong and mighty arguments, and encouragements, able one would
think to open any Heart in the World to Christ; and yet considering how fast
the Hearts of Men are glued to their lusts, fixed and riveted in their sins
until the Spirit come upon them with powerful convictions: and when under
conviction, what mighty discouragements they labor under from their former
sinfulness and present unworthiness; all this is little enough to bring them to
faith: nay, in it self utterly insufficient without the Almighty power second
and set them home with effect on the Heart; for it is not mere moral suasion
will do the work. It Is true, Christ will not make a forcible entrance into the
Soul, he will come in by the consent of the Will; but the Will consents not,
till it feel the power of God upon it, Psalm. 110. 3. Almighty power opens the
Heart, and determins the Will, but still in a way congruous to the nature of
the Will, Hos. 11. 4. I drew them with the cords of a man, with the bands of
love. When under the influence of this power the Soul opens unto Christ, he
will come in, take that Soul for his everlasting habitation; refresh and feast
it with the sweetest consolations and privileges, purchased by his Blood;
whence the Tenth Observation is,

DOCT. X.
That Christ will certainly come into the Soul that opens to him; 10. Doct.
and will not come empty handed, but will bring rich entertainment with him; I
will come in to him, and sup with him.

When the prodigal (the Emblem of a convert) returned to his Father, Luke 15.
22. his Father not only received but adorned, and feasted him. In opening this
Point, I shall show First, What Christ's coming in to the Soul intends.
Secondly, How it appears Christ will come in to the opening Soul. Thirdly, What
that rich entertainment is he brings with him. Fourthly, Why he thus
entertainsthe Soul that receives him and opens to him.


First, What Christ's coming in to the Soul intends; and in general, I must say,
this is a great mystery, which will not be fully understood, till we come to
Heaven, John 14. 20. At that day you shall know that I am in my Father, and you
in me, and I in you. Then the essential union of Christ and his Father, and the
mystical union between believers and Christ will be more clearly understood,
than we are capable to understand them in this imperfect state: yet for present
so much is discovered as may justly astonish poor sinners at the marvelous
condescension of the Lord Jesus to them. More particularly, this expression, I
will come in to him, imports no less than his uniting such a Soul to himself;
for he comes in with a design to dwell in that Soul by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. to
make such a man a mystical member of his body, flesh, and bones, Ephesians. 5. 30.
which is the highest honor the Soul of man is capable of; indeed, this coming
of Christ into the Soul of a sinner, does not make him one person with Christ,
that is the singular honor to which our nature is advanced by the Hypostatical
Union; but this makes a person mystically one with Christ, and though it be
beneath the Hypostatical Union, yet it is more than a mere Foederal Union.
Christ's coming into the Soul signifies more than his coming into Covenant with
it, for it is the taking of such a person into a mystical Union with himself by
the imparting of his Spirit unto him; as the vital sap of the stock coming into
the grass, makes it one with the stock, John 15. 5. So the coming of Christ's
Spirit into the Soul makes it a member of his mystical body; and this is a
glorious supernatural work of God, 1 Cor. 1. 30. most honorable, most
comfortable, and for ever sure and indissoluble; Method of Grace, p. 25
as I have elsewhere more fully showed.

Secondly, In the next place, I shall evidence the truth and certainty of this
most comfortable point, that Christ will come in, and that with singular
refreshments and comforts, to every Soul that hears his voice, and opens to
him. No present unworthyness, or former rebellions shall bar out Christ, or
obstruct his entrance into such a Soul. Whatever thou have been, or done; all
that notwithstanding, Christ will come into thee, and dwell with thee; and make
thy Soul an habitation for himself through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. I say, let
thy Heart but open to him and he will both fill and feast thee, with a non
obstante, as to all thy former miscarriages.

I know it is the common discouragement that multitudes of convinced humbled
sinners lie under, who seeing so much vileness in their natures, and practices;
cannot be persuaded that ever the Lord Jesus will cast an Eye of favor on
them; much less, take up his abode in them. What, dwell in such a Heart as
mine, which has been an habitation of Devils, a sink, a puddle of sin from my
beginning! This is hard to be believed; but sinner, thou have the word of a
King from Heaven for it; a word whose credit was never cracked or stained from
the first moment it was spoken; that whatever thy former or present vileness or
unworthiness has been, or is; he will not be shy of such a Soul as thou art,
if thou be but willing to open to him; thy great unworthiness shall be no bar
to his union with thee, If any man open, I will come in to him, etc. For,

First, If personal unworthiness were sufficient to bar Christ out of thy Soul,
it would equally bar him out of all the Souls in the World; for all are
unworthy as well as thy self. Wherever Christ finds sinfulness, he finds
unworthiness; and to be sure he finds this wherever he comes. Christ never
expected to find worthiness in thee, but it highly pleases him to find thee
under a becoming sense of thy personal unworthiness, Ier. 3. 13. Only
acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgrest against the Lord thy God,
etc. The returning prodigal acknowledged to his Father, I am not worthy to be
called thy Son, Luke 15. 18, 19. But this did not bar his access to, or hinder
his acceptance by his Father. All that come to God to be justified, must see
and confess their own vileness, and come to him as one that justifies the
ungodly, Romans 4. 5.

Secondly, Thy former vileness and present unworthiness can be no bar to
Christ's entrance, because it can be no surprise to him. He knew thou wast an
unworthy Soul when he made the first overture of grace and reconciliation to
thee; and if thy unworthiness hindered not the beginning of his treaty with
thee, it shall not hinder the closing and finishing act thereof in his union
with thee. I knew that thou wast a transgressor from the womb, Isa. 48. 8.

Thirdly, Christ never yet came into any Soul where Satan had not the
possession before him. Every Soul in which Christ now dwells, was once in Satan's
power and possession, Acts 26. 18. To turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God. So Luke 11. 21, 22. When a strong man armed
keeps his palace, his goods are in peace. But when a stronger than he shall
come upon him, and overcome him; he takes from him all his armor wherein he
trusted, and divides his spoil.

Fourthly, Thy present vileness and unworthiness can be no bar to Christ's
entrance into thy Soul, because Christ never yet objected to any man his
unworthiness, but his unwillingness to come unto him, John 5. 40. You will not
come unto me, that you might have life. And again, Matthew. 23. 37. How often would
I have gathered thy Children, and ye would not? Indeed, you find something like
a repulse from Christ to that poor Canaanitess, Mat. 15. 24, 26. Lord help me,
said that poor distressed Soul; but he answered and said, It is not meet to
take the childrens bread, and cast it to dogs. However harshly and
discouragingly these words sound, yet certainly it was none of Christ's intent
to damp and discourage her faith, but to draw it forth to a more excellent and
intense degree; which effect it obtained, verse. 27.

Fifthly, Neither would Christ have made the tenders of mercy so large and
indefinite, had he intended to have shut out any Soul upon the single account
of personal unworthiness, provided it be but willing to come unto him. Cast
thine Eye, poor discouraged Soul, upon Christ's invitations and proclamations of
grace and mercy in the Gospel, and see if thou can find any thing beside
unwillingness, as a bar betwixt thee and mercy; harken to that voice of mercy,
Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money, come ye, buy and eat; come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. (i. e.) without personal desert, or worthiness: So again, Rev.
22. 17. The Spirit and the bride say come, and let him that is athirst come;
and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Here you see
personal vileness and unworthiness is no obstacle in the way of Christ. Once
more, see John 7. 37. In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Thus you
see what Christ's coming into the Soul is, and what evidences there are, that
when once the Soul is made truly willing, Christ will certainly come into it;
and no former vileness or present unworthiness shall be a bar to obstruct his
entrance.

Thirdly, In the next place, I shall show you, That when Christ comes into the
Soul he will not come empty handed. It Is Christ's marriage day, and he will make
it a good day; a festival day; bringing such comforts along with him, as the
Soul never tasted before; he spreads as it were a Table, furnishes it with the
delicates of Heaven: I will sup with him, says the Text: What those Spiritual
mercies are which Christ brings a long with him to the opening willing Soul,
comes next in order to be spoken to. And

1. When Christ comes into the Soul of a sinner, he brings a Pardon with him, a
full, a free, and a final pardon of all the sins that ever that Soul committed.
This is a feast of it self; good cheer indeed: Christ thought it to be so when
he told the poor Palsey-man, Matthew. 9. 2. Son be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee. He does not say, Be of good cheer, thy Palsy is cured, thy body
recovered from the grave; but be of good cheer, thy sins are pardoned. O how
sweetly may the pardoned Soul feed upon this! And this is not any peculiar
mercy, designed for some special favorites, but what is common to all
believers, Acts 13. 43. By him all that believe, are justified from all things.
Christ and pardon come together; and without a pardon no other mercy would
relish; no feast, no music, no money, or honor, have any favor or comfort
with them to a condemned man; but the comfort of a pardon reaches to the very
Heart, Isa. 40. 1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord; Speak
comfortably to Jerusalem, or as in the Hebrew, Speak to the heart of Jerusalem.
But what are the ingredients of that cordial that will comfort Ierusalems
Heart? Why, Say unto her that her iniquities are pardoned; that carries along
with it the Spirit of all consolation.

And there are four things in the pardon of sin that make it the sweetest mercy
that ever the Soul tasted; comfort which is impossible to be communicated to
another, with the same sense that the pardoned Soul has of it, Rev. 2. 17.

First, That which makes the pardon of sin ravishingly sweet, is the trouble
that went before it. The labourings and restless tossings of the troubled Soul,
which were antecedent to this pardon, make the ease and peace that follows by
it incomparably sweet. As the bitterness of Hell was tasted in the sorrows of
sin, so the sweetness of Heaven is tasted in the pardon of it.

Secondly, The nature of the mercy it self is incomparably sweet; for it is a
mercy of the first rank. Pardon is ^uch a mercy as admits no comfort to come
before it, nor any just cause of discouragement can follow after it. If God
have not spoken pardon to the Soul, it can have no fetled ground for joy, Ezekiel.
33. 10. And if he have, there can be no just ground for dejection, whatever the
troubles be that lie upon it, Isa. 33. 24. The inhabitants shall not say, I am
sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquities.

Thirdly, The third thing that makes this mercy delicious, and ravishingly
sweet to the Soul; are the properties of it, which are four. (1.) God writes
upon thy pardon frank; it is a free mercy, which cost thee nothing, Romans 3. 24.
Being justified freely by his grace. Thou have bought me no sweet Cane with
money, yet I, even I am be that blotteth out thy transgression, for my own
names sake. (2.) God writes upon thy pardon full, as well as free, the pardon
extends to all the sins that ever thou committedst, Acts 13. 43. By him all
that believe, are justified from all things. The sins of thy nature, and
practice; the sins of thy youth, and age; great sins, and lesser sins, are all
comprehended within thy pardon. Thou art acquitted not from one, but from all!
Certainly, the joy of Heaven must come down in the mercy of remission. O what a
feast of fat things with marrow, is this single mercy; a pardon free without
price, full without exception! And then (3.) its final, without revocation; the
pardoned Soul never more comes into condemnation: Thine iniquities are removed
from thee as far as the East is from the West; as those two opposite points of
Heaven can never meet, so the pardoned Soul and its pardoned Sins can never
more meet unto condemnation, Psalm. 103. 12. (4.) God writes upon the pardon
another word, as sweet as any of the rest, and that is sure. It Is a standing
mercy never to be recalled, vacated or annulled, Romans 8. 33, 34, 35. The
challenge is sent to Hell and Earth, Men and Devils; Who shall lay any thing to
the charge of Gods elect? It Is God that justifies, who is he that condemns?
It is Christ that died, etc. Who can arrest when the Creditor discharges? Who
can sue the bond, when the debt is paid? It Is Christ that died. The Table is
spread, and the first mercy served in, is the pardon of sin. Eat, O friends,
drink, yea, drink abundantly O beloved. Now the laboring Conscience that
rolled and tossed upon the waves of a thousand fears, may drop Anchor and ride
quiet in the pacifique Sea of a pardoned State. What joy must stream through
the Conscience, when the sweetness of that Scripture, Romans 8. 1. shall be
pressed into thy cup of Consolation! The pardoned Soul may speak and think of
Death and Judgment without consternation; yea, may look upon it as a time of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. 19. This is heavenly Manna,
the sweetness of it swallows up all expression, all conceptions; no words, no
thoughts, can comprehend the riches of this mercy.

II. And yet this is not all, behold another mercy in consequence unto this,
brought in to refresh and cheer the consenting Soul, and that is peace with
God. Pardon and peace go together, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God. Peace is a word of a vast comprehension; peace in the language
of the Old Testament, comprehends all Temporal good things, 1 Samuel 25. 6. And
peace in the New Testament, comprehends all Spiritual mercies, 2 These. 3. 16.
the blessings of Heaven and Earth are wrapped up in this word. The Soul that
opens to Christ has peace of reconciliation in Heaven, the enmity that was
betwixt God and that Soul is taken away through the blood of Christ, Isa. 12.
1, 2. O Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me, thine anger
is turned away, and thou comfortest me. This must be an invaluable mercy, for
the purchase of it cost the blood of Christ, Isa. 53. 5. The chastisement of
our peace was upon him. He made peace by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20.
and this peace of reconciliation is settled by Christ upon a firm foundation.
His blood gives it a more firm and steady basis and foundation than that of the
Hills and Mountains, Isa. 54. 10. And that which makes it so firm and sure, is
the Advocateship of Jesus Christ in Heaven, 1 John 2. 1. 2. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father. There is also peace in the believers
Conscience, peace as it were by Proclamation from Heaven; and this is built
upon the peace of Reconciliation. We cannot have the the sense of peace, till
we are brought into a state of peace; the latter is the result of the former.
And this is a special part of that supper Christ provides to entertain the Soul
that receives it. How sweet this is, is better felt than spoken. A dreadful
sound was lately in the Ears of the Law-condemned sinner; but now his Heart is
the seat of peace. And this peace is (1.) the Souls guard against all inward and
outward terrors, Phil. 4. 7. The peace of God shall keep (...) or as the word
is, guard your hearts and minds. The persons of Princes are secured by guards
of armed and valiant Men, who watch while they sleep. Thus Solomon had his
royal guard, because of fear in the night, Cant. 3. 7, 8. This peace of God,
Christian, is thy lifeguard, and secures thee better than Solomon's threescore
valiant men, that were about him. Time was when thou wast afraid to sleep, for
fear thou should awake in Hell: Now thou may say with David, I will both
lay me down and sleep, for thou Lord make me to dwell in safety. Now, come
life, come death; the Soul is safe, the peace of God is its royal guard. (2.)
This peace is ease as well as safety to the Soul; It Is heart-ease; no sooner
does God speak peace to the Conscience, but the Soul finds it self at ease and
rest, Heb. 4. 3. We which have believed, do enter into rest. It is with such a
Soul as it was with the Dove, Noah sent out of the Ark; that poor creature
wandered in the Air, as long as her wings could carry her; had her strength
failed, there was nothing but the waters to receive her. O how sweet was rest
in the Ark? (3.) This peace is news from Heaven, and the sweetest tidings that
ever blessed the sinners Ear, next unto Christ, Heb. 12. 24. The blood of Christ
speaks better things than that of Abel. And you are come to this blood of
sprinkling, the same day and hour that Christ is come into your Souls. This is
the voice of that blood, Thou have sinned, I have satisfied; Thou have kindled
the wrath of God, And I have quenched it. The Angels of Heaven cannot feed
higher; their joys are not more delicious than those prepared for believers
are, whereof this is a foretast; whatever circumstances of trouble a man be in,
this effectually relieves him. Paul and Silas were in sad circumstances, shut
up in the inner-prison, their feet made fast in the stocks, their cruel keeper
at the door, their execution designed in a few days: God did but set this dish
upon the Table before the prisoners, and they could not forbear to sing at the
feast, Acts 16. 25. At midnight they sang, etc.

III. After these two royal dishes, Pardon, and Peace, a third will come in,
viz. Joy in the Holy Ghost; this is somewhat beyond peace, it is the very
quintessence and Spirit of all Consolation. The Kingdom of God is said to
consist in it, Romans 14. 17. it is somewhat near to the joy of the glorified, 1
Pet. 1. 8. it is Heaven upon Earth. All believers do not immediately attain it,
but one time or other God usually gives them a taste of it; and when he does,
it is as it were a short Salvation. O who can tell what that is which the
Apostle calls, The shedding abroad of the love of God into the Heart, by the
Holy Ghost, which is given to us! Romans 5. 5. It is a joy which wants an Epithet
to express the sweetness of it, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Joy unspeakable and full of glory.
It has the very scent and taste of Heaven in it, and there is but a gradual
difference betwixt it, and the joy of Heaven. This joy of the Holy Ghost, is a
spiritual cheeriness, streaming through the Soul of a believer upon the Spirits
testimony, which clears his interest in Christ, and glory. No sooner does the
Spirit shed forth the love of God into the believers Heart, but it streams and
overflows with joy. Joy is no more under that Souls command; and this will
evidently appear, if you consider the matter of it; it arises from the light of
Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. the heavenly 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen
we love, etc. The Soul is transported with joy, ravished with the glory and
excellency of Christ. Did thou ever see this Christ whom thy Soul is so
ravished with? No, I have not seen him, yet my Soul is transported with so much
love to him; Whom having not seen, we love. But if thou never saw him, how
comes thy Soul to be so delighted and ravished with him? why, though I never
saw him by the Eye of sense, yet I do see him by the Eye of faith; and by that
sight my Soul is flooded with spiritual joy. Believing we rejoice. But what
manner of joy is that which you taste? why, no Tongue can express that, for it
is joy unspeakable. But how are Christ and Heaven turned into such ravishing
joys to the Soul? why, the Spirit of the Lord gives the believing Soul not only
a light to discern the transcendent excellency of these spiritual objects; but
a sight of his interest in them also. This is my Christ, and this the glory
prepared for me; without interest, Heaven it self cannot be turned into joy. My
Soul rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 1. 47. We read, Luke 13. 28. of some
that shall have a sight of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and yet a sight without joy; a dreadful sight to them, for
want of a joint interest with them in that glory. They shall see, and yet wail
and weep, and gnash their teeth: But an interest sealed gives joy unspeakable.
Now as to the excellency of this joy, it will be found to be the pleasant light
of the Soul; light and joy are Synonimous terms in Scripture, Psalm. 97. 11.
It Is as the cheerful light of the Morning after a sad and dismal Night. You
that have sat in darkness and the shadow of death, you that have sat mourning
in the dark without one glimpse of a promise, you that have conversed with
nothing but dismal thoughts of Hell and Wrath; O I shall be cast away for ever!
What will you say when after all this darkness, the Day Star shall arise in
your hearts, the joy of Heaven shall beam upon your Souls? Will not this be a
glorious reward for all your self-denial for Christ? and fully recompense for
the frowns of carnal relations for giving entertainment to Christ? This joy of
the Lord, if there were no other Heaven, is an abundant recompense. This joy of
the Lord shall be your strength, Neh. 8. 10. Let God but give a man or woman a
little of this Joy into his heart, and he shall presently feel himself
strengthened by it, either to do or to suffer the will of God. Now he can pray
with enlargement, hear with comfort, meditate with delight; and if God call him
to suffer, this Joy shall strengthen him to bear it. This was it that made the
Martyrs go singing to the stake. This therefore transcends all the joys of this
lower world: There are sinful pleasures, men find in the fulfilling their
lusts: There are sensitive joys that men find in the good creatures of God,
filling their hearts with food and gladness: There are also delusive joys,
false comforts that Hypocrites find in their ungrounded hopes of Heaven. The
joys of the Sensualist are brutish, the joys of the Hypocrite are ensnaring
and vanishing; but the joys of the Holy Ghost are solid, sweet, and leading to
the fullness of everlasting joy. This is the third heavenly dainty you may
expect to feed on, if you open your hearts to receive Christ by Faith, else you
have all the consolation that ever you must expect.

IV. We read in Scripture of the Sealings of the Spirit, a choice and blessed
Privilege of Believers consequent upon believing, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after
that ye believed, ye were sealed, etc. This then may be expected, by every Soul
that opens to Christ, how rich soever the comforts of it be. The Spirit indeed
seals not before Faith, for then he should set his Seal to a Blank; but he
usually seals after believing, and that as the Spirit of promise. Note here,
the Agent or Person sealing, the Spirit, he knows the counsels, thoughts, and
purposes of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. He also is authorized to this work; and
being the Spirit of truth, he cannot deceive us. There is a twofold Seal spoken
of in Scripture; one referring to God's eternal foreknowledge and choice of
men, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal, the Lord knows who are his, (i. e.) the Lord perfectly knows every
Soul that belongs to him, through the world. But now what comfort is this to a
poor Believer, that God knows who are his? Therefore there is another sealing
referring to the Spirit, as his act upon Believers, to make them know that they
are his. The first is general, The Lord knows who are is: But this is
particular, The Lord knows thee to be his. This is joyful news indeed: the
former makes it sure in it self, the latter makes it sure to us. Now this is a
most glorious privilege, a work of the Spirit which has a most ravishing
delicious sweetness in it; and that which makes it so, is (1) The weightiness
of the matter sealed to, which is no less than Christ, and the eternal
Inheritance purchased by his Blood. This Seal secures our Title to Christ, and
to the eternal glory: We are sealed to the day of redemption. The sealed
Believer can say, Christ, how great, how glorious soever he be, is my Christ;
the Covenant of Grace, and all the invaluable promises contained in it are mine.

(2.) The rest and quietness which follows it, makes it an invaluable mercy;
this brings the anxious solicitous Mind and Conscience to rest and peace. O
what a mercy is it to have all those knots untied, those objections answered,
those fears banished, under which the doubting Soul so long labored, and which
kept it so many nights waking and restless! God only knows at what rate some
poor Creatures live under the scarings of their own Consciences, and frequent
fears of Hell: And what an inconceivable mercy it would be to them to be
delivered at once from their dangers and fears, which hold them under a Spirit
of Bondage? Open to Christ, and thou art in the way to such a deliverance, Come
unto me and I will give you rest, says Christ, Matthew. 11. 28, 29.

(3.) This sealing of the Spirit which follows upon believing, will establish
the Soul in Christ, confirm it and settle it in the ways of God, which is an
unspeakable privilege, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Now he which establishes us with you in
Christ is God, who also has sealed us. Mark how establishment follows sealing.
New temptations may come, great persecutions and sore afflictions may come; but
how well is that Soul provided for them all, that has the sealings of the
Spirit unto the day of redemption? Yea, though the Soul that was sealed should
for the present be under new darkness, new temptations and fears; yet former
sealing will give establishment and relief, when the thoughts run back to the
sealing day, and a man remembers how clear God once made his title to Christ,
Well then, open to Christ, if ever you expect to be sealed to salvation. If you
continue to despise and reject the tenders of Christ in the Gospel, whilst
others that embrace him are sealed to redemption: Your unbelief and final
rejection of Christ will seal you up to the day of damnation.

V. And lastly, we read likewise in the Scriptures of the Earnest of the
Spirit. This is three times mentioned in the Scriptures, Ephesians. 1. 14. Which is
the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchasad
possession, 2 Cor. 1. 22. where it is joined with the former privilege of
sealing, Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our
Hearts. And again, 2 Cor. 5. 5. He that has wrought us for the self same thing
is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. The word is
(...) originally a Syriak word: The Greeks are supposed to get it from the
Phonician Merchants, with whom they traded; and it notes a part paid in hand to
confirm a bargain for the whole. There are two things in an earnest. (1) It is
part of the sum or inheritance: If it were a contract for a sum of money, then
it was a small part of a greater parcel: If for an Inheritance, then the
earnest is a taking a part of the Inheritance, as a twig or turf, part of the
whole. Now the Spirit of God chooses this word on purpose to signify two great
things to his People by it.

(1.) That those comforts communicated by the Spirit to Believers are of the
same kind with the Joys of Heaven, though in a far inferior degree, 1 Pet. 1.
8. called there Joy unspeakable and full of glory, and Romans 8. 23. called
there, The first fruits of the Spirit. The First Fruits and the Crop or Harvest
are one in kind. Surely there is something of Heaven as well as Hell tasted by
men in this world: Hell is begun here in the terrors of some men's Consciences;
and Heaven also is begun here in the absolution, peace and comfort of other
men's Consciences.

(2.) As an earnest is part of the sum or inheritance, so the use and end of it
is confirmation and security; as much as to say, Take this in part till the
whole be paid: yea, take it for thy security that the whole shall be paid.
Believers have a double pledge or earnest for Heaven; one in the person of
Christ, who is entered into that glory for them, John 14. 2, 3. The other in the
joys and comforts of the Spirit, which they feel and taste in themselves. These
are two great securities, and the design of God in giving us these earnests and
foretasts of Heaven, are not only to settle our minds, but to whet our
industry, that we may long the more earnestly, and labor the more diligently
for the full possession. The Lord sees how apt we are to flag in the pursuit of
Heavenly Glory: and therefore gives his People a taste, an earnest of it, to
excite their diligence in the pursuits of it. God deals with his People in this
case, as with Israel; they had been forty years in the Wilderness, many sore
temptations they had there encountered; at last they were come upon the very
borders of Canaan; but then their hearts began to faint; there were Anakims,
Giants in the Land, poor Israel feared they should not stand before them; but
Joshua sends Spies into the Land, who returning, bring the first fruits of
Canaan to them, whereby they saw what a goodly Country it was; and then the
fear of the Anakims began to vanish, and a spirit of Courage to revive in the
People. Thus it is even with the Borderers upon Heaven; though we be near that
blessed Land of promise, yet our hearts are apt to faint upon a prospect of
those great sufferings without us, and those conflicts with corruptions we feel
within us: But one taste of the first fruits of Heaven, like those grapes of
Eshcol, revive our Spirits, rouse our Zeal, and quicken our pursuits of
blessedness. For these reasons God will not have all of Heaven reserved till we
come thither. And now tell me, you that have tasted these first fruits of the
Spirit, (1) Is there not something in faith of that glorified Eye, by which the
pure in heart do see God in Heaven? Matthew. 5. 8. O that eye of Faith! that
precious eye! which comes as near to the glorified eye, as any thing in this
imperfect state can come, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen ye love, in whom
though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice, with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. (2) Is there not something of that glorified love to be felt in
an inferior degree by the Saints in this world? What else can we make of that
transport of the Spouse, Cant. 2. 5. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love? It Is true, our love to God in Heaven is much
more servent, pure, and constant; yet these high-raised acts of spiritual love
have a taste and relish of it. (3) Is there not something here of that heavenly
delight wherewith the glorified delight in God? As the visions of God are begun
on earth, so the heavenly delights are begun here also. Some drops of that
delight are let fall here, Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of the thoughts I had
within me, thy comforts delight my Soul. David's heart, it is like, had been
full of sorrow and trouble; a sea of gall and wormwood had overflowed his Soul:
God lets fall but a drop or two of heavenly delight, and all is turned into
sweetness and comfort. (4) Is there not something here of that transformation
of the Soul into the image of God, which is complete in Heaven, and a special
part of the glory thereof? It Is said in 1 John 3. 2. We shall be like him, for
me shall see him as he is. This is Heaven, this is glory, to have the Soul
molded into full conformity with God; something thereof is experienced in this
world: O that we had more! 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open face, beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory as by the Spirit of the Lord. (5) Is there not something felt
here of the ravishing sweetness of God's presence in Ordinances and Duties,
which is a faint shadow at least, of the joys of his glorious presence in
Heaven? there is certainly a felt presence of God, a sensible nearness unto God
at some times, and in some duties of Religion, wherein his name is as an
ointment poured forth, Cant. 1. 3. something that is felt beyond and above all
the comforts of this world. (6) In a word, the joys of Heaven are unspeakable
Joys; no words can make known to others what they are. When Paul was caught up
into Paradise, he heard unspeakable words, 2 Cor. 12. 4. And are there not
times even in this life, wherein the Saints do feel that which no words can
express? 1 Pet. 1. 8. Rev. 2. 17.

Now, if such earnests of the Spirit do follow after believing; if opening the
Soul to Christ do bring it into these Suburbs of Heaven; who then would not
receive Christ into his Soul, and such an heaven upon earth with him? And thus
I have showed you what some of those heavenly rarities are with which Christ
entertains Believers upon earth, the fullness and perfection whereof is reserved
for Heaven, and hereby secured to the opening or believing Soul: which was the
first thing to be discovered.

Secondly. Next we shall enquire into the reasons why Christ thus entertains,
feasts and refreshes the Soul that receives him. And

First, 1. Reas.
This he does to express the great joy and satisfaction his Soul has in the
faith and obedience of poor Sinners. We read, Isa. 53. 11. of the hard travel
of Christ's Soul, and the great satisfaction he has in the fruit and issue
thereof: He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied. O what
pleasure and satisfaction does it give him to behold the eternal counsels of
God, and sore travels of his Soul brought to such a birth! there is no pleasure
like it, to the Soul of Christ in this world. As it is abundant satisfaction to
a man to behold the accomplishment of a design upon which he has laid out many
thoughts, and much cost, at last happily finished: Or as it is to a Woman that
has had a hard labor, a sore travel for a Child, to behold the fruit of her
Womb, to embrace and smile upon that Child she travailed for. So and much more
than so it is to Christ; and therefore as the Father of the Prodigal manifested
the Joy of his heart for the return of his Son, (who was to him as dead and
lost) by a feast and music: So does Christ here answerably manifest the
content and satisfaction of his Soul, by entertaining the Believer with these
royal dainties of Heaven: it is the Souls welcome home to Christ.

Secondly, 2. Reas.
This Christ does to relieve and refresh poor distressed Souls, who have
endured so many fears and sorrows from the time of their first conviction,
until this day of their union with Christ by Faith. The way of faith is a very
humbling way; there is much cutting work in antecedent convictions and
humiliations, sad nights and sick days with many poor Souls; and these things
bring them very low: They see the Law broken by sin, wrath hanging over them in
the threatenings, the bitter taste thereof they have in their consciences; they
have dwelt with fears and horrors a long time, and they need succor and
support, which the Lord Jesus is now resolved to give them, lest the spirit
fail before him, Isa. 57. 16. He delights to comfort them that are cast down, 2
Cor. 7. 6. Christ is of a compassionate nature, he is as ready as able to
succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. That word which we render Succor,
signifies to run in by way of help, at the cry of one that is in distress. Many
emphatical cries have gone up to Heaven from the distressed sin-sick Soul;
these the compassionate Jesus hears, and now comes in seasonably to succor and
refresh it: He has rich Cordials for fainting hours: the Soul has had a
bitter breakfast, and therefore Christ will give it a comfortable Supper, I
will come in to him, and sup with him.

Thirdly, 3. Reas.
Those that open their hearts to Christ must expect to meet great troubles,
sufferings, and temptations in that new course whereinto they are entered: Their
way to Heaven lies through much tribulation; all our troubles are not over when
we are got into Christ; nay, then commonly our greatest outward troubles begin,
Heb. 10. 32. After ye believed, ye endured a great fight of affliction: Carnal
relations now scoff, frown, and cast off; the world hates them, and marks them
out for persecution: Now that poor Christians may not utterly be discouraged,
when they meet with those troubles in the way of their duty; Christ will cheer
and hearten them by these spiritual refreshments: This is a stock laid in for a
rainy day: Christ himself had a voice from Heaven, Matthew. 17. 5. This is my
beloved Son, a little before his great combat, much more do his poor people
need such consolations to support and encourage them. The wise God foresees,
and by this provision forelays the troubles they are to meet with: An hour of
Sealing fortifies the Soul for an hour of Suffering. It has been the
observation of some Christians, when they have felt more than ordinary comforts
of the Spirit, that some great trial has been near them; and the event has
confirmed it. Whatever comforts Christ gives his people at their first entrance
into his Service, they will have need enough of them all before they finish
their course. To these first sealings they will need often to run back, and
have frequent recourse to them, and all little enough to support them in
after-tryals.

Fourthly, 4. Reas.
Christ comes in to the opening Soul with such divine Cordials and
refreshments, to defeat and countermine the plot of Satan, who has so often,
and so lately, been discouraging them, by representing the ways of Christ as
sad, melancholy ways; telling them, they shall never laugh more, never be merry
more, after they have embraced and espoused the ways of holiness, Spiritus
Calvinianus, est spiritus melancholicus. Well their own experiences shall now
confute it, for they now taste that pleasure in Christ, in faith, and
obedience, which they never tasted in the ways of sin; thus that scandalous
libel of the Devil is experimentally confuted. They find they were never truly
merry till now, Luke 15. 24. All true mirth commences from our closing with
Christ; and they began to be merry.

Now these spiritual refreshments are by Christ here called a Supper, because
the Supper among the Jews was their best meal, Luke 14. 17. and because it is
the last meal. This is not only the best meal that ever a believer made, but
upon these spiritual comforts (though much more refined and perfect) they are
to feed for ever in Heaven. O Christian, well may thou be contented with
thine outward lot of providence, however it shall fall in this World with
respect to thy outward-man; Will a King from Heaven come and sup with thee?
Does he feed thy Soul with pardon, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost? Seals an
earnest of future glory? then thou live at an higher and nobler rate than any
of thy carnal neighbors do. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. The same person that thus blesses God with an Heart
overflowing with joy and comfort, endured as many Persecutions, felt as many
wants and straighs as any man. What ^f Providence do but meanly cloth your
Bodies, so that you cannot ruffle it out in that splendour and gallantry others
do? yet may thou say with the Church, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my
Soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the garments of
Salvation; he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom
decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self with Jewels,
Isa. 61. 10. What if thou fare not deliciously as the great ones of this World
do? yet if Christ will give thee to eat of the hidden manna which he promises,
Rev. 2. 17. Art thou not better clothed and fed than any of the Grandees or
Nobles of the World? This takes away all grounds of complaint; it may be you
will say, O but we have Bodies, as well as Souls; if God had created us Angels,
that we could live without material food it were another case. I reply, Christ
never thus intended to feast thy Soul, and starve thy Body: he that feeds thy
Soul with bread from Heaven, will take care for all necessary provisions on
Earth, Isa. 41. 17. You have sought and found the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness; fear not but all other things shall be added to you.

I. Use for Information.
The Point before us is full of Uses; I shall begin with Information, in the
following Inferences.

I. Inference.
Hence learn, 1. Infer.
That it is a vile and groundless slander upon Religion, to say or insinuate,
that it deprives men of the comfort and joy of life.

The Devil in design to discourage men from the ways of God, puts a frightful
mask upon the beautiful face of Religion, pretending there is no pleasure or
joy to be expected therein; but this is abundantly confuted and refelled in the
Text, I will come in to him, and sup with him. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 10.
19. A feast is made for laughter. I am sure that Soul that sits with Christ at
such a feast as has been described above, has the best reason of any man in
the World to be merry. Religion indeed denies us all sinful pleasure, but it
abounds with all spiritual pleasure. No rational solid mirth can come before
Christ; the unsanctified rejoice in things of naught, and their joy will be
soon ended; they are hastening to that place where they will find that to be
verified of the wages of sin, which they now falsely impute to the wages of
holiness; they shall never rejoice more, never be merry more: But believers
shall find that Scripture attested by their daily experience, Prove. 3. 17. All
her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. And that there
are such pleasures in the ways of God as they never experienced in the ways of
sin; for is it a solid ground of comfort to a man to be out of debt, and all
fears of arrests? And is it not much greater to have our debts paid to God by
Christ our Surety? Matthew. 9. 2. Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.
Is it matter of joy to have a sufficiency of all things for the supply of every
want? he that is in Christ has so, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. All are yours, and ye are
Christ's. Is it a joyful life to be a borderer upon Heaven, to confine upon
blessedness it self? Then it is a joyful life to be in Christ, for they that
are so, may rejoice in the hopes of glory, Romans 5. 2. Is it matter of all joy
to have the Comforter himself, who is the Spirit of all Consolation, taking up
his residence in thy Heart, cheering, comforting, and refreshing it with such
Cordials as are unknown things in all the unbelieving World? Then certainly the
life of a Christian, and the ways of holiness, must be most pleasant and
comfortable; and therefore let none that are looking toward Christ be
discouraged in their way, by the slanderous reproaches designedly cast upon
Religion for that end. Christ and comfort dwell together.

II. Inference.
Hence in like manner it follows, 2. Infer.
That Christians usually meet the greatest difficulties at their first entrance
into Religion.

The first work of Religion is cutting work, wounding work, groaning and
weeping work; thus Religion usually begins, Acts 2. 37. Acts 16. 29. Now the
Soul seems to be struck dead in the giving up of all its former vain hopes,
Romans 7. 9. When the commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed; but afterward
comes pardon, peace, joy in the Holy Ghost. They that go forth weeping, bearing
precious seed, now come back rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them, Psalm.
126. 6. Now that blessing takes place upon the Soul, Matthew. 5. 4. Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be conforted. Light is sown for the righteous,
and joy for the upright in Heart. It Is quite contrary in the ways of sin; all
the pleasures of sin come first, the terrors and gripes of Conscience come
after. Sin comes with smiles in its face, but a sting in its tail. Pleasures
lead the van, Hell and destruction bring up the rear, Job 20. 12, 13, 14.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue;
yet his meat in his bowels is turned into the gall of Asps within him. But here
conviction and humiliation come first, these prepare the way for Christ; and
after him comes rest and peace. Their sorrow is turned into joy, John 16. 120.

But is this always true? Do not the worst things of Religion many times come
last? Object.
How many Christians go out of the world in a bloody winding sheet?

Whatever the after-sufferings of Christians may be, Sol.
the worst is past when they are once in Christ. Great and sharp sufferings
they may endure, but the Lord sweetens them with answerable consolations, 2
Cor. 7. 4. I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our
tribulation. The lowest ebbs, are followed with the highest tides; the greatest
troubles need not give an interruption to their peace.

III. Inference.
Thirdly, 3. Infer.
Hence it follows, that no man can be owner of any true comfort till he be in
Christ.

Comfort and refreshment in the natural order follow faith; it is the vainest
imagination in the World to expect solid Spiritual comfort before union with
Christ; you may as well expect an harvest before a seed-time. I do confess
there are two sorts of comforts found in the World without Christ. (1.) Men may
have sensitive and sinful comforts and delights without Christ; these are
common in the unregenerate World; where you may daily see rich men taking
comfort in their riches; voluptuous men in their pleasures, Iam. 5. 5. You have
lived in pleasures upon Earth. But these are the pleasures common to bruits,
and beneath the noble immortal spirit of a Man. (2.) Hypocrites have their
delights and comforts, in a false imaginary happiness which they fancy to
themselves; but this is a vanishing shadow: they take comfort from their
groundless hopes of Heaven, whither they shall never come; it is a feast in a
dream, Isa. 44. 20. Thus they make a bridge of their own shadow, and are
drowned in the waters. Such sensitive and false comforts and pleasures Men may
have; but no true solid scriptural joy takes place in any man's Heart before
Christ come into it.

IV. Inference.
Guess from hence what Heaven is, 4. Infer.
if there be such a feast to the Soul in the very foretasts of it.

If a relish, a taste of Heaven in the earnest thereof be so transporting and
ravishing, what then is the full fruition of God! If these be unutterable, what
must that be! Give me leave to say, Whatever the comforts and joys of any
believer in this World may be, yet Heaven will be a surprise to him when he
comes thither. The joys of Gods presence are other manner of things than our
present comforts are; though these be of the same kind with them, yet in a far
inferior degree. There is a fix-fold difference betwixt the Spiritual comforts
of believers on Earth, and the joys that are above. They differ, 1. In
Quantity. 2. In Constancy. 3. In Purity. 4. In Efficacy. 5. In the Society. 6.
In the Durability of them.


First, They differ in quantity; Here we know but in part, but when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13.
9, 10. When the Scripture speaks of the comforts communicated to Saints on
Earth it usually expresses them in some diminutive terms or other, calling them
first fruits, earnests, and the like; and indeed it is necessary we should
receive them here with such alloys, and in remiss degrees, because the
imperfection and weakness of our present state will not bear them in their
plenitude and perfection. Here the joy of the Lord enters into us, but there we
are said, to enter into that joy, Matthew. 25. 21. It Is too great to enter into
us, therefore we enter into, and are swallowed up in it.

Secondly, They differ in Constancy; the best comforts upon Earth are found to
be intermitting comforts; a Sun-blast and a Cloud; a good day and a bad; you
know houskeepers feed upon two sorts of meat, dayly-bread, and dainties;
rarities come not every day to the Table. The dayly-bread upon which believers
live, is the recumbence, and affiance of faith; as for assurance and joy, those
come but now and then.

Thirdly, They differ in Purity, as well as Constancy; here we have the
comforts of the Spirit, but we mingle sin with them, and usually the sin of
Spiritual pride, which spoils all. Yea, many times the Lord suffers Satan to
mingle his temptations and injections with them, lest we should be exalted, 2
Cor. 12. 7. But above, the comforts of the Saints are as the pure water of
life, clear as Cristal, Rev. 22. 1.

Fourthly, They differ in Efficacy as well as in Purity. The highest comforts
of the Spirit here are not perfectly transformative of our Souls into the image
of God, as they are in Heaven, 1 John 3. 3. We shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. Here, after we are comforted by him, we grieve the comforter
himself by sin; neither do the comforts of the Spirit, in this state, produce
the fruits of obedience in their perfect maturity, as they do above; there is
the same difference in in point of efficacy as there is betwixt the influence
of the Sun beams in the winter-months, and those in May, and June.

Fifthly, There is a great difference in respect of Society. Here the believer,
for the most part, eats his pleasant morsels alone; one Christian eats, and
another hungers; but in Heaven they all feast and feed together at one Table,
Matthew. 8. 11. They shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of God. O what is it to rejoice in the fellowship of Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, where the joy of one is the joy of all!

Sixthly, They differ also in Durability; sin here puts a stop to our comforts,
but in Heaven as there is no comma, so there shall never be a full point, or
period: Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: There Is an eternal feast, no
taking away the cloth, no rising from that feast, 2 These. 2. 16. It Is
everlasting consolation: We shall be ever with the Lord.

II. Use.
This point puts serious matter of Exhortation into my mouth. The Lord direct
it to the Hearts of all, whether they be in Christ, or out of Christ.

First, To those that are out of Christ, and will not yet be persuaded to open
their Hearts and consent to his terms. O what a spiritual infatuation is here!
What, shut the door of thy Heart against Christ, and all the delights and
comforts of this and the coming World! What madness is this! Hear me thou poor
deluded sinner, that wilt not be persuaded to part with thy sinful sensual
delights in exchange for Christ, and the peace, comfort, and joy that follow
him: I have a few things to speak on Christ's behalf at this time; O that they
might prevail, O that by them the Spirit of the Lord might persuade thy Spirit,
thou poor unregenerate creature! Let me offer four or five Considerations or
Pleas on Christ's behalf; if happily they may prevail and make way for his
entertainment in thy Soul. And

I. 1. Plea.
Let me plead thine own necessity with thee; a mighty argument, which in other
cases uses to make its way through all oppositions, and make all difficulties
fly before it; thou art a poor, necessitous, pining, famishing Soul; however
thy body be accommodated, thou have not one bit of spiritual bread for thy
famishing Soul to live upon. Christ is the bread that comes down from Heaven;
the starving Prodigal, Luke 15. v. 16, 17. is the lively Emblem of thy Soul, he
fed upon husks, and thou feedest upon that which is not bread, Isa. 55. 2. Thou
art wretched and miserable, poor, blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. Thy body has
often been filled and refresht with the good creatures of God, but thy Soul
never tasted one bit of spiritual bread, since it came into thy body; it never
smackt the sweetness of a pardon, the deliciousness of a promise, the joy and
comfort of Christ; the choicest food that ever thou tastedsts was such as thy
Soul cannot live upon.

II. 2. Plea.
Christ is at the door of thy Soul with plenty and variety of heavenly
comforts, costly dainties purchased by his blood; if thou will but open to him,
Thou shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, and drink the
rivers of pleasure, Psalm. 36. 7, 8. He that believes, as the Scripture has
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, John 7. 38. meaning
the graces and comforts of the Spirit.

III. 3. Plea.
If Christ be put off and refused now, you may never taste of those invaluable
mercies for ever, Luke 14. 24. For I say unto you, That none of those men which
were bidden shall taste of my supper. They were bidden, invited to this feast,
and so are you; they refused to come, God grant you may not; for methinks this
sentence of Christ, Those men which were bidden shall not taste of my supper;
is like the sentence upon a malefactor that is to be hanged in chains, and whom
the Law permits none to relieve. O'twill bed readful to see the Saints sitting
at the Royal feast in Heaven, and your selves shut out; as a company of
starving beggars standing in the Streets, and about the doors where the
marriage supper is kept; they see the lights, they behold the rich dishes
carried up, they hear the mirth and music of the guests, but not a bit comes
to their share.

IV. 4. Plea.
The refusal of Christ's invitation, as it is the greatest of all sins, so it
will be avenged with the forest wrath and greatest punishment; it is said of
those guests that were bidden, Matthew. 22. 5. that they made light of it, but it
fell heavy upon them, verse. 7. He was wroth, and sent forth his armies, and
destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their City. Have a care of making light
of Christ.

V. 5. Plea.
What light and vain things are all those pleasures of sin, for the sake
whereof you deprive your Souls of the everlasting comforts of Jesus Christ?
Deluded Soul, it is not the intent of Christ to rob thee of thy comfort, but to
exchange thy sinful for spiritual delights, to thy unspeakable advantage. It Is
true, you shall have no more pleasure in sin, but in stead of that, you shall
have peace with God, joy in the Holy Ghost, and solid comfort for evermore;
what are the sensitive or sinful pleasures of this World? You have the total
sum of them, in 1 John 2. 16, 17. All that is in the World, the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but
is of the world. And the world passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that
does the will of God abides for ever.

But how may a poor unregenerate Soul be prevailed with to make such a blessed
exchange, Quest.
to part with the pleasures of sin, in exchange for the comforts of Jesus
Christ?

Beside all that has been offered before, Answ.
let me briefly add these three following Directions and Counsels to such a
Soul.

First, Labor to see and feel thy need of Christ, and then thou will quickly
be willing to give up all the pleasures of sin for the enjoyment of him. What
makes men so tenacious of their lusts, so hard to be persuaded to give up their
sinful pleasures, but this, that they never felt the need of a Savior! Oh
sinner, did thou but feel thy need of Christ, were thou but an hungry and
thirsty for him; thou would never stand upon such trifles for the enjoyment
of him. We read, in the famine of Jerusalem, how they parted with their
pleasant things for bread to relieve their Souls; Jewels, Rings, Bracelets,
things which cost dear, and were highly valued at another time, now were
willingly parted with for bread. Christ is more necessary to thee than thy
necessary bread.

Secondly, Consider the spiritual and immortal nature of thine own Soul, which
cannot live upon material things, and must over-live all temporary things. Now
if thy Soul cannot live upon them, and must certainly over-live them; what a
miserable condition will it unavoidably fall into, when all these sensual and
sinful enjoyments are vanished and gone, as thou know they shortly will be,
1 John 2. 17. These things pass away; and then has thy Soul nothing to live
upon to all eternity.

Thirdly, Hearken to the reports and experiences of the Saints, who have tried
both sorts of pleasures, which you never did: They have tried the pleasures of
sin, and they have tasted the pleasures of Christ, and so are best able to make
a true judgment upon both; and they have accordingly determined, That one
glimps of the light of Gods countenance, puts more gladness into their hearts,
than in the time that their corn and their wine increased, Psalm. 4. 7. Nay, the
wisest Christians upon trial of both have rightly determined, That the worst
things in Religion are infinitely to be preferred to the best things belonging
to sin; the very sufferings and afflictions of the people of God, have been
pronounced better than the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11. 25. Could
you but see with their Eyes, and were you but capable of making a right
judgment as they did; there needed not a word more to be said to persuade you
to let go your most pleasant and profitable lusts in exchange for Christ and
his beneficial comfortable sufferings.

Secondly, The point affords variety of Counsels and Exhortations to the
Regenerate, who have opened their Wills to Christ, and are thereupon admitted
into this comfortable state.

It is found; in experience, a difficult thing for Souls after conversion to
bear and duly manage their own comforts, as it was to bear and rightly manage
their troubles at conversion. My buisiness here is to advise Souls, under their
first comforts and sealings of the Spirit, how to manage and improve their
spiritual comforts that they may abide with them, and be growing things
continually in their Souls.

I. Advice.
And first, See that you humbly admire and adore the condescending goodness of
God to you, in all the comforts of the Spirit which refresh you.

Oh, that ever God should comfort such a Soul as thine, that has so often
grieved him! That Christ should be a joy to thee, who have been a sorrow unto
him! If you look into Ephesians. 1. 3. you will find the Spirit of the Apostle there
filled with the sense and admiration of this mercy; which breaks forth into
this rapturous expression, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places (or
things) in Christ. Some there are that never enjoy an ordinary degree of
earthly comforts, Job 30. 3, 4, 5. others enjoy abundance of earthly comforts,
but no spiritual comforts, Psalm. 17. 14. Some there are for whom God intends
everlasting consolations in the World to come; but are kept low as to spiritual
comforts in this Would, Psalm. 88. 15. O what cause have you to admire the bounty
of God to you, for whom there is not only fullness of joys prepared in Heaven;
but such precious foretasts and earnest of it communicated in the way thither.

II. Advice.
Secondly, Cleave fast to Christ, and those sweet and comfortable duties of
Religion wherein you have found and tasted the best comforts that ever your
Souls were acquainted with.

This is one thing God aims at in the communication of these spiritual
refreshments, to glue your Souls fast by them to the ways of holiness. The Lord
knows temptations will befall you, discouragements enough you shall be sure to
meet with; but these enjoyments of God, which you have met with in Prayer and
Hearing, in Meditations, Sacraments, etc. should engage your Hearts for ever to
the ways of obedience. You never found that sweetness in the ways of sin, which
you have found in repentance and faith. When a temptation comes baited with
sinful pleasures, say as the Olive Tree and the Vine in Iothams parable, Judges
9. 9, 10, 11. Shall I leave such Soul refreshing comforts as these for the
insipid pleasures of sin? God forbid.

III. Advice.
Thirdly, Be communicative of the spiritual comforts you enjoy, for the benefit
and refreshment of others.

The Lord never intended you should engross the comforts of his Spirit to your
selves, nor eat your pleasant morsels alone, 2 Cor. 1. 4. He comforts us, that
we may be able to comfort them that are in any trouble; by the comfort
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. It Is true, Religion lays not all
open, nor yet does it conceal and hide all. There needs a great deal of wisdom,
humility and caution, to secure us from pride and vanity in Spirit, whilst we
communicate our comforts to others; as Ostentation, so also Impropriation of
our comforts are against Scripture law; he may be justly suspected that opens
all, and so may he too that conceals all. Spiritual comforts are not diminisht,
but improved by a wise and humble communication.

IV. Advice.
Fourthly, Be much in renewing the acts and exercises of faith; be frequent in
that work.

Your first faith has brought in your first comfort, your renewing and
repeating those precious acts of faith will bring you in greater stores of
comfort than you yet enjoy. We are not to look upon faith as a single, but a
continued act, 1 Pet. 2. 4. To whom coming as unto a living stone. Thy Soul
Christian is to be in a continual motion toward Christ; the more you believe,
the more you will rejoice. You see the door through which comfort comes into
your Souls. Joy is the daughter of faith, Romans 15. 13. your present comfort is
the first birth of faith; but there are many comforts more in the womb of
faith, which will yet be born to your Souls if unbelief cause not a miscarriage.

V. Advice.
Fifthly, Take heed you be not a grief to Christ who has already brought so
much comfort to you.

'Twill be a sad requital, if after he has given you the joys of Heaven to
drink, you should give him that which is as Wormwood and Gall; the Lord write
that caution upon thy Soul, Reader, Ephesians. 4. 30. and grieve not the holy Spirit
of God, whereby you are sealed to the day of Redemption. The argument of the
Apostle in this place, strongly infers caution from comfort. Christ has been
all joy, all peace, rest and comfort to you; take heed you be not a grief and
shame to him. The intermissions of thy duties, the falling and flatting of thy
affections in duties, thy rash adventures upon sin, will be a grief to the
Heart of Christ, who has filled thy Heart with so much comfort; and if you
grieve him, you cannot expect he should comfort you. A little sin may rob you
of a great deal of comfort.

VI. Advice.
Sixthly, Be not staggard or dejected, if the first comforts Christ gives you
should afterward abate, (...) be taken away for a time.

This is a very common thing in the experience of most Christians. You must not
think your first comforts are such fixed settled things, that there is no hazard
of losing them. Alas, nothing is more volatile than the joys of a Christian;
you will be apt to lose your first love, Rev. 2. 4. and if you lose your first
love, no wonder that you lose your first comforts; yet if it should so fall
out, be not cast down, and discouraged; Christ is not gone, though comfort be
gone; and though comfort be gone, it is not gone for ever; renew thy repentance,
faith and obedience, and try if God will not renew thy comfort. There is a
former, and there is a latter spring of joy; God will make thy comforts spring
again. Beside, thy Justification is steadfast, though thy Consolation be not
so; there are two things belong to a Christian, one to his being, viz. union
with Christ; another to his well being, viz. comfort from Christ: The latter is
uncertain and contingent, the former fixed and steadfast.

VII. Advice.
Seventhly, Be filled with compassion to others who want those comforts you
enjoy, especially such as God has knit to you in the bonds of natural relation.

Art thou a Father or a Mother to whom God has given those comforts, and Soul
refreshments that have been opened in this discourse? And have thou no
compassion for thy poor Children, who never yet tasted one drop of these
spiritual consolations? Certainly, it will do a man little good, to be feasted
abroad, whilst his Wife and Children are starving at home; say to them, as Paul
in another case, Would to God you were all as I am, except these corruptions.
Religion breeds bowels of compassion. O tell them what sweetness there is in
the ways of godliness: Counsel, plead and pray, that those that are yours may
also be Christ's.

VIII. Advice.
Eighthly, As ever you expect the continuance or enlargement of your comforts,
See that you walk circumspectly.

It Is as much as all your comfort is worth to give way to a little carelessness;
that is a remarkable expression of the Psalmist, Psalm. 85. 8. I will harken what
God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his people, and to his
Saints; but let not them return again to folly. Sin, in this Text, is fitly
called by the name of folly, for indeed it is the greatest folly and madness in
the World to forfeit and divest our selves of such sweet peace and comfort by
returning unto sin, which has cost us so much sorrow and trouble before. Are
you willing to be in your former darkness and fears, tears and troubles, to
exchange the pleasant light you now enjoy, for the horrors you have formerly
felt? This you must do if you return again to folly.

IX. Advice.
Ninthly, Long for Heaven, where the fullness of those joys is, whereof these
you taste are but the earnests and first fruits.

One design of God in giving them, is to set us a longing after Heaven; to help
our conceptions, and raise our affections; if these be so sweet, what must they
be? Romans 8. 23. We which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our
selves, groan within our selves; waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our body. We are not sit down satisfied, and say we have enough
in these first fruits; but they are given to set us agroaning after fullness of
those enjoyments. This answers Gods end in giving them.

X. Advice.
Lastly, Improve every spiritual comfort you have from Christ, unto greater
cheerfulness in the paths of obedience to Christ.

This is another end for which God communicates them, that our Souls being
refreshed by them, we might pluck up our feet the more nimbly in the paths of
duty, Psalm. 119. 32. Then will I run the ways of thy commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my heart. Now God expects that you pray more frequently, meditate
more delightfully, and perform every duty more cheerfully: And this is the way
to perpetuate your comforts. How many Christians go on droopingly in the ways
of duty for want of those encouragements you enjoy?

SERMON XI.
Revel. 3. 20. -- I will sup with him, and he with me.
WE have heard the first encouragement or argument of Christ, to persuade the
Hearts of Sinners to open to him, viz. That he will come in to them, and that
not empty handed; He will also Sup with them; and to make the encouragement
complete and full, he here adds, And he with me. This last clause sets forth
that Spiritual-soul-refreshing-communion which is betwixt Christ and believers;
begun in this World, completed and perfected in the World to come. Hence our
tenth Observation is,

XI. DOCT.
That there is a mutual, sweet and intimate communion betwixt Jesus Christ, and
believers in this World.

Communion with Christ is frequent in the lips of many men, but an hidden
mystery to the Souls of most men. This Atheistical age scoffs, and ridicules
it, as Enthusiasm, and Fanaticism; but the Saints find that reality, and
incomparable sweetness in it, that they would not part with it for Ten thousand
Worlds. When the Roman Soldiers entered the Temple at Jerusalem, and found no
Image there, as they used to have in their own Idolatrous Temples; they gave
out in a Jeer, that the Jews worshipped the Clouds. Thus profane Atheists scoff
at the most solemn, awful and sweetest part of internal Religion, as a mere
fancy; but the thing is real, sure, and sensible; if there be truth in any
thing in the World, there is truth in this, That there are real intercourses
betwixt the visible and invisible World; betwixt Christ, and the Souls of
believers, which we here call communion, 1 John 1. 3. Truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus. It Is really and truly so, we
impose not upon the World, we tell you no more than we have felt. The life of
Enoch is called his walking with God, Genesis 5. 24. O sweet and pleasant walk!
All pleasures, all joys, are in that walk with God. Blessed are the people that
hear the joyful sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy
countenance, Psalm. 89. 15. The joyful sound there spoken of, was the sound of
the trumpet, which called the people to the solemn Assemblies, where they
walked in the light of Gods countenance, the sweet manifestations of his
favor; and because the World is so apt to suspect the reality and certainty of
this Doctrine, the Apostle again asserts it, Phil. 3. 20. Truly our conversation
is in Heaven. We breath below, but we live above; we walk on Earth, but our
conversation is in Heaven. To open this Point three things must come under
consideration, 1. What Communion with Christ is? 2. That there is such a
Communion betwixt him and believers. 3. The excellency of this Communion.


First, What Communion with Christ is in the general nature of it. To open this
it must be considered that there is a twofold Communion.

1. A state of Communion. 2. Actual Communion.
The first is fundamental to the second; we can have no actual Communion with
the Father, Son or Spirit till we be first brought into a state of Communion.
This state of Communion is in Scripture called (...), our fellowship or
partnership with Christ. Such a Fellowship as Merchants have in one and the
same Ship and Cargo; where one has more and another less, but however a joint
though unequal interest; one lives in one Kingdom, another in another Kingdom,
but they are jointly interested in the same Goods. This comparison must not be
stretched beyond its intention, which is to show nothing but this, that Christ
and believers are copartners, or coheirs in the same inheritance; hence they
are called, Psalm. 45. 7. his fellows; God even thy God has anointed thee with
the oil of gladness above thy fellows; and again, Romans 8. 17. If children, then
heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. Christ states his people,
gives then a right and title not only to himself, but to those good things
purchased by him; yea, and the very glory he now enjoys in Heaven, John 17. 22.
The glory which thou gave me, I have given them.

It Is true, there are some things in Christ which are peculiar to himself, and
incommunicable to any creature, as his eternity, consubstantiality with his
Father, etc. neither have we fellowship in his mediatorial Works; we have the
fruits and benefits of them, but no partnership with him in the glory and
honor of them; that is peculiarly his own: and though it be said in the
Scriptures, that believers are righteous as he is righteous, yet the meaning is
not that they can Justify others, as Christ does; no, they are Justified by
him, but cannot communicate righteousness to others as Christ does to them. But
there are other things wherein there is a partnership betwixt Christ and his
people; among others, they partake with him in the Spirit of Sanctification on
Earth, and glory in Heaven: The same Spirit of holiness which dwells in Christ
without measure, is communicated by him to the Saints in measure, 1 John 4. 13.
He has given us of his Spirit. And as Christ communicates his Spirit to the
Saints, so he communicates the glory of Heaven to them; not that they shall be
as glorious in Heaven as Christ is, no, no; he will be known among the Saints
in glory, as the Sun is known from the lesser Stars. Thus briefly of the state
of communion which is called in Scripture, our being made nigh, Ephesians. 2. 13. and
indeed we must be made nigh, before we can actually draw nigh. We must be put
into a state of fellowship, before ever we can have actual communion with God.

Secondly, Beside this state of Communion, there is also an actual Communion,
which the Saints have in this World with the Father and Son in the duties of
Religion. This is that I am here engaged to open: This is our supping with
Christ, and his with us; and for clearness sake I shall open it both, 1.
Negatively, What it is not. 2. Positively, What it is.


I. Negatively, What it is not; for I find persons are hugely apt to mistake in
this matter, taking that for Communion with God which is not so; and here let
it be noted,

First, That Communion with God does not consist in the bare performance of
Religious duties. I do not say that Men may have Communion with God in this
World without duties, it is a delusion of Satan to think so; but this is what I
say, that Communion with God consists not in the mere performances of Duties.
Communion and duties of Religion are two things separable one from the other.
Men may multiply duties, and yet be strangers to Communion with God in them;
even humiliation and fasting days may be kept by Souls that are estranged from
Communion with the Lord, Zach. 7. 5. Speak unto all the people of the Land, and
unto the Priests saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth, and seventh
month; even these seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? q.
d. Had your Souls pure intentions and respects in those duties to my glory? Had
you special Communion with me, or I with you in those duties? Did you ever feel
your Souls in these days wounded for sin? Or did you not fast out of custom,
and mourn for company? God may be near in Men's mouths, and at the same time far
from their reins, Ier. 12. 2. Religious words may flow out of Men's lips, when
not one drop of Religion touches their reins and hearts; that is, the secret
inward powers of their Souls; you cannot therefore safely depend upon this,
Christ rejects this plea, Matthew. 7. 22. Get a better evidence of Communion with
God than this, or you will certainly come short of your expectation. I know you
not, says Christ; there was never any Spiritual acquaintance betwixt your
Souls and me; I know you not in a way of approbation.

2ly, Neither do all stirrings and workings of the affections in duties,
infallibly evidence and prove Communion betwixt God and that Soul, for it is
possible, yea, common, to have the affections raised in a natural way, and by
external motives in the duties of Religion; this you see in that Example, Ezck.
33. 32. And lo thou art unto them as a very lovely song, of one that has a
pleasant voice; and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words,
but they do them not. The sweet modulation of the Prophets voice, was like the
skilful touch of a rare musical Instrument, which in a natural way moved and
excited their affections: thus John's hearers rejoiced in his Ministry for a
season. I confess, this is very apt to cast Souls into a mistake of their
condition. They distinguish not betwixt the influences that come upon their
affections from without, from extrinsick things, and those that are purely
inward, Divine, and Spiritual. But then,

II. To show you positively what Communion with God is. Here we must consider
two things. 1. What things it presupposes in us. 2. Wherein the nature of it
consists.


First, There are diverse things pre-required and presupposed unto all actual
Communion with God in Duties; and where these things are wanting men can have
no communion with God. You may have Communion with his People, and Communion
with his Ordinances, but not Communion with God and Christ in them. And these
pre-requisites are three,

I. Union with Christ is fundamentally necessary to all Communion with him. All
Communion is founded in Union; and where there is no Union there can be no
Communion. You know (says an excellent Person) the member receives nothing
from the head, Dr. Iacom in Romans 8. p. 69, 84.
unless it be united to it; nor the branch from the root. All is yours, and ye
are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 23. Here Is a vast possession, but all founded upon
Union; as all Communion is founded upon Union, so all Union terminates in
Communion; and the closer the Union, the fuller is the Communion.

Before our Union with Christ, we are strangers unto God, Ephesians. 2. I3. We live
without God in the World; it is in Christ that we are made nigh; it is in the
beloved we are made accepted. Whilst we are in the state of alienation from
Christ, we have no more to do with the communications of joy and peace, with
the seals and earnests of the Spirit, than a Native Indian has with the
privileges of London. If any man open to me, says Christ, I will come in to
him and sup with him, and he with me.

II. Communion with God presupposes the habits of grace implanted in the Soul
by sanctification; a found and sincere change of Heart. No sanctification, no
communion, 1 John 1. 6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness we lie, and do not the truth. The Apostle gives the lie to such bold
pretenders: The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, unto all that call upon
him in truth: That latter clause restrains all spiritual communion unto upright
Souls. For an Hypocrite shall not come before him, Job 13. 16.

III. Communion with God does not only suppose grace implanted, but also
implanted grace excited; grace in act: For a man may have the habits of faith,
love and delight in him, and yet be without actual communion with God; for by
this grace is awakned and put into act. A believer when he is asleep, and acts
no grace, is in a state of communion with God; but if he will have actual
communion, his faith, love, and delight must be awakned; they must not lie
asleep in the habit. Thou said, seek my face, my heart said unto thee, thy
face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. It was in order to actual communion with
Christ that the Church so earnestly begs fresh influences of the Spirit to
excite her graces into act, Cant. 4. I6. Awake O North Wind, and come thou
South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my
beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. And though believers
are not so to wait for influences of the Spirit, as mean time to neglect all
proper outward means of exciting their own graces, engaging their Hearts to
approach unto God, Ier. 30. 21. Yet certainly it is the work of Gods Spirit,
and without him we can do nothing to any purpose. The Seaman may trim the
Sayls, wey the Anchor, put all into a sailing posture; but till a gale come
from Heaven there is little or no motion. The same Spirit that plants the
habits, is he also that excites the acts of grace. These three things therefore
are pre-requisites unto all communion with God.

Secondly, Next let us consider wherein this Heavenly privilege of communion
with God does consist; and more generally it will be found to lie in a
spiritual correspondency betwixt Christ and the Soul. God lets forth influences
upon our Souls, and we by the assistance of his Spirit, make returns again unto
God. Communion is a mutual action, so in the Text, I will sup with him, and he
with me. We cry to God, and God answers that cry, by the incomes of Spiritual
grace upon the Soul, Psalm. I38. 3. In the day that I cried thou answeredst me,
and strengthnedst me with strength in my Soul. More particularly, there are
many ways or methods wherein Men have this Spiritual correspondence or
communion with God, viz. 1. In the contemplation of his Attributes. 2. In the
exercises of our grace in Religious duties. 3. In his various Providence. In
all these the Saints have communion with them.


First, There is a sweet and sensible communion betwixt God and his people in
the contemplation of the divine Attributes, and the impressions God makes by
them, upon our Souls whilst we medi^ate on them, As for instance,

(1.) Sometimes the Lord discovers and manifests to the Souls of his people his
immense greatness; the manifestation of which Attribute makes an awful humbling
impression upon the Soul; makes them seem as nothing to themselves. Thus when
Abraham that great believer considered the greatness of that God with whom he
had to do; that sight of God seemed to reduce him to his first principles, to
crumble him as it were into dust and ashes again, Genesis 18. 27. I that am but
dust and ashes have taken upon me to speak unto God. He now looks upon himself
as an heap of vileness and unworthiness; so David, Psalm. 8. 12. When I consider
thy Heavens, the work of thy hands; the Moon and the Stars which thou have
made, (from whence he inferred the greatness of the Creator) Lord what is man,
that thou art mindful of him? q. d. When I consider what a great God the
Creator of the World is, I am justly astonished that ever he should set his
Heart upon so vile a thing as Man. When men compare themselves among
themselves, and measure themselves by themselves, their Spirits are apt to
swell with pride; but would they look up to God, as these holy men did, they
would admire his condescension. And this is communion with God in the
meditation of his immense greatness.

Secondly, The representations and meditations of the purity and holiness of
God, working shame and deep abasement in the Soul, for the pollutions and
sinful filthiness that is in it. This is communion with God, and an excellent
way of fellowship with him. Thus when a representation of God in his holiness
was made unto the Prophet, Isa. 6. 3, 4, 5. There were the Seraphims, covering
their faces with their wings; and crying one to another, saying, Holy, holy,
holy is the Lord God Almighty; the Earth is full of his glory. The effect this
produced, or the return made by the Prophet to this manifestation of God in his
holiness, was deep abasement of soul for his unsuitableness to so holy a God,
verse. 5. Then, said I, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips, etc. And this is real communion with God in his holiness: Thus Job who
had stiffly defended his own integrity against men, yet when God enters the
lists with him, and he saw what a great and holy God he had to do with; cried
out, Job 40. 4, 5. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my
hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice, but
I will proceed no further. q. d. I have done, Lord, I have done; I could answer
men, but I cannot answer thee; thou art holy but I am vile.

Thirdly, There are sometimes representations of the goodness and mercy of God
made unto the Souls of his people. When these produce an ingenuous thaw and
melting of the Heart into an humble, thankful admiration of it, and an
answerable care of pleasing him in the ways of obedience; then have men
communion with God in his goodness: The goodness of God runs down to men in a
double channel; his goodness to their bodies, in external providence; his
goodness to their Souls, in spiritual mercies. When the goodness of God either
way draws forth the love, and gratitude of the Soul to the God of our mercies;
then have we real communion with him: Thus Jacob, Genesis 32. 9, 10. And Jacob
said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God of my Father Isaac; which said unto
me, Return unto thy Country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with
thee. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth
which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this
Jordan, and now I am become two ^ands. Ah, Lord, I see a multitude of mercies
round about me, and the least of them is greater than I: So David, 1 Chronicles. I7.
I6, I7. And David the King came and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O
Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou have brought me hitherto? And yet
this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God, etc. what can David speak more to
thee? You see in these instances what effects the goodness of God even in
inferior outward mercies, uses to produce in sanctified hearts. But then, if
you come to spiritual mercies, and ponder the goodness of God to your Souls, in
pardoning, accepting, and saving such vile sinful creatures as you have been;
this much more affects the heart, and overwhelms it with an holy astonishment;
as you see in Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 16. The grace of our Lord was abundant. I was a
persecutor, a blasphemer, yet I obtained mercy. So Mary, that notorious sinner,
when pardoning grace appeared to her, into what a flood of tears, into what
transports of love did the sight of mercy cast her Soul! She wept and washed her
Saviors feet with tears of joy and thankfulness, Luke 7. 44. No terrors of the
Law, no frights of Hell, thaw the heart like the apprehensions of pardoning
mercy.

Fourthly, Sometimes there are special representations of the veracity and
faithfulness of God, made unto his people, begetting trust and holy confidence
in their Souls; and when they do so, then have men communion with God in his
faithfulness, Thus Heb. 13. 5, 6. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.
There is a discovery of the faithfulness of God; and what follows upon this?
See verse. 6. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is our God; we will not fear
what man can do unto us. Here Is faithfulness in God producing trust and
confidence in the believer. This is that reciprocation, that sweet fellowship
and communion betwixt God and a believer with respect to his fidelity. Behold,
God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid, Isa. I2. 2. And truly,
friend, this is what the Lord justly expects from thee, even thy trust and
confidence in him, thy steady dependence on him, in return to all the
discoveries of his faithfulness to thee, both in his Word and Providence.

Fifthly, There are manifestations of the anger and displeasure of God, by the
hiding of his face from them, and the frowns of his providence, when these
produce repentance, and deep humiliation for sin; an unquietness, a restlesness
of Spirit till he restore his favor, and manifest, his reconciliation to the
Soul; even here also is real communion betwixt God and the Soul, Psalm. 30. 7.
Thou hidest thy face, and I was troubled. Nor will a gracious Soul rest there,
but will take pains to sue out a fresh pardon, Psalm. 51. 8. Make me to hear joy
and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice; restore unto
me the joys of thy salvation, verse. 12.

I cannot here omit to detect a great mistake here, even amongst Gods own
people; many of them understand not what communion there should be with God,
under the manifestations of his displeasure for sin; they know that the
affectionate meltings of their Souls into love, praise, etc. to be communion
with God; but that the shame, grief and sorrow, produced in them by the
manifestations of Gods displeasure; I say, that even in these things there may
be communion with God they understand not. But let me tell thee, that even such
things as these are the choice fruits of the Spirit of Adoption, and that in
them thy Soul has as real and beneficial communion with God, as in the
greatest transports of Spiritual joy and comfort. O'tis a blessed frame to be
before the Lord, as Ezra was, after conviction of thy looseness, carelessness,
and Spiritual defilements, the consequents of those sins; saying with him, O my
God I am ashamed, and even blush to lift up my face unto thee, Ezra 9. 6. Shame
and blushing are as excellent signs of communion with God, as the sweetest
smiles.

Lastly, There are representations and special contemplations of the
omniscience of God, producing sincerity, comfort in appeals, and recourse to it
in doubts of our own uprightness. And this also is a choice and excellent
method of communion with God. (1.) When the omniscience of God strongly obliges
the Soul to sincerity and uprightness, as it did David, Psalm. 139. 11, 12.
compared with Psalm. 18. 23. I was also upright before him. The consideration
that he was always before the Eye of God, was his preservative from iniquity,
yea, from his own iniquity. (2.) When it produces comforts in appeals to it,
as it did in Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 3. Remember now, O Lord, that I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. So Job 10. 7. he also appeals
to this attribute, Thou know that I am not wicked. So did Jeremiah, Chap.
12. 3. But thou, O Lord, know me, thou have seen me, and tried my heart
toward thee. (3.) When we have recourse to it, under doubts and fears of our
own uprightness. Thus did David, Psalm. 139. 23. Search me, O God, and try my
heart; prove me, and see my reins; see if there be any way of wickedness in me.
In all these attributes of God, Christians have real and sweet communion with
him, which was the first thing to be opened: Communion with God in the
meditation of his attributes.

Secondly, The next method of communion with God, is in the exercise of our
graces in the various duties of Religion; In Prayer, Hearing, Sacraments, etc.
in all which the Spirit of the Lord influences the graces of his people, and
they return the fruits thereof in some measure to him. As God has planted
various graces in regenerate Souls, so he has appointed various duties to
exercise and draw forth those graces; and when they do so, then have his people
sweet actual communion with him. And

1. To begin with the first grace that shows it self in the Soul of a
Christian, to wit, repentance and sorrow for sin. In the exercise of this grace
of repentance the Soul pours out it self before the Lord, with much bitterness
and brokenness of Heart; casts forth its sorrows, which sorrows are as so much
seed sown, and in return thereto the Lord usually sends an answer of peace,
Psalm. 32. 4, 5. I said, I will confess my transgression, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Here Is a voice of sorrow sent up, and a voice of peace
coming down; which is real communion betwixt God and Man in the exercises of
repentace.

2ly, As there are seasons in duty, wherein the Saints exercise their
repentance, and the Lord returns peace; so likewise the Lord helps them in
their duties to act their faith, in return whereunto they find from the Lord
inward support, rest and refreshment, Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had
believed. And oft-times an assurance of the mercies they have acted their faith
about, 1 John 5. I4.

3ly, The Lord many times draws forth eminent degrees of our love to him, in
the course of our duties; the heart is filled with love to Christ. The strength
of the Soul is drawn forth to Christ in love; and this the Lord repays in kind,
love for love, John 14. 21. He that loves me, my Father will love him; and we
will come and make our abode with him. Here is sweet communion with God in the
exercises of love. O what a rich trade do Christians drive this way in their
duties and exercises of graces!

4ly, To mention no more, in the duties of Passive Obedience, Christians are
enabled to exercise their patience, meekness, and long suffering for Christ; in
return to which, the Lord gives them the singular consolations of his Spirit.
Double returns of joy; The Spirit of glory and of God rests upon them, 1 Pet.
4. 13, 14. The Lord strengthens them with passive fortitude, with all might in
the inner-man, unto all long-suffering; but the reward of that long-suffering
is joyfulness, Col. 1. 11. This is the trade they drive with Heaven.

Thirdly, Beside communion with God in the contemplation of his attributes, and
graces exercised in the course of duties; there is another method of communion
with God in the way of his Providence; for therein also his people walk with
him: To give a taste of this, let us consider Providence in a fourfold aspect
upon the people of God.

1. There are afflictive providence, rods and rebukes, wherewith the Lord
chastens his children; this is the discipline of his house, in answer whereunto
gracious Souls return meek and childlike submission; a fruit of the Spirit of
Adoption; they are brought to accept the punishment of their iniquities. And
herein lies communion with God under the rod; this return to the rod may not be
presently made; for there is much stubborness unmortified in the best hearts,
Heb. I2. 7. but this is the fruit it shall yield, and when it does, there is
real communion between God and the afflicted Soul. Let not Christians mistake
themselves, if when God is smiting they are humbling, searching, and blessing
God for the discoveries of sin made by their afflictions; admiring his wisdom,
in timing, moderating, and choosing the rod; kissing it with a childlike
submission, and saying it is good for me that I have been afflicted; that Soul
has real communion with God, though it may be for a time without joy.

2ly, There are times wherein providence straightens the people of God; when
the waters of comfort ebb, and run very low; wants pinch; if then the Soul
returns filial dependence upon fatherly care, saying with David, Psalm. 23. 1.
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want: It belongs to him to provide, and to
me to depend: I will trust my Fathers care and love. Here now is sweet
communion with God under pinching wants. The wants of the Body enrich the Soul:
Outward straightnings are the occasions of inward enlargments. O see from hence
how good it is to have an interest in God as a Father, whatever changes of
providence may come upon you.

Thirdly, There are seasons wherein the Lord exposes his people to eminent and
visible dangers; when to the Eye of sense there is no way of escape. Now when
this produces trust in God, and resignation to the pleasure of his Will; here
is communion with God in times of distress and difficulty; thus David, Psalm.
56. 3. At what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. q. d. Father, I see a
storm rising, thy poor child comes under his Fathers roof for she^^er; for
whether should a distressed Child go, but to his Father? And then as to the
issues and events of doubtful providence, when the Soul resigns and leaves it
self to the wise disposal of the Will of God, as David, in 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.
Here am I, let him do with me as seems good in his sight. This is real and
sweet communion with God in his providence. And so much for the nature of
communion with God.

Secondly, In the next place, I shall evidence the reality of communion with
God; and prove it to be no fancy. I confess it grieves me to be put upon the
proof of this, but the Atheism, and profaneness of the age we live in seems to
make it necessary; for many men will allow nothing for certain but what falls
under the cognizance of ^ense. And oh, that they had their Spiritual senses
exercised, then they would sensibly discern the reality of these things: but to
put the matter out of question, I shall evidence the truth and reality of the
Saints communion with God diverse ways.

First, 1. Evid.
From the Saints union with Christ; if there be a union betwixt Christ and
believers, then of necessity there must be a communion between them also. Now
the whole Word of God which you profess to be the rule of your faith, plainly
asserts this union betwixt Christ and believers; a union like that betwixt the
branches and the root, John 15. 4, 5. or that betwixt the head and the members,
Ephesians* 4. 16. Now if Christ be to believers as the root to the branches, and as
the head to the members; then of necessity there must be a communion between
them: for if there were not a communion, there could be no communications, and
if no communications no life. For it is by the communication of vital fap and
spirits, from the root and from the head, that the branches and members subsist
and live.

Secondly, 2. Evid.
There is a cohabitation of Christ with believers; he dwells with them, yea, he
dwells in the^^ 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell in them, and walk in the^^. The Soul
of a believer is the Temple of Christ, yea, his living Temple, 1 Pet. 2. 5. And
if Christ dwell with them, yea, if he dwell in them and walk in them, then
certainly there must be communion betwixt him and them; if they live together,
they must converse together. A man indeed may dwell in his house, and yet
cannot be said to have communion with it; but the Saints are a living house,
they are the living. Temples of Christ; and he cannot dwell in such Temples
capable of communion with him, and yet have no communion with them.

Thirdly, 3 Evid.
The reality of communion betwixt God and the Saints is undeniably evinced from
all the Spiritual relations into which God has taken them. Every believer is
the Child of God, and the Spouse of Christ. God is the believer Father, and the
Church is the Lambs Wife. Christ calls the believer not only his Servant, but
Friend; hence forth I call you not Servants but Friends, etc. Now, if God be
the believers Father, and the believer be Gods own Child, certainly there must
be communion between them. If Christ be the believers Husband, and the believer
be Christ's Spouse, there must be communion between him and them. What, no
communion between the Father and his Children, the Husband and the Wife? We
must either renounce and deny all such relations to him, and therein renounce
our Bibles; or else yield the conclusion, that there is a real communion
betwixt Christ and believers.

Fourthly, The reality of communion with God evidently appears from the
institution, 4 Evid.
and appointment of so many Ordinances, and duties of Religion, on purpose to
maintain daily communion betwixt Christ and his People. As to instance but in
that one institution of Prayer, a duty appointed on purpose for the Souls
meeting with God, and communion with him, James 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he
will draw nigh to you. Now to what purpose can it be conceived such an
Ordinance is appointed for the Souls drawing nigh to God, and God to it; if
there be no such thing as communion to be enjoyed with him? If communion with
God were a mere Phantome, as the carnal World thinks it to be, what
encouragement have the Saints to bow their knees to the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ? But surely there is an access to God in prayer, Ephesians. 3.
12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidenc^. Access to what? If God
be not there, and that there can be no communion with him, what means that
access? I will meet you, says the Lord, and I will commune with you in every
place where I record my name, Exodus 25. 22. Certainly duties had never been
appointed, but for the sake of Gods communing with us, and ours with him.

Fifthly, This is yet further evidenced from the mutual desires both of Christ,
5 Evid,
and his people to be in sweet and intimate communion one with the other. The
Scripture speaks much of the Saints vehement desires of communion with Christ,
and of Christ's desires after communion with the Saints, and of both jointly.
The Saints desires after communion with him, are frequent in all the
Scriptures, see Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 42. 1. Psalm. 119. 20. and the like
throughout the New Testament. And Christ is no less desirous, yea, he is much
more desirous of communion with us than we are with him. Consider that
expression of his to the Spouse, in Cant. 8. 13. O thou that dwell in the
Gardens, the companions h^rken to thy voice, cause me to hear it. As if he
should say, O my people, you frequently converse one with another, you talk
daily together; why shall not you and I converse one with another? You speak
often to men, O that you would speak more frequently to me! Let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance
comely. And then these desires are mutually expressed one to another, Rev. 22. 20.
Surely (says Christ) I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, says the
Church: Now if there be such vehement mutual desires after communion betwixt
Christ and his people in this World; then certainly there is such a thing as
real communion between them, or else both must live a very restless and
dissatisfied life.

Sixthly, The mutual complaints that are found on both sides of the
interruption of communion, 6 Evid.
plainly proves there is such a thing. If God complain of his people for their
estrangements from him, and the Saints complain to God about his silence to
them; and the hidings of his face from them: Surely then there must be a
communion between them, or else there could be no ground of complaints for the
interruptions of it. But it is manifest God does complain of his people for
their estrangments from him, Ier. 2. 5. Thus says the Lord, I remember thee
the kindness of thy youth, and the love of thy espousals. What iniquity have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? As if he should say,
You and I have been better acquainted in days past; what cause have I given for
your estrangments from me? And thus Christ in like manner complains of the
Church of Ephesus, after he had commended many things in her, yet one thing
grieves and troubles him, Rev. 2. 4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee,
because thou have left thy first love. And then on the other side, when the
Lord hids his face and seems to estrange himself from his people; what sad
laments and moans do they make about it? As an affliction they know not how to
bear. Thus Heman, Psalm. 88. 14. Lord, why castests thou off my Soul? Why hidest
thou thy face from me? So Psalm. 27. 9. Hide not thy face from me, put not thy
servant away in anger. This is what they cannot bear.

Seventhly, 7 Evid*
The reality of communion with God is made visible to others, in the sensible
effects of it upon the Saints that enjoy it. There are visible signs and tokens
of it appearing to the conviction of others. Thus that marvelous change that
appeared upon the very countenance of Hannah after she had poured her heart in
prayer, and the Lord had answered her, it is noted, 1 Samuel 1. 18. She went away
and her countenance was no more sad. You might have read in her face, that God
had spoken peace and satisfaction to her heart. Thus when the Disciples had
been with Christ, the mark of communion with him was visible to others, Acts 4.
13. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, they marvelled; and took
knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus. It Is sweet, Christian, when the
heavenly cheariness, and spirituality of thy converses with men, shall convince
others that thou have been with Jesus.

Eighthly, 8 Evid.
We may prove the reality of communion with God, from the impossibility of
sustaining those troubles the Saints do without it. If prayers did not go up,
and answers come down, there were no living for a Christian in this World.
Prayer is the outlet of the Saints sorrows, and the inlet of their supports
and comforts, Romans 8. 26. Say not other men have their troubles as well as the
Saints, and yet they make a shift to bear them without the help of communion
with God. It Is true, carnal men have their troubles, and those troubles are
often too heavy for them. The sorrows of the world work death; but carnal men
have no such troubles as the Saints have; for they have their inward Spiritual
troubles, as well as their outward troubles. And inward troubles are the
sinking troubles; but this way the strength of God comes in to succor them: and
except they had a God to go to, and fetch comfort from, they could never bear
them, Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted unless ^ had believed. Paul had sunk under
the buffetings of Satan, unless he had gone once and again to his God, and
received this answer, My grace is sufficient for thee; 2 Cor. 12. 9.

Ninthly, We conclude the reality of communion with God, 9 Evid.
from the end of the Saints vocation. We read frequently in Scripture of
effectual calling; now what is that to which God calls his people out of the
state of nature, but unto fellowship and communion with Jesus Christ? 1 Cor. 1.
9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his son Jesus
Christ our Lord. They are called, you see, in to a life of communion with
Christ; therefore certainly there is such a communion: else the Saints are
called to the enjoyment of a fancy, instead of a privilege, which is the
greatest reproach that can be cast upon the faithful God that called them.

Lastly, 10 Evid.
In a word, the characters and descriptions given to the Saints in Scripture
evidently prove their life of communion with God. The Men of this World are
manifestly distinguished from the people of God in Scripture; they are called,
The Children of this World; the Saints, The Children of light, Luke 16. 8. They
are said to be after the flesh, Saints to be after the Spirit, Romans 8. 5. they
mind earthly things, but the Saints conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3. 19, 20.
By all which it undeniably appears that there is a reality in the Doctrine of
communion betwixt Christ and his people. We are not imposed upon, it is no
cunningly devised fable; but a thing whose foundation is as sure as its nature
is sweet.

Thirdly, In the last place, I shall show you the transcendent excellency of
this life of communion with God; it is the life of our Life, the joy of our
Hearts, a Heaven upon Earth; as will appear by the Twenty Excellencies thereof
following.

I. Excellency.
It is the Assimilating instrument whereby the Soul is molded and fashioned
after the image of God. This is the Excellency of communion with God, to make
the Soul like him. There is a twofold assimilation, or conformity of the Soul
to God, the one perfect and complete, the other inchoate and in part. Perfect
assimilation is the privilege of the perfect state, resulting from the
immediate vision and perfect communion the Soul has with God in glory, 1 John
3* 2* When he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Perfect vision produces perfect assimilation; but the Souls assimilation or
imperfect conformity to God in this World, is wrought and gradually carried on
by daily communion with him. And as our communion with God here, grows up more
and more into spirituality and power, so in an answerable degree does our
conformity to him advance, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open face, beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord; are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. All sorts of communion among men
have an assimilating efficacy; he that walks in vain company, is made vainer
than he was before; and he that walks in spiritual heavenly company will be
ordinarily more serious than he was before; but nothing so transforms the
Spirit of a man, as communion with God does. Those are most like unto God that
converse most frequently with him. The beauty of the Lord is upon those Souls;
it figures the Spirit of a Man after the Divine pattern. That Is the first
Excellency of communion with God, it assimilates them to God.

II. Excellency.
It is the beauty of the Soul, in the Eyes of God, and all good men; it makes
the face to shine. No outward splendour attracts like this; it makes a man the
most desirable companion in the whole World, 1 John 1. 3. These things have I
written unto you, that you might have fellowship with us, and truly our
fellowship is with the Father and with the Son Jesus Christ. This was the great
and only inducement the Apostle makes use of to draw the World into fellowship
with the Saints; that their fellowship is with God. And if there were ten
thousand other inducements, yet none like this. You read of a blessed time,
Zach. 12. When the Earth shall be full of holiness; when the Jews that are now
as a lost generation to the Eye of sense, shall be called, and an eminent
degree of sanctification shall be visible in them; and then see the effect of
this, verse. 23. In those days ten men shall take hold, out of all languages, of
the Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew; saying, We
will go with you for we have heard that God is with you. This is the powerful
attractive, the Lord is with you; it is the effect of communion with God which
makes the righteous more excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. what a
vast and visible difference does this make between one man and another! How
heavenly sweet and desirable, are the converses and company of some men! How
frothy, burdensoin, and unprofitable is the company of others! And what makes
the difference but only this, the one walks in communion with God, the other is
alienated from the life of God?

III. Excellency.
It is the Center which rests the motions of a weary Soul; it is the Rest and
Refreshment of a man's Spirit, Psalm. 116. 7. Return unto thy rest, O my Soul.
When we attain perfect Communion with God in Heaven, we attain to perfect Rest;
and all the Rest the Spirit of man finds on Earth, is found in Communion with
God. Take a sanctified person who has intermitted for some time his communion
with the Lord; and ask him, is your Soul at rest and ease? He will tell you no.
The motions of his Soul, are like those of a member out of Joint, neither
comely, nor easy. Let that man recover his spiritual frame again, and with it
he recovers his Rest and Comfort. Christians, you meet with variety of troubles
in this World; many a sweet Comfort cut off, many a hopeful project dashed by
the hand of Providence; and what think you is the meaning, of those blasting,
disappointing Providence? Surely, this is their design and errand, to disturb
your false rest in the bosom of the Creature; to pluck away those pillows you
were laying your Heads upon, that thereby you might be reduced unto God, and
recover your lost communion with him; and say with David, Return unto thy rest,
O my Soul. Sometimes we are settling our selves to rest in an Estate, in a
Child, or the like: at this time it is usual with God to say, Go Losses smite
and blast such a man's Estate, go Death, and take away the desire of his Eyes
with a stroke, that my Child may find rest nowhere but in me. God is the Ark,
the Soul like the Dove, Noah sent forth, let it fly where it will, it shall
find no rest till it comes back to God.

IV. Excellency.
It is the Desire of all gracious souls throughout the World. Wherever there is
a gracious Soul, the desires of that Soul are working after communion with God;
as Christ was called, The desire of all Nations; so communion with him, is The
desire of all Saints: and this speaks the excellency of it, Psalm. 27. 4. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I might dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to see the beauty of the Lord,
and to enquire in his Temple. (i. e.) To enjoy communion with him in the
public duties of his worship. One thing have I desired, that is, one thing
above all other things; such an one, as if God shall give me, I can comfortably
bear the want of all other things. Let him deny me what he will, if so be he
will not deny me this one thing; this one thing shall richly recompense the
want of all other things. Hence the desires of the Saints are so intense and
fervent after this one thing, Psalm. 42. 1. My Soul pants after thee O God;
and Psalm. 119. 81. My Soul faints for thy Salvation, Psalm. 101. 2. When will thou come unto me? No duties can satisfy without it; the Soul cannot bear the
delays, much less the denials of it. They reckon their lives worth nothing
without it. Ministers may come, Ordinances and Sabbaths may come; but there is
no satisfaction to the desires of a gracious Heart till God come too. O when
will thou come unto me?

V. Excellency.
As it is the Desire, so it is the Delight of all the Children of God both in
Heaven and Earth; as communion with the Saints is the delight of Christ, Cant.
2. 14. Let me hear thy voice. And again, Cant. 8. 13. The companions harken to
thy voice, cause me to hear it. So communion with Christ is the delight of his
people, Cant. 2. 3. I sat under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit
was sweet unto my taste. It Is the pleasure of Christ to see the yearning
Countenances, the blushing Cheeks, the droping Eyes of his people upon their
Knees. And it is the delight of the Saints to see a smile upon his Face, to
hear a voice of pardon and peace from his Lips. I must tell you Christians, you
must look for no such delights as these in any earthly enjoyment; none better
than these till you come home to glory. Communion with God then appears most
excellent in as much as it is found to be the desire and delight of all
gracious Souls.

VI. Excellency.
It Is the Envy of Satan; that which cuts and grates that wicked Spirit. O how
it grates and galls that proud and envious Spirit, to see Men and Women
enjoying the felicity and pleasure of that communion with God, from which he
himself is fallen, and cut off for ever! To see the Saints embosomed in
delightful communion with Christ, whilst himself feels the pangs of horror and
despair! This is what he cannot endure to behold. And therefore you shall find
in your experience, that times of communion with God, are usually buisie times
of temptations from the Devil, Zach. 3. 1. And he showed me Joshua the high
Priest standing before the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist
him. It Is well for thee Christian, that thou have an Advocate standing at Gods
right hand to resist and frustrate his attempts upon thee; otherwise Satan
would this way destroy your communion with God, and make that which is now your
delight, to be your terror. Many ways does the Devil oppose the Saints
communion with God. Sometimes he labors to divert them from it. This business
shall fall in, or that occasion fall out, on purpose to divert thy Souls
approach to God; but if he cannot prevail there, then he labors to distract
your thoughts, and break them into a thousand vanities. Or if he succeed not
there, then he attacks you in your return from duty, with Spiritual Pride,
Security, etc. These fierce oppositions of Hell discover the worth and
excellency of communion with God.

VII. Excellency.
It Is the End of all Ordinances and Duties of Religion; God has instituted
every Ordinance and Duty, whether public or private, to beget and maintain
communion betwixt himself and our Souls. What are Ordinances, Duties, and
Graces, but perspective Glasses to give us a sight of God, and help us to
communion with him? God never intended his Ordinances to be our rest, but
mediums and instruments of communion with himself, who is our true rest. When
we go into a Boat, it is not with an intention to dwell and rest there, but to
Ferry us over the Water, where our business lies. If a Man miss of communion
with God in the best Ordinances or Duty, it yields him little comfort. He comes
back from it, like a man that has traveled a great many miles, to meet a dear
friend, upon special and important business; but met with disappointment, and
returns sad, and dissatisfied. God appoints Ordinances to be meeting places
with our God in this World, Exodus 25. 21, 22. Thou shall put the mercy-seat
above upon the Ark, and in the Ark thou shall p^^ the testimony that I shall
give thee; and there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from
above the mercy-seat, from between the two Cherubims. It was not the sight of
the golden Cherubims, or of the Ark overlaid with pure gold, that could have
satisfied Moses; had not the special presence of God been there, and he had had
communion with them. O God (says David) my Soul thirsts for thee, that I
might see thy beauty and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary,
Psalm. 63. 1, 2. Magnificent structures, artificial ornaments of the places of
Worship, are of little account with a gracious Soul. It Is the presence of God,
and communion with him, which is the beauty and glory the Saints desire to
behold.

VIII. Excellency.
It Is the Evidence of our Union with Christ, and interest in him. All Union
with Christ must evidence its self by a life of communion with him, or our
pretensions to it are vain and groundless. There be many of you (I wish there
were more) enquiring after evidences and signs of your union with Christ; why,
here is an Evidence that can never fail you; do you live in communion with him?
May your life be called a walking with God, as Enoch's was? Then you may be
sure you have union with him; and this is so sure a sign, as death it self,
(which uses to discover the vanity of false signs) will never be able to
destroy, 2 Kings 20. 2, 3. Remember now, O Lord, (says Hezechiah) that I have
walked before thee in truth, and in a perfect Heart. O Professors, 'twill be a
dreadful thing, (whatever ungrounded hopes, and false comforts you now have) to
find them shrinking away from you as certainly they will do at death, and all
upon this account; I have been a man of knowledge, I have been frequent in the
external duties of Religion, but my heart was not in them; I had no communion
with the Lord in them, and now God is a terror to my Soul. I am going to his
awful bar, and have not one sound evidence to carry a long with me; that is a
remarkable place, Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the
Spirit; that is, let us evidence the life of grace in us by exercising that
grace in a life of communion with God. When all is said, this is the surest
evidence of our union with Christ, and no gifts or performances whatsoever can
amount to an evidence of our union with Christ without it.

IX. Excellency.
It Is Ease in all pains; sweet and sensible ease to a troubled Soul. Look as
the breathing of a vein cools, eases, and refreshes a severish body; so the
opening of the Soul by acts of communion with God, gives sensible ease to a
burdened Soul; griefs are eased by groans heavenward. Many Souls are deep
laden with their own fears, cares and distresses; no refreshment for such a
Soul, no such Anodine in the whole World as communion with God is, Psalm. 32. 1,
2, 3. How did troubles boil in David's Soul? Night and day Gods hand was heavy
on him; his Soul, as Elihu speaks, was like bottles full of new Wine, he must
speak to God that he may be refreshed; and so he did and was refreshed by it. I
said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. It would grieve one to see how many poor distressed Souls
carry their troubles up and down the World, making their complaints to one, and
another; but no ease. Away to thy God poor Christian, get thee into thy closet,
pour out thy Soul before him; and that ease which thou seek in vain,
elsewhere, will there be found, or nowhere.

X. Excellency.
It Is Food to the Soul; and the most delicious, pleasant, proper and satisfying
food that ever it tasted; it is hidden Manna, Rev. 2. 17. By these things, O
Lord, do men live, and in them is the life of their Soul, Isa. 38. 16. A
regenerate Soul cannot live without it; their bodies can live as well without
bread or breath, as their Souls without communion with God; it is more than
their necessary food. Here they find what they truly call marrow and fatness,
Psalm. 63. 5, 6. O the satisfaction and support they suck out of spiritual
things, by thoughts and meditations upon them! To be spiritually minded is life
and peace, Romans 8. 6. The delicates upon Princes Tables are husks and chaff to
this. Crows and Vultures can live upon the Carrion of this World; but a renewed
Soul cannot subsist long without God. Let such a Soul be diverted for a time
from its usual refreshments this way, and he shall find something within
paining him, like the sucking and drawing of an empty stomach; it is Angels
food, it is that your Souls must live upon throughout Eternity, and most happily
too.

XI. Excellency.
It Is the Guard of the Soul against the assaults of temptation. It Is like a
Shield advanced against the fiery darts of that wicked one. Your safety and
security lies in drawing nigh to God, Psalm. 73. 27, 28. They that are far from
thee shall perish. But it is good for me to draw near to God. It Is good indeed,
not only the good of comfort, but the good of safety is in it, Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him. You know the gracious
presence of God is your shield and safety; and if you will have the Lord thus
present with you in all your fears, straights and dangers, see that you keep
near to him in the Duties of communion, For the Lord is with you whilst you are
with him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.

XII. Excellency.
It Is the Honor of the Soul, and the greatest honor that ever God conferred
on any creature; it is the glory of the holy Angels in Heaven to be always
beholding the face of God, Matthew. 18. 10. Oh! that God should admit poor dust
and ashes unto such a nearness to himself! To walk with a King, and have
frequent converse with him, puts a great deal of honor upon a Subject; but the
Saints walk with God, so did Enoch, so do all the Saints, 1 John 1. 3. Truly
our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus. They have
liberty and access with confidence; the Lord as it were delivers them the
golden key of prayer, by which they may come into his presence on all
occasions, with the freedom of Children to a Father.

XIII. Excellency.
It Is the Instrument of mortification; and the most excellent and successful
instrument for that purpose in all the World, Gal. 5. 16. This I say then, Walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the works of the flesh. Walking in the
Spirit is the same thing with walking in communion with God. Now, says the
Apostle, if you thus walk in the Spirit, in the acting of faith, love and
obedience, throughout the course of holy duties, the effect of this will be,
that ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; he does not say, You shall not
feel the motions of sin in you, or temptations to sin assaulting you; but, he
says, you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; sin shall not have dominion
over you; this will let out the lifeblood of sin. A temptation overcome this
way, is more effectually subdued than by all the vows, resolutions, and
external means in the World; as a Candle that is blown out with a puff of
breath, may be rekindled by another puff; but if it be quenched in water, it is
not so easily lighted again. So it is here, you never find that power or
success in temptations, when your hearts are up with God in the exercises of
faith and love, as you do when your hearts hang loose from him and dead toward
him. The Schoolmen assign this as one reason why the Saints in Heaven are
impeccable, no sin can fasten upon them, because, say they, they there enjoy
the beatifical vision of God. This is sure, the more communion any man has
with God on Earth, the freer he lives from the power of his corruptions.

XIV. Excellency.
It Is the Kernel of all Duties and Ordinances: Words, gestures, etc. are but
the integuments, husks, and shells of Duties. Communion with God is the sweet
Kernel, the pleasant and nourishing food which lies within them; you see the
fruits of the Earth are covered and defended by husks, shells, and such like
integuments; within which lie the pleasant kernels and grains, and that is the
food. The Hypocrite who goes no farther than the externals of Religion, is
therefore said to feed of Ashes, Isa. 44. 20. to spend his money for that which
is not bread, and his labor for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2. He
feeds but upon husks, in which there is little pleasure or nourishment; what a
poor house does a Hypocrite keep? Words, Gestures, Ceremonies of Religion will
never fill the Soul; but communion with God is substantial nourishment. My
Soul, says David, shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, whilst I
think and meditate on thee, Psalm. 63. 5, 6. It would grieve ones heart to think
what airy things many Souls satisfy themselves with; feeding like Ephraim upon
the wind, well contented if they can but shuffle over a few heartless empty
duties; whilst the Saints feed upon this hidden Manna, are feasted as it were
with Angels food.

XV. Excellency.
It Is the Light of the Soul in darkness; and the pleasantest light that ever
shone upon the Soul of Man: There Is many a Soul which walks in darkness; some
in the darkness of ignorance and unbelief, the most dismal of all darkness,
except that in Hell. There are others who are Children of light, in a state of
reconciliation, yet walk in the darkness of outward afflictions, and inward
desertions and temptations; but as soon as ever the light of Gods countenance
shines upon the Soul in the duties of communion with him, that darkness is
dissipated and scattered; it is all light within him, and round about him, Psalm.
34. 5. They looked unto him, and were enlightened: they looked, there is faith
acted in Duty; and were enlightened, there is the sweet effect of Faith. The
horrors and troubles of gracious Souls shrink away upon the rising of this
cheerful light; as wild Beasts come out of their Dens in the darkness of the
night, and shrink back again into them when the Sun arises, Psalm. 104. 20, 21,
22. So do the fears, and inward troubles of the people of God, when this light
shines upon their Souls. Nay, more, this is a light which scatters the very
darkness of death it self. It was the saying of a worthy Divine of Germany,
upon his deathbed, when his Eyesight was gone, being asked how it was within?
Why, said he, though all be dark about me, yet pointing as well as he could to
his breast, hi^sat lucis, here is light enough.

XVI. Excellency.
It Is Liberty to the straightned Soul; and the most comfortable and excellent
liberty in the whole World. He only walks at liberty that walks with God, Psalm.
119. 45. I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. Wicked men cry out of
bands and cords in Religion, they look upon the duties of goldliness as the
greatest bondage and thraldom in the whole World, Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. q. d. Away with this
strictness and precisness, it extinguishes the joy and pleasure of our lives;
give us our Cups instead of Bibles; our profane Songs instead of Spiritual
Psalms; our Sports and Past-times instead of Prayers and Sermons. Alas, poor
creatures, how do they dance in their shackles and chains! When in reality the
sweetest liberty is enjoyed in those Duties at which they thus snuff. The Law
of Christ is the Law of Liberty; the Soul of man never enjoys more Liberty,
than when it is bound with the strictest bands of Duty to God. Here Is liberty
from enthralling lusts, and from enslaving fears. The Spirit of Life which is
in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of Sin and Death, Romans 8. 2.
And here is freedom indeed, If the Son make you free, then are you free indeed,
John 8. 36. And here is freedom from fears, Luke 1. 74, 75. Those that will not
endure any restraint from their lusts, they will have their freedom to sin; a
freedom they shall have, such as it is, Romans 6. 20. When ye were the servants
of sin, ye were free from righteousness. Let none therefore be prejudiced at
the ways of Duty, and strict Godliness. The law of Christ is the perfect law of
liberty, James 1. 25. Not liberty to sin, but liberty from sin.

XVII. Excellency.
It Is a Mercy purchased by the blood of Christ for Believers, and one of the
principal Mercies settled upon them by the new Covenant grant. A peculiar mercy
which none but the Redeemed of the Lord partake of; a mercy which cost the
blood of Christ to purchase it. I do not deny but there are thousands of other
mercies, bestowed upon the unregenerate; they have Health, Wealth, Children,
Honors, Pleasures, and all the delights of this Life: but for communion with
God, and the pleasures that result therefrom, they are incapable of these. No
supping with Christ upon such excellent privileges and mercies as these, till
the heart be opened to him by faith; you cannot come nigh to God, until you be
first made nigh by reconciliation, Ephesians. 2. 13. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. What
would your lives, Christians, be worth to you if this mercy were cut off from
you? There would be little sweetness, or savor in all your outward mercies,
were it not for this mercy that sweetens them all. And there is this difference
among many others, betwixt this mercy and all outward mercies. You may be cut
off from the enjoyment of those, you cannot from this; no prison can keep out
the Comforter. O bless God for this invaluable Mercy.

XVIII. Excellency.
It Is Natural to the new Creature; the inclination and instinct of the new
Creature leads to Communion with God. It Is as natural to the new Creature to
desire it, and work after it, as it is to the newborn babe to make to the
breast, 1 Pet 2. 2 As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that
ye may grow thereby. There is a law upon the regenerate part which inwardly,
and powerfully obliges it, to acts of Duty and converse with God in them.
Communion with God is a thing that rises out of the principles of grace. You
know all Creatures in this lower World act according to the Laws of Nature, the
Sun will rise, and the Sea will flow at its appointed time; and the gracious
Soul will make toward its God in the times and seasons of Communion with him.
They are not forced on to those Duties by the frights of Conscience, and the
fears of Hell, so much as by the natural inclination of the new Creature. Two
things demonstrate Communion with God to be co-natural to the regenerate part,
called the inner-man, and the hidden-man of the heart, viz. (1.) The
Restlesness of a gracious Soul without it, Cant. 3. 2. The Church in the first
verse had sought her beloved, but found him not; does she sit down satisfied in
his absence? No, no, I will rise now and go about the City, in the streets, and
in the broad ways; I will seek him whom my Soul loves. (2.) The Satisfaction
and Pleasure, the rest and delight which the Soul finds and feels in the
enjoyment of Communion with God, plainly shows it to be agreeable to the new
Nature, Psalm. 63. 5. My Soul shall be satisfied whilst I think on thee. And
when it is thus, then Duties become easy, and pleasant to the Soul, 1 John 5.
3. His commandments are not grievous. Yea, and such a Soul will be constant and
assiduous in those Duties. That which is natural, is constant, as well as
pleasant; what is the reason Hypocrites throw up the Duties of Religion, in
times of difficulty, but because they have not an inward principle agreeable to
them? The motives to Duty lie without them, not within them.

XIX. Excellency.
It Is the Occupation and trade of all sanctified persons, and the richest Trade
that was ever driven by men. This way they grow rich in Spiritual Treasures;
the Revenues of it are better than Silver and Gold: There be many of you have
Traded long for this World, and it comes to little; and had you gained your
designs you had gained but trifles. This is the rich and profitable occupation,
Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation is in Heaven. Our Commerce and Trade lies that
way, so that word signifies. There be few Christians that have driven this
Soul-enriching Trade, any considerable time, but can show some Spiritual
Treasures which they have gotten by it, Psalm. 119. 50. This I had because I
kept thy precepts. As Merchants can show the Gold and Silver, the Lands and
Houses, the rich Goods and Furniture, which they have gotten by their succesful
Adventures abroad; and tell their Friends, so much I got by such a Voyage, and
so much by another. So Christians have invaluable treasures, though their
humility conceals them, which they have gotten by this heavenly Trade of
Communion with God. Their Souls were weak, and by Communion with God they have
gotten strength, Psalm. 13 8. 3. I cried, and thou strengthnedst me with
strength in my Soul. They have gotten peace by it, a treasure inestimable,
Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them. They have gotten purity by it, Psalm. 119. 3. They do no iniquity,
that walk in thy ways. O what rich returns are here! Nay, they get sometimes
full assurance by it. The riches of both the Indies will not purchase from a
Christian the least of these mercies. These are the rich rewards of our pains
in the Duties of Religion; In keeping thy Commandments there is great reward.

XX. Excellency.
It Is Oil to the Wheels of Obedience, which makes the Soul go on cheerfully in
the ways of the Lord, Psalm. 119. 32. Then will I run the ways of thy
Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. Non tardat uncta rota. Oyled
Wheels run trig and nimble. How prompt and ready for any Duty of Obedience, is
a Soul under the influences of Communion with God! Then as Isaiah having gotten
a sight of God, Here am I, Lord, send me, Isa. 6. 8. Now the Soul can turn its
hand to Duties, Of 1. Active. And 2. Passive Obedience.



I. Hereby the Soul is prepared and fitted for the Duties of Active Obedience,
to which it applies it self with pleasure and delight, Psalm. 43. 3, 4. Then
will I go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy; or as it is in the
Hebrew, the gladness of my joy. It goes to prayer as an hungry man to a feast,
or as a covetuous man to his treasures, Psalm. 119. 14. I have rejoiced in the
way of thy commandments as much as in all riches.

II. It prepares the Soul for Passive Obedience; makes a man to rejoice in his
sufferings, Col. 1. 24. 'Twill make a Christian stand as Porters in London do,
at the Merchants doors, to receive any burden or load they have to lay upon
their shoulders, and thank them to be so employed: This joy of the Lord is
their strength, Neh. 8. 10. A Christian under the cheerful influences of near
communion with God, can with more cheerfulness lay down his neck for Christ,
than other men can lay out a shilling for him. In all these Twenty particulars
you have an account of the Excellency of this privilege; but oh! How short an
account have I given of it! What remains, is the Application of this point, in
a double Use, 1. Of Information. 2. Of Exhortation.


First, For Information in the following Inferences.

I. Inference.
How sure and certain a thing is it that there is a God, and a state of glory
prepared in Heaven for sanctified Souls?

These things are undeniable, God has set them before our spiritual Eyes and
senses; beside the revelation of it in the Gospel, which singly makes it
infallible; the Lord, for our abundant satisfaction, has brought these things
down to the touch and test of our Spiritual senses and experiences. You that
have had so many sights of God by faith, so many sweet tastes of Heaven in the
Duties of Religion, O what a confirmation and ^eal have you of the reality of
invisible things! You may say of Heaven, and the joys above, as the Apostle did
of him that purchased it, 1 John 1. 1. That which our Eyes have seen, and our
Ears have heard, and our Hands have handled, etc. For God has set these things
in some degree before your very Eyes, and put the first fruits of them into
your own Hands. The sweet relish of the joy of the Lord is upon the very palate
of your Souls; to this Spiritual sense of the blieving Hebrews the Apostle
appealed, Heb. 10. 34. when he said, Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven a better and an enduring
substance. This knowing in our selves is more certain and sweet than all the
traditional knowledge we get from the reports of others, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom
having not seen ye love, whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. There is more of Heaven felt
and tasted in this World than men are aware of; it is one thing to hear of such
Countries as Spain, Italy, Smirna, by the discourses and reports we heard of
them in our childhood, and another thing to understand those Countries by the
rich commodities imported from them in the way of our Trade and Commerce. O did
we but know what other Christians have felt and tasted, we would not have such
staggering thoughts about invisible things; But the secret comforts of Religion
are, and ought to be for the most part enclosed things. Religion lays not all
open; the Christians life is a hidden life.

II. Inference.
If such an height of Communion with God be attainable on Earth, then most
Christians live below the duties and comforts of Christianity.

Alas, the best of us are but at the foot of this pleasant Mount Pisga; as we
are but in the infancy of our Graces, so we are but in the infancy of our
Comforts; what a poor House is kept by many of Gods own Children? Living
between hopes and fears, seldom tasting the riches and pleasures, the joys and
comforts of assurance; and will you know the reasons of it, there are Five
things which usually keep them poor and low as to Spiritual Joys and Comforts.
(1.) The encumbrances of the World, which divert them from, or distract them in
their duties of Communion with God; and so keep them low in their Spiritual
Comforts: They have so much to do on Earth, that they have little time for
Heavenly employments. Oh, what a noise and din do the trifles of this World
make in the Heads and Hearts of many Christians! How dear do we pay for such
trifles as these? (2.) A Spirit of formality creeping in to the duties of
Religion, impoverishes the vital Spirit thereof; like the wanton embraces of
the Ivy, which binds and starves the Tree it clasps about. Religion cannot
thrive under formality; and it is difficult to keep out formality in a settled
course of Duty, and much more when Duties are intermitted. (3.) The business of
temptations pestering the minds of many Christians; especially such as are of
melancholy; constitutions; how importunate and restless are these temptations
with some Christians? They can make little comfort or advantage out of Duty by
reason of them. (4.) Heart-apostacy, inward decays of our first love, is
another reason why our Duties prosper so little, Rev. 2. 4. Thou have left thy
first love. You were not wont to serve God with such coldness. (5.) In a word,
Spiritual pride impoverishes our Comforts. The joys of the Spirit, like brisk
Wines, are too strong for our weak heads. For these causes many Christians are
kept low in Spiritual comforts.

III. Inference.
How sweet and desirable is the society of the Saints! it must needs be
desirable to walk with them, who walk with God, 1 John 1. 3. No such companions
as the Saints. What benefit or pleasure can we find in converses with sensual
worldlings? All we can carry away out of such company is guilt, or grief. All
my delights, says David, is in the Saints, and in the excellent of the Earth,
which excel in virtue, Psalm. 16. 3. And their society would certainly be much
more sweet and desirable than it is, did they live more in Communion with God
than they do. There was a time when the Communion of the Saints was exceeding
lovely, Mal. 3. 16. Acts 2. 46, 47. The Lord restore it, to its primitive glory
and sweetness.

IV. Inference.
What an unspeakable Mercy is Conversion which lets the Soul into such a state
of Spiritual pleasure?

Here Is the beginning of your acquaintance with God, the first taste of
Spiritual pleasures, of which there shall never be an end. All the time men
have spent in the World in an unconverted state, has been a time of
estrangement and alienation from God; when the Lord brings a man to Chris, in
the way of Conversion, he then begins his first acquaintance with God, Job 22.
21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and ^e at peace, thereby good shall come
unto thee. This is your first acquaintance with the Lord, which will be a
growing thing; every visit you give him in prayer increases your acquaintance,
and begets more intimacy, and humble holy familiarity, betwixt him and you. And
oh, what a paradise of pleasure does this let the Soul into! The life of
Religion abounds with pleasures, Psalm. 16. 11. All his ways are ways of
pleasantness, and his paths are peace, Prove. 3. 17. Now you know where to go
and unload any trouble that presses your Hearts; whatever prejudices and
scandals Satan and his instruments cast upon Religion; this I will affirm of
it, that that man must necessarily be a stranger to true pleasure, and empty of
real comfort, who is a stranger to Christ and the duties of Communion with him.
It Is true, here is no allowance for sinful pleasures, nor any want of Spiritual
pleasures. Bless God therefore for converting grace, you that have it; and list
up a cry to Heaven for it, you that want it.

V. Inference.
Lastly, If there be so much delight and pleasure in our imperfect and often
interrupted Communion with God here; O then, what is Heaven! What are the
immediate visions of his face in the perfect state? 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. You have heard glorious and
ravishing reports in the Gospel of that blessed future state, things which the
Angles desire to look into. You have felt and tasted joys unspeakable, and full
of glory, in the actings of your faith and love upon Christ; yet all that you
have heard, and all that you have felt and tasted in the way to glory, falls so
short of the perfection and blessedness of that state, that Heaven will and
must be a great surprise to them that have now the greatest acquaintance with
it. Though the present comforts of the Saints are sometimes as much as they can
bear, for they seem to reel and stagger under the weight of them, Cant. 2. 5.
Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, I am sick of love. Yet, I say,
these high tides of present joy, are but shallows to the joys of his immediate
presence, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And as they run not so deep, so are they not constant
and continued as they shall be above, 2 These. 4. ult. Ever with the Lord. And
thus much for Information.

I. Use for Exhortation.
The last improvement of this Point will be by way of Exhortation, 1. To
Believers. 2. To Unbelievers.


First, Is the privileged state, into which all believers are admitted by
Conversion? Then strive to come up to the highest attainment of Communion with
God in this World; and be not contented with just so much grace as will secure
you from Hell; but labor after such an hight of grace and communion with God,
in the exercise thereof, as may bring you into the suburbs of Heaven on Earth.

Forget the things that are behind you, as to satisfaction in them, and press
toward the mark, for the prize of your high calling. It Is greatly to your loss
that you live at such a distance from God, and are so seldom with him. Think
not the ablest Ministers, or choicest Books, will ever be able to satisfy your
doubts, and comfort your hearts, whilst you let down your Communion with God to
a so low a degree. O that you might be persuaded now to hearken obediently to
three, or four necessary words of Counsel.

I. Counsel.
Make Communion with God the very level and aim of your Souls in all your
approaches to him in the Ordinances and Duties of Religion. Set it upon the
point of your compass, let it be the very thing your Souls design; let the
desires and hopes of Communion with God be the thing that draws you to every
Sermon and Prayer, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will
I seek after, that I may see the beauty of the Lord, and enquire after him in
his Temple. That was the mark David aimed at. And Men's success in Duty is
usually according to the Spiritual aims and intentions of their Hearts in them;
both sincerity and comfort lie much in men's ends.

II. Counsel.
In all your approaches to God, beg and plead hard with him for the
manifestations of his love and further Communications of his grace. Hear, O
Lord, when I cry with my voice; have mercy also upon me, and answer me. When
thou said, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face Lord will I
seek. Hide not thy face far from me, put not thy servant away in anger, Psalm
27. 7, 8, 9. How full and thick of pleas and arguments for Communion with God
was this prayer of David? Lord, I am come in obedience to thy command, thou
said, Seek ye my face, thou bidst me come to thee, and will thou put away thy
servant in anger? Thou have been my help, I have had sweet experience of thy
goodness, thou do not use to put me off, and turn me away empty.

III. Counsel.
Desire not comfort for comforts sake, but comforts and refreshments for
service and obedience sake; that by it you may be strengthened to go on in the
ways of your duty with more cheerfulness, Psalm. 119. 32. Then will I run the
ways of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. As if he should
say, O Lord, the comforts thou shall give me, shall be returned again in
cheerful services to thee. I desire them, as Oil to the Wheels of obedience,
not food for my pride.

IV. Counsel.
As ever you expect to be owners of much comfort in the ways of your Communion
with God, see that you be strict and circumspect in the course of your
Conversations. It Is the looseness and carelessness of our hearts and lives, which
impoverishes our Spiritual comforts. A little pride, a little carelessness
dashes and frustrates a great deal of comfort which was very near us, almost in
our hands; to allude to that, Hosea 7. 1. When I would have healed Israel, then
the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered. So here, just when (...) desire of thy
heart was come to the door, some sin stepped in the way of it. your iniquities,
says God, have separated between you and you God, and your sins have hid his
face from you, Isa. 59. 2. The Comforter, the holy Spirit, is sensible and
tender, he has quick resentments of your unkindnesses and offenses. As ever
therefore you expect comfort from him, beware of him, and grieve him not.

Secondly, In the last place, this Point speaks necessary counsel and advice to
Unbelievers; to all that live estranged from the life of God, and have done so
from the Womb, Psalm. 58. 3. To you the voice of the Redeemer sounds a summons
once more, Behold I stand at the door and knock. Oh, that at last you might be
prevailed with to comply with the merciful terms propounded by him. Will you
shut out a Savior bringing Salvation, Pardon and Peace with him? Christ is thy
rightful owner, and demands possession of thy Soul, if thou will now hear his
voice, thy former refusals shall never be objected. If thou still reject his
gracious offers, mercy may never more be tendered to thee; there is a call of
Christ, which will be the last call, and after that no more. Take heed what you
do, if you still demur and delay, your damnation is just, inevitable and
unexcusable. Hear me therefore you unregenerated Souls, in what rank or
condition soever providence has placed you in this World; whether you be rich
or poor, young or old, Masters or Servants, whether there be any stirrings of
conviction in your Consciences or not. For however your conditions in this
World differ from each other at present, there is one common misery hanging
over you all, if you continue in that state of unbelief you are now fixed in.

And first, Harken to the voice and call of Christ, you that are exalted by
providence above your poorer neighbors; you that have your Heads, Hands and
Hearts full of the World; men of trade and business; I have a few solemn
questions to ask you this day.

I. You have made many gainful bargains in your time, but what will all profit
you if the agreement be not made betwixt Christ and your Souls? Christ is that
treasure which only can enrich you, Matthew. 13. 44. Thou art a poor and
miserable wretch, whatever thou have gained of this World, if thou have not
gained Christ; thou have heaped up guilt with thy riches, which will more
torment thy Conscience hereafter than thy estate can yield thee comfort here.

2ly, You have made many assurances to secure your floating Estates, which you
call Policies; but what assurance have you gotten for your Souls? Are not they
exposed to eternal hazards? O impolitick man! To be so provident to secure
trifles, and so negligent in securing the richest treasure.

3ly, You have adjusted many accounts with men, but who shall make up your
accounts with God, if you be Christless? What shall it profit a man to gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? Matthew. 16. 26. Say not you have much
business under your Hands, and cannot allow time; you will have space enough
hereafter to reflect upon your folly.

Secondly, You that are poor and mean in the World, what say you, Will you have
two Hells, one here, and another hereafter? No comfort in this World, nor hope
for the next? Your expectations here laid in the dust, and your hopes for
Heaven built upon the sand? O, if you were once in Christ, how happy were you,
though you knew not where to fetch your next bread! Poor in the World, but rich
in faith; and heirs of the Kingdom which God has promised, James 2. 5. O
blessed state! If you had Christ, you had then a right to all things, I Cor. 3.
22, 23. You had then a Father to take care for you: but to be poor, and
Christless; no comfort from this World, nor hopes from the next; this is to be
truly miserable indeed. Your very straights and wants should prompt you to the
great duty I am now pressing on you; and methinks it should be matter of
encouragement that the greatest number of Christ's friends and followers came
out of that rank and order of men to which you belong.

Thirdly, You that are Seamen, floating so often upon the great deeps, you are
reckoned a third sort of persons between the living and the dead; you belong
not to the dead, because you yet breath; and scarcely to the living, because
you are continually so near death: What think you friends, have you no need of
a Savior? Do you live so secure from the reach and danger of death? Have your
lives been so pure, righteous, and innocent, who have been in the thick of
temptations in the World abroad? Ponder that Scripture, I Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, etc. Ponder it, I say, and think
whether you have not as great and pressing a necessity of Jesus Christ, as any
poor Souls under Heaven? You have had many temporal Salvations from God, great
and eminent deliverances, and will these satisfy you? Is it enough that your
bodies are delivered from the danger of the Sea, though your Souls sink and
perish in the Ocean of Gods wrath for ever? If you will yet accept Christ upon
his terms, all that you have done shall be forgiven, Isa. 55. 2. The Lord now
calls to you in a still voice, if you hear his voice well, if not you may
shortly hear his voice in the tempestuous storms without you, and a roaring
Conscience within you. Poor man, think what an interest in Christ will be
worth, were thou now (as shortly thou may be) floating upon a piece of wreck,
or shivering upon a cold and desolate rock, crying mercy, Lord, mercy: Well
mercy is now offered thee, but in vain will thou expect to find it, if thou
continue thus to despise and reject it.

Fourthly, You that are aged and full of days, hearken to the voice of Christ,
God has called upon you a long time: When you were young, you said, it is time
enough yet, we will mind these things when we are old, and come nearer to the
borders of Eternity. Well, now you are old, and just upon the borders of it;
will you indeed mind it now? you have left the great concernments of your Souls
to this time, this short, very short time: And do the temptations of your Youth
take hold upon your Age? what, delay and put off Christ still, as you were wont
to do? Poor Creatures, you are almost gone out of time, you have but a short
time to deliberate; what you do must be done quickly, or it can never be done:
Your night is even come upon you, when no man can work.

Fifthly, You that are young in the Bud or Flower of your time, Christ is a
Suitor for your first Love; he desires the kindness of your youth; your Spirits
are vigorous, your Hearts tender, your Affections flowing and impressive; you
are not yet entered into the encumbrances and distracting cares of the World;
hereafter a crowd and thick succession of earthly employments and engagements
will come on; sin will harden you, by custom and continuance; now is your time;
you are in the convertible Age; few that pass the season of youth
(comparatively speaking) are brought over to Christ afterward: It Is a rarity,
the wonder of an Age, to hear of the conversion of aged Sinners; besides, you
are the hopes of the next Generation: Should you be Christ-neglecting and
despising Souls; how bad soever the present Age is, the next will be worse. Say
not, we have time enough before us, we will not quench the sprightly vigor of
our Youth in melancholy thoughts: Remember there are Sculls of all sizes in
Golgotha; Graves of all lengths in the Churchyard: You may anticipate those
that stand nearer the Grave than you seem to do. O you cannot be happy too
soon: As young as you are, did you but taste the Comforts that be in Christ,
nothing would grieve you more, than that you knew him no sooner. Behold he
stands at thy Door, in the morning of thy Age, knocking this day for
admission into thy Heart.

Sixthly, You that have had some slight ineffectual vanishing Convictions upon
you formerly; the Lord Jesus once more renews his call, will you now at last
hear his voice? It Is an infinite mercy to have a second call. I doubt not, but
there are many among you, whilst you have sat under the Word, have had such
thoughts as these in your Hearts, sure, my condition is not right, nor safe;
there must another manner of work pass upon my Soul, or I am lost for ever.
External duties of Religion I do perform, but I am a stranger to Regeneration.
Such inward convictions as these were the Knocks and Calls of Christ, but they
passed away and were forgotten; your Convictions are dead, and your Hearts the
more hardened; for it is in putting a Soul under Conviction, as it is in putting
Iron into the Fire, and quenching it again: which hardens it the more. You have
been near the Kingdom of God, but the more miserable for that, if you be shut
out at last. The quicknings of your Convictions is the right way to the saving
of your Souls. The Lord make you this day to hear his Voice.

Seventhly, Such as have come hither upon vain or vile accounts, for mere
novelty, or worse ends; to catch advantages, or reproach the truths of God.
Scoffing at the most solemn and awful Voice of Christ. The Word that you have
slighted and reproached, the same shall Judge you in that great Day, except the
Lord give you Repentance unto Life, and make the Heart tremble under it, that
has scoffed at it. Be not mockers, lest your bands be made strong, Isa. 28. 22.

Eighthly, To Conclude, Let all, whose Hearts the Lord has opened this day,
for the enjoyment of the Gospel, the blessed instrument of their Salvation,
bless the Lord, that has made it a Key by Regeneration to open the door of
Salvation to your Souls. And as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so
walk ye in him.

AN APPENDIX To the Foregoing TREATISE FROM ROMANS 1. 18.
For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, Text.
and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
IN all the foregoing Sermons I have been pleading and wooing for Christ. And
as Abraham's Servant to win the Damsels Consent, told her what Treasures his
Masters Son had, so have I labored to show you some part of the unsearchable
Riches of Christ, if by any means I might allure your hearts, and be
instrumental to close the happy Match betwixt him and you; and (as the Apostle
speaks) espouse you to one Husband, even to Christ.

But alas! How few stir toward him? The most seem to be immovably fixed in
their Natural State, and sinful Courses. All our Arguments and Entreaties
return to us again, and effect nothing. It Is amazing to think what is the
matter, that Souls which have in them the inbred Hopes and Fears of the World
to come, and self reflecting Powers; cannot for all this be prevailed with to
quit the way of sin, and to embrace the way of Holiness, though their
Consciences mean while stand convinced that Eternal Damnation is the issue and
result of the one; Life, Peace and Eternal Joys of the other.

This has put me upon a serious search what may be the cause and reason of
this fixed and unreasonable obstinacy, and in this it seems evidently to lie,
with most that live in an unregenerate state under the Gospel; that they put a
force upon their own Consciences, and do imprison and hold the Truth in
unrighteousness, though the Wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against all
that do so.

If by this Discourse I can but set truth at Liberty, and loose the Lords
Prisoners which lie bound in your Souls. I shall not doubt but the value of
Christ will quickly rise among you, and free Convictions will make the work of
your Ministers much more easy and successful than they now find it. It Is
hardly imaginable but the things you have heard must leave your Souls under
Convictions, but if you suppress and stifle them, they produce nothing but
aggravations of Sin and Misery. Now in order to the free and effectual working
of all your Convictions, and begetting that reverence which is due to them from
every Soul, as to the Voice of God, I have chosen this Scripture, the scope and
sense whereof I shall next give you.

The true scope and aim of this Context, is to prove the Justification of
Sinners to be only by the imputed Righteousness of Christ in the way of Faith.
To make this evident, he distributes the whole World into Gentiles and Jews;
the one seeking Righteousness by the dim Light of Nature, or the Law written in
their Hearts; the other, viz. the Jews by the works of the Law, or External
Conformity to the Law of Moses, but that neither can find what they seek, he
distinctly and fully proves. He proves it first upon the Gentiles, from this
verse to the 17th. verse of the second Chapter; and then he proves it upon the
Jews also from thence to the end of the third Chapter. As for the Gentiles, he
acknowledges that they had inbred Notions of God, imprinted in their Nature,
they had also the Book of the Creatures before them; enough to leave them
without Excuse, ver. 20. they have no pretense of ignorance, but these common
Notices of God, and of Good and Evil, they did not obey and put in practice,
but acted against the very Light and Dictates of their Natural Consciences. For
which cause the Wrath of God was revealed from Heaven against them, as the Text
speaks. Wherein note, 1. A clear and dreadful Revelation of Divine Wrath. 2.
The Object or impulsive Cause thereof, Ungodliness and Unrighteousness. 3. The
special aggravation of this their Ungodliness and Unrighteousness, that they
held the truth in unrighteousness.


(1.) Here is a clear and dreadful Revelation of Divine Wrath, the wrath of God
(says the Apostle) is revealed from Heaven, (...) the indignation or vengeance
of God. It Is a word of deep and dreadful signification; the Damned that feel
the weight of it, have the fullest sense ot it. It Is said, in Psalm. 90. 11. Who
knows the power of thine anger, according to thy fear, so is thy wrath. That
is, the fears of an incensed Deity are no vain Bug-bears, Nor the effects of
Ignorance and Superstition as Atheists Fancy; but let men's Fears of it be what
they will they shall find except they repent, the Wrath of God to be according
to, yea and far above their Fears of it. If the Wrath of a King be as the
Messengers of Death, what then is the Wrath of the great and terrible God? This
Wrath is here said to be revealed, (...). discovered, or made manifest, and so
it is diverse ways; it was revealed to them by the light of Nature, their own
Consciences gave them notice and warning of it. Thus it was revealed to them by
an internal Testimony, a Witness within them, and it was also revealed to them
by the Instances and Examples of strokes and punishments of Sin in all Ages by
the immediate hand of a justly incensed God. They came not by chance, but
Divine direction, therefore it is added (...) from Heaven, or from God in Heaven.

(2.) Here is the Object, or impulsive Cause of this revealed and inflicted
Wrath, it is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men. (...). The former (...), ungodliness, comprizeth all sins against the
first Table; the irreligious lives and practices of Men, living in the neglect
of the Duties of Religion: The other word (...), unrighteousness, comprizeth
all sins against the second Table, acts of Fraud, Uncleanness, etc. against
Men: And because these two general comprehensive words are branched out into
many particulars, therefore he says, the wrath of God is revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness. There is not one of the many sins into which
ungodliness and unrighteousness are branched out, but incenseth the Lords
Wrath, and though he only mentions the Sins, in the Abstract, we are to
understand the Abstract put here for the Concrete; the sins for the sinners
that commit them; or Gods punishing these sins upon the persons of the Sinners.

(3.) Lastly, We have here before us the special aggravation of these sins, or
that which made them much more provoking to God than otherwise they had been.
And it was this, that whilst they committed these Sins, or omitted those
Duties, they held the truth in unrighteousness: (...), the word signifies to
detain, stop, hinder, or put a Remora in the way of that Truth of God, or those
common Notions they had of his Being, Power, Goodness, Truth, etc. as also of
his Worship, and the difference between Good and Evil. These Truths struggled
in their Consciences, as the Child in the Womb, to come to the Birth;
Conscience instigated them to Duty, and labored to restrain them from Sin, but
all in vain, they overbare their own Consciences, and kept those Sentiments and
Convictions Prisoners, though they struggled for Liberty to break forth into
Practice and Obedience. Their Convictions were kept down under the Dominion and
Power of Corruptions, as a Prisoner is shut up by his Keeper: Their Lusts were
too hard for their Light. Thus you have both the Scope and Sense of the Text.
The Point from it is this.

DOCTRINE.
That the wrath of God is dreadfully incensed against all those that live in
any course of Sin, against the light and dictates of their own Consciences.

Sins of Ignorance provoke the Wrath of God, yet are they not of so heinous a
nature as sins against light and Conviction are, nor shall they be punished so
severely, Luke 12. 47. That servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
It excuses a tanto in some measure, when a man can say, Lord, had I known this
to be a sin, I would not have done it, but when the Conscience is convinced,
and strives to keep us from such an act or course of sinful actions, and we
stop our Ears against its Voice and Warnings; here is an high and horrid
Contempt of God and his Law, and gives the sin a Scarlet Dye or Tincture. Sins
of Ignorance cannot compare with such sins as these, Ioh. 3. 19. Ioh. 15. 22.
To open this Point, let me.

1. Show you what Conscience is. 2. What the Light of Conscience is, and what
its kinds are. 3. How this Light binds the Conscience, and makes it strive in
us. 4. Then instance in some Cases wherein it does so. 5. And Lastly, how and
why the imprisoning of these Convictions so dreadfully incenseth the Wrath of
God.
(1.) 'Twill be needful to speak a little to the nature of Conscience in
general. Conscience (as our Divines well express it) is the judgment of a man
upon himself, as he is Subject to the judgment of God. A Judgment it is, and a
practical Judgment too; it belongs to the understanding faculty, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
If we would judge our selves, etc. this self-judgment is the proper Office of
the Conscience; and to enable it for this its work and office, there are (as is
generally observed) three things belonging to every man's Conscience.

(1) A Knowledge of the Rule or Law according to which it is to judge, called
the Synteresis, which is a treasury of Rules and Principles without which
Conscience can no more do its work, than an Artificer that wants his Square or
Level can do his.

(2) Knowledge of the Facts or Matters to be judged, called the Syneidesis. The
Conscience of every man keeps a Register of his Actions, Thoughts, and the very
Secrets of the Heart.

(3) An Ability and delegated Authority to pass Judgment on our selves and
Actions according to the Rule and Law of God, called Crisis, Judgment. Here it
sits upon the Bench as Gods Vicegerent, Absolving or Condemning as it finds the
Sincerity or Hypocrisy of the heart upon Trial. 1 Ioh. 3. 20, 21.

Conscience therefore is an High and Aweful Power, it is solo Deo minor; next
and immediately under God* our Judge; riding as Joseph did in the second
Chariot, and concerning Conscience he says to every man, as he once did to
Moses with respect to Pharaoh, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.
1. The Voice of Conscience is the Voice of God. What it binds or loses on
Earth, Clave non errante, is accordingly bound or loosed in Heaven, 1 Ioh. 3.
21. the greatest deference and precise Obedience is due to its Commands. Its
Consolations are of all the most sweet, and its Condemnations (only excepting
those by the mouth of Christ in the last Judgment) most terrible. Zuinglius
spoke not without ground when he said, What Death would I not rather choose?
what Punishment would I not rather bear? yea, into what profound Abyss of Hell
would I not rather enter, than to witness against my Conscience? It Is like he
had felt the Terrors of it, to be more bitter than Death. How many have chosen
strangling rather than life under the Terrors of Conscience? Wherever you go,
Conscience accompanies you. Whatever you say, do, or but think, it Registers
and Records in order to the Day of Account. When all Friends forsake thee,
yea, when thy Soul forsakes thy Body. Conscience will not, cannot forsake thee.
When thy Body is weakest and dullest, thy Conscience is most vigorous and
active. Never more life in the Conscience, than when Death makes its nearest
approach to the Body; when it smiles, chears, acquits, and comforts, O what an
Heaven does it create within a Man? And when it frowns, condemns, and
terrifies; how does it becloud, yea, benight all the Pleasures, Joys and
Delights of this World. O Conscience, how glad would the damned be to have
taken their last farewell of thee, when they bid this World, and all its
Inhabitants farewell at Death! And what had become of all the Sufferers and
Martyrs, when shut up from Friends in Dungeons, had it not been for thy
chearing Cordials and Comforts, thou there administredst to support them! It Is
certainly the best of Friends, or the worst of Enemies in the whole Creation.
This is Conscience, these are its Powers and Offices, which was the first thing.

Secondly, Our next enquiry must be into the Light of Conscience, and the
various kinds of that Light.

The Lord did not frame such an excellent Structure as the Soul of Man, without
Windows to let in light; nor does he deny the benefit of light to any Soul: But
there is a twofold Light which Men have to inform and guide their Consciences.
1. The Light of Natural Reason, which is common. 2. The Light of Scripture
Revelation, which is special.


(1,) There is the common light of Natural Reason, which is connate, called by
Solomon, Prove. 20. 27 The Candle of the Lord. The Spirit of Man is the Candle
of the Lord. This is affirmed by him that had an extraordinary portion of
intellectuals, a brighter lamp of Reason and Wisdom than other Men: And this is
not only true of the Soul in general, but of that special Power of it, which is
called Conscience, which is Gods Spy, and Man's Overseer. The Heathens had this
Light shining in their Minds and Consciences: Some of them by the alone help of
this Natural Light made wonderful discoveries of the Mysteries of Nature, yea,
they found its Efficacy and Power great in their Consciences to raise their
hopes or fears according to the good or evil they had done.

Conscia men's ut cuique sua est, ita concipit intra
Pectora pro facto, spemque metumque suo.
Ovid. And to the shame of many that are called Christians, some among them
paid great Reverence to their own Consciences

-- Imprimis reverere teipsum,
Turpe quid ausurus, te sine test time.
But however, the generality of them did not so, and are taxed for it in the
Text: And besides, this Light can make no discoveries of Christ, and of the way
of Salvation by him. The most Eagle-ey'd Philosophers among them, were in the
dark here. And therefore,

(2.) God has afforded Men a more clear and excellent Light to shine into
their Minds and Consciences; even the Light of the Gospel, which compared with
the Light of Natural Reason, is as the Light of the Sun to the dim Moonlight,
Psalm. 147. 20. He shows his word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments to
Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation, and for his Judgments they have
not known them, Praise ye the Lord. Every Creature has the Name of God
engraven on it, but he has magnified his Word above all his Name, Psalm. 138.
2. God who best knows the rate and value of his own Mercies, accounts this a
singular favor and privilege to any Nation. Without Revelation, we could
never have known the cause of our Misery, the fall of Adam, or the only way and
means of our recovery by Christ: By this a People are lifted up to Heaven,
Matthew. 11. 21. in respect of means and advantages of Salvation; and
consequently the contempt or neglect of such Light and Love, will certainly
plunge the guilty into proportionable misery. John 3. 19. This is the
condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather
than Light.

Moreover, God does not only afford the Light of Natural Reason, and External
Gospel Revelation to some Men in an eminent degree; but to both these he
superadds the internal illumination of his Spirit, which is the clearest and
most glorious Light in the whole World. He shines into their hearts, to give
the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4. 6. These are the three sorts of Light that God makes to shine into the
Souls and Consciences of Men, to direct and guide them; the first a common and
general Light, the two last the most clear and transcendent in Excellency;
especially that of the Spirit with the Gospel: For though the Sun be risen, yet
men may draw the Curtains about them, and lie in darkness, but the Spirit opens
them, and makes it shine in.

(3.) How this Light shining into the Consciences of Men, obliges them to
Obedience, and how Men's Lusts struggle against the Obligations of an enlightened
Conscience, is the next thing to be spoken to.

It Is manifest and beyond all Controversy, that an enlightened Conscience lays
strong and indispensable Obligations and Engagements on the Soul to Obedience:
For the Will of God is the Supreme Law, 1 Timothy 6. 15 it is the Will of the only
Potentate the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: And the promulgation and
manifestation of it, so binds the Conscience of the Creature to Obedience, as
no Authority or Power on Earth can loose those bands; no Man can grant a
supersedeas in this case, or relieve the Soul so bound by a noli prosequi; for
Conscience as Gods Vicegerent in his Name requires Obedience, and the Man that
hears the Voice of God from the Mouth of his own Conscience, presently
thereupon becomes a Debtor, Romans 1. 14. put under a necessity, 1 Cor. 9 16.

Now Conscience by reason of the Light that shines into it, feeling it self
under such strong bands and necessities, stimulates and urges the Soul to
Obedience, warnes, commands, and presses the Soul to its duty, against the
contrary Interests and inclinations of the Flesh: And hence arise those Combats
and conflicts in the bosoms of Men; as the struggles of the Child in the Womb
at the fullness of time causes the throws and pangs of Travail. Sometimes
Conscience prevails, and sometimes Lusts and Corruptions prevail, and that with
great difficulty; for it is not alike easy to all Men to shake off, or burst
the bands of their own Consciences, though others can do it easily What an hard
tugg had Saul to conquer his own Conscience? I forced my self, says he, 1 Samuel
13. 12. He knew it belonged not to him to offer Sacrifice, his Conscience
plainly told him, it would be his Sin, but yet the fear of the Philistines being
stronger than the fear of God, he adventured upon it renitente conscientia,
against the plain dictates of his own Conscience. Thus Herod gives Sentence to
put John to death, Matthew. 14. 9. The King was sorry, nevertheless, for his
Oaths sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he commanded it to be given
her. His Honor weighed up all his fears of sin, his own Word weighed more with
him than Gods Word: Nemo ita perplexus tenetur inter duo vitia, quin exitus
pateat absque tertio: No man is held so perplexed between two Vices, but he may
find an issue, without falling into a third.

Pilates Conscience was convinced of Christ's Innocence; Matthew. 27. 18, 19. yet
the fear of Coesar hurries him on to the greatest of wickednesses, even to give
Sentence against Innocent Blood, yea, the Blood of the Son of God. Darius in
like manner, Dan. 6. 14. He knew that Daniel was not only an excellent Person,
but that he was entrapt by the Nobles merely for his Conscience, and that to
put him to Death, was to sacrifice him to their Malice, this he and his
Conscience debated all the day, many encounters he had with it, for the Text
says, He was sore displeased with himself, and set his Heart on Daniel to
deliver him, and labored until the going down of the Sun to deliver him; but
after a days sharp fight betwixt him and his Conscience, Lust prevails at last
against Light, and returns Victor out of the Field in the Evening. So it was
with poor Spira, he seemed to hear as it were an inward Voice, Don't write
Spira, don't write; but the love of his Estate, Wife, and Children drew his
Hand to the Paper, though Conscience struggled hard to hold it back.

Thus as the restless Sea strives to beat down, or break over its bounds, so do
impetuous Lusts strive to overbear Light and Conviction; video meliora
proboque, deteriora sequor: They know this or that to be a Sin, and that they
hazard their Souls by it, but yet they will adventure on it, and rush into Sin
as the Horse into the Battle.

(4.) I promised to give you some instances of the Conflicts betwixt Men's
Consciences and their Corruptions, wherein Conscience is vanquished and
overborn, and by what Weapons the Victory over Conscience is obtained. Now the
Convictions of Men are twofold, viz. I. General, Respecting their State. II.
Particular, Respecting this or that Action.


(I.) There are general Convictions, and Notices given to some Men and Women by
their Consciences, that their Condition or State of Soul is neither right, nor
safe; that they want the main thing which constitutes a Christian, viz.
Regeneration, or a gracious change of Heart and Life: They hear and read the
signs and effects of these things, but their Conscience plainly tells them, it
cannot find them in them; that they enjoy the External privileges of the
Saints, but they belong not to them, that something is still wanting, and that
the main thing too: O my Soul, thou art not right; thou have gifts, thou have a
Name to live, but for all that thou art dead. Some further work must be done
upon thee, or thou art undone to Eternity: thou passest for a good Christian
among Men, but woe to thee if thou die in the State thou art. These, and such as
these are the whispers of some Men's Consciences in their Ears; and yet they
cannot yield themselves up into the hands of their Convictions, so as to
confess, and bewail their Hypocrisy, and gross mistakes, and seek for a better
foundation to build their hope on. Foelix his Conscience gave him such a
terrible rouse and monition as this, and made him to tremble whilst Paul
reasoned with him about Righteousness, and Temperance, and Judgment to come,
Acts 24. 25. it whispered in his Ear such Language as this, O poor Soul, how
shall such an Oppressor, such an intemperate wretch as thou art stand before
God in this day of Judgment, which Paul proves in thy face, is certainly
future; for as Tacitus says of him, He was inexplebilis Gurges, an insatiable
gulf of Covetousness; so it was with Agrippa, Acts 26. 28. He stood at half
bent, dubious and unresolved what to do: He saw the Heavenly Doctrine of
Christianity evidently confirmed by Doctrine and Miracles, his Conscience
pleaded hard with him to embrance it, and had almost prevailed. Almost, or
within a little as the word is, thou perswadest me to be a Christian; but
Agrippa had too much Wealth and Honors to deny and forsake for Christ; the
Love of the present World overbore both the hopes and fears of the World to
come: And thus that Excellent Fisher for Souls, who had thoroughly converted so
many to Christ, caught but a piece of Agrippa, almost is a great deal for so
great a person: The Gospel is a Drag-net, and brings up all sorts, whole
Christians, and half Christians. The Conscience is caught, and the Will begins
to incline, but oh the power and prevalence of Sin! which like the Rudder,
commands all to a contrary course.

If we come a little nearer, and enquire what are those remoraes that stop
Conscience in its course, bind and imprison, stifle and suppress its
Convictions, that although a Man strongly suspect his foundation to be but
Sand, his hopes for Heaven a strong delusion, yet he will throw up his vain
hopes, consfess his self deceits, and begin all anew: What is it which
overbears Conscience in this cafe? Let Men impartially examine their hearts,
and it will be found that these three things bind and imprison these
Convictions of Conscience, and hold the truth in unrighteousness, viz. shame,
fear, and pride of Heart.

(I.) Shame, Men that have been Professors, and of good esteem in the World,
are ashamed the World should know the Mistakes and Errors of all their life
past, and what deluded Fools and self-deceivers they have been: This is a
powerful restraint upon Conviction; how shall they look their Acquaintance in
the face? What will Men think and say of them? How can ye believe which receive
Honor one of another? Says Christ, John 5. 44. q. d. What you be Christians,
and yet not able to endure a censure, or a scoff upon your Names? That stand
more upon your Reputation, than your Salvation: How can you believe?

Oh what Madness and exalted Folly appears in this Case! Men will choose rather
to go on, though Conscience tells them the end of that way will be Death, than
suffer the shame of a just and necessary retraction, which yet indeed is not
their shame, but their Duty, and Glory. You that are so tender of the shame of
men, how will you be able to endure the contempt and shame that shall be cast
on you from God, Angels and Men in the great Day? Luk 9*26. It Is no shame to
acknowledge your mistake, but persist in it after Conviction, is shameful
Madness.

I knew an excellent Minister, who proved an eminent Instrument in the Church
of God, who in the beginning of his Ministerial Course, was not upon the right
Foundation of Regeneration. This Man had rare Abilities, excellent Natural and
Acquired Gifts, and could Preach of Regeneration, Faith, and
Heavenly-mindedness, though he felt nothing of these things in his own
Experience. His Life was very unblameable, and he had no mean Interest and
esteem among good men. It pleased the Lord whilst this Man was studying an
excellent Spiritual Point to preach to others, his Conscience first preached it
in his Study to himself, and that with such a close and rousing Application, as
made him to tremble at it; telling him, that though he had Gifts above many,
and sobriety in his Conversation; yet one thing, and that the main thing
Sanctifying Grace was wanting. Hereupon the pangs of the New Birth seized his
Soul, and the Lord made him a most inward, searching, experimental Minister,
and crowned his Labors with unusual Success. This Minister to his dying day,
was not ashamed in all companies to acknowledge his mistake, and bless God for
his recovery out of it, and in most of his Sermons, he would endeavor to
convince Professors of the necessity of a second Conversion.

(2.) Fear is another pull-back, which withholds men from executing the
Convictions of their own Consciences, and obeying its calls in this grand case
and concern of the Soul. They are pretty easy and safe under the External
Profession, and Duties of Religion, and are afraid of throwing up their vain
hopes, and engaging themselves heartily and thoroughly in Religion, and there
be two things scare them.

(1) The inward pains and troubles of Spirit attending the New Birth; which
they have read and heard of, and seen the effects of in others. Oh it is a
dreadful thing to lie under the Terrors that many have felt, and so it is with
them as with one that has a bone ill set, who if he have any ease, will rather
endure a little daily pain, and be content to halt all his Life, than undergo
the pain of another fraction or dislocation in order to a perfect cure.

(2) They are afraid of External Sufferings. The form of Godliness leaves men a
latitude to take or leave according as the times favor or frown upon the ways
of Religion, but the power of Godliness that will engage and put them beyond
retreat: They must then stand to it, come what will. But Soul let me tell thee
if the just fears and apprehensions of Hell, and the Eternal Wrath of God were
upon thee, to which thy Hypocrisy and formality will expose thee; all these
fears of inward or outward troubles would vanish the same Hour.

(3.) Pride of Heart suffers not this Conviction of Conscience to work out its
effects, but holds this Truth in unrighteousness, to the hazard and ruin of
many Souls. Men that live upon their own Duties, and Self-Righteousness are not
easily brought to renounce all this, and live upon the Righteousness of Christ
alone for Justification. Proud nature will rather venture the hazard of
Damnation than such self denial, Romans 10. 3. As you see it common among poor
People, to live meanly on coarse Fare of their own, than upon the Alms and
bounty of another.

O but if once the day of Gods Power be come, and a man begins to feel the
Commandment come home to his Conscience as Paul did, Romans 7. 9. when he comes
to realize the World to come, the value of his Soul, and the danger it is in;
then all these Remora's are as easily swept away, as so many straws by the
rapid Course of a mighty torrent. Then let men say or think what they please, I
must not throw away my own Soul, to maintain a vain Estimation among men. Let
inward or outward sufferings be never so great, it is better for me to feel
them, than to suffer the everlasting wrath of the great and terrible God. Let
my own Righteousness be what it will, all is but dung and dross to the pure and
perfect Righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, As this General Conviction with respect to Men's State and Condition
is held in Unrighteousness, and Men and Women go with grumbling Consciences and
frequent inward Fears by reason of it: so there are many particular Convictions
bound and imprisoned in Men's Souls. Particular Convictions I say, both as to
sins committed, and known Duties omitted against both Tables of the Law of God;
called in the Text, ungodliness and unrighteousness. Conscience labors and
strives to bring men to confess, bewail, and reform them, but cannot prevail;
contrary Lusts and Interests overpower them, and detain them in
unrighteousness. What these are, and how they are withheld by those Lusts, I
shall give some Instances.

I. Instance.
And First, for Convictions of Ungodliness. There are many that call themselves
Christians, whose Consciences tell them God is to be daily and duly worshipped
by them, both in Family, and Closet Prayer. It sets before them Iosua's pious
practice, Ios. 24. 15. As for me, I and my house we will serve the Lord. They
know God is the Founder, the Owner, the Master of their Families; that all
Family Blessings are from him, and therefore he is to be owned, acknowledged
and sought, in daily Family Prayers and Praises. It tells them the Curse of God
hangs over prayerless Families, Ier. 10. 25. and that they live in the
inexcusable neglect of these Duties, seldom worshipping of God with their
Families, or in their Closets; and that therefore they live without God in the
World. And dreadful will the account and reckoning be at the Great Day, for
their own Souls, which they have starved for want of Closet Prayer, and for the
Souls committed to their charge, which perish for want of Family Duties. This
is the case of many who yet will needs pass for Professors of Christianity.

Lord, how sad a case is here? How can men possibly live in the daily neglect
of so great, so necessary a Duty? Certainly it is not for want of Light or
Conviction, the very light of Nature, if we had no Bibles, discovers these
Duties. But three things hold this Truth of God dictated by Men's Consciences in
Unrighteousness, viz. 1. The Love of the World. 2. Consciousness of Inability.
3. A Disinclined Heart.


First, The Love of the World choaks this Conviction in the Souls of some; and
they think it enough to plead for their Excuse, the want of opportunities, and
many encumberances they have, which will not allow them time for these Duties.
The World is a severe Taskmaster, and fills their heads and hands all the day
with Cares and Toils.

And must the mouth of Conscience then be stopped with such a plea as this? No,
no, God and Conscience will not be answered and put off so. The greatest number
of Persons in the World from whom God has the most Spiritual and excellent
Worship; are of the lower and poorer rank, Psalm. 74. 20. Iam. 2. 5. And its
highly probable your Necessities had been less, if your Prayers had been more*
And what sweeter outlet and vent to all these troubles can you find, than
Prayer? This would sweeten all your Labors and Sorrows in the World.

Secondly, Consciousness and sense of Inability and want of Gifts, restrains
this Conviction in others. Should they attempt such duties before others, they
shall but expose their own ignorance and shame.

But this is a vain pretense of shake off Duty. The neglect of Prayer is a
principal Cause of that inability you complain of. Gifts as well as Grace grow
by Exercise. To him that has shall be given, and he shall have more
abundantly. And besides, it is the fruit of Pride, and argues your eye to be
more upon your own Honor than Gods. The Lord regards not Oratory in Prayer;
your broken Expressions, yea, your Groans and Sighs please him more than all
the Eloquence in the World.

Thirdly, But the principal thing that restrains Men from obeying their
Convictions as to Family and Closet Prayer is, A disinclined Heart. That Is the
root and true cause, of these sinful neglects and Omissions. You favor not the
sweetness of these things, and what a man relishes no sweetness in, or finds no
necessity of, is easily omitted and let pass.

But woe to you that go from day to day self condemned for the neglect of so
known, so sweet, and so necessary a Duty. If our Hearts condemn us, God is
greater than our hearts, I Ioh. 3. 20. He that lives without Prayer, is dead
whilst he lives; and let men talk what they please, of secret Communion with
God; I am sure, if Religion did thrive in the Closet, it could never be
banished out of the Family. The time is coming also when death will disband and
break up your Families, separate the Wife from the Husband, the Child from the
Parent, the Servant from the Master; and then where you shall find relief and
comfort who have spent your time together so sinfully and vainly, I cannot
tell, nor what account you can give to God in the great day. Think sadly on
these things, they are worth thinking on.

II. Instance.
A second Instance of Ungodliness continued in under the Convictions of
Conscience, is Formali^y in all the external duties of Religion, and Ordinances
of God. Have not some of your Consciences often and plainly told you that
though you be often engaged in the public duties of Hearing, Prayer, etc. yet
your hearts are not with God in those duties. They do not work after communion
and fellowship with him therein. It Is nothing but the force of Education,
Custom, and care of Reputation brings you there.

Such a conviction as this could it work home, and do its work thoroughly, would
be the salvation of thy Soul. Were power added to the form, as Conscience would
have it, thou were then a real Christian, and out of the danger of Hell. The
want of this thy Conscience sees will be thy ruin, and accordingly gives thee
plain warning of it. O what pity is it such a conviction as this should be held
in Unrighteousness! but so it is in very many souls, and that on several
accounts.

First, Because Hypocrisy is so odious and abominable a sin that men are loath
to own and acknowledge it how guilty so ever they be of it. What, dissemble
with God, and play the Hypocrite with him; it is so black and foul a Crime that
men cannot easily be brought to charge themselves with it* They may have the
infirmities which are common to the best of men, but yet they are no
hypocrites, thus Pride of Heart casts a chain upon this conviction, and binds
it that it cannot do its work.

Secondly, It Is a cheap and easy way to give God the external Service and
Worship of the Body, but Heart-work is hard work. To sit or kneel an hour or
two is no great matter, but to search, humble, and break the Heart for sin; to
work up the dead and earthly Affections into a spiritual heavenly frame, this
will cost many an hard tugg. It Is no severe task to sit before God as his
people, whilst the fancy and thoughts are left at liberty to wander which way
they please, as the thoughts of formal Hypocrites use to do, Ezekiel. 33. 31. but
to set a watch upon the heart, to summon in the Thoughts to God, to retract
every wandering thought with a sigh; this is difficult, and the difficulty
overpowers conviction of duty.

Thirdly, The Atheism of the heart quenches this conviction in men's Souls.
Formality is a secret invisible sin, not discernable by man; the outside of
Religion looks fair to man's eye, and so long its well enough, as if there were
not a God that tries the hearts and the reins. This when a beam of light and
conviction shines into the Soul, a cloud of natural Atheism overshaddows and
darkens it.

But poor self-couzening-hypocrite, these things must not pass so; thy
Conscience as well as the Word tell thee that it is not the place of Worship,
but the spirituality of it that God regards, Ioh. 4. 23, 24. That they are
Hypocrites in Scripture account, who have God in their mouths, but he is far
from their reins, Ier. 12. 2. and that hypocrites will have the hottest place
in Hell, Matthew. 24. 51.

III. Instance.
A Third instance of Convictions of ungodliness held in unrighteousness is in
declining or denying to consfess the known truths of God, which we our selves
have professed, when the confession of them infers danger.

In times of danger conscience struggles hard with men to appear for the Truths
of God, and upon no account whatsoever, to dissemble or deny them; and
enforces its Counsels and Warnings upon us with such awful Scriptures as
these, Luke 9. 62. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back,
is fit for the kingdom of God. And Matthew. 10. 33. But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven. In this
case Conscience uses to struggle hard with men, yet is many times overborn,
by the prevalent Temptations of the Flesh, as

First, By Carnal Fears. The fear of Suffering gets the ascendant of the fear
of God. Men choose rather to adventure their Souls upon Wrath to come, than the
present Wrath of incensed Enemies. They vainly hope to find mercy with God,
but expect none from men. Thus the fear of man brings a snare, Prove. 29. 25.
and so the voice of conscience is drowned, by the louder clamours and threats
of Adversaries.

Secondly, As the fear of man's Threatenings, so the distrust of Gods Promises
defeats the design of Conscience. If men believed the promises, they would
never be afraid of their duties. Faith in a promise would make men as bold as
Lions. If such a word as that Isa. 57. 11. Of whom have thou been afraid or
feared, that thou have lied, and have not remembered me? Men would say, as
Zuinglius did in the like case, what Death would I not rather choose to dye?
what punishment would I not rather undergo? yea, into what vault of Hell would
I not rather choose to be cast, than to witness against my own conscience?

Thirdly, The immoderate and inordinate Love of the World overpowers
conscience, and drowns its voice in such an hour of Temptation. So Demas found
it, 2 Timothy 4. 10. O what a dangerous conflict is there in an hour of Temptation
betwixt an enlightened head, and a worldly heart?

Lastly, The Examples of others who comply, and embrace the sinful terms of
Liberty to escape the danger emboldens men to follow their Examples, and Satan
will not be wanting to improve their Examples. Don't you see such and such men
beating the road before you? Learned Men, and prudent men, who it may be have
less heat, but more Wisdom than you. Why will you be singular? Why will you
hazard all for that others will hazard nothing.

But certainly such sins as these will cost you dear, it is a dreadful thing to
betray the Truths and Honor of God, for base secular ends; and you will find
it so, when you and your consciences shall debate it together in a calm hour.

Secondly, There are also sins of Unrighteousness, against the Second Table, in
which many live against the plain dictates and warnings of their own
Consciences, though they know the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against
all unrighteousness of men, who hold the Truth in unrighteousness. To give some
Instances of this.

I. Instance.
And first let me Instance in that sin of Defrauding, and going beyond others
in our civil Commerce and Dealings with them; overreaching, cozening, and
cheating the ignorant or unwary, who it may be would not be so unwary as they
are, did they not repose trust and confidence in your deceitful words and
promises. Conscience cannot but startle at such sins, the very Light of Nature
discovers the evil of it, and the sober Heathen abhor it; but we that live
under the Gospel cannot but feel some terror and trembling in our Consciences
when we read such a severe and awful prohibition backed with such a dreadful
threatening as that is in 1 These. 4. 6. That no man defraud or go beyond his
brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such. The
word is, (...), that no man overtop, viz. by power or by craft and policy. To
this sin a dreadful threatening is annexed, the Lord is the Avenger of all
such. The word is (...), but once more that I remember used in the New
Testament, Romans 13. 4. and is there applied to the Civil Magistrate, he must
see Execution done upon Malefactors, but here, the Lord himself will do it, he
will be this man's Avenger. This Rod, or rather this Ax, Conscience shows men,
and gives warning of the danger, and yet its Convictions are overpowered and
bound as Prisoners, by

(1.) The Excessive Love of Gain; 1 Timothy 6. 9. But they that will be rich, fall
into Temptation, and a snare; and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition. When a resolution is made for the
world, men will be rich by right or wrong, this powerfully arms the
Temptation. Set Gain before such a man, and he will break through the Law of
God, and convictions of Conscience but he will have it. This drowns them in
perdition and destruction, that is, it surely, thoroughly, and fully ruins them;
as he is a dead man that is only drowned, but to be drowned in destruction, yea
in destruction and perdition too; this must needs make his ruin sure; as sure
as words can make it, and so all such persons shall surely find it, who persist
in such a Course.

(2.) Pinching Necessities and Straights overbear Conscience in others.
Necessity has no Ears to attend the voice of the Word and Conscience. Here
Conscience and Poverty struggle together, and if the Fear of God be not exalted
in the Soul, it now falls a prey to Temptation. This danger wise Agur foresaw,
and earnestly entreated the Lord for a competency, to avoid the snare of
Poverty, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Poor Wretch! how much better were it for thee to
endure the pains of a griping stomach, than those of a griping Conscience? such
gains may be sweet in thy mouth, but bitter in thy Bowels.

(3.) The Examples of others who daily venture on such sins without scruple,
and laugh at such squeamish Consciences as cheque at such things: this
emboldens others to follow them, Psalm. 50. 18, and thus the voice of Conscience
is drowned, and Convictions buried for a time, but it will Thunder at last, and
thy buried convictions will have a Resurrection, and it shall be out of thy
power to silence them again.

II. Instance.
The truth of God is held in Unrighteousness, when men's Lusts will not suffer
them to restore, what they have sinfully and unjustly gotten into their hands.
This Sin lies boking in the Consciences of some men, makes them very uneasy,
and yet they make an hard shift to rub along under these regrets of Conscience.
Now those things which make a forcible entry into the Conscience, take the
truths of God Prisoners, and bind them, that they cannot break forth into the
duty of Restitution are,

(1.) The shame which attends and follows the duty to which God and Conscience
calls the Soul. O it is a shame and reproach they think, to get the name of a
cheat. Loath, loath they are, these works of darkness should come into the open
Light; men will point, and hiss at them; and say, there goes a Thief, a Cheat,
an Oppressor; this keeps many from Restitution.

But do thou not here commit a greater Cheat than the former? Which is the
greater shame think thou? to commit sin, or to confess and reform it? to tie
the snare upon thy soul by Commission, or loose it off from thy Conscience by
Repentance and Restitution? to be the derision of wicked men, (for none else
will deride thee for thy duty) or to be the contempt and derision of God,
Angels, and all good Men for ever. To attain inward peace at this hazard, or
to lie under the continual lashes and wounds of thy own Conscience?

(2.) Poverty and inability is sometimes pleaded to quiet the troubled
Conscience; and indeed this is a just and very frequent blast of God upon ill
gotten goods. The curse of God is upon them. They melt away. O what a miserable
snare have you now entangled your souls in? once you could, but would not
restore, a Worldly heart would not part with unjust gains; now you would, but
cannot. Thus a worldly heart, and an empty purse holds you first and last under
the guilt of a known sin. A lamentable case!

(3.) Vain purposes do often suppress and silence convictions, my condition may
after, I may be in a capacity hereafter when I can better spare it than at
present. Or I Will do it in my last Will when I dye, and charge my Executors with
it. Thus do men bribe their Consciences, to get a little quiet whilst they
continue under known guilt, and cannot tell how soon death shall summon them to
the aweful Bar of a just and terrible God.

Sirs, As you value your peace, and which is more, your Souls; release the
Lords Prisoner which lies bound within you, with cords and chains of Satan's
making; do it I say, as you hope to see the face of God in peace. You know
without Repentance, there can be no Salvation; and without Restitution, no
Repentance: For how can you repent of a sin you still knowingly continue in?
Repentance is the Souls turning from sin, as well as its sorrow for sin. You
cannot therefore repent of sin, and still continue in it; How shall we that are
dead to sin, continue any longer therein? Romans 6. 2. Trust Providence for the
supply of your wants, and the wants of yours, in ways of Duty and
Righteousness. A little that a Righteous man has is better than the Riches of
many wicked. You Will have more comfort in Bread and Water with peace of
Conscience than in full Tables with Gods curse. You Will lie more at ease on a
burden of Straw, than on a Bed of Down with a grumbling conscience.

III. Instance.
How many lie under the condemnations of their own consciences for the lusts of
Uncleanness, in which they live? and though they read, and their consciences
apply to them such Scriptures as that, 1. Cor. 6. 9. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with mankind, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God; a dreadful
Sentence: and that, Heb. 13. 4. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Yet
convictions are overborn and stifled by

(1.) The Impetuous Violence of carnal Lusts, which permit not of calm debates;
but hurry them on to the sin, and leave them to consider the evil and dangerous
consequences afterward. Thus they go, as an Ox to the slaughter, or as a fool
to the correction of the stocks, Prove. 7. 22. Lust besots them. To give counsel
now, is but to give Physic in a Paroxisme, or counsel to him that is running a
Race, Lust answers conscience as Antipater did one that presented him a Book
treating of Happiness, (...), I have no leisure to read such Discourses.

(2.) Others would feign solve their scruples, with the sinful failings of good
men, as David, Solomon, etc. not considering what brokenness of Heart it cost
David, Psalm. 51. and the other, sorrow more bitter than death, Eccl. 7. 26.
Laeta venire venus, tristis abire solet. This is a presumptuous way of sinning,
and how dreadful that is, see Numb. 15. 30.

IV. Instance.
Truth is often held in unrighteousness by sinful Silence, in not reproving
other men's sins, and thereby making them our own. We are sometimes cast into
the company of ungodly Men, where we hear the name of our God blasphemed, the
Truth, Worship, or Servants of God reproached; and have not so much courage to
appear for God, as others have to appear against him. In such cases Conscience
uses to instigate men to their duty, and charge it home upon them in the
authority of such a Scripture, as that Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. O says Conscience, thy silence now will be thy sin. This
poor wretch may perish for want of a seasonable, plain, and faithful rebuke.
Thy silence will harden him in his wickedness. No sooner does such a conviction
stir in the Conscience, but many things are ready to lay hold on it; as

(1.) A Spirit of Cowardice, which makes us afraid to displease men; and chooses
rather the wrath of God should fall on them, than that their wrath should fall
on us. We dare not take as much liberty to reprove sin, as others do to commit
it. They glory in their shame, and we are ashamed of what is both our glory,
and our duty.

(2.) Dependence on, or near relation to the Person sinning. It Is a Father, an
Husband, a Superior on whose favor I depend; and should I displease him, I may
ruin my self: this is the voice of the Flesh. Hence duty is neglected, and the
Soul of a Friend basely betrayed. Our Interest preferred to Gods, and thereby
frequently lost: for there is no way to secure our own interest in any man's
heart, as to settle it by our Faithfulness in his Conscience, and by being
willing to hazard it for Gods interest and glory. The Lord blesses Men's
Faithfulness above all their sinful Carnal Policies, Prove. 28. 23. He that
rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor than he that flattereth with
his lips.

(3.) Men's own Guilt stops their Mouths, and silences them. They are ashamed
and afraid to reprove other men's sins, left they should hear of their own. Fear
of Retortion keeps them from the duty of Reprehension. Thus we fall into a new
sin for fear of reviving an old one. He that reproves a scorner, gets to
himself shame; and (...) that rebukes a wicked man, gets himself a bist.
Prove. 9. 7.

But this is the fruit of our Pride and Ignorance, What we fear might turn to
our benefit. The Reproof given is a Duty discharged, and the Retortion in
return, a fresh call to Repentance for sin past, and a caution against sin to
come.

V. Instance.
Another Instance of Convictions of unrighteousness imprisoned in men's Souls,
is in not distributing to the necessities of others, especially such as fear
God, when it is in the power of our hands to do it, and Conscience as well as
Scripture calls us to our Duty.

Men cannot be ignorant of that Text, Math. 25. 40, 41. where by a Synecdoche,
Charity to the Saints is by Christ put for the whole of Obedience; and men's
Eternal States are cast according to their observance of this command; though I
fear few, very few study and believe it as they ought. Thou can, says
Conscience if thou will relieve such or such a poor Christian, and therein
express thy love to Christ; yea refresh the bowels of Christ, do it, God will
repay it; if thou refusest, how dwells the love of God in thee? 1 Ioh. 3. 17.
This is the Voice of God and Conscience, but diverse Lusts are ready to lay hold
on and bind this Conviction also, as soon as it stirs, viz.

(1) The excessive love of Earthly things. The World is got so deep in men's
Hearts, that they will rather part with their peace, yea and with their Souls
too, than to part with it. Hence come those Churlish answers like that of
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 11. Shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh; and
give it to men, whom I know not whence they be?

(2.) Unbelief, which denies to give Honor and due Credit to Christ's Bills of
Exchange drawn upon them in Scripture and presented to them by the hands of his
poor Saints. They refuse I say to credit them, though Conscience protest
against them, for their Noncompliance. Christ says, Mark 9. 41. Whosoever
shall give you a cup of cold water to drink in my name, because ye belong to
Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. He shall gain that
which he cannot lose, by parting with that which he cannot keep.

(3.) The want of love to Jesus Christ. Did we love Christ in sincerity, and
were that love so fervent as it ought to be; it would make thee more ready to
lay down thy neck for Christ, than thou now art to lay out a shilling for him.
1 Ioh. 3. 16. It Is our Duty in some cases to spend our blood for the Saints. So
it was in the primitive times, Behold (^said the Christians Enemies) how they
love one another, and are willing to dye one for another. But that Spirit is
almost extinguished in these degenerate days.

VI. Instance.
How many stand convinced by their own Consciences what a sin it is to spend
their precious time so idly and vainly as they do? When a day is lost in
vanity, duties neglected, no good done or received; at night Conscience reckons
with them for it, and asks them what account they can give of that day to God.
How they are able to satisfy themselves to lie down and sleep under so much
guilt? and yet when the morrow comes, the vanity of their hearts carries them
on in the same Course again the next day; and whilst they keep themselves in
vain Company, they are quiet, till Conscience finds them at leisure to debate
it again with them. Now the things which master Conviction are

(1.) In some men, their Ignorance and Insensibility of the Preciousness of
time. They know it is their sin, to spend their time so vainly, but little
consider that Eternity it self hangs upon this little Moment of Time; and that
the great work of their Salvation will require all the time they have, and if
it be not finished in this small allottment of time, it can never be finished,
Ioh. 9. 4.

(2.) The Examples of other vain persons, that are as Prodigal of their
precious time as themselves, and entice them to spend it as they do.

(3.) The charming power of sensual Lusts and Pleasures, Oh how pleasantly does
time slide away in Plays, Alehouses, in relating or hearing taking Stories,
News, etc.

(4.) Inconsiderateness of the sharp and terrible rebukes of Conscience for
this on a Deathbed, or the terrors of the Lord in the day of Judgment.

In all these Instances you see how common this dreadful evil of holding the
truth in unrighteousness is; yet these are but a few selected from among many.

(5.) In the next place I am obliged to show, how and why the imprisoning of
Convictions, or holding the Truths of God in Unrighteousness, so dreadfully
incenseth his Wrath. And this it does upon several accounts:

(1.) Knowledge and Conviction of sin is an excellent means, or choice help to
preserve Men from falling into sin: There be Thousands of sins committed in the
World, which had never been committed, if Men had known them to be sins, before
they committed them. Every Sinner durst not make so bold with his Conscience as
you have done. The Apostle tells us the reason why the Princes of this World
crucified the Lord of Glory, was, because they knew him not, 1 Cor. 2. 8. Had
they known him, they would not have dared to do as they did. And so it is in
multitudes of lower and lesser sins than that, Satan mops their Eyes with
Ignorance, then uses their Hands and Tongues in Wickedness; he is the Ruler of
the darkness of the World: Ephesians. 6. 12. But when Men do know this or that to be
sin, and yet venture on it, here an excellent Antidote against sin is turned
into a dreadful aggravation of sin, which highly incenses the Wrath of God.

(2.) Knowledge and Conviction going before, adds presumption to the Sin that
follows after it; and presumptuous Sin is the most provoking and daring Sin;
from this way of sinning David earnestly beseeches God to keep him, Keep back
thy servant (says he) from presumptuous sins: When a man sees sin, and yet
adventures on it, in such sinning there is a despising of the Law of God: A Man
may break the Law, whilst he approves, reverences, and honors it in his heart,
Romans 7. 12, 13. but here the Commandment is despised, as God told David, 2 Samuel
12. 9. It Is as if a Man should say, I see the Command of God armed with
threatenings in my way, but yet I will go on for all that.

(3.) Knowledge and Conviction leave the Conscience of a Sinner naked, and
wholly without excuse or apology for his sin: In this case there is no plea
left to extenuate the offense: John 15. 22. Now they have no cloak for their
sin; if a man sins ignorantly, his ignorance is some excuse for his sin, it
excuses it at least a tanto, as Paul tells us, thus and thus I did, but I did
it ignorantly: Here is cloak or covering, an excuse or extenuation of the sin,
but knowledge takes away this cloak, and makes the sin appear naked in all the
odious deformity of it; nothing left to hide it.

(4.) Light or Knowledge of the Law and Will of God, is a very choice and
excellent Mercy; it is a choice and singular favor, for God to make the light
of Knowledge to shine into a Man's mind or understanding: It Is a Mercy withheld
from multitudes, Psalm. 147. 19. and those that enjoy it, are under special
engagements to bless God for it, and to improve it diligently and thankfully to
his Service and Glory; but for a Man to arm such a Mercy as this against God,
to fight against him with one of his choicest Mercies, this must be highly
provoking to the Lord: It Is therefore mentioned as an high aggravation of
Solomon's sin in the 1 Kings 11. 9. that he sinned against the Lord, after the
Lord had appeared unto him twice.

(5.) This way of sinning argues an extraordinary degree of hardness of heart;
It Is a sign of little tenderness, or sense of the evil of sin: Some Men, when
God shows them the evil of sin in the glass of the Law, they tremble at the
sight of it: So did Paul, Romans 7. 13. When the Commandment came, sin revived,
and he died; he sunk down at the sight of it: But God shows thee the evil of
sin in the glass of his Law, and thou make nothing of it: O obdurate heart!
When the Rod was turned into a Serpent, Moses fled from it, was afraid to touch
it, but though God turns the Rod into a Serpent, and discovers the venomous
Nature of Sin in his Word, thou can handle and play with that Serpent, and
put it into thy bosom, this shows thy heart to be of a strange complexion.

(6.) To go against the convincing warning voice of Conscience, violates and
wounds a Man's Conscience more, than any other way of sinning does; and when
Conscience is so wounded, who, or what shall then comfort thee? It Is a true
Rule, Maxima violatio Conscientiae, est maximum peccatum: The more any sin
violates a man's Conscience, the greater that sin is: The sin of Devils is the
most dreadful sin, and what makes it so, but the horrid violation of their
Consciences, and malicious Rebellion against their own Light and clear
Knowledge, James 2. 19. They know and sin, they believe and tremble, (...),
they roar under the Tortures of Conscience like the Rote of the Sea, or noise
of the Rocks before a Storm.

O then, if there be any degree of sense and tenderness left in you, if any
fear of God, or regard to salvation; let go all Gods Prisoners which lie bound
and are imprisoned in any of your Souls this day: Blessed be God some have done
so, and are at ease, and rest in their spirits by so doing: They could have no
ease till they unbound them, and yielded obedience to them. It Is said, Acts 16.
38. that when the Magistrates of Philippi understood, that those Men whom they
had bound and imprisoned, were Romans, they feared, and well they might, for
the punishment was great for any Man that injured a Citizen, or Freeman of
Rome; but every Conviction you imprison is a Messenger of Heaven, a Commission
Officer of God, and woe to him that binds or abuses it. Do you know what you
do? Are you aware of the danger? Wast thou not afraid (said David to the
Amalakite) to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the Lords Anointed? So say I,
Art thou not afraid to destroy the immediate Messenger of God sent to thy Soul
for good? Conviction is a kind of Embrio of Conversion; the Conversion and
Salvation of thy Soul would be the Fruit of it, were it obeyed: Thy strivings
with it causes it to miscarry, renders it Abortive, and thy Life must go for
it, except God revive and recover it again: As you know the Law is for striking
a pregnant Woman, Exodus 21, 22, 23. Loose then every Man the Lords Prisoners, I
mean your restrained stifled Convictions, stifle them no longer, you see what a
dreadful aggravation of sin it is, and that the Wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men that hold the truth
in Unrighteousness.

I. USE. For Information.
I. Inference.
This will prove a fruitful Doctrine to inform us, First, That knowledge in it
self, is not enough to secure the Soul of any Man from Hell.

No Gifts, no Knowledge, but that only which is operative and influential upon
the Heart and Life, and to which we pay Obedience, can secure any Man from
Wrath, John 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them: The
greatest sins may be found in Conjunction with the greatest knowledge, as you
see in the fallen Angels: Light is then only a Blessing, when guides the Soul
into the way of Duty and Obedience; there is many a knowing head in Hell: Yet
from hence let no Man indulge himself in Ignorance, or shun the means of
knowledge, that he may sin more freely, and less dangerously; for you must
account with God for all that knowledge you might have had, as well as for that
you had; for the means of knowledge he gave you, as well as for that knowledge
you did actually attain by them.

II. Inference.
What singular and choice Mercy is a tender Conscience! A Conscience yielding
Obedience to Conviction! A drop of such tenderness in the Conscience is better
than a Sea of speculative knowledge in the head, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Many poor
Christians are ashamed to see themselves so out-stripped and excelled by others
in Gifts, and apt to be discouraged, but if God have blessed thee with a tender
obediential Heart to the Will of God, so far as he is pleased to manifest it to
thee; thou have no reason to be discouraged for want of those Excellent Gifts
and parts others do enjoy: You cannot discourse floridly, nor dispute subtly;
but can you obey conscienciously, and comply with the manifested Will of God
tenderly? Then happy art thou, O! It Is far better to feel a Truth, than merely
to know it: It was the high Commendation of the Romans, that they obeyed from
the Heart that form of GospelDoctrine which was delivered them, Romans 6. 17. or
into which rather, (...)
they were delivered, as melted Metals are into the Moulds. Two Learned Divines
traveling to the Council of Constance, were affected even to Tears, at the
sight of a Shepherd in the Fields, mourning and melting at the sight of a Toad;
and blessing God that he had not made him such a loathsome Creature; whereupon
they applied Austins words to themselves, Surgunt indocti, etc. The Unlearned
will rise and take Heaven from the Learned: Thy little knowledge made effectual
by Obedience, is more sanctified, more sweet, and more saving than other Men's;
and therefore of much greater value: It Is more sanctified, for the Blessing of
God is upon it, Gal. 6. 16. It Is more sweet, for you relish the goodness, as
well as discern the Truth of Gospel-Doctrines, Psalm. 119. 103. It Is not an
insipid dry speculation, and then it is more saving, being one of those better
things that accompanies Salvation, as it is, Heb. 6. 9.

III. Inference.
Learn hence in the third place, What an uncomfortable Life knowing, but
unregenerate Men and Women do live: They are frequently in Wars and Combats
with their own Consciences, Isa. 46. 22. There is no peace to the wicked, says
my God. They and their Consciences are ever and anon at Daggers drawing: They
have little pleasure in Sin, and none at all in Religion: They have none in
Religion, because they obey not its Rules, and little in Sin, because their
Consciences are still gauling and terrifying them for imprisoning their
Convictions.

It Is true, some Men's Consciences are seared as with an hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
but most have grumbling, and some have raging, and roaring Consciences; they
seldom come under the Word, or Rod, but their Consciences lash them: And when
Death approaches, the Terrors of the Almighty do shake and terrify them:
Altogether to neglect Duty, they dare not, and how to escape a lash from their
Consciences they know not. Feign they would have the pleasures of sin, but then
like Balaam they meet a Sword in the way; they plunge themselves into Earthly
diversions, like Cain, to be rid of a Fury within them, but all will not do. Is
this a Life for thee Reader to live? No peace with God, nor any with thy self?
No, no, expect no peace whilst thy Convictions lie bound and imprisoned in thy
Conscience: Sin for a moment is sweet in thy mouth, but its presently turned
into the Gall of Aspes within thee Ioh 20. 14. O that you did but know the
pleasures of a pure peaceable Conscience, ence, and how much it excels all the
delights of sense and sin!

IV. Inferences.
Ministers had need often to repeat and inculcate the same Truths to their
hearers: For the work is not half done, when Truth is got into the minds and
Consciences of Men.

Our work sticks at the Heart, more than the Head: The Understanding is many
times opened when the Heart and Will are locked, and fast barred against it: To
open the passages betwixt the Head and Heart is the greatest difficulty; this
is the work of Almighty Power: There is knowledge enough in some Men's heads to
save them, but it has not its Liberty: Restrained Truth cannot do its Office:
It Is much easier to convince the Mind, than to change the Heart, or bow the
Will: The hardest part of the Ministerial work is to preach Truths into the
Hearts and Lives of Men. This makes the frequent inculcations of the same
Truths necessary and safe to the peoples Souls, Phil. 3. 1. To write the same
things unto you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe.

V. Inference.
How astonishing and wonderful is the Power and Strength of Sin, which can hold
Men fast, after their Eyes are opened to see the Misery and Danger it has
involved them in.

One would think if a man's eyes were but once opened to see the Moral Evil that
is in sin, and the Everlasting train of Paenal Evils that follow sin; together
with a way of escape from both; it should be impossible to hold that sinner a
day longer in such a state of Bondage; the work were then as good as done; but
alas, we are mistaken; sin can hold those Men and Women fast, that see all
this. They know it is an horrid violation of Gods just and holy Laws, they know
it brings them under his Wrath and Curse, and will damn them to all Eternity if
they continue in it: They know Christ is able to save them to the uttermost
that come unto God by him, and that he is as willing, as he is able; and yet no
Arguments can prevail with them to part with sin. Show but a beast a flame of
fire, and you cannot drive him into it, if he see any way to escape it. Tell a
man this is rank poison, and will kill you; and you cannot make him swallow it,
though wrapped up in Sugar, or put into the most pleasant Vehicle. But let a
sinner see death and destruction before him, and sin can make him rush on as a
horse into the battle Ier. 8. 6. He goes as an Ox to the slaughter. His heart
is fully set in him to do evil, Eccl. 8. 11. As one said, when his Physician
told him, If he followed such a course of sin, he would in a little time lose
his Eyes; Then, said he, vale lumen amicum, farewell sweet light, I cannot part
with this practice. So it is with others, rather than forego their pleasures, and
break their Customs in sin, farewell Heaven, Christ, and all. O the enchanting
efficacy of Sin! Ier. I8. 11, 12, And they said, there is no hope, but we will
walk after our own devises. When a man considers what Visions of Misery and
Wrath Conviction gives Men, he may wonder that all convinced men are not
converted; and on the otherside, when he considers the strong hold sin has
gotten upon the hearts of sinners, it may justly seem as great a wonder that
any are converted:

VI. Inference.
How dreadful is the State and Case of Apostates, who have had their eyes
opened, their Consciences awakened, their Resolutions for Christ seemingly
fixed: and yet after all this, return again to their former course of Sin.

You see Brethren, sin has not only power to hold men in Bondage to its Lusts
after their eyes have been opened; but it has power to recover and fetch back
those that seemed to have clean escaped out of its hands, 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19. The
unclean Spirit may depart for a time, and make his re-entry into the same soul,
with seven Spirits worse than himself. Matthew. 12. 43. Restraints by conviction
and formality do not wholly dispossess Satan, he still keeps his propriety in
the Soul, for he calls it my house, and that propriety he keeps under all those
Convictions and partial Reformations opens to him and all his Hellish retinue a
door for his return. But oh how doleful will the end of such Men be! and how
just is that Martial Law of Heaven, that dooms the Apostate to Eternal Wrath!
Heb. 10. 38. Such are 'twice dead, and will be plucked up by the Root, Jude 12.

VII. Inference.
To conclude this Use, How sure and dreadful will be the condemnation of all
those in the day of the Lord, who obstinately persist and continue in sin,
under the Convictions and Condemnations of their own consciences!

Poor wretches, you are condemned already, Ioh. 3. 18. Condemned by the Law of
God, and by the sentence of your own Consciences. What thy own Conscience says
according to Gods Law, God will confirm, and make it good, 1 Ioh. 3. 20. If our
hearts condemn w, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. His
sentence will be as clear, as it will be terrible; for in the last Day the
Books will be opened; the book of Gods Omniscience, and the book of thine own
Conscience. Now the book of Conscience is as it were a Transcript or
Counterpart of Gods book, for thee to keep in thine own bosom: Now when Gods
book and thy own book shall be compared, and found exactly to agree, there can
be no farther dispute of the Equity of the account. O when God shall charge
thee saying, thou knew this and that to be sin, and yet thy lusts hurried
thee on to commit it; Is it not so? Look sinner into thine own book, and see if
thy Conscience have not so charged it to thy Account. Thou knew Prayer was
thy duty, when thou neglectedst it; and overreaching the lgnorant, Credulous
and Unwary, was thy sin, when the love of gain tempted thee to it, You knew I
had plainly told you Thest, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, and Extortion, would bar
you out of the Kingdom of Christ and of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. and yet putting
that to the venture, you have lived in those sins; is it not so? Examine the
book in your own bosom, and see. The Lord make men sensible of coming Wrath,
for those sins they live in under light, for the Wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven against them.

II. USE.
Is the Wrath of God revealed from Heaven a against all that hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness? Then let me exhort and persuade you, by all the regard and
love you have for your Souls, by all the fears you have of the Incensed Wrath
of the great and terrible God; that you forthwith set your Convictions at
Liberty, and loose all the Lords Prisoners that lie bound within you, because
there is Wrath beware, Job 36. 18. O stifle the Voices of your own Consciences
no more, slight not the softest whisper, or least intimation of Conscience;
reverence and obey its Voice. Motives pressing and persuading this are many,
yet estimate them by weight rather than by number.

I. Motive.
The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against them that hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and because there is Wrath beware. Are you truly informed what
the Wrath of God is? Who knows the power of thine anger? according to thy
fear, so is thy wrath, Psalm. 90. v. 11. O if the Wrath of a King (who in all
his Glory is but a mortal Worm) be as the roaring of a Lion, and as the
Messengers of Death; Prove. 20. 2. Prove. 16. 14. What then is the power of his
Wrath, at whose frowns the Kings of the Earth tremble, the Captains and the
Mighty Men, shrink like worms into their holes! if the lesser Executions of it
by Providence in this world, be so dreadful, that men, yea, good men have
desired an hiding place in the Grave, till it be past; Job 14. 13. then what is
the full execution thereof upon the ungodly in the place of Torments! If the
threats and denunciations of it against others, have made an Habakkuk, though
assured of personal safety to quiver with his Lips, and tremble in his Bowels;
as you see it did, Hab. 3. 16. How much more should those tremble and quiver
who are to be the Subjects of it, and not the mere Heralds of it as he was! And
(which is more than all) if Jesus Christ who was to feel it but a few Hours,
and had the power of the Godhead to support him under it; did notwithstanding,
sweat as it had been great drops of blood, and was sore amazed; think with wthy
self poor wretch, how shall thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong when thou
have to do with an incensed Deity?

II. Motive.
Till you let your Convictions go, Satan will not let you go He binds you,
whilst you bind them. Here is the Command of God, and the Command of Satan in
competition. Let go my Truths, says God, which thou hold in
unrighteousness; bind and suppress them says Satan, or they will deprive thee of
the liberty and pleasure of thy Life. Now, whilst thou slightest the voice of
God and Conscience (for the voice of Conscience is the voice of God) do thou
not avowedly declare thy self the bond-slave of Satan? His Servants ye are, to
whom you obey, Romans 6. 16. Dare not to make one step further in the way of
known sin says Conscience, continue not at thy Peril in such a dangerous
state, after I have so clearly convinced and warned thee of it: fear not says
Satan, if it be bad with thee, 'twill be as bad with Millions. God will wound
the heads of such as go in their Trespasses says Scripture, Psalm. 68. 21.
Tush, others do so, and escape as well as the most nice and tender, says
Satan. Now, I say, thy Obedience to Satan's commands, plainly declares thee, all
this while to be a poor enslaved Captive to him, acted and carried according to
the Prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that now works in the Children
of disobedience.

III. Motive.
Nay further, until you obey your Convictions, you are Confederates with the
Devil in a desperate Plot against your own Souls. You join with Christ's great
and avowed Enemy to dishonor him, and damn your selves.

Two things make you Confederates with the Devil, against your own Souls.

First, Your Consent to this his Project, for your Damnation; for so your own
Consciences out of the Scriptures inform you it is. Consent makes you a Party.

Secondly, Your Concealment of this Plot brings you in as a Party with him.
Confess thy sin and bewail it says Conscience, not so says Pride and Shame,
how shall I look men in the face if I do so? Don't you in all this believe
Satan, and make God a Liar? Don't you act as men that hate your own Souls, and
love death? Prove. 8. 36. O it is a dreadful thing for men to be accessory to
their own Eternal Ruin, and that after fair warning and notice given them by
their own Consciences. Satan (be his power what it will) cannot destroy you
without your own Consent.

IV. Motive.
Whilst you go on stifling your own Convictions, and turning away your ears
from its calls to Repentance and Reformation, you cannot be pardoned. You are
in your sins, and the guilt of them all lies at your door. You may see what the
Terms of Remission are, Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked for sake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him turn unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy on him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. So again, Prove.
28. 13. He that hardneth his neck shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
for saketh shall find mercy. You see by these, and may see by many more plain
Scripture Testimonies, there can be no hope of Remission whilst you go on in
this path of Rebellion; concealing, yea and persisting in your known
wickedness. There is a necessary and inseparable Connection betwixt Repentance
and Remission, Acts 5. 31. and Luke 24. 47. And can you endure guilt to be your
Bedfellow during Life, and your Grave fellow after Death?

V. Motive.
You can never have peace with your own Consciences, whilst you keep
Convictions Prisoners. Now a man's Conscience is his best Friend, or his worst
Enemy. Thence are the sweetest Comforts, and thence are the bitterest Sorrows.
It Is a dreadful thing for a man to lie with a cold sweating Horror upon his
panting Bosom. Tum pallida men's est Criminibus, tacit a sudant praecordia
culpa. And this (or which is worse) Obduration and Stupidity must be the case
of them that hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. There can be no sounding a
retreat to these terrors, till Sheba's Head be thrown over the Walls; I mean,
till that Sin your Conscience convinces you of, be delivered up. As Israel
could have no peace, till Achan was destroyed, so thou shall have no peace,
whilst thy sin is covered, and hid. Men may cry peace, peace, to themselves,
whilst they continue in sin, Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19. but the sharpest troubles of
Conscience, are better than such peace. Deliver up thy self Man, if thou love
peace, into the hands of thy own Convictions, and thou art in the true way to
peace. Thy rejoicing must be in the Testimony of thine own Conscience, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1. 12. or thou rejoycest in a dream, in a delusion, in
a thing of naught.

VI. Motive.
What dreadful Charges are you like to meet with upon your deathbeds, on the
account of those sins you have lived in, against Knowledge and Conviction!
Conscience is never more active and vigorous than in the last hours and moments
of Life. Now, it will be stifled, and overruled no longer. It whispered
before, but now it thunders. If a Man have a clear and quiet Conscience, his
Evening is clear, and his Sun sets without Clouds, See Psalm. 37 37. The end of
that man is peace. In Contemplation of this Felicity it was that Balaam uttered
that wish, let my last end be like his: This peace is the result of a Man's
integrity, and Obedience to the voice of Conscience, this being the Evidence,
we can most safely rely upon, of our Uprightness, and Interest in Christ, but
the result of such violences and abuses to thy Conscience, cannot be peace to
thy Soul: It Is true, some wicked Men dye in seeming peace, and some good Men in
trouble, but both the one and other are mistaken; the first, as to the good
Estate he fancies himself in, and the other as to his bad Estate; and a few
Moments will clear up the mistakes of both.

VII. Motive.
Obedience to Convictions will not only produce peace at Death, but it will
give you present ease, present relief and refreshment in hand: No sooner did
David resolve to obey the voice of his Conscience, in confessing his sin; but
he had sensible ease in his own Spirit, Psalm. 32. 5. So Isa. 32. 17. the fruit
of Righteousness is peace, quietness, and assurance for ever: On the contrary,
you find in Job 20. 20. Wicked Men have no quietness in their Bellies, that is,
in their Consciences: For Guilt lies boking there as a Thorn does in the Flesh:
And what is Life worth without ease? To live ever in pain, to live upon the
Rack, is not worth while to live: If then you love ease and quietness, obey
your Consciences: Pull out that Thorn, I mean that Sin that sticks fast in thy
Soul, and aches in thy Conscience: Who would endure so much anguish for all the
flattering pleasures of sin?

VIII. Motive.
Convictions followed home and obeyed, are the inlets to Christ and Eternal
Salvation by him; they are the first leading work of the Spirit, in order to
union with Christ, John 16. 8. till you obey and yield up your selves to them,
Christ is shut out of your Souls, he knocks, but finds no entrance, at your
peril therefore be obedient to their calls: All the while you parley with your
Convictions, and demur to their demands, Christ stands without, offering
himself graciously to you, but not admitted; so that no less than your Eternal
Happiness or Misery depend on your Obedience, or disobedience to the Voices and
Calls of your Convictions.

IX. Motive.
Obey your Convictions, Honor their Voices, and restrain them not; then shall
your Consciences give a fair testimony for you at the Judgment seat of Christ:
You read 1 Pet. 3. 2I Of the answer of a good Conscience toward God; than
which nothing can be more comfortable: This gives a Man boldness in the day of
Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. Believe it firs, it is not your Baptism, your
Churchpriviledges, the Opinion Men have of you; but the testimony of your
Consciences that must be your comfort. I know Men are not justified at Gods
Bar, by you own Obedience, nor any exactness of Life, it is only Christ's
Righteousness that is the Sinners plea; but yet your Obedience to the Calls and
Voices of God and Conscience, are your evidence that you are in Christ.

X. Motive.
Lastly, Consider what a choice Mercy it is to be under such Calls and
Convictions of Conscience as are yet capable of being obeyed: It Is not so with
Men's Convictions after this Life. Conscience convinces in Hell as well as
here, but all its Convictions there are for torment, not recovery. Oh it is a
choice Mercy your Convictions are yet Medicinal, not purely Poenal; that you
are not malo obfirmati, so fixed in the state of Sin and Misery, as the damned
are; but may yet enjoy the saving benefit of your Convictions, but this you
will not enjoy long, therefore I beseech you by all that is dear and valuable
in your Eyes; Reverence your Consciences, and let go the Lords Prisoners that
lie bound within you.

III. USE.
I next come to expotulate the matter with your Consciences, and propound a few
Convictive Queries to your Souls this day: I cannot but look upon this Assembly
with Fear, Jealousy and Compassion. I am afraid there be many of you in this
wretched case: Men and Women that hold the Truths of God in Unrighteousness,
though the Wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against all them that do so:
Let me Demand,

I. Demand.
Do not some of you stand convinced by your own Consciences this day, that your
Hearts and Lives, your Principles and Practices, are vastly different from the
People of God, among whom you live; and whose Characters you read in Scripture?
Do not your own Consciences tell you, that you never took that pains for your
Salvation you see them daily to take; that there be some it may be in your
Families, nay, possibly in your Bosoms that are serious and heavenly, whilst
you are vain and earthly; that are in their Chambers upon their knees,
wrestling with God, whilst you are in your Beds, or about the things of the
World: And does not Conscience sometimes whisper thus into thine Ear, Soul thou
art not right; something is wanting to make thee a Christian: Thou want that
which others have; and except something further be done upon thee, thou will be
undone for ever: If it be so, let me advise thee to hearken diligently to this
voice of Conscience: Don't dare to adventure to the Judgment Seat of God in
such a case: Ponder that Text, Matthew. 21. 32. and let the disparity your
Conscience shows you betwixt your own course and others, awaken you to more
diligence and seriousness about your own Salvation: How can^t thou come from
the Alehouse, or thy vain Recreations, and find a Wife, or Child in Prayer, and
thy Conscience not smite thee? It may be they have been mourning for thy 'ins,
whilst thou haft been committing them. It may be there lives not far from thee
a Godly poor Man, who out of his hard and pressing Labors, redeems more time
for his Soul in a week, than ever thou did in thy Life. O hearken to the
voice of thy Conscience: Else thou art he that hold Truth in Unrighteousness.

II. Demand.
Did thy Conscience never meet thee in the way of Sin, as the Angel of the Lord
met Balaam with a drawn Sword, brandishing the threatenings of God against thee?
Did it not say to thee as a Captain once said to his Soldiers about to
retreat, he cast himself down in their way, saying, if you go this way, you
shall go over your Captain: You shall trample him first under your feet: Stop
Soul, stop, said thy Conscience; this and that Word of God is against thee: If
thou proceed, thou must trample upon the Sovereign Authority of God in this or
that Command; yet thy impetuous Lusts have hurried thee forward: Thou would
not fairly debate the case with thy Conscience, and then did not thy Conscience
say to thee, as Ruben spoke to his Brethren, Genesis 42. 22. Spoke I not unto you
saying, do not sin against the child, but you would not hear; therefore also
his blood is required of you: If this have been your course of sinning, verily
you are the persons that have held the Truths of God in Unrighteousness, and
against you the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven.

III. Demand.
Have you not seen the Wrath of God revealed from Heaven against other Sinners
that have gone before you in the very same tract and course of sin in which you
now go, and yet you persist in it, notwithstanding such dreadful Warnings? Thus
did Belteshazzar, though he saw all that the God of Heaven had done to his
Father, Dan. 5. 20, 21, 22. You have seen great Estates scattered, and their
Owners that got them by fraud and oppression reduced to beggary; and yet when a
temptation is before you, you cannot forbear to take the advantage (as you call
it) to get the gain of oppression: You have seen Drunkards clothed with rags,
and brought to miserable ends: Adulterers severely punished, their Names and
Estates, Souls and Bodies blasted and wasted by a secret, but just stroke of
God: Have you taken warning by these strokes of God, and hearkened to the
monitions and cautions your Consciences have thereupon given you? If not, thou
art the Man that hold the truth of God in Unrighteousness.

IV. Demand.
Do not you inwardly hate, and do not your hearts rise against necessary and
due reproofs given you by those that love your Souls better than your selves?
If you hate a faithful Reprover, though you know you justly deserve the
reproof, and are guilty of the sin he reproves; if you recriminate, or deny in
such cases; you are certainly so far Confederates with Satan against your own
Souls; and imprison your own Convictions.

V. Demand.
Are not some of you Apostatized from the first Profession, and are not those
hopeful blossoms that once appeared upon your Souls blasted and gone? You had
quick Convictions, and melting Affections, tenderness in your Consciences, and
zeal for Duties: But all is now vanished: Your Affections are grown cold, your
Duties omitted, though Conscience often bids you remember from whence you are
fallen, and do your first Works: You are the persons guilty of this sin.

VI. Demand.
Do none of you presume upon future Repentance, and so make bold with your
Consciences for present, thinking to compound that way with it? This argues
thee to be a self-condemned Man, and one that hold truth in Unrighteousness:
Thy Sin is present and certain, thy Repentance but a peradventure, 2 Timothy 2.
25. This is an high and a daring way of presumptuous sinning.

VII. Demand.
Lastly, Have none of you taken the Vows of God upon you, to reform your
course, and break off your iniquities by Repentance, when you have been under
dangerous sickness on shore, or dreadful tempests at Sea? Have you not said,
Lord, if thou will but spare and save me this once, I will never live at the
rate I have lived any more: Try me O Lord this once: And yet when that
Affliction has vanished, your purposes and promises to God have vanished with
it: You are the Persons that hold the known Truths of God Prisoners in your
Souls; and to all these seven sorts of Sinners, this Text may justly be as the
handwriting upon the Wall once was, even a Mean tekel; that may make thy very
loins to shake.

IV. USE.
This Doctrine winds up and finishes in Directions for the prevention of such
presumptuous sins in Men for time to come; that truth may have its free course
through your Souls.

I. Direction.
And to this end, my first Counsel and Direction is, that you fail not to put
every Conviction in speedy Execution. Don't delay, it is a very critical hour,
and delays are exceeding hazardous: Convictions are fixed and secured in Men's
Souls four ways.

(1.) By deep and serious consideration, Psalm. 119. 59. I thought upon my
ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

(2.) By earnest Prayer, thus Saul under his first Convictions fell presently
on his knees, Acts 9. 11. Behold be prays: The warm breath of Prayer foments
and nourishes the sparks of Conviction, that it be not extinct.

(3.) By diligent attendance upon the Word, the Word begets it, and the Word
can through God's blessing preserve it, 1 Iam. 23. 24.

(4.) Present Execution, falling without delay on the Duty thou art convinced
of, Iam. 1. 24. Be not forgetful hearers, but doers of the work; otherwise a
Man is as one that looks into a glass, and straightway forgets what manner of
man he was. Take the sense thus, a man looks into the Glass in the Morning, and
there perhaps he sees a spot on his Face, a disorder in his Hair, or Clothes;
and thinks with himself, well I will rectify it anon; but being gone from the
place, one thing or other diverts his mind, he forgets what he saw, and goes
all the day with the spot on his Face, never minding it any more. O brethren,
delays are dangerous, sin is deceitful, Heb. 3. 13. Satan is subtle, 2 Cor.
11. 3. and this way gains his Point. This Motto may be written on the
Tomb-stones of most that perish, Here lies one that was destroyed by delays.
Your Life is immediately uncertain, so are the strivings of the Spirit also.
Besides, there is a mighty advantage in the primus impetus, the first heat of
the Soul, when thy heart is once up in warm Affections and Resolutions, the
work may be easily done, as a Bell if once up goes easily, but hard to raise
when down. See 2 Chronicles. 29. 36. What advantage there is in a present warm
frame! Beside, the nature of these things is too serious and weighty to be
post-pon'd and delayed. You cannot get out of the danger of Hell, or into
Christ too soon Moreover, every repetition of sin, after Conviction greatly
aggravates it. For it is in sinning, as it is in numbering; if the first be
one, the second is ten, the third an hundred, the fourth a thousand. And to
conclude, think what you will, you can never have a fitter season than the
present, the same difficulties you have to day you will have to morrow, and it
may be greater. Fall presently therefore to execute your Convictions.

II. Direction.
If you would be clear from this great wickedness of holding the Truth in
Unrighteousness, then see that you reverence the Voice, and stand in awe of the
Authority of your own Consciences; and resolve with Job, My heart shall not
reproach me as long as I live, Job 27. 6. There be two considerations apt to
beget reverence in men to the Voice of their own Consciences.

1. It Is our best Friend when pure and inviolated. 2. It Is our worst Enemy when
wounded and affronted.
1. Conscience obeyed and kept pure and inviolate, is thy best Friend on Earth,
2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our Consciences. The very
Heathen could say, Nil conscire tibi, nulla pallescere culpa,
His murus ahenus esto.
What comforted Hezekiah on his supposed Deathbed, but the fair Testimonial his
Conscience gave in of his Integrity, 2 King 2. 3. A good man (says Soloman)
shall be satisfied from himself; but the backslider in heart shall be filled
with his own ways. Mark the opposition, Conscience gives the Backslider his
Belly-full of Sorrow, and the upright man his Heart-full of peace. He is
satisfied from himself, that is from his own Conscience, which though it be not
the Original Spring, yet it is the Conduit at which he drinks peace, joy, and
encouragement.

2. Conscience wounded and abused, will be our worst Enemy. No Poniards to
Mortal as the wounds of Conscience. A wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.
14. Could Judas bear it? or could Spira bear it? What Is the Torment of Hell, but
the Worm that dies not? and what is that Worm, but the remorse of Conscience?
Mark 9. 44. O what is that fearful Expectation mentioned, Heb. 10. 27. see how
you like that life described Deuteronomy. 28. 65, 66. the primitive Christians chose
rather to be cast to the Lions, than into the Paws of an enraged Conscience, ad
leones, potius quam ad Lenones. Every little trouble will be insupportable to a
sick and wounded Conscience, as a quart of water would be to your Shoulder in a
great leaden Vessel.

O if men did but fear their own Consciences, if they did reverence themselves,
as the Moralist speaks. If they did herein Exercise themselves to have always
a Conscience void of offense, as Paul did, Acts 24. 16. Then would you be clear
of this great Sin of holding the Truth in Unrighteousness.

III. Direction.
If you would escape the guilt and danger of holding Gods Truths in
Unrighteousness, then keep your Hearts under the awful sense of the Day of
Judgment, when every secret thing must come into Judgment, and Conscience like
a Register book is to be opened and examined.

The Consideration of that day gives your Consciences a sevenfold defensative
against Sin.

(1.) It provokes every man to get real solid Grace, and not rest in an empty
Profession, Matthew. 25. and this secures us from formal Hypocrisy. That we be
not found foolish Virgins.

(2.) It excites us to the diligent improvement of our Talents, that we be not
found slothful Servants, neglecting any duty, God and Conscience calls us to,
Matthew. 25. 21.

(3.) It confirms and establishes us in the ways of God, that we wound not
Conscience by Apostasy, 1 Ioh. 2. 28.

(4.) Its a loud call to every man to Repentance, and not to lie stupid and
senseless under guilt, Acts 17. 30, 31.

(5.) It Is a powerful Antidote against formality in Religion, the general and
dangerous disease of Professors, Matthew. 7. 22, 23.

(6.) It excites holy fear and watchfulness in the whole course of Life, 1 Pet.
1. 17.

(7.) It puts us not only to our watch, but to our knees in fervent Prayer, 1
Pet. 4. 7.

And he that feels such effects as these from the consideration of that Day, is
fortified against that sin my Text warns of; and dares never hold the Truth of
God in Unrighteousness. It Is our regardlessness of Judgment to come, and
ignorance of the Nature of it, which so emboldens us to neglect known Duties,
and commit known Sins, Amos 6. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. If our Thoughts and
Meditations were engaged more frequently and seriously on such an aweful
Subject, you would rather choose to dye, than to do violence to your Consciences.

IV. Direction.
Get right and true apprehensions of the Moral Evil that is in sin, and of the
Paenal Evil that follows sin: then no Temptation shall prevail with you to
commit a sin, to escape a present trouble, or neglect a known duty, to
accommodate any earthly interest, and consequently to hold no truth of God in
unrighteousness. It Is fear of Loss and Sufferings that so often overbears
Conscience, but if men were once made thoroughly sensible, that the least sin is
worse for them than the greatest affliction or suffering; the peace of
Conscience would be well secured. And that this is really so, appears thus;

(1.) Afflictions do not make a man vile in the Eyes of God. A Man may be under
manifold Afflictions, and yet very dear and precious in Gods Account; Heb. 11.
36, 37, 38. but S in makes a man vile in the Eyes of God, Dan. 11. 2.

(2.) Afflictions do not put men under the Curse of God, Blessings and
Afflictions may go together; Psalm. 94. 12. but Sin brings the Soul under the
Curse, Gal. 3. 10.

(3.) Afflictions make men more like unto God, Heb. 12. 10. but Sin make us
more like the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. Ioh. 8. 34.

(4.) Afflictions for Conscience sake are but the Creatures wrath inflamed
against us, but Sin is the inflamer of Gods Wrath against us, as in the Text.

(5.) Afflictions are but outward Evils upon the Body, but Sin is an internal
Evil upon the Soul. Prove. 8. 36.

(6.) Afflictions for Duties sake have many sweet Promises annexed to them,
Matthew. 5. 10. but Sin has none.

(7.) The effects of Sufferings for Christ are sweet to the Soul, 2 Cor. 7. 4.
but the fruits of Sin are bitter; it yields nothing but shame and fear.

(8.) Afflictions for Christ are the way to Heaven, but Sin is the Road-way to
Hell, Romans 6. ult.

(9.) Sufferings for Duty are but for a Moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17. but Sufferings
for sin, will be Eternal, Mark 9. 44.

If such thoughts might be suffered to dwell with us, how would they guard the
Conscience against Temptations, and secure their Peace and Purity!

V. Direction.
Be thoroughly persuaded of this great Truth, that God takes great pleasure in
uprightness, and will own and honor Integrity amidst all the dangers that
befall it, Psalm. 11. 7. Prove. 11. 20. when he would encourage Abraham to a Life
of Integrity, he engages his Almighty power for the protection of him in that
way, Genesis 17. 1. I am God Almighty, walk thou before me and be perfect. So
Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, he will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will be withold from them that walk uprightly.

An upright man is the boast of Heaven, Job 1. 8. He is Gods darling; and the
reason is because he bears the Image of God, Psalm. 11. 7. The upright Lord
loves uprightness: Yea, and if Integrity bring them into trouble, they may be
sure the Lord will bring them out; Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the afflictions of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of all. How safely then may
they leave themselves in the hands of his infinite Wisdom, Power, and Fatherly
Care?

Nay, God is not only the Protector, but he is also the Rewarder, of
Conscientious Integrity, Psalm. 18. 20. and that four ways.

(1.) In the inward peace it yields them, Isaiah 32. 17. The work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. But the effect of sinful shifts and carnal Policies, are
shame and sorrow.

(2.) In the Success and Issue of it; it not only turns to Gods glory, but it
answers and accommodates our own designs and ends far better than our sinful
projects can do, Prove. 28. 23.

(3.) Great is the Joy and Encouragement resulting from it in the day of Death,
2 King 20. 3. Psalm. 37. 37.

(4.) In the World to come, Psalm. 49. 14. Were this duly considered, and
thoroughly believed, men would choose rather to part with life, than the purity
and peace of their own Consciences. They would suffer all wrongs and injuries,
rather than do Conscience the least injury.

VI. Direction.
Do not idolize the World, nor overvalue the Trifles of this life, it is the
love of the World that makes men warp from the Rules of their own Consciences,
2 Timothy 4. 10 it is this that makes men strain hard, to get loose from the ties
and bonds of their own Consciences. The young man was convinced, but the world
was too hard for his Convictions, Luke 18. 23. the degree of his Sorrow, was
according to the degree of his Love to the Creature. It Is not the having, but
the overloving of the world that ruins us. It Is a worldly Heart which makes men
twist and turn, shuffle and dissemble at that rate they do in time of
Temptation. Could you once dethrone this Idol, how secure and safe would your
Consciences be! The Church is described, Rev. 12. 1. as clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her Feet The most zealous Age of the Church, was the Age of
Poverty. Try these few considerations upon your hearts to loose them from the
inordinate love of the World.

(1.) What good will the World do you when you have lost your Integrity for its
sake, and peace is taken away from the inner man? What joy of the world had
Judas, and what comfort had Spira? If you part with your integrity for it, God
will blast it, and it shall yield you no joy.

(2.) Except you renounce the world, you are renounced by Christ. Disclaim it,
or he will disclaim you; Luke 14. 33. No man can be admitted into Christ's
Service, but by fealing those Indentures with him.

(3.) What ever loss or damage you shall sustain, for Christ and Conscience
sake, he stands obliged to repair it to you, and that with an infinite
overplus, Mark 10. 29. 30.

(4.) In a word, all the Riches, Pleasures, Honors, and Liberties in the world
are not able to give you that Joy and heart-refreshing Comfort, that the
acquitting and chearing voice of your own Consciences can do. Settle these
things in your hearts, as defensatives against this danger.

VII. Direction.
Lastly, Beg of God, and labor to get more Christian Courage and Magnanimity,
for want of this Conscience, is often overborn against its own Light and
Conviction. Christian magnanimity, is Consciences security. It Is excellent and
becoming a Christian, to be able to face any thing but the frowns of God and
his own Conscience. All the famous Champions of Truth, and VVitnesses for God
that came victorious out of the Field of Temptation with safe and unwounded
Consciences, were men of Courage and Resolution; see Dan. 3. 16. Heb. 11. 27.
Acts 21. 13. and what is this Christian Courage, but the fixed resolution of
the Soul to Encounter all dangers, all sufferings, all reproaches, pains and
losses in the strength of assisting Grace, that shall assault us in the ways of
our duty, and so it stands opposed in Scripture to the Spirit of Fear, Heb. 11.
27. to Shame, Mark 8. 38. to Apostasy, Heb. 10. 39. He must neither be afraid,
nor ashamed, nor lose one inch of ground for the sake of what dangers he meets
with, and that because he has embraced Christianity upon those terms, and was
told of all this before, Ioh. 16. 1. because there is no retreating but to our
own ruin, Heb. 10. 38. because he owes all this, and much more than this to
Christ, Phil. 1. 29. because he understands the value of his Soul above his
Body, and of Eternals above and beyond all temporals, Matthew. 10. 28 and in a
word, because he believes the Promises of Gods Assistance, and rewards, Heb 11.
25, 26, 27.

O my Friends, were our fears thus subdued, and our Faith thus exalted, how
free and safe would Truth be in our Consciences. He that owns any Truth to live
upon it, or accommodate a carnal Interest by it, will disown that Truth, when
it comes to live upon him, let Conscience plead and say what it will; but he
that has agreed with Christ upon these Terms, to be content to be miserable
for ever, if there be not enough in Christ to make him happy; this man will be
a steady Christian, and will rather lie in the worst of the Prisons, than to
imprison Gods known Truths in Unrighteousness.

The Conclusion.
I have now done my Message. I have set before you the Lord Jesus in the glory
of his Free Grace, and condescending Love to Sinners; Oh that I had skill and
ability to have done it better; I have woed and expostulated with you on
Christ's behalf. I have labored according to my little measure of strength, to
cast up and prepare the way by removing the stumbling Blocks and
Discouragements out of it. This has been a time of Conviction to many of you,
some have not been able to hold their Convictions any longer under restraints,
but many I fear do so, and therefore I have in the close of all, handled this
startling and awakening Scripture among you, to show you what an horrid evil it
is to detain Gods Truths in Unrighteousness. I have also in the Name and
Authority of God demanded all the Lords Prisoners, his suppressed and
restrained Truths at your hands: If you will unbind your Convictions this day,
cut as under the bonds of carnal fear, shame, etc. with which you restrain
them; those Truths you shall so make free, will make you free: If not, but you
will still go on stifling and suppressing them in your own Bosoms; remember
that there are so many VVitnesses prepared to give evidence against you in the
Great Day. And Oh that whilst you delay this Duty, the sound of this Text may
never out of your ears, nor suffer you to rest. For the wrath ^f God is
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who
hold the truth in unrighteousness.

FINIS.

