A FUNERAL SERMON On His Late Royal Highness, William, Duke of Gloucester,
PREACHED Aug. the 4th. 1700.

BY W. FLEETWOOD, CHAPLAIN in ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed; and Reprinted in Dublin at the Back of Dick's Coffee-House
in Skinner-Row: And are to be Sold by Matthew Gunn at his Shop in Essex-Street,
MDCC.

A SERMON Preached Aug. the 4th. 1700.

BY W. FLEETWOOD, CHAPLAIN in ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed; and Reprinted in Dublin at the Back of Dick's Coffee-House
in Skinner-Row: And are to be Sold by Matthew Gunn at his Shop in Essex-Street,
MDCC.

PREFACE.
I Give this Sermon up to the desires of a great many good People of the
Parishes of St. Austin and St. Dunstan in the West, to whom I can deny nothing
of this Nature, which they shall find reasonable to ask of me: But not to their
Desires only, but also to the hopes I have, that, from something or other
hinted at in it, other Wise and Virtuous People may be put upon considering,
whereabouts we are; and on contributing all that lies in them to the preventing
whatever Evils we may apprehend from the great Loss we have sustained in the
Death of the most Noble and most Hopeful Prince, the Duke of Gloucester. I know,
I have no other Aims than these, in making this Sermon public, and they who
know me well, will, I believe, think so too: I undertake not therefore to
defend the Irregularity of some of my thoughts, nor the Order in which they are
ranged. They were produced in Grief, and deep Concern, and that, I think, may
in some sort, excuse them with tender and good-natured People. I am only
careful of guarding against two sorts of Men; 1st. Such as will needs call This
great Misfortune, a Judgment of God, for what has passed amongst us. 2d. Such
as will certainly try to make it one, as soon as ever they can. To the first,
we must freely own, we have deserved God's greatest Judgments, but not for the
causes they assign; and freely own, that this Misfortune has the Face of one,
and is as heavy as a Judgment, and therefore I hope all People will improve
under it, and make as good use of it, as if it were indeed a Judgment. But till
they shall produce some certain and impartial Rules by which they proceed in
forming Censures, and in applying them, to Nations, or to private People, they
will give us leave, I hope, to suspend. And to the second sort, who think to
turn a Kingdom into a Commonwealth, I can only say, that I hope, the Extent of
our Dominions, the Number of our Nobility, the Honor of our Gentry, the Genius
of our People, and the whole Current of our Laws, will always provide us with a
ready Answer to an impudent and clamorous Faction. God, I hope, will evermore
preserve us from a Species of Government, as ill fitted for our Nation, as
Popery is for our Religion.

A SERMON On Psalm cxlvi. verse. 3, 4, 5.
O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any Child of Man, for there is no help
in them.

For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth; and
then all his thoughts perish.

Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.


WE know not who it was that composed this Psalm, nor what it was that
occasioned it. But the Providence of God furnishes all People, with occasions
more then enough, of applying these words, to themselves, but too too
pertinently. It has furnished Us, with One, not many years ago, so very
proper, that it gives fresh and lively pain, to every one that remembers it,
with half the Consideration it deserves. It furnishes us now with another, of
which no living Man, perhaps, can see the consequence at full, but every one
can see enough to drive him to Sorrow and Amazement, and cause him to say, with
the Psalmist, The Lord is King, the Earth may be glad thereof; yea, the
multitude of the Isles may be glad thereof: glad, that their Affairs are in the
hands of him, who has all Power, and is all Wisdom, and all Goodness; who
brings Light out of Darkness, Good out of Evil, and can turn every thing to
their Advantage who serve him truly.

Whether it were, that the Psalmist here directs himself, against the common
inclination of Men, which is, to build great hopes upon the Promises of Princes
and great Men, and rather to depend on them, than on God above, who keeps his
Promise for ever; or whether the Death of some Great Prince, had given to the
Jews, in their Captivity, some mighty disappointment; whatever it was, that
occasioned the composing of this Psalm, it is plain the words of the Text advise
us, First, Not to put our trust in Princes, nor any Child of Man: and that for
this reason, There is no help in them, because when the breath of Man goes
forth, he shall turn again to his Earth, and all his thoughts perish. Secondly,
they direct us where we are to place our Trust and Confidence, and that is in
God; Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is
in the Lord his God. I. Of the Persons in whom we are not to place our Trust
and Confidence, and they are Princes: Put not your trust in Princes, i. e. in
no Body, no Child of Man; for if you might in any body, you might in them,
because they have most Power, and more opportunities, of answering to your
Confidence, than any Men besides. I see no reason to think that any thing is
here said to the Disparagement of Princes, as though they were to be trusted
less, than other Men, for Falsehood or Forgetfulness of Promises: And therefore
to trust, is not here put for believing: But they are rather here considered,
as the Faithfullest, as well as the most powerful Managers of human Affairs, of
the best Intentions, as well as greatest Abililities, both to design and
execute great Matters; and yet, not to be entirely depended on, for other
Reasons. It Is much the same that is expressed in Psalm cxviii. 8, 9. It is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any Confidence in Man. It is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put any Confidence in Princes, i. e. the chiefest
and the best of Men: And the Reason here assigned, why they are not so to be
trusted and depended on, namely, because they are so subject to Death, delivers
them from all suspicion of Blame; to put our trust therefore in Princes, does,
in this place, signify, to think the settlement of their Affairs so strong and
sure, that nothing can disturb them; to trust so to the Wisdom of their
Management, their Valor, and their Might, their good Intentions, and their
great Abilities, as to be quite secure, and to suspect no Change can happen; it
either signifies this Confidence, which is innocent, though inconsiderate; or
this Confidence with Impiety, trusting in the Arm of Flesh alone, and vaunting
with the foolish Man, who says in his heart, Tush, I shall never be moved, no
harm shall happen to me. If the Trust that is here dissuaded from, be contrary
to, or exclusive of, that Trust we always ought to put in God, then to be sure,
it is condemned, and sinful; but if it be only a weak and groundless Trust,
then there is less Offense than Folly in it, and the heavy Disappointments it
must needs meet, will punish it sufficiently. Sometimes we see a Prince truly
noble, just, and merciful, wise and brave, a Father of his Country, a lover of
his People, careful of all their Interests and their Honor, and born, as it
were, to the good of Mankind: It would be impossible not to put great
Confidence in such a Prince, and to hope a Nation will be happy under such
Administration, whilst he lives; this sort of Trust is reasonable, because it is
built upon so good ground. Another time, we see a Prince of beauteous Aspect,
lovely Disposition, inclined to Learning, Virtue, Piety, and full of all good
Qualities; it would be Stupidity not to hope well of him; and to promise our
selves a Harvest answerable to a Field of so fair show; such Hope and
Confidence as this, becomes us, as we are reasonable and considering Creatures,
and it would be a kind of Ingratitude to God, from whom we acknowledge all these
Gifts and Graces come, not to conceive such Hopes as such excellent Endowments
promise: A Man must shut his Eyes on Providence, that will not make his
Observations on what passes, and collect what is most reasonable and likely.
For since God acts by reasonable Causes, and procures our Peace and Happiness
by Instruments that are in Nature proper for that purpose, we owe it to him, to
expect it from them, where they are so promising. This is properly to trust in
God; for to look for Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles, is to hope
against Nature, and against Reason, and not to be excused by any Reverence we
pretend to God, or dependence on his Power, though he is truly able to produce
those Fruits from those unnatural Stocks. The Men of no Religion, and no
Thought, are so intent upon these second Causes, that they see no first, nor
will acknowledge any Supreme Power, that over-looks and governs our Affairs,
but governs them by Nature and by Reason: but they who trust to One, still in
Subordination to the other, in constant dependence on him, and always in his
Power to change and suspend, as he sees fit, do truly put their trust in God,
even when they put their trust in Princes. They look for Rest and for security
in Peace, where Kings are virtuous, wise, and watchful, and the People are at
Unity; for Victory in War, where Generals are brave and wary, the Soldiers
healthy, numerous, obedient and courageous, and well paid, i. e. they promise
to themselves the natural effects of Wisdom, Strength, and Concord; but all
from God, who is to bless these natural and these moral Causes. They look for
plenteous Harvests, where the Fields are full and flourishing, but know, it is
God that made them so, and he that is to bring them in. This Confidence he does
himself raise in us, and therefore never is offended with it, because it is
built upon the Confidence we have, that he will suffer things to go on orderly
and naturally, unless we provoke him to change or suspend the common Course of
them. And though our Disappointments are very great, and very many, yet might our
hopes and expectations be very reasonable, and just, and are not to be
condemned, by an unhappy issue. If our trust in Princes, exclude not our trust
in God, we need not be afraid it will be faulty. Nor does the Psalmist here
condemn such trust, for its Impiety, but rather (for the avoiding troublesome
and heavy Disappointments) would dissuade us, from putting so much trust in
Princes, whose Lives are so uncertain, and to look up to God more ardently and
frequently, whose Mercy, and Goodness, like himself (they are himself) endure
for ever. I think it is a kind Advice, not to raise in our minds, hopes that
are so easily defeated, and when defeated, so vexatious and afflicting. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in any Child of Man, for there is no help in them.
There is no help in Man, in many Cases; A thousand and ten thousand evils
befalls us, wherein the Wisdom, Skill, the Riches, and the Strength of all
Mankind, can give no Help, afford no Comfort. If we want Rain, or have too much
of it, Can all the World procure a Shower, or hinder it from falling? Can it
procure a favorable Wind, or hinder a contrary one from blowing? Can it
recover Health, where it is wanting, to the good of thousands; or restore a
precious Life, that is, like David's, worth ten thousand? The utmost of humane
Power, for ought that appears, is but an ability of doing huge Mischief; and
the best of it, is, an ability of hindering one another from doing Mischief. But
when we want Assistance, in most of our Extremities, Oh how unable is this
World to give it! The Wisest, Richest, and most powerful Men want help
themselves, and neither can afford it to themselves, nor others; there is
indeed no help in them. For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall return
again to his Earth, and then all his thoughts perish. The very best is here
supposed of the very ablest of them, that they may be full of good Intentions,
form great and good Designs, have their Hearts wholly bent, on honoring God,
promoting Virtue, and profiting Mankind, seeking the Interest of their People,
doing Justice, showing Mercy, and imitating Him, whose Ministers and
Substitutes they are. Happy for them, that they are full of these Designs! no
better thoughts can possibly possess their Hearts, or employ their hours; the
King of Kings, the Mighty Master of them all, shall bless them, and reward
them, whom he finds so doing. But this is, much too often, all they do; they
form a multitude of brave Designs, and live to effect but few! I have said ye
are Gods, but ye shall die like men, and this they find, and we find also. Poor
Princes! Poor People! They raise our Hopes, and they destroy them suddenly. We
gather up all our Trust, and place it on their Lives, and in a day or two,
those Lives are spilt like water on the ground. They are, as the Prophet calls
them, the breath of our Nostrils: And Nations sometimes seem to live in them,
and only to breath their breath; and yet their breath goes forth, like other
Peoples breath, and they return again to their Earth (their earth as well as
ours) and then all their thoughts perish, and all our thoughts too, with them;
but not our thoughtfulness, that still survives, to trouble every wise
considering Man. Our Thoughts are in this place our Hopes, and they expire with
the breath of him who kindled them. His thoughts, who raised our thoughts,
perish, and therefore ours must perish with them. Who can enough esteem those
Lives, which by experience, are found so useful to the World, to the securing
its tranquillity and happiness; or those who from their earliest Infancy, have
promised all the good, that Men can look for, from the most virtuous towardly
disposition, and whose precocious advances, could not fail of giving us some
jealous Fears, with our most lively Hopes! Who can enough esteem such Lives, if
we consider these fine Qualities! and who can value them too little, or trust
too little in them, who considers how soon their breath goes forth, and they
return again to Earth, and all their thoughts perish! What must we do in this
uncertainty? Our Affairs require a life as durable as Brass, and the Laws of
our Mortality will admit of none, but what is subject to a thousand certain,
and a thousand accidental evils, each of which may break us all to pieces. Let
us do any thing in this uncertainty, but blame the Providence of God, who hangs
the good of so much people, on so small a Thread: for, Righteous are his Ways,
and just his Government, whatever we may fear, whatever we endure.

But may I not, unblam'd, say with the Prophet, Jerem. 12.1. (I know I say it
with all deference and humility) Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with
thee, yet let me talk with Thee of thy Judgments? When thou, in mercy, turnedst
away the Captivity of our Zion, we were like them that dream; when our Enemies
were just upon us, they stumbled and fell; then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with joy. The greatest Enemies we had, could not
forbear proclaiming, The Lord has done great things for them. We could not our
selves, in Gratitude forbear proclaiming, The Lord has done great things for
us already, whereof we rejoice.

Either to temper these Felicities, or punish our Ingratitude, Thou stoppedst
up, for ever, the Breath of our Nostrils; The anointed of the Lord was taken
away from us, of whom we said, under her shadow, we shall live (not among the
Heathen, but at home) in plenty and security.

To show thou did intend but to correct, and not to give us unto Death, thou
did, by unexpected Instruments, deliver the Life of the King from fear of the
Enemy, and from the Snare of the Hunter; Thou savedst him from Destruction, and
crownedst him with Mercy and Loving Kindness; and made him instrumental in
procuring the desire of all our Hearts, an honorable Peace; the Opportunity of
healing all our Wounds, recovering all our Losses, and making up the Breaches
our intestines Foes, our foolish Discords, and ill grounded Animosities had
occasioned; the Opportunity of settling our Affairs, and looking to the Ground
we stood upon; of putting them in such a Posture, that neither Enemies abroad,
nor Enemies at home might give us any great Disturbance; that the Religion of
our Country, and its most ancient, properst, and best-tempered Government,
might be secured, against the Attempts and Machinations of its old inveterate
Enemies, the Sons of Violence and Darkness, and from the noisy Importunities of
unexperienced, raw, newfangled Schematists, and Speculators. But contrary to
this, the Spirit of Discord is gone out among us, and the sweet Hope of all the
Kingdom, is in a moment, snatched away from us; e're we had time to try to move
thee, by our Prayers, or time to apprehend a Stroke so painful and so mortal.
Thy former Favors did not promise such Conclusion. But we will hold our Peace,
since it is thy doing; We are much surer that thou may in Justice, thus
chastise us for our Sins, than we could be that thou had so much Mercy for
such Sinners, as we have, all our Lives, experienced from thee. Permit us never
so long, to talk with thee of thy Judgments, yet must we still conclude,
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when we plead with thee.

Such Losses, and such heavy Disappointments, needs must prove effectual Cures
of all our Confidence in Princes. Never were Hopes more justly raised, nor
placed more reasonably, than ours have been, upon two Noble Objects; and yet
six years have quite defeated them, dried up our Springs, and almost desolated
a Royal Tribe, one of the fairest and most fruitful in the World. How short is
our Prospect now! in what a little Compass is our Kingly Family contained! Two
precious Lives make up our whole Treasure!

The People of the East, we find in Scriptures, addressed to their Princes,
with -- O King, Live for ever. It Is a vain Complement to Men of Flesh and
Blood, whose Breath goes forth so suddenly, who dye like other Men, who return
again to their Earth, and whose Thoughts all perish in a moment; but if 'twere
ever reasonable, our Case would call for it, and we would use it. May God
enlarge these Borders! build to these Princes a sure House! and bind up their
Souls in the Bundle of Life! a long one here for our sakes, and, for their own,
an Everlasting one, in Heaven!

II. Let us now withdraw from this uncomfortable side. The Lives of Princes,
are, it seems, like Lands of Darkness, where, every step we make, is in
Distrust and Fear: They give us little but Alarms, Defeats and Disappointments.
Let us seek a Country of more Light and Safety, where Hope dwells, and where we
may abide with Confidence. Blessed is he who has the God of Jacob for his
help, and whose hope is in the Lord his God. This is a Life, and Will, and
Power, we may depend upon; Great is the Lord, and mavelous, worthy to be
praised, there is no end of his greatness. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and his dominion endures throughout all ages. These are Foundations strong
enough for all the Trust and Confidence a Heart can hold. He is of infinite
Goodness to intend the Happiness of all his Creatures, of infinite Wisdom to
know wherein it lies, and of infinite Power to effect his wise and good designs
toward us. Here, therefore, we may place our Trust, without any Fears of
Disappointment; here we must fix our Hopes, for here we can only find our Help.

Were there not such a Power above, to overlook and govern Men, and their
Affairs, what a place of Misery and Confusion would this World be? what with
the certainty of natural Causes, working many sad effects, tho known before,
yet unavoidable; what with the multitude of fearful Accidents, never to be
prevented nor foreseen; what with the Folly, Ignorance, Mistakes, the Malice,
and Perverseness, and the Rage of one another Passions, how wretched a thing
would the Life of a Man be!

The Ways of God, I think, are to permit natural Causes to work their natural
Effects, according to the Powers he has endued them with; reserving to himself
the Power of altering or suspending them, as he sees fit, and when he pleases;
and to suffer Men to act as free Agents, having given them Reason, and revealed
his Will to them, and laid down all sufficient Motives, to restrain them from
what they know is evil, and to encourage them to what is truly good; reserving
to himself, however, the Power of changing their Inclinations, directing them
in their Designs, and influencing them all, as he sees fit. By which means,
neither the Certainty of natural Operations, nor the Freedom of Man's Will,
exclude his Government of Men and Nature, nor hinder us, from addressing to
Him, by Prayer, for what we want, and Praise for what we have received; both
which would be in vain, were Nature not to be diverted from her Way, nor the
Will of Man flexible, by some superior overruling Power. Were Natures Course
unalterably fixed, and the Will of Men not to be moved, Prayer would be
insignificant and useless. Were not Men at liberty, in general, they could not
be accountable for what they did, they could have neither Vice nor Virtue. Were
not the Laws of Nature fixed, we could not live in any sort of Certainty, we
could not undertake any thing, nor could have any Hope or Expectation of
succeeding. But as it pleases God, to Govern by these two known Rules, and to
be still the Master of them both, there is all the room that can be for our
Endeavors, Care and Vigilance, our Virtue, and our Studies, and all the Reason
and Grounds for our applying to him, our trusting in him, and dependence upon
him. Our Hope and Trust in God, must therefore be directed by these settled and
established Rules of Providence. These are the known and standing Laws of his
Wise Government; The Rest is Dispensation, Favor, Grace, and sometimes
Miracle. Dispensation, Grace and Favor, we may innocently hope for, pray for,
and expect, from his indulgent Goodness, where no established Law of Nature is
subverted; but for a Miracle, it is much more reasonable to wish for, than
expect, one in our Favor. We know that nothing is impossible with God, but yet
our Hope is never equal to his Power; nor do we ever trust in him for any thing
uncommon, without some Promise in particular. We know it is as possible for God
to restore again the Dead to Life, as Health to a diseased Man; what is the
Reason, then, that we do not importune him with our most earnest and united
Prayers, to give us back that dear, inestimable Life we have so lately parted
with, but that we think he signifies his Will and Pleasure to us, by the known
stated Course of Nature, and know we have no reason to look for Miracles? Death
would not give us such Despair immediately, but that we measure the Power of
God, by the common Exercise of it, in the World. And so it is with putting our
Trust in him, we can carry it no farther than he gives us leave, by his common
Rules, or by particular Promise. When therefore the Psalmist would invite us to
hope in God, and put our trust in him, he would not have us raise in our selves
Expectations of things strangely unusual and unlikely; nor to believe that God
will do for us, or bring to pass, whatever we expect or wish for, or what we
think we want. But we may hope, and trust in him, for every thing, that is in
it self reasonable; and fit for Him to give, and for us to receive.

Our Passions often put us upon asking what, is not in it self very reasonable
to expect; no matter, provided it be nothing wicked and forbidden, and nothing
to the prejudice and injury of any one else. Our Parents, and our Friends, live
here, even beyond the common term of human Life, and we yet desire of God, they
may continue longer with us, and we may hope that he will hear our Prayers:
This does not seem very reasonable, when we consider the Life of Man, and call
to mind the Years that are past, and observe how it has always been with other
People: But yet it is very innocent and lawful so to do; because we know of no
set term of days, beyond which none shall pass; that is still in the hands of
God; and because the protracting of that Life, is to us, we think, of use, and
to no ones wrong.

The Child is dying, there, of a malignant Fever, a Train, as it were, of
liquid Fire, is running through its Veins, and burning up the Life, that has
been the Desire of I know not how many years past, and the Hopes of I know not
how many more to come; the Parents pray to God, in earnest, you may be sure,
and put their trust in him, and hope he will extinguish this unnatural Flame;
and this they do, when Remedies are ineffectual, Physicians found of no value,
and every thing about them bids them give it up for lost. The thing they ask is
lawful, the time is not too late, the work is not impossible in Nature, and God
is the Master of all. The Event alone could declare, whether it were not fit
for God to give this Life, or for Parents to receive it. Their Confidence in
God was well placed, although their Hopes and Desires were disappointed. If
Reasons were to be sought for, in such cases, out of, or beyond what natural
Causes teach us, we may be sure that God denies us, with as much Reason as he
gives us, what we ask. We must not therefore think our Hopes were wrong placed,
and our Confidence in God ill grounded, and our Prayers in vain, because we
receive not what we ask so earnestly. Because it is the Power and Goodness of
God, which justifies our Hope and Trust in him, and which encourages us to
pray; and this his Power is not diminished by our Disappointment, nor is his
Goodness the less, in his not granting what we thought (not He) convenient for
us. It is impossible (as I have before said) to pray to God without believing
him kind to intend our good, wise to discern what is our good, and powerful to
procure it. These are the very Reasons of Prayer, and the Motives of addressing
to God, for what we think we want: And these are the Foundations of all our
Hope and Confidence in him. And yet these are the very Reasons, why our Prayers
may not be heard, and our Hopes not answered, and yet God be still as merciful
and good intention'd toward us, as when he grants our Requests. We suppose him
good, to intend our Happiness, he may therefore be good in withholding from
us, what we think is good for us, but is not. We suppose him to be all wise,
and therefore refer it to him to choose for us. How do we know he does not
Exercise his great Discernment, in refusing to us what we think is good for us,
but what he knows is not? Shall we only think he judges right, when he judges
as we judge, and measure out his Wisdom by our Affections and Desires? If we
believe him wise enough to choose for us, the same Reason will show him full as
wise in refusing what we ask of him; yes, and full as kind too, if we would
believe that is good for us to have, which he gives, and that not good (all
things considered) which he withholds from us. But the misfortune is, that we
measure good by our own Affections and Desires; this is good, we think, which
we seem to want, and to set our Hearts upon, and nothing else can satisfy.

Let your Father be 70 years of Age, and your Child 7, the first a wise and
virtuous Man, a Life that is necessary to you, and useful to the Common wealth,
and all that are about him; the other, as the rest of Children are, hopeful
enough: If some Distemper put these two Lives into equal Danger, you will do
what you can for both; and you pray for them both, and trust in God for both
their Healths and Safety: But both of them die, and Nature swallows up the
Concern for the Parent, in the grief for the Child; and because the biass of
Affection is strongest on that side, our Hope and Confidence seem more
defeated, and our Prayers, we think, less heard, in the one Case, than the
other. It Is plain we consider not the usefulness of the aged Life (the
continuance of which was certainly the greater good) in respect of the dearness
of that little Life, which yet we could not tell what it might prove. These
things show us, a little, that we are governed more by our Affections, than our
Reason; and that as they make us pray more earnestly, and hope more firmly, so
they make our Disappointments much more heavy, and occasion us to think our
Trust and Confidence in God were deceived, when they were only, not answered
according to our Wishes. But wherein, then, stands the blessedness of having
God for our help, and hoping in the Lord our God, if he will only help us in
the way of Nature, and we may only hope for what is reasonable and fit? why,
this is as much as any reasonable Man can look for, or desire. The utmost that
a reasonable Creature can hope for, is to be favored and succeeded by God in
all his reasonable and honest Undertakings, by means that are natural, and
common to him with all the World. It Is a great support to the mind of Man, to
believe himself under the protection of a Power, that is able and ready to
secure him, whilst he is acting reasonably and honestly; able to continue on
the course of Nature, in its established Settlement, by which Men live in good
hope, and expectation of success; by which they Plow and Sow, and Hope to Reap
and gather in their Harvest; by which they Study, Labor, Venture out to Sea,
and hope to gain the Fruits of each, in its due Season: able to prevent a great
many mischievous events; able to remove all hindrance and impediment in the
course of Nature; able to influence Peoples minds, by diverting them from
enterprizing things that would do hurt to others; and by throwing little
occasions in their way, of doing good; and able, by a thousand and ten thousand
little undiscernible means, to secure our happiness, and prevent our misery; to
turn the accidents that look as if they would swallow us up in Ruin, into the
means of our security and preservation; to dissipate those Clouds of
Misfortunes that are ready to burst upon our heads, and overwhelm us, and give
us Day again, with calm, and safety. I cannot tell how a man can live in such a
World as this, with any joy, that does not verily believe, and much depend upon
the Providence of God; and that, without expecting Miracles or Favors very
much out of course, but only looking for such as are consistent with his known
Rules of Government. What should we do without this everlasting Source of
Comforts, this powerful Refuge, under all distresses? How many sore Calamities,
public as well as private, do we fall into, out of which no human Power or
Wisdom can deliver us, nor show us any way out of? And how must this perplex a
man, unless there were a Being above, kind and able, to have a recourse to?
Hope is the food and sustenance of the Mind, and Men will live a great while
upon it, and all the while much easier, tho in misery; whereas the same
afflictions would, without that hope, oppress them quite, and drive them to
despair and madness; and this must often be the Case, were not the World, and
Men, and their Affairs, all in the hands of God, and his Government, who can do
every thing, beyond what we are able to ask or think. And who would part with
such a sure Foundation of Trust, and Hope and Confidence, that is not weary of
his Life? Who would let go this Rock of Ages, for any thing else he can lay
hold on, in this World? Oh may we never be forsaken by him! yea, rather, may we
never first forsake him! The Life of Princes is a mole of Sand; all the
Stability of human Things, is the Stability of Wind and Water, changing their
face, shifting their places every moment; God alone abides for ever. God alone
is worthy of our trust, and never will deceive it. It Is he alone who can
extricate us out of all Difficulties, wipe away all our Tears and Sorrows from
our Hearts, deliver us from our Enemies, protract our Princes Lives, save us by
Few as well as Many, give us no more occasions of Complaint and Lamentation,
and turn even this to our advantage; give us the Spirit of Unity and Love of
one another, of Wisdom to direct us in our Public Resolutions, and to improve
under all the several Dispensations of his Providence. Is any Rock, like our
God? Who is so great a God as our God? Be thou exalted Lord in thine own
Strength, so will we sing and praise thy Power.

FINIS.

