A TREATISE OF THE BVLK and SELVEDGE OF THE WORLD.

WHEREIN The GREATNESS, LITTLENESS and LASTINGNESS of BODIES are freely Handled.

With an Answer to Tentamine de Deo, By S. P. D. D.

By N. Fairfax, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornhill, over
against the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXIV.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir William Blois, Knight.
SVch is that wonderful and most comely Chain of Beings, which winds up into
World, that if the small and lowermost things therein make shift to show
themselves, it is always by the leave, or with the help of the Bigger and the
Higher. That rotten wood may give its glimmerings, the Sun must take away its
light: And if the Flowers will needs be rising out of their colder beds, or the
Fryes of Wrigglers and swarms of Quicklings or Insects, peep out of their
Graves and Dungeons, they must wait upon the Sun to bring about those beams of
his that make the Spring; whence they may have their Prison doors unlockt,
their fetters taken off, and be tickled into such a laughing briskness, and
judged up into such a smirkish liveliness, as may last as long as the Summers
warmth holds on to cocker them, and the days heat to frigge and chafe them. Now
I reckon that I must bethink my self in this Address, how far I am taken in
here, and be well aware how Woodbridge stands so near to Grundsborough Hall,
that if such an underly Shrub in Knowledge, and unthrifty Sucker in Philosophy
as I am, shall strive to put forth this Spring time here, I can do no less than
ask the good liking of such a neighboring Cedar, under whose shade I must
needs creep up, befann'd from next Dogs-day scorchings, and within the bosom of
whose shrowdings I must be cloakt from wind and weather. Nor should I ever aim
to blow up any Fire-light of useful Knowledge in this place, were it not that
you have thought meet to withhold those Sun-like beams of yours, that would
soon bedim its fainter twinklings, and shine out all its dying glitter. Indeed
you have purchased so fair a Lordship of Knowledge in these Parts, that I fear
I should wrong your Freedoms, and encroach upon your Royalties, if I should put
in any Claims but Under ones, or own any other Hamlet so near you, but what is
a limb of your Township. Nor is it but meet that I should hold all my Natural
knowledge of your Manor, and become Tenant to so good a Landlord in
Philosophy. So that paying this acknowledgment, should be nothing but doing my
bounden Homage, and bringing in my Lady Rentcharge; while the Lord of the Soil
holds nextly of the King, and does his devoir in a Regi Sacrum.

Thus however it may be thought by others, I have miscarried in the Thing I
treat of; I am sure I have not mistook the Man I address to. And though it may
seem but a wooden come off, and like that of the sorry numb-skull'd Russes, who
when they are pincht with a hardness beyond the learning of Horn-book, are wont
to answer, that God and the Great Duke knows all things: Yet I being bound so
far by the laws of Mine and Thine as I have been free in acknowledging it; must
spring as much from a rightful mind in me, to deal out to the Greater Owner his
Greater Share, as it does from a shotten brain in any of them, to tell another,
I know not who can answer I know not what.

Sure I am, if I ever felt my self at all, it is in my breast to woo Dame Kind
with as busy a warmth and hearty earnestness as any man; but it is not in my
Chest to endow her with that Fullness that he can, whose mind is as Great and
Wealthy as his Love can be strong and flaming, and whose endowments have made
him to be as much stared at by the Yeomen, as indeared to men of skill and
breeding. And I cannot think I mistook my self in Courtship, while I waited
upon the youngest and most Housewifely Daughter of Philosophy, named Workful,
so long as I happened of such a Rival in the Parlor with her. I do believe, Sir,
that your self as well as I, had so much rather be a Well-willer to a
Bricklayer, than a Philosopher taking name from Aristotle's Physics, by how
much the more it is behoving Mankind, to have houses on the earth for settled
and easeful dwelling, than such capering Castles in the Air, whose Groundsils
are laid with Whims, their Overwayes with Dreams, and rooft with Cream of
thinking. I must needs say, that I do think my self so much more bettered by a
Philosophical Transaction of a Month, or Journal des Scavans of a Fortnight,
than by a Mercury Gallant of half a Year, by how much the more I like my self,
when I am kindly and steadily knowing, above what I do, when I feel that I am
Gay and Towering. And I think our Royal Society at London is as much before that
Des belles Lettres at Paris, as the History of that Body of Worthies outstrips
the Academy of Complements. In that narrow Chat that I have had with
Outlanders, it has been hugely to my liking, that hard upon the first greeting,
I have been plied with so many good words for our R. S. in the whole, and Mr.
Boil alone. Nor can I find, that either your self, or I, or any man else, that
has kenn'd the drift and bounds of that undertaking, have made less reckonings
of their growing worth and works already known, or abated our hopes for time to
come; for all the Tee he is that have been broke by Men of Droll, or dirt that
has been thrown from Daring spite. And it goes a great way with me, to mark,
that the same-kidneyed men, who have either a sharp flowt at the end of their
tongue, or a bitter hate in the middle of their heart, for the wary
Experimenter, have another of the same in their Budget, for the Book that is
named from its Holiness, or indeed for any thing else, but what is flesh on the
one side, and air on the other. Nor can any man ghess it should be otherwise,
but that he who had a sneer or grudge for the Book of Gods Works; the Print
that he has given us of his Almighty Power and houndless less Wisdom: should
have no less for that other of his Word; the likeness he has drawn for us of
his truth and holiness.

Whence I have somewhat the more wondered how it could ever get into the heads
or hearts of Men of insight or holiness, that a right knowledge of the Works
which God has done, should lead from the knowledge of, or lessen the love for,
that boundless Wisdom and Goodness who brought those things about. As if
showing the Coats and garments which Dorcas made, before the holy Mourners, had
been to wheedle off their thoughts from the Work-woman to the Works, and drown
their sorrows for the jewel that was lost, in the floudings of of their joy for
the Cabinet that was left. Can the same train of holy ends which God has framed
for Mankinds bliss, be less indearing, for that they are known to be as
skilfully ranged as lovingly aimed? How others may have been wrought upon by
that doing Knowledge, which now spreads amongst us like love amongst the Youth,
kindly and takingly, I cannot tell: But if I were now to die, and knew it so, I
must speak it from within me, That I have found my self more warmly shined upon
by the Father of Lights, and breathing into more becoming flames, from the
reading of Malpighius about the hatching of an Egg, or Dr. Grew about the
sprouting of a Bean, (a thing set at naught to a byword;) than ever I could do
from the shelves full of those Books, that have struck fire for the Government
of Churches and some other things, bearing their religious weight in their
Names, and their light in their Newness, in the late days of Blame, and years
of Topsie-turvy. Wherein, when men had wrought up all the Woman within them
that was feeble and glowing, into a fine-spun thread, they played the Men only,
when they had done, in pelting on it with the distaff. I can easily taste the
sweetness of God through the bitterness of wormwood; but could never feel the
sweetness of the Christian through the bitterness of the Man. And I love the
New Philosophy so much the more; For why, It sets the hand a working not a
striking, and answers the noise of Talking by the stilness of Doing, as the
Italians clam rowt and tattle into nodding and beckning. Yet it is not to be
looked for, that the Bulk of men amongst us, should love that which they neither
know nor care to know. It will be enough for those that have betrothed the Way,
that many are the hands heads and hearts of such worthy and unwearied Gentlemen
as are Going along with them. And I shall ever think with that Great part of
the R. S. the Great Mr. Oldenburg, that Sound Philosophers are each to other
sufficient Theaters. The kindness and good greetting that is of one sort, is
wont to be enfolded mainly within the rank or stock Guild or kindred of the
same. And that man who can find what it is to love knowingly and beseemingly,
will never feel himself less at ease for being wedlockt but to one. Which I do
not speak as if I ghess'd you had your Philosophy to choose, any more than your
Religion; or that you could shift the former with as much slight as some
others do the latter. I believe you deal in Holdfasts as well as Truths, and
can foretell what you shall be, as well as tell what you are. But because there
are a great many so much upon the spur, that they cannot stay so long till the
writing can be fetched which is graven with the finger of God: but grow so hot
on it, as to melt down their thoughts forthwith, and fall a graving of them into
Calvish likenesses, that may go blazing before them in the wilderness they are
got into; that however they miss wool they may have noise, something loud,
though nothing useful. I was so forward to chide such a rash piece of
Will Worship, that I slipped into speaking of while I was speaking to. But it is
indeed time to remember, that I have spoken enough of one and other. I am sure
he whom I speak to, is too much taken with things to be over fond of words; and
it is a misbecomingness to have a doing Philosophy set forth by a talking
Philosopher. That Manly knowledge that is now in the Chair, is to be trimmed
silently. And it is well for me that neither Man nor Thing wants gilding. For I
could never open my mouth Charmwise, nor breath out Spells to bind down men. I
never drew from, nor matched to the House of Peacock. Gay and I are nothing a
kin, nor like to be, but all that dwells at my home is homely. My brain is not
wont to go big with flower. When ever I spy one it is aloof to be sure: So I
leave both to shine for themselves, and outshine others. And I know whatever is
a Nonesuch, will draw enough as it is, without the Hogow of the stifling
Haulers. To be joy'd of praise-worthiness, is more than to be lifted up by the
Hoist of breath, or to be rung with a peal of Hum and Outcry. It will be more
than enough for me, though I cannot raise nor greaten, the height and
spreadingness of your Worth, by sayings that are big and lofty, if it may not
be thought a lowning and lessening of it, to take into the List of your Menials

SIR, Your most bounden Homager Natha. Fairfax.
Woodbridge, Mar. 25. 1678.
To the Reader.
IF I may measure others by my self, it is a more ticklish thing to pen a
Preface, than it is to write a Book. For when ever I lay hands on a New piece,
as soon as I have once spelled the Great letters of its Name, I am wont hastily
to take forth to the Forespeech for the Reader, as thinking that to be the
handle, that I am to hold the Book by, which, according as I relish or mislike,
oftentimes so fares the whole with me. For if I find the man has it not in him
to erect a Scheme in the Say that he has for me there, I am shrewdly given to
mistrust, that he will never conjure much in the Book that comes after: or when
the first Greeting me is sour or faint, I am ready to fear the after treat
will be none of the sweetest or the winningest. Whether others conne Books with
these kind of reckonings, I cannot tell; but while I can tell my self that I do
so, it stands me in hand to be a little wary of tripping upon such slippery
ground. Now to speak truth, all the tale that I have to tell the Reader is but
this: That finding in my self a kind of forwardness toward Philosophy, and
mainly to that part of it which takes knowledge of Bodies; as which, of all
others, I found I could receive most helps and furtherance in, from those
spreading lights and wealthy stores, with which the Royal Society at home and
others abroad, set into the way by their showing and enheartned to go on by
their works, had both embellisht and enricht it, I let my mind alone to take
its full swing in the Conning of Bodies, this and that; and forthwith or ere I
could well help it, I fell a Roving, and plunged out from what I was meddling
with and tossing of, to another thing that was earlyer and Bulkier, and to
somewhat still that was more betimes and more of Boak; and being quite lost in a
wild and a frightful on and on, I'een took back again where I was, and fell to
unravel the thing that was too big to be fathomed, that I might make it little
enough for my mind to grapple with: but I was as unluckie at lessening and
narrowing as I had been before at widening and bigning. As the one had wrackt
and limm'd my thoughts, with endless tenters and boundless retchings out; so
had the other nipt in my soul and shrivelled up my thoughts, with restless
gripes and unwearyed parings off: so that I had both lost and benothing'd my
self in the lessenings made within my self, as I had lost and bewildred my self
in the scopes still left without my self. Nor could I be at rest in my mind,
till I had tried, whether I could not cut off Boundlessness and endlessness, so
as at length I might have ease, to find, that Body, which I had to do withal,
had both beginning and end, an inmost part and an outmost whole, as I my self
had: and so the remarks and experiments that I was to make, were not upon
Bodies that carried Boundlessness in their bellies, and were themselves a
swimming in a boundless gulf, so that I must needs have my thoughts to dance
after them in an endless round, or launch into a boundless width; but that I
might settle here or pitch down there, and tell the first and ken the last, and
cope with the biggest and the least: and as soon as I got to the spring head of
Lastingness, I sat me down and drank a health to sweet rest, and blisst my
self that I was there; and when I came at the Selvedge of Bulk, I took heart
afresh to think with my self, that there was all, and nothing at all beyond,
and I need weary my self with no more wanderings in a wast, but might come home
again fair and soft, and fasten on this or that, or little or great, as I
thought best, to set a mark on or make a Trial of. For then I saw that all was
not wood within a wood: but me-thought the world was a curious Frame of well
set Bodies, the beginning of which the least of which, and the whole of which,
might all be come at.

Thus having shaken off the things I could never grasp, and taken Body by the
right handle, I found I was freer to think, and better at ease to work: and
deeming there were more in the world that were of my make, I did not know but
they might think, and do so too; and it was but a friendly part to set any man
into his way, that I thought was out of it: and therefore what I thought I
writ, and what I writ, the Reader sees is comen abroad.

Which if it takes, I shall not mislike it, that another man has found that
which he looked for; and if it does not, the worst on it is but this, that that
which has not yet been made out by any man, nor has it been by me. And whatever
ill luck betides it, I have no body else to blame for it; for I writ it all at
home, and 'twas given at my self. And to tell troth, I don't love to ask
another man, whether my Child be not pretty or hopeful; for I think, that must
needs be a crotchet piece of unluckyness, that is not fit to be Printed if a
friend has it to read over for that end, or to be praised, if another man has
it to make a New song upon.

But if any man ask me what I think on it my self? I answer, The very same that
I think of other men's writings, and that is, that they are the writings of Man
and nothing more, writing and miswriting mingled together. Only I can say the
Writer indeed is neither Green nor Gray. So though the Reader may fear he shall
find little that is full ripe, I hope he will find less that is altogether raw.
As I think otherwise from what I did some years ago, so happily I may think
otherwise from what I do some years hence, even about some things here spoken
to: and therefore I love to speak soft for my own sake as well as others. I do
believe too if I had kept it longer I could have drawn it up better, but that
bare no sway with me to do so; for then the only day of its coming into the
world must have been the day of my going out of it. Notwithstanding though I
don't believe it is the best that can be done, or the best that I could do my
self, yet it is rid of as many mislikes as I could strike out at twice reading,
and I did not think it worth while to read it again to find more. As it is, I
neither reckon it my God nor my Golden Calf, nor am I fond on it or ashamd on it.
Should I say I had slighty thoughts of it, I cannot tell how it would be wit or
good manners to put it into the hands of my Betters; and if I give out I set
highly by it, I should lacken it as much by making such a Fondling the Penman
of it. However the management of it may seem weak or low, I am sure the drift
and scope was manly and lofty. There being no lower nor other aims in it, than
that we might not think amiss of that Almighty Being which has made us, nor of
the sundry Beings he has made, that we may neither dote nor dare, stragle nor
be lost: but may be led by such a clue of understanding, and softened by such a
bashfulness of knowledge, that we may be wise and awful both in one; that the
knowledge of things may be less a weariness to the flesh, and that thoughts of
things without us may less gall that Being within us; that, as God beholding
what he had made, said with himself that all was good, we may see it and say it
too, and love the spring from whence they came, while we wonder at the wisdom
by which they are; worshipping the same with a more becoming dread, a fuller
enlightened mind, freer outgoings of heart, steddyer and closer thoughts about
things that he has made more easeful to the mind, and better sorted in it: that
so giving to God his right, we may take to our selves our own rest.

In the doing of which, the freedom that I have taken, I give too. Think and
let think, are engraven upon my very soul. And I shall never think amiss of the
Reader for not being of my mind, any more than I do of those Learned men which
I thought meet somwhere to name. Which I did, not from any itching to thwart
them: but I thought it would speak nothing of Breeding, to look full on a Great
man standing in my way, and not to vouchsafe him worth Doffing to, or to write
my self of another mind from what some men of Name are, whose reasons for what
they hold have fallen into a many good hands, without I should also say why I
am not of their mind for their reason. But as for any lessenings of them, who
have done huge well, as I think, elsewhere, and may have done well enough, as
others think, where I take them to be out; it is so much against my meaning and
the very Grain of me to let any such fall from my Pen, that if in any thing I
so much as but seem to do it, it is all my unwariness, and nothing of my aim.
And I do think my self so much the more bound to take heed how I handle the
good name of others, by how mnch the more I see, how an ill willed and frampled
waspishness has broken forth, to the royling and firing of the age wherein we
live, and for ought I can foretell, even those too, that are coming after.

Indeed, when I read such things as are spoken to, further on, in a late
Writer, I cannot for my life but think, he may mistake a little, as you and I
and all men do, and have done and shall do. And that thereupon he would not
willingly be called Names, such as cannot be spoken without a stinking breath,
nor written but with a brazen pen, nor spelled but with the letters of the Dog
and the Goose, the grinning and the hissing. And remembering it is good Bible, Do
as you would be done by, I can easily let go my self in some forward wishes
leading to self love in behalf of such a one, heartily bespeaking him, for Gods
sake, for that of self, and the Commonwealth of Learning, that hereafter we
might read writings with other sentences besides those of Condemnation, with
other wit besides that which lies in the forehead, and where all the Dashes of
the pen may not be strokes upon men; as knowing that such Doomesday Books, may
soonest be burnt themselves, which are readiest to inflame others.

I believe no man wishes with more earnestness than I do, that all men of
Learning and knowledge were men of kindness and sweetness, and that such as can
out do others would outlove them too; especially while self bewhispers us, that
it stands us all in hand to be forgiven as well as to forgive. The hardest
things that I know, had their beginnings laid in the softness and yieldingness
of a kind of dew; and whoever would have all men stand up stiffly for what he
holds, will find it best at length to lead them in those easier paths of
Nature. Sure I am, it would be more than a wonder to me, should any ones sight
be bettered by spitting fire into clay and besmearing eyes with it. For every
man's mind is his Castle; and if it cannot be taken by strength of reason, the
throwing in Grenades, will be nothing but a smutty, stinking token to the
world, that ill will would have done more mischief, but weak Gear could not. So
long as he who has but a teeming brain, may have leave to lay his eggs in his
own nest, which is built beyond the reach of every man's puddering pole, why
should the ears of all the neighborhood be dinn'd and grated with the Cackle,
as if the whole world besides were all Weasils and Poulcats, vermin and
Lurchers? I do verily bear my self in hand, that if the humor of huffing be but
a little further cocker'd and more warmed, the Leyden gown must needs take
place of the Long robe at Cambridge and Oxford, instead of the side thing the
thing by the side, and snicking and sneeing will be nothing else in the world
but writing of Book a la mode d' Angleterre. For so long as men have but unlike
thinkings, and that will be as long as they have unlike faces, they must look
for no better fare from a world of Bears and Scratchers, than first to be
galled in the tenderest part of their good name, and then to fall under the
rods and axes of a cutting hate, and ill will set on fire. Were I but to
whisper to him of whom so many talk aloud, I should rown him thus much in the
ear, with all the heartiness of a friend, that the next time he has left to
bless us with his Day breaks, he would choose a softer quill to make his pen of;
that the Reader at length might be as ready to have good thoughts for him, as
he has been to have bad words for others.

As for the way of wording it, I know aforehand, it is not trim enough for these
Gay days of ours; but dressing is none of my business. When I look at things, I
can afford to overlook words, and I had rather speak home than fair, nor do I
care how blunt it be, so it be strong. Every man has his way of writing and
speaking, and I have mine; which as I allow it to others, I may look it should
be allowed me. Only it is like there is one thing which I may be blamed for by
many; and that is a kind of shiness all along of those borrowed words and
gaynesses, that Englishmen have picked and cull^d from other Tongues, under the
name of Choice words and Sparkling sayings. To which, after I have marked, how a
greater man than I, in the same business of Bodies, has gone a good way toward
it already, I mean the Learned Sir Kenhelm Digby, I have but thus much more to
say, That thinking with my self, how I an English man would write a Book in
English tongue, I made it now and than a little of my care, to bring in so many
words of that speech, that the Book might thence be called English, without
mis-calling it. And indeed however our smoother tongued Neighbors may put in a
claim for those bewitcheries of speech that flow from Gloss and Chimingness;
yet I verily believe that there is no tongue under heaven, that goes beyond our
English for speaking manly strong and full. And if words be more to teach than
tickle, as I reckon they are, our Mother tongue will get as much by speaking
fit and after kind, as it can loose by faring rough and taking up the tongue to
utter, and more than any else can gain by kembing better and running glibber.
Besides where I thought an outlandish word would be better taken, I have often
for the Readers sake set it down, as for my own sake set an English by it, as
thinking it unmeet to force my words upon another, in such a piece as where I
was to leave all free, as to the things I spoke about. Only I thought it not
amiss, after I was once in, for the taking off that charge that some have too
heedlesly laid upon our speech, of a patcht up Tongue from Lands and kinreds
round about, to show, that a Book of thus many sheets, might be understandingly
and roundly written, in hail and clear English, without taking in from abroad,
so much as twice so many words (and he that writes it in the most unbroken
tongue upon earth, shall go near to light upon so many), unless where the same
thing is fuller and kindlyer spoken by those we have at home, taking but out
the Cant words or terms of art, as they are called, which are rather tallies or
spells in the tongue, that is, no bodies, because every bodies, than the
homebred words of any whatsoever; and are taken up and forged at will, by the
whole stock of learned men in all Lands, wherewith to fish out one another
meaning. And as for a tongue that borrows not nor spends, I believe it is no
where to be found, or ever will be: all tongues through time being so far
blended, that there are not any of those now in the world in whole, that were
at the great Speechbreak at Babel, any more than there would be the same bodies
crew of atoms to those Speakers now that they had then, or the same kinreds of
men unmingled with Out-setters that were among them then, should they have
lived and jugg'd together to this day. Yet that some tongues lose more than
others at home, and get from abroad, is easy to be seen, and our own is enough
to bring any man to believe it. And in earnest, if the knack of borrowing, or
robbing and pilfering rather, gets but a little further ground amongst us, at
the scantling it has done hitherto, it will in time to come be harder for an
Englishman to speak his own tongue without mingling others with it, than to
speak a medly of sundry others without bringing in his own. But for my part, I
am of the mind, that the larding of Latin with High Dutch, in what is written
to the whole world, as some Germans in their Motley Books have already done, is
even as praiseworthy, as the haling in of Latin or other tongues, when we are
speaking in English to English; and the rather, for that the words thus foisted
in, are of such a sort most an end, that if you look but to their rists, and
lay their betokenings to the things whose names they bear, I dare undertake
twenty for one, that even the slighted and off-cast words in the mouths of
Handy-crafts-men and Earth-tillers shall be better drawn and more patly brought
in. And inasmuch as that Fellowship of Worthies in London, who are now embodied
under the name of Royal, have given us already so many new things, and are
daily starting more, neither named nor known by those before us; and for the
enriching of the English tongue, as well as fulfilling of Englands stores, have
thought fit their discoveries should almost wholly come abroad in our own
Speech, as they are happily made in our own Land: I think it will well become
those of us, who have a more hearty love for what is our own than wanton
longings after what is others, to take light and life from such happy
beginnings, and either to fetch back some of our own words, that have been
justled out in wrong that worse from elsewhere might be hoisted in, or else to
call in from the fields and waters, shops and work-housen, from the inbred
stock of more homely women and less filching Thorps-men, that well-fraught
world of words that answers works, by which all Learners are taught to do, and
not to make a Clatter; And perhaps if we slip this tide, we shall never come
again at such a nicking one. For inasmuch as almost the whole of those words,
that we speak in things or knowledges of things that are not body, are taken
from things that are body, and spoken in a borrowed meaning from thence, either
as they have Beings from God, or a Suchness of being from our handiwork: so
all the words about body and hangers on to body that we have to do with, are
either such as flow from or mainly well fall in with those that are uttered by
Workmen, for such things as are done by hand-deed. Now the Philosophy of our
day and Land being so much workful as the world knows it to be, methinks this
of all times should be the time, wherein, if ever, we should gather up those
scattered words of ours that speak works, rather than to suck in those of
learned air from beyond Sea, which are as far off sometimes from the things
they speak, as they are from us to whom they are spoken.

Besides, it may well be doubted, whether Latin can now be made so fit to set
forth the things of a Working Philosophy by, as our own Speech, or those other
of our Neighbors, who are with us carrying on that way of Doing. For we must
know, that almost all the old pieces of good Latin that we draw by, have been
taken up by that sort of learning that is wont to be worded in the Schools, and
spent in the setting to sale of such things as could best be glazed with the
froth of ink, by the men of Closets. Whence he that is best skilled in it, is
so hard put to it, in the Kitchen, that Shop, and the Ship; and ever will be,
though Plautus should be as well understood as Tully. For the words that are
every day running to and fro in the Chat of Workers, have not been gotten into
Books and put aboard for other Lands, until this way of Knowing by Doing was
started amongst us. So that we and others of the Handed Philosophers may either
find better words among our own Yeomanry, for such businesses of workmanship as
are already known by name, or at least coin fitter for new ones in a
likewiseness to the old, than can be lent us from that Tongue wherein we know
not how the Folks talked in the Country, nor do any body else or ever shall do.
Whereby too we shall not only with more ease and kindliness be understood by
the Pains-taking men amongst us, whose Crafts will be more helpful to an hail
Philosopher, than the Bookishness of others. But as Learnings being locked up in
the Tongues of the Schools, or Love's being lickt up in the more womanly
simprings of the lips, and the smiling kissing speeches of some others abroad,
have been enough to enkindle in us a panting after, and fondness for some of
those Outlandish dynns: So if the works of our own men shall be shipped over by
words of our own tongue, it may happily make others who have love enough for
the things, to seek as much after our words, as we upon other scores have done
after theirs; the first draught being English, name and thing, doing and
speaking. Which while we forbear to do, and snip here and snatch there from
some of them, being as much beholden to them for new and handsome words, as they
to us for fresh and useful things, the works are not more greatned by their
spreading name, than the workers seem lessened by the unluckiness of the slur,
That Englishmen can do by their own Hands, what they cannot speak in their own
Tongues.

THE HEADS OR CONTENTS Reckoned up.
Chap. I. THE Introduction or foreruner. The ground of mistakes thought to be
ill blendings, shown in two or three things of another sort, as much mismingled
and brought home to close with, and set forth the business in hand. Page 1.

Chap. II. Way opened for the minds easier grasping of Body, or world, by
laying hold of room and time, and laying one to Gods immensity, the other to
his eternity; whereby it is found that Room is not widned out with the former,
nor time lengthned out with the latter, but that they differ altogether. Gods
eternity an Everlasting Now: Time is on and on, past, at hand, and to come.
[Am] speaks [was] and [will be,] in eternity. The words and Grammar that we
speak by, are matched to time, and cannot speak forth eternity. We are at a loss
for words in some outgoings of the soul, and flight of thoughts, as we are for
some other things that truckle beneath us. Doctor Charleton's taking in with
eternal time, carried on and further strengthened and dress't up by Doctor S. P.
His arguments laid down and answered, by showing there is no outward eternity
at all, and if there were, it would be no better than none at all. The Doctors
objection against the Nowness of eternity answered. The matching of it with the
way of the souls being in the body. Eternity not such a Now as that of time is,
but is quite wide of it, all and some. Thinking is, and does, to Ghost, as bulk
to body. Second argument answered, by showing there would be no run of unmade
time between two worlds, nor formerness nor afterness. The Doctors answer to
the known Choke, Whether the parts of an infinite length be finite? found to be
none at all. Page 12.

Chap. III. All Bulk a point to Gods immensity, which is altogether; as all
time a Now to his eternity, which is all at once. We should never have thought
of Room, had we not been body, (as we cannot now think beyond it, nor where
about souls are in it, or our own in the body). Many things are, which are no
where. Whereness is too much a kin to place to suit Ghost, if we could but help
it by a better word. The kind of some things, stands in their being or knot
being according to somewhat. Things coming into senses, are such only to those
that have them. Our understanding of things is nearer a kin to them, than our
feeling of them. Sense mistakes, and misshews, and thereby reason often misled.
What we feel, we know not, nor can help another to know: The new knowledge of
Light from Master Newton, don't help the sight of it. The world one thing to
Gods Idea, another to our feeling. Page 41.

Chap. IV. The outmost reach of Body must needs be bounded. Roomth beyond the
world can no more be boundless, than the world it self. Outworldish emptiness
an idle thing. Gods Almightiness would ask Room as well as his Allfillingness,
one being as much roomthy as the other. Room is no where but where body is.
Ghost is no more in Room than thought is. Doctor More for roomthyness of Ghost,
and outworldish emptiness taken off. God must as well be of some shape as of
some Bulk. The world may be bounded without Emptyness beyond it. The foremost
mistake, a Dreaming first of emptyness, and then of world in the midst of it:
Whereas room is in the world and not the world in Room about it; nor should we
have thought of room, till 'twas made, and where 'twas made. Doctor More's
arguments answered, by showing an arrow cannot be shot beyond the worlds
Selvedge, nor arm born out of it; the Frame of the world hindering as much as
the stiffest bodies waylaying: proved by the stop of falling Bodies at the
Earths middle. The world no heap, but a set of Bodies locked fast together.
Ghost cannot carry Body beyond the world. The biggest Body cannot be fathomed by
place, as the least cannot be cloven. Another world would be neither near this,
nor far from it. To Ghost the biggest Body and the least, all one. If nothing
be between two worlds or Bodies the Rims would touch; Answered, That two Bodies
touch, something must needs be between; else onlay'd bodies, and inlay'd would
be all one. Des Carts and Master White gotten over: they must either unsay, or
make the world boundless. Doctor More's cramp argument, brought off. The sides
of a vessel emptyed of Body, would not only not touch, but be further asunder,
than when full. A body may stand still and yet shift place. Things are so near
each other, as they can come to be. Stirring of Bodies, or the room between
them, comes all to a reckoning. If there were boundless room beyond the world,
its running would be standing still, and its standing still running. Master
Barlow answered. Body cannot stir but in Body. All Bodies start saw wise.
Sirring of Ghost is like skipping of thought. God would be no more by halves in
two worlds, than he is in the two halves of this. Page 54.

Chap. V. Whether Bulk holds of leastings. Magnenus laid aside. An Atome has
not this and that. It Is mated with a now of time. An Atome touches secundum
impenetrabilitatem, and longitudinem seminalem, made out by the souls closing
with the body, and some other less heeded touches. What is brought against it,
answered, as to figure and motion. Slow pace is made of Starts and Bearings.
Bearing is neither rest nor stirring, but the keeper or spring of stirring,
(the beginnings of things and the things themselves being two), further opened
by the stirring of a watch, of thrown bodies, the springiness of an egg, of
brooding, of boughed bodies. Of sproutings, of Breathers. Begetting is shifting
springs. Souls may be shifted in a Blosom of Body, and not moved. Life and soul
are two. Man the Son of Man. Swift motions, in likelihood, outstrip time.
Motion a thing bodyless, not ghostly. Body as it is lodged may move it self. All
Body, as throwfaresom to Ghost as some. The nimbleness of Ghosts in their
hurryings of Body. Of our Saviors Body. The Laws of motion enough to stop
bodies running a tilt at the middle atome. Such laws bind the Soul to the Body,
even against will. God holds us by laws of kind as we do others by those of
right. Birds curbed by laws of kind, and all things else, the lowest things,
stee'rd by the highest wisdom. Page 105.

Chap. VI. Beginning the world sooner and sooner would nevermake it
everlasting, but to be so, it must be all at once. How the world is somewhat
besides God. Against Doctor S. P. holding the world might have been from
eternity. No soonerness before world, nor time, nor ages. The world a Decreed
world, the Decree never a decreeing. Gods eternity and the Souls two things
infinitely asunder. The soul shall never have lived an infinite number of
minutes, nor reach half or any part of Gods everlastingness, any more than an
halfway boundless Bulk, can reach half his alfillingness. God otherwise
everlasting than in the root against the Doctor. Whatever is in God is
forthwith. The Doctors argument, If nothing to come of Gods eternity, it is at
an end, Answered; and his half given him back again, to make the best he can of
the scurvy recoil of his absurdness and impossibility. Something of likeness
hinted at. What an ill looked, frightful train haunts the Doctors new Tool, of a
growing Everlastingness. Body as lasting in its kind as Soul. A time beyond
which the world shall not hold out, may be fastened on, from the sureness of the
bodies rising again. Page 154.

Chap. VII. A Moreness of worlds, and Earlyerness of this world, stand upon the
same untrusty bottom. It Is rational to think the world could not have been
sooner, nor bigger, nor more. More, or bigger or earlier worlds, would not
better set out Gods power, eternity, or immensity, than this does. Doctor More
for a boundless tale of worlds taken off. The saying of worlds framed, or made,
in Holy Writ; and world without end, or before all worlds, in the Common
Prayer, cleared from mistake. Page 187.

The Bulk and Selvedge of the WORLD.
CHAP. I.
WHoever in good earnest betakes himself to the scanning of bodies, one and
other, as they lie in the whole bulky throng of this World, either as to their
kinds of being or wonts of working, will find nothing that the mind at freedom
is readier to fasten upon, likelier to be lost in, or, as to the knowledge of
other things, be checked or stifled by, than those two puzling things, the
maximum quantum and the minimum; how far a body may be biggened by putting to
it, or lessened by taking from it: the one losing it self in spatio imaginario,
the other in puncto Mathematico. Now I have been thinking, there is so much of
kindred between the two riddles, that if but one of them were rightly made out
to man's understanding, the other would thence, as well gain somewhat of more
light, as give back somewhat for further settling, and withal a fairer way would
be made for the mind to busy it self about all those beings that lie far and
wide between them.

Wherein to attach other men's reasonings of weakness, or to sing Mattins and
Evensong to my own (...), by a sort of big and lofty strains, is none of my
business, only I would beg leave to say, that what I have met with from the
pens and tongues of learned men hereabout, have left me altogether in the dark,
whatever light others may thence have gathered, and that what I have hit upon
as to this affair, and am now about to set down, has set my own mind so far at
freedom, that I was not altogether given to mistrust, but it might somewayes
also be helpful, to the setting right the thoughts of some others. Methought
then that the answerings or analogies of beings, have been hitherto but ill
pitched or adjusted, and that those things that right reason and a wisdom above
us, had evened out into ranks and kindreds by themselves, have been unhappily
hudled and broken by the mind of man; and that other things wide enough off as
to their Births and seats in the world, have been unkindly brought together by
our less wary way of thinking, besides a great many things which are either
begotten by the understanding, working upon the draughts or idea's of things
that sense has to do with, or else do arise from the answerings or habitudes
that the things of the World bear to the make of mankind, are hastily
forethought to have such a kind of being in analogia mundi, as they seem to
have in analogia nostri. Whereupon things being either lodged in the mind, that
have no dwellings in the world, or otherwise shaped, linkt, or laid, than they
are in the world, it falls out that things that are not, are reckoned as if
they were, or things that are, are reckoned otherwise than they are.

Thus a right understanding having bound up Moral beings, with their belongers,
in one bundle, and Metaphysical with theirs, in another, by the too forward
working of the mind of man, the bond has been loosned and a medly made to the
everlasting shackling of that head or question, Praestat non esse quam miserum
esse, for although it be as clear, as that which is clearest, that, so laid
down, it is a known truth, yet Durandus's Argument will stand unanswered till
Doomsday, to wit, that which takes away the greater good, is the greater evil,
but not being does so, for it takes away the good of well-being and the good of
being both. This Mr. Barlow grants but with a Supposita semper subjecti
duratione. But in my mind that answer is not of the same piece with the
learnedness of the rest; for it is not asked, whether to Peter not being Peter it
be evil to be endlesly wretched? but whether to Peter, being Peter, it be not
worse to lose his good of well-being and his good of being too, than to lose
but one of them? which is no worse way of speaking than what our blessed Lord
spoke of another of the twelve, (...). comparative.
Better had it been for that man, if he had not been born. Now he that grants
bonum entis or essentiae to be the object of the will: that is, bonum
Metaphysicum to be bonum Morale, has shut himself out from answering, even for
evermore: but give but to each good its right, and the thing is at an end; for
bonum entis not being bonum Morale, any more than verum entis, which a lie may
have, is verum Morale, knit unto malum Miseriae a moral evil, and so laid
before the will, it is easy enough to foretell where the choice will be: And
that these two goods are wide enough asunder, is clear, for why? Non bonum,
that is, non ens Metaphysicum, may be as truly bonum Morale, and so the darling
of the will, as what is most of all so. Thus the not being of the world it
self, before all worlds, till it had a being, was as truly good, and so the
object of the will of him that made it, as its self same being when it began to
be.

Thus again by the blending of Ens Physicum with Ens Morale, another question
about the thing that sin is, has been as much rufled and darkened as any
whatsoever; for though it has been made out, as heretofore, so moreover of
late, by no mean hands, to be Ens positivum, yet most well-knowing men have
been wary of speaking it out, for fear they should allot God Almighty a share
in it, he being the maker of every positive being; whereas, if I do not much
mis-think at least, though God Almighty be the Maker of every being that is
Physically so, it follows not that he is the same of each being that is Morally
so: it is enough that God is the maker of the power to do evil, (which being
good, may therefore spring from him) not of the things that are so done, so as
from them he should take name: thus it is most sure, that a non ens Physicum may
be a moral good; a Jews naked not doing business on his Rest-day, had as truly
Being in it, as the doing the other works of the day, for why? as truly good;
and if God should will me not to be, my not being, and willingness not to be
Physically, would be as much Being, because as much good Morally, as my very
being alive and willingness to be so, worshipping God whilst so. A natural
being leaves off to be so, when it no longer abides in the World; but a moral
being skills not the world, but is such only from its closing with, or swerving
from the Law it is laid to; whilst it is, it is indeed nothing in the World, nor
is any thing else of it self, rightly speaking, unless it takes up room there.
Had there been as much of the will of God, as there might be of the will of
man, in those two odd wishes, of two holy hearts, in the holiest of Books,
blotting out of the Book of God would have been a good, and accursedness from
Christ, a blessedness. For then a being grows up to its full ripe happiness,
when it fully reaches all that bliss, which God aims at, for its utmost good;
which whether it abides Physically or not, is neither here nor there, it being
a weakness of understanding to say, that a made being is more happy in its
natural life, which God wills not, than in its being nothing when God wills it
so: for then either we could never have bin fully happy, unless we were as well
from everlasting, as to it; or at least, those that go to heaven at the end of
the World, would not be so blissful as those that went in the beginning, the
former having an happy being, while the latter had neither happiness nor being;
whereas both standing even in the love of God, they should do so too, in their
own bliss. I think we do respect or look toward Gods glory, and our own
happiness more, by what we have in us of Ens morale, than by what we have of
Ens Physicum.

Notwithstanding all which there would follow nothing to make us think that sin
should be any whit long of God; for why, all that he does toward it, is, to
leave us to our selves to bring it forth if we will; and instead of driving on
to it as a fellow helper or procatarctick cause, he draws from it, and toward
the good, with unspeakable endearments of woing, and drives from it, by
forbidding the evil, with all that earnestness of threatening, that may beget in
man the utmostness of dread; nor is he any nearer the Physical cause of it,
than to give that good power, which is not the cause at all, as it looks
toward him, for by giving this power he is at the same time the evil thing is
done, as much the cause of the gainstanding good that is not done; now if he be
no more the cause of it, than he is of that which is not at all, then he is not
the cause at all.

Besides this power is not only good, but also needful, for though the
fulfilledness or perfection of the will in the next life, will not be in a
standing at jar, and wavering alike toward good and evil, but only in a
self-willingness to good, yet in this life, I think it mainly does, and must;
for this is a life of doing, or believing, as it looks on to reward in that to
come: that, a lie of rewarding, as it looks back to doing or believing here.
Now if we do but allow God to deal with us, who are reasonable beings, in ways
bearing an evenliness with our kind, as he does with lower beings in ways
agreeable to theirs; then must he needs bestow upon us this freedom to sin that
we are speaking of; for it seems not so much of right reason to reward that in
man, which though he did willingly, yet he could not for his life do otherwise,
least then a stock or a stone should put in too for reward, for its deeds of
kind, which it does not unwillingly, but yet must needs do. In like manner
Heaven being a life, not of earning wages, but of taking pay, it is enough
there, for the freedom of the will to stand alone in spontaneitate ad bonum, or
self-willingness to good.

Hence likewise we are in a fair way to answer that threadbare Question, which
did so much gravel the ungospel'd world; to wit, (...); For inasmuch as sin is
a moral thing, we are well enough on it if we can but track it up to a spring of
its kind, without looking after any other riste: Now unbounded wisdom and
goodness having laid out endless happiness as reward for obedience, and the
same wisdom and rightwiseness allotted endless wretchedness as punishment for
sin; without this obedience there could be no heaven, without sin no Hell; and
without a power not to do, in both, there could be neither. So then, that God
may have leave to make man happy for holiness, man must needs have power to
make himself wretched for sin. That evil should always flow from evil in a
chain of breeders, is a great misunderstanding; for as fire arises from that
which is no fire, by a smart stroke upon a flint, so evil springs from that
which is not evil, by a cross blow given the Law.

If it be gainsaid, Then man may thank himself too for all the good he does,
that being as much long of him as the other, while the thing done forbears to
be denominated from God, at the freeness of the power in man: and so to make
God not the spring or Author of good, would be much at one with the making of
him the Author of evil.

I answer, it follows not; For in the first place, of all the good that man
does, God is still the Moral cause, egging on to it by all those sweetnesses of
entreaty, that the will can any way be wrought upon by; and though man's being
free to it, makes it his deed (at second hand at least) both which, even holy
writ and reason speak aloud; yet inasmuch as the stream of goodness, by the
putting forth of freeness, is not damm'd up, but left to run on to the thing
done: and again the same Almighty hand that barely upheld while sin was done,
does over and above further the thing that good is, by enlightening the mind,
renewing the will, healing the spring in man, of that a^l which inbred sin had
brought upon it, and in a word making it every way more it self; God must be
more an owner there than man, and thence the thing done falls in with the
divine will, because it flowed from divine goodness; all that which is good in
man by way of offspring, being so in God by way of wellspring.

Once more by the medly of Ens Mathematicum and Physicum, the Question De
compositione continui, or the making up of a bulky being, has been overwhelmed
and lost in the finenesses of words, and the airiness of tattle, beyond all
helps of freedom to a right understanding; whereas by dealing the dole evenly
between both, we hope, further on, to make it likely at least, that the
doctrine of atoms is not wound up in those darknesses that some men's
understandings have may-hap over-weened.

And lastly, whereas Ens Physicum or natural, is either materiale, or
immateriale, body and ghost or body and not body, by bewedding to body the
things that belong to ghost, or bringing over to ghost, or that which is not
body, the things cleaving unto body, the bulkiness of the world, the business
of motion, the emptiness beyond the world, the all-fillingness of God, the
herenesses and therenesses of ghosts, have been too much interwoven and twisted
together, even to the bewildring of our closest and best weighed thoughts about
them.

Besides our very way of thinking upon bodies, or drawing their likenesses upon
our souls, from the unluckiness of those pipes and suckers, through which we
have fetched them, have drunk in such a tang of manishness, or a mingle mangle
of half man, half world together, that it is uneasy to say, what things a body
has from us, and what it has from him that made it.

Now by giving to the abovenamed what is their own of right, and taking from
them, what we have given them in wrong, as far as is belonging to what we have
before us, is that which we have undertaken, to the utmost of our scantling, at
least, to be all along most heedfull of, and whence also we look for more light
and ease to betide the understanding, than from the giving way to such unkindly
minglings as we have blamed before.

CHAP. II.
THus then in the first place, one of the readiest ways for us to free the
mind from mistakes about the knowledge of the world, is, for us to gather
remarks of things, as much in a nearness to the Divine idea of them, or that of
ghostly beings, as our more underly way of thinking will give us leave to reach
to; and to uncloath them of, or make allowance for, all those answerings or
analogies, that do arise to them upon the account of our animalities or
beghosted bodyhood. For I reckon it will be a good step toward the knowledge of
what the world ought to be to us, who are body and ghost both together, if we
but know what it is to such Being or Beings as are ghost altogether.

Now the two first and most bewildring things that the mind is likest to fasten
on, as the main belongers to the world, are the room that the world takes up,
and the time that the world lasts: But if we come to lay these to the Divine
Being, we shall find, that as Time is to Gods eternity or everlastingness, so
Bulk is to Gods immensity or his all-fillingness. Our knowing then how the
world behaves it self to one of them, will help us still to understand how it is
to the other, as our knowing how it is unto both, will give us somewhat better
to guess how it is to us who have neither.

Inasmuch then as the known perfection of God is to be so everlasting, as not
to be successive or jogging on and on, the idea or likeness that he frames of
timesome Beings that are so, must not be by shrinking up this his fullness, to
the narrowness of those Beings which must needs be creeping forwards while they
are; for that would be to make himself like them; that is, not to be God: but
he must take the ken of these beings, after ways becoming his boundless or
infinite being: if then it will not beseem God to be at this time, and at that
time, this after that, then neither will it become him to know things that are
so, after that kind of way. Now because all the things we can gripe in our
minds are such, and the likenesses that God has of them are not such, the words
by which we call them being answering to the things, we are as much at a loss
for words, as for thoughts, about things so vastly beyond us: all that we can
do toward it is, to choose out such words to set forth Gods ever-beingness
by, as may be sure to shut out formerness and afterness, which Gods
everlastingness has not, though we cannot on the other hand make them take in
what we believe it has. Thus the whole world almost of well enlightened, and
right believing men, have hit upon the way of calling Gods everlastingness, a
cleaveless or indivisible now: not as if 'twere a moment of that time which we
take up, (time being cast out, as well in part as in whole) but only because it
cannot be brought to our bounded understandings, shrouded under any other word
that can like that, cut off all formerness and latterness, which must by no
means be taken in.

Which way of speaking has as sure footing too in holy Writ, as in well-guided
reason. I am has sent me, this day have I begotten thee, before Abraham was, I
am; being as much sense spoken of God, as they would be nonsense of any one
else. Had Abraham been at the beginning of the World he had not been sooner, as
to Gods everlastingness; or had he not been till the words spoken, he had not
been later, because there is neither sooner nor later in the thing: that which
would be [was] in Grammar to Abraham, is [am] to God, as that which would be
[will be] to us, is still [am] to him. Gods saying, I am before Abraham or the
world, and I am after him or it, (answering to our were and will be) is as well
the fullness, as truth of speaking, for then we have spoken all that ought,
when we have spoken all that can be; and then all that can, when there are no
more words to speak more with.

And that it may not seem so strange to us that we are thus word-bound in such
kind of things, we may remember that we are enough put to it for words about
things belonging to our own selves, when we would give forth those ravishments
of love that we feel, but can not, (without giving Soul and all) give another
to understand, our words, it seems, being most an end as little squared to
unboundedness in the intention of degrees, or screwing up high, as it is to that
in the extension of parts, or letting out wide.

Besides, if Gods everlastingness were to be set out by words, it must not
surely be, by such words as are fitted to the analogy that is betvveen us, and
other timesome and boundsome beings, as all those we yet have are, but is only
to be set forth by words running even with the ansvverings betvveen them and
the Divine Being, which we neither know, nor can tell whether ever we shall.
Thus Logic and Philosophy cannot be uttered by the neighing of Horses, the
barking and howling of Dogs, the hissing and gagling of Geese, the chirping or
prating of other Birds, though they speak enough that, amongst themselves,
which we cannot give them to know by our more full words; they, it seems, being
as unfit for Beings beneath us, as above us.

Indeed the Philosophical Dr. Charleton, (from the Mighty Gassendus before him,
as he from Epicurus) has taken up again, the opinion of Vorstius, so learnedly
overthrown by Mr. Barlow, that Gods everlastingness is boundless time, and that
his unmeetsomeness is boundless width: Both which to me, (whatever they are to
others) seem no less then frightful notions: For if we are existant in a small
part of that duration, or the world in a small part of that extension in which
God exists, and Gods eternity not be an everlasting now, and his immensity an
unbounded unextendedness; it will follow that some part of Gods everlastingness
is yet to come, and not now; and some part of his all-fillingness beyond the
world, not in it, which would make such a medly of succession and division in
the Attributes of God, which are God himself, as I cannot now understand, or
believe, I, or any man ever shall; being as sure, as I am of my own
thinkfullness, that what is bounded or finite, cannot hold pace with that
which is unbounded or infinite, vvitho(...) whole nor in part.

But because it has been undertaken since by a Reverend Divine, who has
followed it as well more closely, as more fully, and that too with a goodly
income of Learning, and a right handsome address of words, and well air'd
periods; it may happily seem to the Reader, that either we want a kindness for
the business we have hitherto owned, while we let such a rub lie in our way
uncared for, or else that we want respect enough for the Author, to think that
so, which he has wrought hard to make so; especially too, having done so much
to awaken us, as, to reckon all that think otherwise than himself does, to be
no less than fools and laughing-stocks; notwithstanding yet the whole throng of
those that have been of most name for learning, or of most worth for holiness,
have been of the side that he is not of, from the beginning of the World to
this day.

In the doing of this he warns his Reader of Tentamina Phys. Theol. de Deo. p.
373.
two kinds of abiding, inward or in gross, and outward or by it self: The
inward is the very essence or existence of the thing, which if, as to what it is
made up of, it be daily throwing off and taking in, (as we and all body-some
Beings do) is then successive; but if it be always the same, as it is with
ghost and the substance of all bodies, then it is shut of succession and
division, and is self-same or permanent, like as God is.

Page 376, 377. The outward has so little reality in it, that the understanding
cannot get a draught of it; it has nothing at all of positive reality (though
it be not yet a sheer dream or figment) which is gathered, because it must
always needs be, both unmade by God, and unbeholden to, or independent on God;
if God had never made any thing, it should for all that have been; and if he
should unmake all things, it would still be. Page 378. The whole of this is
eternity or everlastingness, the half is aevum or endlesness, that share of it
that lackies it by the worlds side is time.

Page 398. Thus Gods inward everbeingness, or aeternitas concreta, is the very
existence of God, with an outward badge or denomination from time by-running;
which is permanent and indivisible: and it is about this aeternitas, Boethius
and others should be understood, when speaking of its being tota simul.

Gods outward or abstract is in an endless onwardness, and is unto Gods
everlastingness, asspatium imaginarium is to his all^illingness, which is not
an attribute of God, but an unbounded retching out together with it.

To bring off all this fairly, we have two things to do; First, to show that
there is no such thing at all as this same aeternitas externa. Secondly, that
if there were, it would not yet do the job for which it is brought.

For the first, A real outward eternity or eternal time that has nothing at all
of positive reality, is not; because it is a contradiction in adjecto, that it
should be a right down self-cut-throat, fordoing even its own being. Eternity,
and nothing at all of positivity, can by no means stand together; for whatever
is eternal, must needs be positive of eternity, as long as eternity is somewhat
positive it self: and whatever is big with or positive of eternity, cannot go
farrow, or be privative of real entity; for a thing cannot be everlasting, and
not be at all: and that this is really so, is clear, in that it is not a figment
or whimsie; So it is yielded to have a little reality in it, and a little real,
is real; especially seeing that little reality is enough to make it really
lengthened out with Gods most real inward everlastingness, and so that although
God were not, that would be, and though God had never been, that should be.

Besides he that gives it a little reality or thingsomeness, cannot for his
heart be so sparing as to hold his hand there, and give it no more: for why,
it is such a craving Horsleech, it will suck in more whether a man will or not:
Whilst it must for truth's sake be granted, that that little snip of
everlasting time, which reaches from my Birthday, or at least, the Worlds
raising day, till now, has a little reality in it; For I have lived, and the
World lasted really that little while; the reality of time being grafted in its
timeishness, not in its boundlesness; so that every little share of time must
have a little of this little reality, and every little must make a mickle. Then
say I, if the time that I have lived and the world lasted, has a little reality
in it, then that of it, which is beyond, must have more; and that of it which
reaches infinitely beyond it,) because it is as real as it is infinite, and as
really more as it is real, (must have an infinite deal of reality beyond it; and
that which has more, and infinitely more than a little, cannot surely be said
to have but a little, or less than a great deal, or any thing short of infinite
reality.

2. Its independency or looseness from God, lies as crotchet every whit, as its
being; for if you ask about it the question that is wont to be asked all the
homeless Crew, Whence comes it? The answer must fare as if it were a God; for
it is to be said, God did not make it, nor did any thing else; and yet it is
indeed, and was unbeginningly, and will be endlesly; and that is as much as can
be said of God himself, under that head. If it be said that God has besides an
inward ever-beingness, that is neither cleavesome, nor on and on; so has this
too, by good luck; for the inward abiding is nothing but the existence of a
thing always the same: now this outward everlastingness has always been the
same, without getting or losing ought, but moments of existing, which the
everlasting God and all substances do. If it be said that in God there is
All-fillingness, as well as Everlastingness; so there is out of God too, a
boundless roomthiness, such as would be though God were not, nor had been ever;
and while he is, is retcht out together with him; and was, as he himself,
without beginning, and without him too. So we have gotten somewhat to chew
upon, that is as everlasting, and as much every where, as God is, and as
unbeholden to God for being, as God is to any thing else for his; and yet in
the upshot, it is such a kind of somewhatkin, as truckles beneath the very
tinyness of an half nothing, and is forsooth a fierdhalf nothing; for after the
full nice brattling out of reality, into muchnesses and littlenesses, there
falls to the share of this, as little as may be, to keep it from dwindling into
an altogether nothing, or a middlekin between something and nothing, that is
neither of them. Whereas I have thought, that as time had not been if God had
not made timesome beings, nor room if he had not made roomthy; so neither had
eternity or immensity been, if there had not been a God everlasting and every
where, the maker of all things.

3. As this new Everlastingness breaks with it self, upon the score of being or
entity, so it as much undoes it self upon that, of its boundlesness or
infinity; for as before we were told it was a real eternal, not real positive,
so over and above, we are done to wit, that it is an infinite not infinite: for
it is such an infinite as is cut in a trice into two halves, one past and the
other to come. Now it being impossible that I should give thus much to be the
half of a thing, without I knew the whole were as much again, it follows that
if I know how much the whole is, (and that I cannot but do, because I am told
what the half is,) then is this infinite, finite; for I who am finite can
fathom it, and by my bounded knowledge of it, bound it; and yet again this
finite is the measure to an hair of Gods infinity in abiding, who is boundlesly
far and wide of me, and of my utmost knowledge. All which being dainties of too
high a seasoning, for my more homely understanding, I must leave them, with
their Miche-good-do't-ye to the elder sons of relish and shrewd fetches.

But secondly, if this same cleaving of Eternity in two (that is, into inward
and outward) were yielded, we should be never the nearer fadging for all that;
for the concrete or inward everlastingness is said to be the very existence or
essence (which as they do not differ to speak of, so our Author mingles) of God
himself, with the outward denomination taken from time gliding by. Now, though
it seems harsh (to me at least) that an outward denomination, should come into
the definition of an inward being, yet that the inward essence or existence of
God must nobe nakedly understood, is clear enough; for the naked essence of God
is as much his all-knowingness, his all-fillingness, or his one-foldness, as
his everlastingness; and that cannot be said to be Gods everlastingness, which
is as much somewhat else, as it is that. Gods everlastingness then is not Gods
Being or Essence only, but Gods Essence everlasting, or everlasting God, or
Gods Essence as it is to himself, or in himself endlesly abiding: as Gods
knowledge is his Essence as to, or within himself all-knowing, his
all-fillingness as to, or within himself filling all things. Now if all this be
cleaveless or indivisible, as is fairly yielded above; and of, and by it self
too, as, I think, may as fairly be hence gathered, to wit the externa
aeternitas and immensitas, or the everlasting time and boundless roomthiness,
being utterly of themselves without God, it would be a foolish blasphemy or
dirtying of God, not to yield that Gods inward everlastingness and
boundlesness, may as well be without the outward, as they could be without the
inward. Then, say I, after all this wheeling about, we are not a step further
than where we were; for Gods whole eternity rightly taken, and as it is to
himself, is not successive or growing on, but altogether, or one only everbeing
now.

All that we have gotten by it is, a measure for it that is growing onward, as
we have for his all-fillingness, another that may be sundred. Now surely it is
as hard to imagine, how that which is successive and divisible, as the outward
are, should be the measure of that which is permanent and indivisible, as the
inward is; as it is that that which is all at once, should hold way with that
which is on and on, or that that which is altogether should hold out with that
which has part and part; which is the huge nonsense that is to be fathered
upon the otherwise minded. And verily, for my share, I cannot see why we may
not have a yard or an ell of good-Angell, or a pound or an ounce of the foul
fiend, as well as a successive share of Gods unsuccessive everlastingness, or a
divisible piece of Gods indivisible all-fillingness: but such it seems may be
had, if you knock at the right door; for measures that have fore and aft, and
part and part, are the things, and the only things, by which it is meted out.

Besides it carries a train of things after it, that are as hard to answer as
easy to light upon. To name one for all; there being as many things to be
known, as there are dotts or points in the outward immensity; and as many new
things to be known, as new minutes to be lived in, in the outward eternity; it
will follow that Gods knowledge as well as his everlastingness is both divisible
and successive: without we should answer that God knows all that scope of
points without retching out that his essence which is his knowledge; and all
that chain of minutes, without any lengthening out of that his being which is
his everlastingness; but then the new knack is quite split, and we are no
wiser, nor speak no more wonders, than the gray bearded men, that have gone
before us.

But it being likely that that which bespoke a kindness for this more hazardous
by-road, was, because the open way was looked upon as more encumbred and less
enlightened; that the charge may be shown, as less groundedly taken up, we shall
give answer as far as we can, unto what has been laid before us under that head.

Among the hard sayings then that we meet with, these come in chief; to wit,
Page 384, The understanding cannot take it, how one now should hold on with the
whole runlong of all ages, any more than that one point should be driven out to
the utmost wideness of the whole World.

Page 386. Again, if everlastingness were cleaveless, nothing could be in any
part of time, but it would be likewise whole everlastingness; the whole being
in every least of time.

Page 388. And further yet, it cannot be thought that two abidings or
durations, to wit, time and everlastingness, should be together and not be the
same abiding; when inasmuch as they are together they become one, as two rooms
cannot be within one abutment, unless they be thereby clapped into one.

All which being of so near a kindred, we shall cramp them with this one
instance, and that shall be one too, no farther from home than we our selves
are from our selves: I mean that oneness that is between soul and body, as it
makes up the being that is called man.

The soul is as cleaveless or indivisible as a point of roomthiness, or a now
of time; and yet it is as much in every roomthy part of the body, all at once
and altogether, as in the very least: and if another man's understanding cannot
take it, how a thing that has no parts, should be every where at once, in a
thing that has, the blame lies at the man, not in the thing, for we are as sure
that it is, as he can be that he don't understand it. Thus again the bone is as
hard to pick, how a limb of the body should not be as big as the whole, it
being as big as the whole of that, which is full as much as the whole body, and
in the mean time, the whole of the same too, is even with that which is but a
limb of it. And another of the same is, that two abidings, that is to say, time
and eternity, may be together and not be the same abiding, as well as the soul
may be every where, where the body is stretched out, and yet it self not be
stretched out at all. But now either all this is true, or else the soul is as
bulkie as the body, and as full of parts as it; or else as little as an atome,
and so takes up only the least room in it; both which are so easy to take off,
that a few words will be enough to dispatch them.

Page 297, and 300. First then, That the soul is not a Substance, body-like
extended, for closeness indivisible, for thinness penetrable, (which seems to
be that draught of a ghost which our Author has some kindness for, and has both
roundly helped on and filled up) is thus to be made out.

It Is given out that ghost, as well as the substance of body innerly, is such a
thing, as is always the same, as much as God is; so that if you shift it, you
quite and clean undo it. But now that ghostly being which enlivens the body of
man, if it were stretched out with the body, would be as surely not the same,
but shifted and changed, as the body it self is: therefore we gather rightly it
must not be co-extended with it at all. The reason of it in more words stands
thus: the body is not only reeking out whole steams of little unseen
off-shoots, and taking to it as many more, but over and above it is taking in a
daily minglement of bigger bodies, by what we eat and drink, which splicing in
their little shives, within the crowd of pieces that are clinging close
together, at once grow one with the body, and give further bigness to the body;
and also, as it may happen, the body may be almost as much lessned, by lopping
off its branches, as 'twas bigned by the growing of its trunck. Now it is asked,
does this extended ghost within the body biggen and lessen with it, or does it
not? The soul that I was quickened with at birth day, is the same that I am
quickened with at this day, but the body that I have now is bigger than that
which I had then: Is my soul bigned or is it not? If it be not, it reaches then
only the lesser share of that body which I now have, the greater being
soul-less; but if it be bigned, then it is not the same it was, any more than my
body; nor to be sure, is it so much the same, as God is, who is so the same as
to be neither bigger nor less. Again, if I have an arm or a leg cut off, my
body is lessned; but I ask whether my soul be or not? If not, then have I
forsooth some pieces of my soul jetting out of my body, some in it; and when I
walk, that assignable, but indivisible part of my soul, which was in my leg,
comes shoveling after me, and that in my arm is swingling by me, in such a
shape of air, as takes up that room, that my leg and arm did, when limbs of my
body; But if my soul does not thus featly stick out of my body, then it
withdrew at the off-cut, and so my soul is not the same that 'twas before, but
less. Besides, when the soul draws back so, into what does it draw? Into it
self it cannot, for it is already so close packed that it can be no closer; if
it could be closer, it must be from some emptiness within, but because it must
always needs be brim full, there can be none, and if there were any such, it
might then be cut a pieces body-like; for, with those that hold this, it seems
the reason why an atome, as well as why a ghost, cannot be cloven, is nothing
but because it sticks so close together, that no emptiness can come between; a
thing being cleavesome, not from its bulkiness, but inward emptiness mingled.
Again, on the other hand, if the soul were as close as it could be at first,
(and so it must be, or else be out of kind,) then what it has put forth since
of it self, to keep even with the growth of the body, has left such little
emptinesses within, (the body by waxing, having cracked a many holes in it,)
that it is now, at manhood, as like to be shorn in pieces as the body.

Secondly, If the Soul be not retched out with the body, but settles in some
room whence it may best, by unknown reins, sway the whole body; then it is
asked, whether that room be cleaveless or not: If it be the Maw or Stomach, the
whirl-pool of the spirits in the blood, the brain, the water of it, or the
Glandula pinealis in it, (which some or other have set out for it,) they being
all extended, the business would be the same as if 'twere in the whole body: If
it be but in one atome or leasting in the body, then a child would have more
soul to its body than a man, and should thence seem more a man, there being
more atoms in the bigger than in the less body. Besides the body being all over
spending some and getting others, that atome in which the soul first lodged,
may either shift rooms in the body, or quite slip out of it, as well as any
others that do so; and so for ought I know, my soul was whilom in my head, and
sometime in my toe, and after at my fingers end, according as that atome in
which it dwelt, chanced to be bounced about for elbow-room: and I may have been
I know not how many men since I was born, according as that atome happened to
leave me, and another popped into its stead; I being I, no longer than I have
that in me, in which my soul is.

From the whole then looked back upon but wistly, it seems that Gods
everlastingness may be all at once, or a beginningless endless now, and time
that is successive be together with it, without making that so; as well as our
souls which are all together, may be every where, where the body is, without
having parts, as that has: which latter, while we are fain to yield, it seems
but unhandsome we should make a boggle at the former.

Withal, it were not perhaps amiss to remark, that a main thing which has put
a cheat upon the understanding herein is this; When eternity is said to be an
everlasting now, and immensity as an every where cleavelesness, some have been
so hard with it, as to strain from it what belongs to a now of time, and a
least of body: whereas both of them standing off in their whole kind, it is
impossible they should hold together in some part; and seeing they so differ as
things infinite and finite, it is impossible, the agreement that we make between
them in words, should be by making that which is everlasting, the least part of
that, which is but a while lasting, and that which is beyond all bounds the
least share of that little thing, which has bounds. That eternity therefore is
called a now, and immensity a thing indivisible, hence it is, and hence only: to
wit, every part of lastingness besides a now, is onwardly as well as bounded,
and every part of bulk besides the least, is cleavesome as well as bounded; now
it is better to call them by words speaking finite barely, which one thing they
are not; than by words speaking finite and successive, or finite and divisible,
which two things we are sure they are not; and though a point be the least of
boak, and a now the shortest of time, yet they may speak everlastingness, and
allfillingness, upon another score, (as much as we can, that is, not as much as
they should,) for all their shortestness and leastness, as well as the longest
or the biggest, if they could be brought in without other unfitnesses; for
neither of them would come any nearer to everlastingness, or everywhereness,
than the shortest and the least do; but would, to be sure, be further off from
them, by taking in more things which they have not, nor can have.

Therefore when our Author tells us (page 384.) of a now longer than Ages, and
a being unretcht out, that should be more than one that is, it is nothing to the
business: for we only call Gods Everlastingness a now, to clear it of as many
things as we can that would make it on and on, as things Time-lasting are; and
Gods All-fillingness an altogether, to loosen it from any thing of sundership,
which all extended Beings have: not but that one is boundlesly more than all
the Nows of Time, and the other boundlesly more than all the Clefts of Body;
but forasmuch as we want words wherewith to name them what they are, we take
those that have least to do with Time and Body, which they are not. In a word,
Everlastingness is no more All at Once, as a Now of Time is, because it is not
thing enough to be a while, than it is it self Timesom; nor is All-fillingness
any more unextended, as an Atome is, that is, because it is not thing enough to
be recht out, than it is it self extended: but Everlastingness is quite another
thing infinitely from what Time is, and the parts of Time are; and
Every-whereness is quite another thing infinitely from what Bulk is, and the
cleavings of Bulk are: But because our mind gives us, that Time should be liker
to Eternity, and Bulk liker to Immensity, than any other bounded things are, we
choose the renablest words belonging to the former, wherewith to set forth the
latter.

Perhaps the understanding may draw somewhat nearer the thing as it is, by
taking the next thing that arises from Soul, which is thinking, together with a
next thing that streams from Body, which is roomthyness; thoughtsomness setting
full as close to the very stamp or inmostness of a thinking Being, as boak or
roomthyness does to the Being that is Bodysom; so that if I would have bulk or
roomthyness do any thing, it must be such a thing for all the world as I would
have Body do, and vice versa, or heads and heels, so I may have it become big
or little, show of this or of that shape, stir or stand still, because these
are things that I can have Body do: In like manner, if I would have Ghost do
any thing, it must for all the world be such another thing as I would have
thought or thinking do, and on the other hand; for if every thing must do
according as it is, thought being as much an inmate in the very heart of the
thinking Being, as bulkiness is in the very inside of Body, it cannot be, but
that that which is so much of Ghost in its Being, should be very much so too in
its doing; as outstretchedness which is so much of Body, does as much like
Body. If then I would have thought to be here or there, in a great thing or in
a little, it must do these things the nearest that can be to what a Ghost would
do about them; now I find my thoughts are here and there, without moving hither
and thither Body-like, and in a great thing or a small one, without being great
or small themselves; and thence I think I may freely gather, that Ghost would
do so too, which is of all things in the world the next to it, and the root of
it: Insomuch, that as there may dwell as many thoughts upon Regiomontanuses
Fly, or Tredeskins chained Flea, as upon a First-rate Kings man of War, or the
greatest Hall-place of the greatest Keisar, (while thoughts being off in their
whole kind from the works of Handycrafts, they must needs be off too from what
befalls them as such); so there may be likewise as much Soul in the shaplings
or tiny keeles of the great Malpighiuses eggs within the six hours setting, as
was in the foul stalking lundging body of that og of Bashan, at the utmost bulk
to which the Rabbis have beswoln him: And, to end, as much of Gods
Everlastingness in the shortest now, as in the longsomness of a thousand years,
and as much of his All-fillingness in the least of bodies, as in the greatest
throng of them: for why, much and little, short and long are no more akin to
Ghost or what holds to it, than thinking is to Body or its belongers; it being
as likely to take the scantling of a stone by a chain made of thought after
thought, which only haunt the ghost of a thinking Being, as to take the measure
of Gods All-fillingness from bulk or extention, which sticks as close to Body.

But there comes up another Argument by the by, which may happily at first
blush seem to have more tiew in it than all the stands we have met with
hitherto, and that is in short thus.

P. 383. Suppose God ten thousand years ago to have made a world, and then to
have unmade it, and after to have made this, or (which is all one) suppose this
to be benothing'd, and some ten thousands of years hence another to be made;
Now if there were not time between them, there would be one upon the nick of
another, when yet we have supposed a long while betwixt them; And if there
would be time between them, then we are quite broke, inasmuch as time may then
be unmade, and of it self, without timesom Beings.

To which the answer is, first: If it were not easier to take up things upon
trust, than to frame Arguments, we had never been surprised with this which
hangs so ill together: For to suppose God before any thing else was made to
make something, and then to unmake all that he had made, and leave nothing as
he found nothing, and yet to leave ten thousand years or some ten thousands; is
to suppose God to leave nothing, and yet to leave something: for ten thousand
years, or some ten thousands, are, in my mind, as much something as the other
were that were made nothing; and I believe it would hold any man as many
thousand years as there are years in the thousands, to bring it but cleverly
off, how ten thousand years between should not be time between, or how ten
thousand years should not be ten thousand years.

But taking it for granted that we shall be bated the supposition in this
unweildy draught of words, and only be brought to this straight or dead lift,
whether if God should make a world, and a while after annihilate or make it
nothing, and again should make another, and sometime after benothing that
likewise, and lastly, should over and above make a third World, would there be
Time between these made or unmade Worlds? and would one be before or after the
other, or would they not?

To this we answer round-dealing-wise, There would be no Time at all between
them, nor would one be before the other or after the other, nor, in any other
meaning than as they are in Gods Everlastingness, would they be together. The
reason of this short answer stands thus: There being nothing but everlasting
God besides them, in whom there is nothing of timesom onwardness, nor ground
upon which to fasten fore and aft, there can be no such thing as Time, or fore,
or aft, at all. And we are withal to know, that the ground why we give
afterness to some things in the World, is from the things that were former, so
as until we come at a first; and formerness to other things, from the things
that will be afterward, so as until we come to a last; insomuch as some things,
even in this World, may not be fore and aft, but only fore or aft: the first
thing in the world that was made being after nothing, for why, nothing was
before it; and the last thing in the world that shall be unmade, being before
nothing, because there shall be nothing after it: as what we gave answer about,
and namely, the whole world now in being, is neither before nor after; because
there is nothing besides but God, of whom it cannot be rightly said, he was
before or will be after, but that he always is.

If this should come unlookt for to the Readers understanding, it will may-hap
seem more kindly further on, when we come to strengthen it with an answer of
the same sort, about its twin-brother, outworldish emptiness.

The little that is yet behind, is the answer that our Author would fain give
to that most unanswerable Argument against a successive and divisible
everlastingness, and everywhereness; to wit, Whether the parts of it be finite
or infinite?

Which with him is twofold, 1. Enough or abundantly, 2. More than enough, or
superabundantly: Enough, by acknowledging that it cannot be answered at all,
(p. 402.) And then over and above, to that hard saying, Finite put to finite
cannot make infinite he says, A set number cannot indeed, yet nothing
withholds, but that from an infinite tale of finites there may at length arise
an infinite, as who should say, from an infinite twenty or twenty one, there
should start up an infinite: what you will; for every number being even or odd
as those are, there is not a pin to choose whether you take one of them or some
other; that must be as even or as odd to the full as one of them is, and that
at the last be such a number as you may put one more to unto all Eternity, or
be a numberless number, or a number which is not a number, which is the very
pith, and marrow, and heart, and strength of a fineness. And, as to the back
door that belongs to this, which is, that The number by which we are to tell
the finites that go to the making up of an infinite, is beyond the numbers of
Arithmetic, without all iffs and ands it is the very twin-trangham of a figure
beyond all the figures in Geometry; both which are to be understood by no other
thing in the world, but the own dear sweet friend of them, yeleped reason
beyond the reason of Logic.

But because the main Castleward to shroud these weaklings from blows and
qualmes, is no other, but its fellow Fierdhalf nothing called space or
roomthiness; which, that it is every way infinite, (though made up all of
finites,) is said to be as clear as the clearest thing in the world, (page
403): and it being as clear to us that it is not so, but bounded as well as
Time, we are, when it comes in our way, to lay down reasons; which, so much as
they will make for that, so much will they make against this.

Now having thus far unbenighted ourselvs, and cleared our way in the foregoing
from all that lumber that could hitherto be stumbled on, it is hoped we may have
leave to settle Gods whole Everlastingness, as untimesom, and altogether
unbeclogg'd with onwardness; and as for any other of the name that should be
outward, that the same is altogether nothing but the airiness of thinking: and
withal, that Time and timesom Beings, this time-lasting World, and every
while-being thing in it, is neither early nor late, as the ken is taken of it
by God Almighty; but that earliness and lateness sticks to the things made, as
made and not being unbeginningly, and so is only a tang, that all timesom
things have among themselves, and cannot be relisht by that everlasting Being
that made them, any more than we can relish his Everlastingness; but all the
things that are early or late to us, are always now to him.

Which is the first undertaking, in the sorting of things, so as our
understandings might best come at them, that is, by laying them as near as we
can to the understanding of that Being, who is so all Mind as to be nothing
Body: whence we have seen how the lastingness of the World and made things,
bears it self to such a Being; which was the uppermost thing, the mind was like
to start, in its thoughts about them.

CHAP. III.
THe next to this, is the Room that the World takes up; which body-haunter of
roomthiness, that we may rightliest know, we shall do by it as we did by
lastingness; (time and Room being fellows,) which as we brought for that end
before Gods Everlastingness, so we shall search what this will be, as it stands
toward Gods All-fillingness.

As then the abiding of the World from first to last, was nothing but a now to
Gods everbeingness, so the bulk of the World from least to greatest, will, I
think, fall out to be but a cleavless thing to his All-fillingness: For as Gods
Eternity is not endless longsomness, so neither is his Immensity unbounded
outstretchedness; but as his everness is all at once without before and after,
so his unmeetsomness is altogether, without here and there: and so still, as
the Worlds abiding being long, makes no length in his Everlastingness, but it is
yet as to that all at once, so its bulk being wide, makes no wideness in his
All-fillingness, but it is nevertheless, as to that, altogether: For, it is as
impossible that God should be in Room, which is one of the hangers on to Body,
as that he should be in Time, which is another. When therefore we say that God
is every where, it must have the same respect to Place, that his being past, at
hand, and to come, has to Time. As then God does as truly abide, after the way
of his everlasting nowness, as other things do after the guise of their timesom
running on and on, without being himself timesom, like them: So God is as truly
every where, after ways becoming his altogetherness, as other things are by
the way of their bulkiness, without being himself extended, like to them. And
as to those other stainings of the word as it is given to Body, we are wholly to
forewarn them in this business; for whereness is a word, which though the
Schools have marked for another thing than locality, yet betokens too much ex
analogia nostri, and, as it is often made to speak, is almost quite embrew'd in
Body if not altogether, our souls in the meaning of it, can hardly be said to
be any where; and I believe, if we were all Ghost, and nothing else in the
world were Body, we should not readily know what to do with it, or ever well
reach the meaning of it; for so much does it hang to motion, which I think is
altogether befasted to Body, that it is thought by those that can best brook the
word, that a thing may move from one whereness to another, as easily as Body
may from one place to another. Although I can frame in my mind as easily as
others, that ten thousand Angels as well as one, may be altogether on a needles
point, (they being all throwfaresom alike), yet it would crack my brain to find
so many whernesses there, to stow each of them in. Had there never been any
bodies, but only souls, made, I cannot yet think there would ever have been
such a question, as where are your thoughts? they being only said there to have
a whereness where bodies have a room.

Thus a Mathematical point or Geometrical figure are no where, good and evil
are no where, this Treatise, before written here, was no where; yet it as truly
was before the writing, (and so the others before the doing,) as it is now,
whilst written; the words are only here, the meaning's by them set forth, as
much no where as before: so true is it, that whatever is, is somewhere, is
untrue.

Now everywhereness, which is the word by which we set out Gods
All-fillingness, sounding as if it were a gathering together of all the rooms
that may be taken up in the World, or in unbounded boak without the World,
seems no more fit to mete out Gods Immensity by, than a chain of the nows of
Time are, by which to mete out Gods Eternity; the one speaking as much
division, as the other does succession. When therefore we say that God is every
where, we must mean that he is not so somewhere, as not to be elsewhere; and
that there is nothing there, but all things here to his unmetesomness, as there
is nothing past or to come, but all now to his everlastingness.

A thing is only there, to me, in behalf of my being here, and not there; for
when I am there, the thing is clothed with hereness: so because God cannot be
now here and not there, or now there and not here, it is clear that the
thereness or hereness was nothing belonging unto God, but grounded in the
things here or there; for in close speaking whilst God is every where, he
cannot be there, because there would be here to him, we are then speaking of
two things, by some such words as are bounded by one of them. And indeed
whereness is a word of so much narrowness, that it does not reach the All of
those things which it most cleaves to, that is, of bodies: forasmuch as it may
rightly be said the whole world is no where; for because we cannot step out of
the world and becken it or point to it, as there; nor while we are in it, say,
it is here, because it is as much there or yonder as here; nor can we say it is
every where, it is as much too little for that as too big for the other, and God
alone is, or can be so; it must then be remarkably no where, if so be, that
which is neither to be shown here nor there, nor to be understood every where,
be assignably no where.

What we gather hence, is not that the words are not to be used, or that it is
blameworthy in them that speak so, but only that we remember when we do, that
such words don't answer the thing spoken of so as they do bodies, though we
must not forsake them, only because we cannot frame others that will come
nearer; though they be not the best that were to be wished, they are for ought
is known, as good as any we can come at. Thus, if I say I love such a thing at
my heart, I do not mean you should understand me as if my love were seated any
where in the middle belly, as my heart is; if you rend out my heart it is not to
be found there, because it was a thing rooted in my manhood, not placed in my
body: so do but unstring my soul and body, though you leave my heart in the
same place, the thing is gone, and so gone as to be no where else too; and yet
I cannot speak plainer English, nor be better understood.

And this way of speaking has so good footing, that in the Book of books it
self, we find not only the same oftentimes, but even a step beyond it
sometimes; whilst not only the things of body are given to things not body, but
even bodyhood it self is. Thus we read of the body of sin, and the limbs of it,
or members upon earth, as uncleanness and worldly-mindedness; which
nevertheless are such moral beings, whose kind of existence is not a being any
where in the world, but according to, or swerving from a Law, which when they
do they only are, and when they do not are not, which fills up the whole of
their Being, without any further being any where.

Our souls are indeed so far tinged with body, that as it is hard for us to
think how there should be an abiding so unlike to ours, as we are creatures,
as not to be lengthned out after the rate that we are; so it is hard to think
there should be a vvhereness so unlike to ours, as we are creatures with body,
as not to be boakt out after the way that we are. Time not being wrought out
into any outvvard shape or roomthiness, vvherevvith to smite the sense, we can
more easily think it svvallovved up in Gods Everlastingness, in which we also
frame nothing of shape or bulk, than to have the worlds whole throng of hard,
vvide, and off-standing bodies, ingulfed in such an immensity as has nothing at
all of bulkiness in it.

Whereas now, we ought to mend this thought, by remembering that the things
that are hard, soft, vvide, off, stirred, and such like, are only so among
themselves; as all things touching senses, are only so to those that have them:
so that were all seeing things sightless, there would be no colors nor
shovvs; all hearers deaf, no sounds nor dins; all feelers numb, nothing
handlesom; all tastless, nothing relishing; all unsmelling, nothing scented.

Besides, were they all Ghost who are now body and ghost, there would be to
them nothing impenetrable, or that could not be drill^d through, nothing hard,
soft, bulkie or stirred; as there are no such things now either to God, Angels
or Devils, how strong soever it may be rooted in our minds, that a thick, hard,
stirred Being is so in it self, as well as to some other Beings.

To close up this, we are to wit, that those things that we get knowledge of
by the help of our senses, we know by ways more off from their kindly draughts
or ideas, than those we take in, by the workings of reason upon experiments
wisely made, and remarks heedfully laid: Thus the knowledge of heat that we
have from the feeling of it, is far more off from the right knowledge of it, or
such as may likeliest become God, than the notion of it according to the great
Lord Bacon, in his forma calidi; inasmuch as body, and the cleavers to it, are
further off from the God-like nature, than the soul is, and its ways of working
are.

Sense has so much to do in the mis-shewing or disguising of things to us, that
if there be but a great or little change in us, it is all one as if there were
such in them. Were we but so long clear of body, as to furnish an idea or
draught of all the laws of doing, ways, and powers of the Beings, to be set
awork in the framing of a Watch, such as we may best think a Ghost has; and
upon embodying again should find it of some hiew and bulk, with such and such
motions, hard, cold, dry, smooth or rough, and the like; hear it beat, smell to
it, and the like; the thing, though the same, would surely seem much another
thing to us, thus changed at home: Or did we but so take in things with the
naked eye only, as we do by the sundry ground glasses, or Telescopes,
Microscopes, Multiplying-glasses, Prisms, or through died glasses, the late
Empty Tubes, through the hollow of the hand, upon a piece of Perspective, we
must then hold, that which is now no bigger than a mite, to be as big as a
spider; what is far off, to be at hand; what of one color, to be of another;
what is flat, to be hollow; what is one, to be two or ten; especially if helped
on by such a sense of feeling as we have, when, laying one finger upon another,
we roll a pea upon a board; and such an hearing by some inward slight, as in
an echo, by an hollow without: so that we must needs then reckon the world
another thing from what it is, and as rightly too as we reckon it otherwise now,
inasmuch as we go upon the very same grounds.

Nor does reason mistake only when it builds upon sense, but when it deals too
with those lists and cravings that keep the lower house of the soul. Thus she
that is the darling of the Lovers heart, be she what she will, is the best in
nature; the more he loves, the better she is and does, and, as long as the fire
burns, holds on to be and do: but as soon as ever it begins to be winter with
the heat, it is spring with the faults, and as the one grows on to cold, the
other grows up to great: and all this, not because she is another she, but
because the love is another love. Now if we may be thus benighted in our petty
likes and dislikes, notwithstanding we have the light of reason to shine
within, and the whole World besides to set us right without, who are we that we
should take upon us to say, This wide World is that very same thing that sense
says it is?

And further, to beget wariness about sense; we may find that as it is too low
and scant to give us the marks of Ghost, or because its tools or organs are
sluggish, and, taking up room, can bring home no errands of moments or atoms,
it asking time and place, it seems, for the doing every thing in, that it does:
So on the other side, the soul is too high bred to give us any rational
accounts of the awarings of sense, as heat, cold, wetness, dryness, hardness,
softness; which had never been known by us, if we had only had that reason
which makes us men, and not those senses that make us animals or earthly
feelers.

Those things we feel, we don't know, nor can we by the sense we have of them,
give another to know, unless we could also make another to feel them as we do:
So that a blind man may talk as knowingly of colors, and be as well
understood, as one that can see; for that which I talk of color is quite
another thing than that which I see. A world of men have seen colors since the
beginning, but, for ought we know, no man could ever yet tell another what they
were; till to the brightning of our Island, our happy wonder of ingenuity, and
best broacher of new light, Mr. Isa. Newton, hit upon the thing that it is
indeed: and now we do know (which no man would ever have ghessed before,) that
white is a medly mingling of beams differently breaking or refrangible; we see
it no better than we did before. I remember that I once asked a blind man, who
had been so from his Infant Baptism (the same water that God in goodness
allotted to wash away sin, happening through cold and carelessness to wash away
his eyesight,) what kind of thing he thought whiteness to be? he answered
warily, That sure it must be a bright lightsom color: and what blackness was?
he said, That must be a dark color; which two took in all that he had to say
of colors, and that little too was uttered from the glimmerings of sight in
him; he having so much of the Moles eye, that if he held his face to the South
and looked up, he would say whether it were day or night. And if all our eyes
had been of that make, we should have known no more than those two, nor no more
of them neither. And what we do feel of them as we are, sets so close to us as
we are such or such, that whatever wants the tools that we have shall never
feel the things that we feel, the things being wholly begotten between the
organ and the object, the tool and that it works upon. Now God having no such
bodily organs by which to take in things secundum habitudines nostri, and such
an have-likeness being as needful on the behalf of the organ and object both,
for the begetting of a sensation or feeling, as the make of such a screw is, to
wind in to such another, or the mutual fitnesses and yernings of kind are, to
the begetting of the like in those that do so, it is clear he can no more be
brought down to do the one, than to that other. So that, that which to us is
World (seen or unseen,) to him is Being, life, might, springsomness,
self-entwining, law of doing, seed, teemingness, and such like. Thus day and
night, light and darkness, are both alike to him; 1000 years as one day, 1000
years to come as yesterday when it is past, past and to come as now,
impenetrable or unthroughfaresom as penetrable, body as emptiness, hot, cold,
wet, dry, hard, soft, cleavesom, and the like nothing at all (no more than they
would be to our own souls out of the body), heaven and earth not far and wide
asunder (nor to our own thoughts that can be now in heaven and the next now on
earth); lastly, all bodiship, with those its belongers which make it sensible
unto us, coming not at all into that idea that God Almighty frames of them, any
more than his idea of them comes into our feeling; and his idea or likeness of
them being nearer to that analogy they would bear to us were we all ghost,
inasmuch as he is so; it follows that there are no such things as we may think
belonging to extended bodies, sundred from our ghesses at them secundum
analogiam hominis, or the business they have to do one with another secundum
analogiam sui; bodies being one thing to us and themselves, another thing to
God and Ghost. So the wide, thick, all-to-be decked heap of visible beings may
be swallowed up in the altogetherness of Gods All-fillingness, as well as the
long chain of ages from the worlds first to its last, in the only one now of
his Everlastingness.

And this ends the second Head, wherein we were to show, How the Worlds
vastness behaves it self toward Gods Immensity. In both which, having seen
what the Worlds lastingness and roomth is, as it concerns that boundless Being
which is neither timesom nor roomthy, and what its bulk is to the same being
as immense, and to those ghostly beings which though they are in time are not
yet in any room; where it is found, that time has no length but as it looks to
timesom beings, nor has bulk vvideness or thickness but as it stands to body:
we have perhaps opened a fair gap, for the better knovving what the World is
unto our selves, who as we are men and made up of ghost and body both, are
even a part of it, and take up time and room in it.

CHAP. IV.
THe dealing or business that is betvveen body and body, being as real as that
betvveen body and ghost, and body and us who are body and ghost mingled; it
being as sure that one body cannot penetrate another, as it is that a ghost can,
that the whole throng of bodies and each one in it is extended, as that a
ghost is not so, and that a piece of body may be cloven asunder or stirred so
and so, as it is that a ghost can be neither, like it: having seen what body is
to God and Ghost, it seems now as much behoving us to sift out, what body is
to body and us. In the doing of which, we shall endeavor to show, how far
body or the world of bodies may be stretched out, how small a piece of body
may be crumbled, how swift or how slow either may be moved? And also,
because we find the stuff of body of a more flitting kind than the
ground-vvork or substance of ghost, How long it has or might have already
been, and how long it does or may last? And forasmuch as body may happily
shift its being as well as its seat, Whether there may not have been some
bodies or worlds heretofore, which now are not? And last of all, whilst one
may be a great way off from another, Whether some are not so far from our
place, as to be far also from the world in which we are placed? Of each of
these, as they will best fall in with that train of thoughts which we have
framed about them, without aiming at any better rangement for them.

The first Head about extension in the whole or the utmost reach of bodies,
will fall into these things; to wit, Whether the world be boundless or bounded?
And if bounded, what it is that bounds it; whether body or emptiness? And if
either, Whether they be bounded or not? which shall be likewise set down in
somewhat a mingled way, as they may lucken most readily to come into mind.

Having erewhile said, That manifold lengths of time coming one after other,
could never make out an Eternity, or a being boundless in abiding, so here we
say, That the cleavesom bitlings of body heapt one upon another, can never make
up an Immensity, or a being boundless in its bulk somness: but now the world is
all heapt up of such little bits: therefore we gather thence, that it cannot be
boundless in its bulk. The reason of the thing to me is clear thus. Every thing
that may be riven apieces may have its pieces told, and every tally by which we
tell things must be either even or odd: every one that is even may have one put
to it to make it odd, every one that is odd may have one put to it to make it
even, and every one that may have one put to it is not infinite: It follows
then, that if there be no parts but may be numbered, and no number but must be
finite; that whatever is made up of parts is finite too, its parts being told
by a finite tally.

Now as to a number beyond the numbers of Arithemetick, I must be so bold with
it, for once, as to ask, Whether it be even or odd? if it be either, we have
the same choaks for it that we had before; and if it be neither, then it is no
number: for every number (whether Arithmetical or Hyperarithmetical,) is even
or odd, though you take leave to eke it out beyond the bounds of Arithmetic,
and make it a greater number; it is to be understood you must not pull out the
pluck of it, and make it quite another thing from number: for that would not be
a number beyond Arithmetic, but a thing besides it; not an eking out in tale,
but a change in kind: and so you may as well call it a shooinghorn beyond the
numbers of Arithmetic, as a number beyond them.

That the world which is made up of parts finite should be infinite, is to me
as great a wonder, as that God should be finite: for I think it is as impossible
that that being which has nothing in it but parts finite should be infinite, as
it is that that being which has nothing in it but what is infinite should be
finite. I cannot see why there may not as well be finite things in the infinite
Being of God, as an infinite All from the finite parts of bulk; finite standing
off no further from infinite than infinite does from finite: it is even as broad
as it is long.

But because most men are willing to wave the boundlesness of the world, so be
it, they may but give it, name and thing, to that same emptiness that is
thought to be beyond it; we shall therefore to our power rumage in it with our
wonted freeness, that we may understand a little, whether it be so boundless as
it is thought to be, or whether there be any such thing at all? for having
already cut off its partner, eternal time, from the abiding of the world, we
are not o trust, if we can, to pare this same immense emptiness too from about
its selvedge.

To me indeed it is as likely, that the world it self should be boundless, as
that any outworldish emptiness about it should be so; that roomthiness being as
really something besides God as the world is. For what is really extended must
be really something, but that roomthiness is as really extended as it is at all;
extension or spreadingness being the very inwards, and indeed the very all of
it.

But the unluckiness on it is, that if outworldish boak be yielded at all, it
must needs be yielded infinite to boot; For why, there can be nothing thought
on, sleeping or waking, to bound it, but that same thought that pitches upon
bounds, slides on to roomthiness beyond the bounds, imaginary in infinitum, or
bound and room, bound and room in infinitum.

To say the truth of it, Some have been so forward to yield the boundlesness of
spatium extramundanum, that they have given it the right hand of fellowship
with God Almighthy; this roomthiness forsooth being needful for the very
existence of an immense God: thereby making it at once something, boundless,
and before God. Something, because needful for God to dwell in, and such
needfulness cannot be spoken of nothing: Boundless, because such is that Being
that must dwell in it: and before God, because it was that God might have scope
to be: and if God had made it, it must have been needlessly; for he might as
well have lived without it a maker, as no maker: besides, that a being should
make another that it self might have room to be, is the very height and depth
of nonsense.

And again, should this dreamt or imaginary space answer its name, and be no
more thing than a dream is, it is worse to think; how somewhat that is the
fondling of our addle brains should be needful to the existence of the ever
blessed God who made us, and the best brains we have to our heads too.

Now I think, that as Gods Everlastingness is in time, and boundlesly before it
as to imaginary years, without before and after, in an ever-being now; so Gods
All-fillingness is in the world, and boundlesly beyond it as to imaginary
worlds or roomthiness, without any roomthy spreadingness, in an indivisible
altogetherness.

For I bethink my self, that God is as boundless in his Almightiness as in his
All-fillingness. Now Gods Almightiness is within the least punctum physicum, or
dustling of body, ('it was made and is kept in being by Almightiness). But Gods
Almightiness being God himself, himself is there altogether: and if the
Almighty be there wholly, the All-filling is there too in like manner; for both
is one, and less than wholly they cannot be there, because less than wholly
they cannot be. And we may as well dream of boundless imaginary stuff for
Almightiness to work upon, as boundless imaginary roomth for All-fillingness to
dwell in; (if it be enough for his Almightiness to work inwards upon his
Essence, so it is too for his All-fillingness to dwell inwards in the same.) God
then being as Almighty in the least brack of the world as in the whole world,
he is as all-filling in the same too as in the whole: and if that were gone
too, he would be as all-filling without it as with it; for he was as immense
before there was an atome of body or room, as he is now when there are both:
and so it follows, there needs neither real nor imaginary scope to make way for
a boundless all-fillingness.

I remember the excellent Dr. Hen. More, whose soul may have roamed as far into
these scopes and vastnesses as most men's in the world, has not only (in his
Enchirid. Metaph.) made Ghost, as such, extended; but has started such a
boundless roomthiness, and as needful as God is (if I understand him) as is a
kind of ghost inwardly drilling through the All of body, and such a one too as
is so far a likeness of God himself, that it wants nothing of him but only his
life and working; and somewhere else finds in his heart to say, That there is a
space wherever God is or any self-subsistent Being, is as plain to him as the
(...): but, for my share, laying aside all humor of thwarting my betters, I do
as verily believe, as I do any thing I have not a word of God for, that there
is roomth no where but where body is, and that ghost is so far from needing
space to be in, that when it is in a world where room is, it is as far from
taking up room as it is from putting on body: nor can I but wonder, that one who
lives so much in the soul, and so little in the body as he seems to do, should
find it quite otherwise. That worthy Gentleman, I do think, had his reasons for
so steady a belief, and of that weight to him, that his own are wont to be to
others; the slighting of which would not strengthen, nor the valuing of them
weaken, those of ours on the other behalf, which are mainly the following.

First, I see this roomthiness in the whole, must as well have unassignable
parts or such as cannot be laid out, as body has assignable or such as can; and
though they be unlaid out in themselves, they may be laid out by body laid in,
as all the parts of that room in which the world is may now be. Now I cannot
understand, how that which is made up of parts, laid out or unlaid out, which
are all finite, should it self be infinite: and that all are so I am sure,
because those I know, which are altogether like the rest which I do not know,
are so: and as for parts more than all those that are all thus finite, they
cannot be: and if all that a thing be made up of be finite, I cannot for my
heart think how the whole, which is no more than all, should be infinite; every
thing being the same with all the parts of it taken together.

Secondly, That such a kind of thing must be, that God himself may be, strikes
me with too great an awe to speak it. They who hold this wild emptiness, hold
also (as they must) its independency on, or unbeholdenness to, God himself: Now
who would think that there were such a thing that God should be beholden to,
for the Being which he has, and that not beholden to him for the being which it
self has? And to say, that both are eternal as well as boundless, and so, one
was not before the other, because neither did ever begin to be, will take off
nothing of the hardness: For, (not to say, that if one could have been before
the other, space had been the eldest,) though one was not before the other in
standing, the one was worthy before the other in causality; though God was
never the cause of room, yet room was ever the cause of God: for that was that
God might have leave to be; and had not that ever been, God had never been, had
not that ever been without him, he had never been within that; its being making
way for his being, its being room making way for his being God; who could not
be it seems, because he wanted room to be in, though that could be room without
his being in it, or would be if he were out of it.

Besides, they that bestow extension upon any thing else but body, as
emptiness, ghost, and thence upon God himself, are not, I fear me, very well
aware of its ill-lookt followers. For whoever makes God a boundless extended
being, may upon the same score make him a boundless extended triangle, (one
figure being as much extension fashioned as another, it is neither here nor
there which:) some figure or other he must be (as to kind) because it is as much
of the nature of extension to be of some shape; as to be of some roomth, unless
we should here borrow a bucket somewhere and draw up a figure too beyond all
the figures in Geometry, out of the same depth with the number beyond all the
numbers in Arithmetic. Already, it seems, God must have as many shapes in his
unassignable parts with us, as all the things of the world have in those that
we have sense of; their shape being nothing but their bulk so cantled out: and
what there is of God beyond the world, being of the same piece with that of him
which is in it, must also put on shape as that does; inasmuch as roomthiness
there, can no more be without it than roomthiness here. Whence would arise what
I am not forward at all to speak of; an harshness in these things not being so
harmless as the cutting of Cork, whereby, though you saw and wring the ears
with the sharm, yet still it is but a light business you have to deal with; and
I am thinking the unhandsomness will lose nothing of its distastfulness for not
being named only out of dread.

But now one reason at least why the understanding has been robletted in to
these wastes and wildnesses is, the forefearing, that if emptiness far and wide
were not granted, the world would not be bounded; wherefore rather than make a
boundless world, many have chosen to yield a boundless scope beyond it. But we
are at no such pend, as we should be fain to fly to either the one or the
other; for the world is not bounded by any thing beyond, nor ought any such
thing, or kind of thing to be imagined: but it is enough that it is bounded by it
self; its boundedness, where it is bounded, arising as unavoidably from its very
kind, as its extension where it is extended.

The leading mistake of all, I think, with freedom to others, is this: We first
roved in our minds at an unbounded emptiness, and then thought put the world in
the midst of it. Whereas we were alike mistaken in the middle and in the thing
too, both which may thank haste; for before any thing was made there was
nothing, and therefore we should have staid and thought of nothing, but only
infinite power, wisdom, goodness, truth, and what other things there are in
God, whereby he vouchsafes to make known himself to us. Now, for a Being whose
very Essence is no other than these, roomth or space is no more needful, than
for the dwelling of the good things of the mind and soul under those names, or
than there is for Universal, or boak, as taken in the Mathematics, stripped out
of body. You may as well be earnest for a finite room for one, as an infinite
for the other, (and perhaps better too, inasmuch as one may be had, whatever
the other may.) If it be said these are other kind of beings, (as Moral,
Metaphysical or Mathematical.) I answer, So is God too, and more other than
they are, because boundlesly other. Besides, I think a being, that is the term
of Creation, or a piece of Gods handiwork, may live without any room, as do
the Angels, and would do if world should be no more. If we can but get thus far
then, as to think there was no roomthiness before the world, (If we think there
was, we find at what peril we must;) it is easy enough to think further, that
there is none beyond it. For it is but thinking the world was made and nothing
else besides it, which surely is true, and the thing is done: for if it were
not before the world was made, nor made with the world when the world was made,
it never was made, nor never was.

But we are not yet out of the mire, nor like to be, until we can fairly rid
our selves of that load of objections with which the men of depth and quickness
have even overburden'd the thing we hold. All, or all the weightiest of which,
that we can feel for, shall be dispatched in manner following.

Obj. 1. Suppose we then with the learned Dr. More, that an Archer were so
seated at the rim of the world, as to level his arrow right through the
selvedge of it outward; there being full strength and right aim given it,
Would the arrow fly, or Would it not?

Ans. It would, and it would not, and either according as you make the
selvedge. If you make it as round as a Mathematical circle, it would not fly:
for arrow standing in a straight line, from the innermost or center to the
selvedge; and there being no more reason why it should warp to the right hand
than to the left, why this way rather than that, it must needs stir no way; but
stick with its head at the selvedge, though it has all the force given it that
strong-bow and arm-strong can make together. But the shapes of nature being of
another kind of make than those of handy-works, it is very likely that the
roundness of the world (if yet it be round) is somewhat otherwise than a true
Geometrick circle. As we see the ring of the Earth, a far less Ball, ends not
in lines evenly drawn from the center thither, but is bounded with hills and
dales; and both earth and water with manifold unevennesses: much more then are
we to ghess such in the bigger roundle of the world. Whence it is, that the
arrow may have, by some lucky rising or other, a Bias given it this way or that
way, as a Coach may be so tickly set upon the surface of the earth, as to give
it self a trundling, one way or other. So then, the motion would be, as
touching the world, in a bow or arch of a circle, upon the very selvedge of it;
but, as touching the Marks-man, in a line straight enough on to the eye. For it
flying in a line as far off as it can, according to the steering that was given
it, it would be seemingly as straight as it can be at all; for the nearer the
eye comes to a great thing that is bowing, the less bowing it seems. When we
first make a Ness at Land too, it seems more a Ness than when we are less off
at Sea; but when we are just at shore, it seems to lie in a straight line with
the rest of the Coast. And as we are not aware of that bow, which is made by
all things darted or shot in the air, supposing the whirle of the earth;
because we our selves are running the same round (as the great Galileo has
altogether made out): so neither do we ken that bow that is made by the
wheeling of a Chariot onwards upon the round surface of the earth (whether it
stirs or stands still); but we see it run as much flatwise or in plano, setting
aside the little risings and fallings of uneven ground, as if the outside of
the earth were a shire flat or level. Nor could Sir Fra. Drake have ever
gathered from the eye, that he sailed otherwise than in a level; when yet he
sailed in a circle round about the earth. As then, whatsoever moves as much in
a flat as it can for the earths rim, we reckon to have moved in a flat
altogether: so whatever flies in as straight a path as the bow of the worlds
bigger rim will give leave, we, if there, would count wholly straight.

And that such seeming streightness would not show sidewise but forwards, may
be gathered from hence. If I were to look through the earth at an enlightened
hole or Well, reaching from me to him that sets foot to foot with me on the
other side, the hole would seem all downwards to me, although in it self it
were half downwards half upwards: As well then may an arrow gliding on the
selvedge of the world, seem to me, there standing, all upwards and nothing at
all sidewise.

But to give the objection all the lifts we can, Suppose we instead of this
Shooter, a man leaving his side against the selvedge of the world, with his arm
down by it, Could he spread forth his arm or could he not? If he could, then he
did it in that emptiness which is gainsay'd: For we will think him to bear it
that way, and for the nonce to hinder all other ways: and if it should but
upon the shove fly upwards or downwards, or otherwise than he aims it, he
would quickly be aware of it, by the change of that posture which it would then
have to the rest of his body. And if it could not, when thus hemmed in, be put
forth into the emptiness at all, What hinders it?

To this we answer in the first place, It Is hugely questionable to me, Whether
such a posture may be allowed as standing with the loadstoneships or magnetisms
of the world, and the ballancings of a body, such as that of man's is. For as we
see it is impossible to have the earth, (in this our roundle) otherwise than
beneath us; so it is agreeable, that we cannot otherwise have the heaven, in the
world, than as to sense above us. The thing taken up then, grates as much upon
the face of Dame Nature, as to suppose a man lying along in the open air at
level, or in a line parallel to the plane of the Horizon.

But secondly, Bating the Objection all this seeming roughness, We answer: If
the man were so laid at the worlds selvedge, as to have it on the side of him,
not above his head, his arm hanging by the same side; if by a sudden rush of
the spirits into it, he should give it an heave outward, and from the same
inward free spring of motion should keep it from slipping awry: then would not
the arm stir at all, there being no place left for it to stir into, it being
all one as if he should thrust it against some hard body at rest, of too stout
a withstanding to yield way or give back. If it be further said, it must sure
fly outward, because it is lifted that way, and there is nothing to forbid its
coming there: it is further answered, The knack or contrivance of the Frame of
the world forbids it; and that is something, and something too as powerful to
check or bind motion, as the way-laying of a gross unweildy body, or any thing
else that we, by sense and trial, find enough to stop the career of a body in
its swiftest hurry.

If this answer seems harsh or stretched, we shall easily slacken and soften it
by a clearer Instance nearer home. Suppose we then a bore through the heart or
center of the earth from outside to outside, into which let a man be thought
falling down: when he comes at the center he falls no further, but is as surely
stopped there, as if the hole were bored no further, but had the whole pillar of
the earths half-thwart line, or semidiameter of even bore to withstand it. Now
in this Instance it may as well be said, there being nothing in the Tube to
hinder, Why should not the man fall further, the air of the Well being all of a
make? What could not stop him in one place could not in another. And indeed, if
the air upon any score could check the downfall, it would sooner do it at the
top of the earth, where the spring of the air below was stronger, though its
weight aloft lighter; than in the middlemost, where the pent or bear of it
beneath was nothing at all, (there being no beneath at all,) though the
weight above much more, the spring of the earth over-ballancing the weight of
it as to power: which perhaps is one reason why all dovvnfals hasten their
speed, by how much the nearer they come to the earth. Now the answer to the
Phoenomenon is this, That the reason why it stops there, is, not the meeting
with any body there of force enough to stand against the shock of its motion,
but only the nice contrivance of the worlds Frame: and more especially the
magnetisms and poyses of the earthly Vortex, which will not allow an heavy
body left to it self within a flovvsom one that is lighter, to buoy up.

Which business of deadning the motion of a stirred body, not from body, but
the law of body, puts me in mind of bodies or a man's being stirred up from
rest, without any jog from body that we are aware of, but mainly from some of
these hidden working laws that round the world. Our sleep is called rest, and a
waking out of it, a being stirring: now it is easy to mark that we are thus
stirred by those wide and unseen laws that wield the day, while we for little
dream of it. Thus our time of waking or stirring is the morning, from that even
share of refreshing sleep, as one would think, that we are wont to take the
night before: But it is shrewdly to be mistrusted, that something a great deal
further off, and broader spread, has some kind of tamperings here. For if you
mind it, you will find, an hundred to one else, That whether you go to bed at
8, 9, 10, 11, or 12 a clock at night, you shall wake at your wonted hour next
morning; (little otherwise whether it begin to rain late in the evening, at
midnight, early or late in the morning, it does likely hold up, as we say, by
that time the Shrews have dined): which cannot be from that measure of rest,
and new breed of quickners that have befallen the body in the night; for why,
there has been so much odds in the hours of sleep. It seems then, that the
thing that calls us up is Morningness, or that woof and plight that the whole
ticklish frame of worldly beings are wheeled into at such a tide of day. Which
we should never have sprung by hunting for, had we not thus been made aware of
it, in that we find there is somewhat in it, that firks us more at such a nick
of time to wake and stir, than the wont that we have got of resting so many
hours, can bind us down to bed and sleep.

And here indeed it is mainly to be heeded, That we are by no means to look upon
the world as a great heap of fast and loose bodies hudled up together at sixes
and sevens by have and carelessness, or an hugger-mugger of meddlesom beings all
at jars: but a curious frame of well-ranged bulks so featly set together by a
boundless cunning, that should but any one pin of it be misdriven, or the
running of its least wheel slipped or jostled, you hazard the cracking and
splitting of the whole. Whence it is, that the least bitling of it will so far
club and fall in with the laws that bind the whole Set, that we can sometimes
force bodies to close with the woof or tenor of the whole, though it lies cross
to those little businesses which they seem to have been set about in their
narrow homes: as may be made out by instances, enough to fill up a book of
bulk, bestowed upon us from that wealthy and yet growing storehouse wherewith
the Royal Society have enricht the world, and singly from that of the Noble Mr.
Boil the glory of it, and Englands too as well as the great wish of the whole
world besides us. He that will but weigh and ponder in his mind what at first
sight puts forth it self, when looking on a Watch, where the single shove or
heave of the spring, which if the pieces of the Watch were unhinged and born
upon by it would only be pusht forwards or by-wards, puts the Watch thus fadg'd
together and in tilter into motions round, right on, level, swingling,
forwards, backwards, upwards, downwards, and otherwise, all because it is a
knack or engine: and shall further mark, (the Watch-wrights craft being not
only the Ape of Nature, but the very Tool, still in her hand,) that if Nature
should but flinch back her hand, or the world that is round about it should but
be plucked away from it, our Watch would without more ado be utterly unwatcht;
its being in the world being as needful to its being a Watch, as its being made
by the skill of a Watch-maker: the whole Watch being nothing else but a cunning
and clever way of laying bodies to the wheels and springs or ballancings of
Nature, as its pieces are put to the spring that is so craftily lodged in it by
the Workman. Nothing less than a world being able to stand upon its own legs,
or do any thing after it is made; all our knicknacks are but engines within an
engine, engines of the Craftsman within the machina mundi, or a Cog put into
Natures wheel, which if one did not stir the other would not, any more than a
mill would be that it is made for, if the world did not help it to vvind or
water to set it a vvorking, as well as stuff of which to make it. He, I say,
who will but weigh and scan these things, will at length have some lovv and
underly rovings at, or at least admirings of that height and depth of
workmanship, that this curious world is wrought up to.

But it is further objected from the same learned hand, Though the arrow shoved
by body, or the arm yerkt by spirit enlivening body, will not be gotten into
this vacuum extramundanum, yet an Angel unencumbred with body may be there, and
help either thither. For if Angels were before the world, and the first ofGen.
should mean only the works that are seen not those too that are not seen or
were the first days work, and so existing before the world was such as it is as
they shall after the breaking up of the world by fire, or being no ways
beclam'd with body as to ubiety or whereness, or may be wherever God is, who
must be in outworldish wastes, then may we imagine them there now, and carrying
the arm or arrow thither?

Answ. This Objection as fast as it comes, comes yet too late: For we have
already bereaved Ghosts of place, and tied up that attribute or belonger to
bodies only. So that it is as impossible to seat an Angel in outworldish
emptiness, as in the world it self; and as impossible to seat or stow it in
this world, as to seat moral virtue or a Mathematical point here. It Is indeed
such a great bellied truth that body only can be in a room, that it has another
truth in the womb of it, which is, That no body but such as is lodged by with
or among other bodies is in a room: For to be in a room is to be in such a
room, or in a room that may be shown, and such a shown room as that wherein
another body is not. So that if there were but one body, it could not rightly
be said to be in a room, but only to be. And in truth of speaking, the whole
world is in no place or room, as bearing no stowsomness to any other body about
it; for want therefore of another body, near to or far from which it should be
placed, it loses its stowsomness or location. Every place of it the meanwhile
being in a place, as having nearnesses or farnesses between each other within
the great verge; while the whole must needs have them from without, or else can
have none at all. Inasmuch as it cannot be said of the world, it is in this
place, or that, or some other place besides, because this and that, and some
other, would be all one, the world taking up no less than all that is; nor that
it is here or there or somewhere else, because there would be here, here there,
and somewhere else no where else, the world filling up all wherenesses; all
which would be an ill kind of medly: Therefore it should seem that it cannot
but harshly be said, that the world has a placeness or whereness at all. In
short, Room is rather in the world than the world in room, as thinking is in
the soul, not the soul in thinking. So that I believe we should never have
dreamt of stowing any thing in a room, if our minds had not first given us that
the room was bigger than the thing to be bestowed; any more than we should have
thought of putting a thing into a box, without we had first thought the box was
so much bigger as to hold it.

The same likewise, as to another thing befalls the Mininium quantum, or the
Least share of the world. Cleavesomness we know is the great hanger on to body;
but yet the least brack of body cannot be broken a pieces, because it is already
the least: yet it is as really body as that piece which can, and no whit nearer
ghost than it was when knit to more. So place is another thing that haunts body
as much; the whole world in the mean time not being in a place, and yet it is
never the nearer being ghost: for that the one has too little bulk to lose any
and yet be, the other too much to have any thing bigger wherein to take up
room, or besides whereby to be placed. Yet these belongers to body are helpful
enough, wherewith to set forth the nature of the things to which we bequeath
them: For we are to understand, that the ends and bounds of natural beings have
things spoken of them much otherwise than what becomes their whole, or the
bigger parts to which they belong. Thus supposing, that as time had a beginning
so it should have an end, and only God himself to be after this world as he was
before it, then the kindliest attribute of time, which is successiveness in
abiding, would not be true of the beginning and the end of it. For if the first
now were successive, it was not the first: for why, it followed a former; and
the last now could not abide, for if it did, it was not the last. When
therefore we say, All time has fore and aft, we must bar the beginning which
had not fore, and the end which had not aft: in the mean time it still holding
good enough, that time is a successive or lengthning kind of abiding. The
beginning or end of time being no more time (as we call it) than the least part
is the whole, and the definition or whatness of a thing ought to to be of a
thing as a thing, not of the least or greatest, first or last part or a thing,
as such part.

But to strain this yet a little further: Suppose God Almighty to have made
another world beyond, or which is better, besides this; which being a gathering
of bodies, may be said to be somewhere, and somewhere too where this world is
not: and there being our world also, it may stand so or so unto ours, and ours
so or so unto that, and thereupon both of them be in a place, and either near
to or far from each other: and all this farness or nearness, or way of standing
off, by the bare making of a world over and above this, without the making any
thing of scope or roomth betvveen. Therefore whatever there would be of such
scope or roomth betvveen two such worlds, must needs before the worlds so
made: and, as it follows, must be the same with that spatium imaginarium
which we have been so shie of ovvning all along.

Ans. To overlook the uncouthness of the thing, We will be so kind to the
supposition of more worlds, by Almighty power, as to let it go for a thing
that may be, though it be a great deal more likely, as we may happily show
beneath, that it may not be than that it may: And in plain English answer,
That such a world besides this, would neither be far from it, nor near to it,
or any vvays meddle or make with it, any more than if this were the only
world, or if instead of two worlds you should there suppose two Angels. For
the clearing up of which we are to understand, That unto a stovvsomness or
local respect betvveen two stovved beings, it is not only needful they should
be both bulky; upon which foot we have taken away all stovvsom medlings
betvveen the world and God, betvveen the world and ghosts, or between God and
the world, and ghost and the world, because but one of them is bulky: but it is
also behoveful there should be something besides the things which are stowed,
to which roomthiness should as much belong; two roomthy beings bearing no
stowsomness to each other, upon the account of their being two or two roomthy
beings, any more than two ghosts: but also upon the score of roomthiness put
between them. Now room between these two worlds being that which is denied, the
argument brought to prove it must by no means be allowed to suppose it. Imagine
we now two Angels point blank over against each other, in the hem or rim of the
world, there is room between, but no roomthy or stowsom respect; because the
two things that are there, are such as cannot be put into a place there, and
all local habitude or behavior must be between two things or more, in a place
so or so. Then let us suppose in the stead of an Angel, some remarkable body;
there is one of the terms, body placed, and there is roomthiness between that
and the other boundary or term: but because that other is not also body, nor
can, for want of being so, take up room, the local respect is shier lost, for
nothing but because the third thing is no roomthy being. A ghost being in it
self not roomthy, it cannot bear any roomthy behavior toward bodies that are
so, any more than bodies that are bulky, can bear immaterial respects or
thoughtsom behaviors toward ghosts that are so; roomthiness being as much
nothing to a ghost, as thinking is to a body. Think any what they will, the
world is what it is and bodies do what they do: so let roomth be, a ghost
thinks and does the same as if roomth were not. They are things that are off in
their whole kind, and one does nothing like the other: So that you may as well
threap one down, that a ghost is heavier or lighter, colder or hotter, wetter
or dryer, harder or softer, whiter or blacker than a body, as to say it is
further or nearer to it, above it or beneath it, a furlong on the right hand,
or a furlong on the left in any other than in a borrowed meaning. As we cannot
say that a body has an inch or an ell of thinking, an ounce or a pound of
understanding or willing: for though body and inch, or ounce agree well enough,
yet the third thing in the bunch, that is thinking, will not be brought to
stick to either, (without it be in such borrowed meanings as when we say, The
love of the world is near the heart, or the fear of God far from it, thoughts
heavy in grief, light in gladness, softness of mind, hard thoughts, and the
like.) As in our former Instance, body at one side of the world, and room from
thence to the other side, did close well enough; but then ghost at the end of
it will stick no more to it, than birdlime will to a thought.

Moreover yet, That it cannot be said of a Ghost it is further or nearer to a
body given, may hence, I think, be seen. The reason why we say this is further
off than that from another, is not only because I came lay a longer line between
them while so far asunder, but that it will also take a longer time to bring
them close together. Now the motions (if we may call them so) of ghosts being
all in an instant, (as the darting of our thoughts are through the world,) they
can both come home in the same time. If then they come home neither sooner nor
later, nor did they lie off either nearer or further. If their coming together
must be measured by the same time, their lying asunder must be meted by the
same metwand. So that which is nearer, must be as far off as that which is
further, and that which was further, as nigh as that which was nearer; which
speaks aloud that nearness and farness had nothing to do with their being what
they were. To a ghost the whole world and the least bit of it are all one. A
ghost at one side of the world is as near the other side as if it were in the
middle, and in the middle as near as if it were at the edge. Now the whole
world bearing no cleavesom behavior to a ghost, it is impossible the whole or
any part of it should bear a local. If we our selves were not body as well as
soul, our understandings would never have coped with such a thing as placeness
or stowage at all. If then we suppose a being that is bulkie, and nothing about
it that is so, or two beings that are bulky and nothing between them that is
so; though both these taken in themselves are, after a sort, and like nothing
but themselves, in a place, yet they have no local respect to one another: that
being in a place which they have, speaking nothing which belongs to them beyond
their own bounds or outsides, and is nothing in the world but their own
roomthiness, and all the unlikeness between them and ghost as to stowage is,
that as to within they are roomthy, and so in place, or rather place it self;
but as to without, there belongs nothing such to them any more than to ghost.

If besides the two worlds we should suppose manifold ghosts laid between them
(which may as well be as our thoughts are while we make the supposal) still
they would bear no place-like respect. For as the placing of body betvveen
two ghostly beings, would not give them a placely behavior; so the stovving
of a ghostly being as a middle thing betvveen two bodies, would not give them
any such behavior neither. If then ghosts betvveen the two worlds would not
give it, surely nothing at all betvveen them could not. That cannot do this one
thing, that can do nothing at all.

But we may further be tvvitted with this, If there be nothing betvveen the
two worlds as we have ansvvered, then the rims of them would touch.

To this we have two or three things to give in. And in the first place, We
say, The catch is so unphilosophical, that that which gainsays it most, is
most true. If nothing were between them, the side of one would not butt upon
the other, but be inlaid in the other. That one body should touch another, it is
altogether needful that something should be betwixt them. For we are to mark,
that the smoothest body in being has more or fewer unevennesses, or ridges and
furrows, in its outerness or surface. The utmost smoothness we can come at by
tools or otherwise, is full of such little ruggednesses, between which lie as
many little holes of air; which holes if they could be filled up, or the little
ridges and knolls brought down to a level with them, so as the surface might
not be some airsom body, but all such thick or fast body, then this body laid
to another, would be so far from touching it, that it would be no other than
one with it, and the nearer any body comes to this plight, the nearer it comes
to inlaying or oneness. The pieces of a body do not pierce one another, but are
only clapped together at their little smoothnesses as close as they can snug, and
held there by the poysings of the world. Thus we see two pieces of flat polisht
marble laid one upon another, are either inlaid secundum quid or after a sort,
that is, as to such parting as may be made by drawing them asunder upwards or
downward, or else they are in a middle between onlaid and inlaid, which is a
thing for which we want a word; for the hundredth part of that power that is
but enough to sunder two such flat abutting marbles, is more than enough to
break up the very inlaying of a sponge.

That stounding and surprising Essex Writer in his Dialogues de Mundo, roundly
bears us down, That two such worlds would touch without any more ado; there
being no off-standing betwixt them, because nothing at all between them. And
all bodies standing off from each other do so, by reason of off-standing or
roomth put between them. And as it follows, Two such worlds must club together
and become one; and upon that ground he shows A moreness of worlds would be
impossible.

But now we are to show, That that which makes two sides of two bodies touch,
is not the not having roomthiness betwixt them. There lies no roomthiness
between the soul and the body, nor between God and the world, and yet they do
not touch, any more than two bodies would do that are off from each other. But
it is also needful there be no possibility of putting a quantum or roomth
between them, where indeed they do touch; as only those things may touch that
have a mayness or possibility of having roomth put between them. To make one
body butt upon another, it is not enough that nothing sensible be between them;
but it behooves them also, that they be the nearest together, that they can be
and not be one. But we have already taken away all show of nearness and farness
from the two bulks, by shutting out the middleness in which such nearness or
farness must needs be pitched. Those bodies or beings that cannot have a placely
respect, cannot have an abutting or touching respect.

Thus on the other hand, the putting of a bulky middleness between two ghosts,
it is not enough to set them at such a farness from each other. Suppose two
Angels to have been before the world in their agreeable wherenesses, after the
making of the world, without any change in their unbodylike way of being
somewhere, one to be found in the roundle of the Moon, another in that of the
earth; extended body is now between them, without the least distance or
off-standing arisen between them. For before the world there was no
off-standing betwixt them, all extension being then unmade, and they holding
the self-same wherenesses, must also have the same non-distance after the world
made. Every thing while it holds the same whereness, keeps also the same things
to be spoken of it as to whereness.

If those sides between which nothing is, do touch and become one, Then if all
the world were unmade but Sun and Moon, they two should forthwith jump into
one; and it would be hard enough to say what it were, Whether a Sun, or a Moon,
or neither? supposing that by Almighty power their Sunship and Moonship might
be kept by them, without worldship.

Again, If between which nothing is put, the sides would touch, according to
sound and right speaking, Then beyond which nothing is put, the selvedge is
infinite. So it falls as hard upon the Cartesians and the Whitings, for an
infinite world, which neither of them dare speak in words, but shuffle it
indeed: emptiness or spatium imaginarium with them, being as verily nothing, as
that which is imagined between the two sides of the vessel emptied of all its
body between them.

And now by driving thus far, We have gained ground for the answering that
puzling argument of the foresaid Doctor, for distance in vacuo, in his
ingenious Canto of Infinity of worlds. Suppose the sky all swept away from
Saturn to the Sun, the Planets still holding their rooms, and holding on their
roundings as they did before, let then an Astronomer take their heights: The
Question is, Whether their Parallaxes would be the same, or other, or none at
all?

I answer upon the Supposition, (which is wide enough from what is natural, and
perhaps from what may be too against nature: for that which claws away world
from about them, would, it is like, wring out their Planethood from within
them.) There would be no Parallaxes at all, no beams of light to take
Parallaxes by, no throughfarings of the least steams or reekings of bodies,
from one globe to another or from our earth to any of the globes, nor any power
to shoot forth any body from one to the other, by any impetus or darting
whatsoever. Though the kindred between these things should be still left, yet
the gossipred would be quite taken away. Though all should jump in this one
thing, to wit, in being Planets as before, yet they could neither speak with,
nor make one another, (if I may word it so much Yeoman-wise,) nor have any more
to do with one another than if there had never been dealings between them; that
by which they meddled and made each with other being taken away. As on the other
side, we find some bodies amongst us hold up a Gossipred, that seem to have
little or nothing of kindred; as may be seen between jet and straw, loadstone
and iron, with some others of that hooking kind: where, setting aside their
angling and groping one for another, there are as few things cleaving to one,
to be met with in the other, as in most twoes in the whole world. In a word,
the business here would be much at one with that of two worlds spoken of
before; one being as free from fellowship and dealing with the other as they
were, or as would be between our earth and so many Angels, having supposed
dwellings there, where those Planets have such place. But as for their motion
in ring or circular, that must not be yielded; for that seems as hard to be in
vacuo, as for a ghost to stand still in pleno.

But once more to take off all show of strength from that way-layer, to wit,
the sides of the vessel must needs touch between which nothing is: We will but
lay it down thus. Take we a square body in the world unevenly sided, out of the
hollow of this take we then (in our minds) all body whatsoever, leaving nothing
at all. The ingenious Des Carts and others tells us, The sides for that trick
alone would touch. But now we say stiffly, and will stand to it so, That the
sides would not only not touch, but be so far, in part, from touching, that
they would, to rights, be further asunder. For the off-standstanding or
distance between them being to be met with only in the body that lies between
them, and the body space and distance which lay nearest between them being
taken away, they can only be meted by that which lies furthest off; those
bodies being further off that are by all measure found to be so. Thus the
middle point in one of the sides, for that it cannot be meted by a straight
line drawn from it to its overthwart, but only by a crooked line of three sides
and two corners tracing along the surface of the hollow, must as needs be
further from it than before, as this crooked line that goes thus far about to
mete it now, is longer than the overthwart straight one by which it might have
been meted before.

But it being easy for me here to Object it to my self, I may think it is as
easy for another to do it, That then two bodies keeping the same place in the
world, or standing stark still, may yet change place as if they stirred out of
it: which seems to thwart at an high rate.

To which I answer. If the world in which they are, be changed, it is no wonder
if their place in it be changed also; or if that by which their distance be
meted, be taken away, is it, that their distance should be so too: a distance
that cannot be measured being none at all. But by supposing this emptiness, the
world is not what it was, but by so much less as our mind took away: as, if the
body made nothing should again be made there, it would be by so much bigger as
that was big; the nearness taken away by one deed, would be brought again by
the other; and to take away place, or to take away the body placed, comes all
to a reckoning. I am in the room where I now stand, about sixty miles from
Westminster Abbey, If you start that sixty miles further, though I stand still,
I am so much further from it as if both had started three miles apiece: but if
both it and I stand still, and a square cut of earth be dug between us, from
the Eastern shore as far as to the Westward, I am as near still by water, but
so much further by land as I am fain to go about for the sake of that cut
betwixt: but if you empty it as well of water as you did of earth, I am just so
far from it by water as I was by land, and am only as near to it as ever I was
by air. So if I were of the winged kind, I might fly to it through the Sky,
as well as I could walk to it by land or row and sail by water: but if you
empty out the air too, and leave nothing, I am then so much further from it all
three ways: and if I would come nearer to it, I must either have a bridge of
body laid between, or else must walk, or row, or fly about. So near one thing
is to another as it can come to be, and no nearer: If then I can come no nearer
to it, but by the ways spoken of, I think I rightly gather I am no nearer to
it. That which is as near to a thing as ever it can come, is as near as it can
be, without iffs and ands, or to all intents and purposes. That I be further
from another thing, it is all one whether you hitch me off from it while that
stand still, or whether you put that back from me while I stand still, or
whether you make that betwixt us further from both while both stand still.
As you see it is the same in making me further off by land, water, or air, so I
see nothing forbidding it to be the same by all other vvayes. While the taking
such things from betvveen makes me further off as to such things or so far, the
taking all things from betvveen should make me further off as to all things or
altogether. A change of the world in the suchness of the betvveen-lyers,
begetting a change in my nearness as answering that suchness: so a change of
the world in the whole of the betvveen-lyers, must beget a change in the whole
of my nearness. The more body there is between me and another body the nearest
way that can be gone, the further are we asunder: and the more body is pared
away from the nearest path that can be gone, the more body is laid between, the
nearest way that can be gone: the more short paths you cut away, the longer you
leave behind: and if you cut away short and long, the things are neither near
nor far, but name and thing are utterly lost.

Furthermore, that the answer may less seem to have any thing of trick in it, a
like thing may be done, the world not thus changed, to make way for it. For as
the world now is, a body may glide at full speed, so shifting place as to the
bodies it glides by, and yet stand still as to the greatest part of the world
besides; so keeping place, and shifting place as uncouthly as in the thing
objected. Thus we will take upon trust the whirling of the earth from West to
East, (which is held by all a thing that may be, by most a thing that is,) and
a ship under sail driving with the same speed from East to West, (not being
checked by the earths giving over its motion to it.) Now this would shift place
as to the bodies making up the earths ball, and hold the same place as to all
the rest of the world besides. So we reckon St. Paul's Church in London to stand
so stone still, that it never stirred ground since the days of Sebert King of
the Saxons; yet supposing the earths motion, it only keeps its place in respect
of the earth, or that steamscope or atmosphere that wheels the same round with
it, and shifts room every day with all the world besides, that by which its
off-standing thereto should be taken, being so often lengthned and shortened by
the whirl of the earth. And in the thing before us, by taking all body out of
the square and leaving just nothing, such pieces of the world would be further
from others, whose nearest roads for measure should lie through such room taken
away, keeping still the same off-standing to all the rest of the world besides.

So true is it, that we name and bound things according to what they oftenest
or easiliest do seem to us to be, and not as to those narrow and less heeded
by-ways, wherein sometimes they may be.

At the foot of this we shall yet set one remark more, and that is this. That
of all men, he that holds a boundless roomthiness beyond the world, must beware
how he hits us in the teeth with this, That we make a body stir and stand still
both together. For if the forestroke give us but a little tick, the backstroke
will be sure to give him a knocker. We say, a body may keep place as to some
things, and shift it as to some others: But he must say, a body must stand
still and run both together, and as to all things. For we will take but this
o'trust, That the world may have been sinking down, or flying up, or starting
aside ever since it was made; He that made it, could as easily make it stir as
stand still; and he that we are speaking with, holds it as easy to stir in
emptiness as in fullness: Then say, we That this utmost speed of about 5675
years, is no other than stark standing still. For while it stands still, it has
but boundless room evenly about it, so as to be, to our thinking, in the midst
of it: but for all it runs, and has done, thus much, and thus long, it has the
very same boundless room every way about it (nor more, nor less) than it should
have had, it it had stood still: therefore it has stood still all the while it
has run so fast. For, if that body which is in the midst of a bounded ring, so
running 5675 years as to be still as much in the midst as ever, does so run as
to stand still all the while it runs, then in like manner, That body which has
unbounded room so every way about it, that if by running never so long, and
never so fast one way, it would neither lengthen the room behind it, nor
shorten the room before it, then it so runs as to stand still all the while it
runs; and then if by making it stand still, it can have no more than the same
unbounded room round about it, that it would have had if scouring all the while
one way or other, its standing still is as much running as its running was
standing still, and each as much the other as it self: Which falls so pat upon
the head of him that owns an emptiness beyond the world, that I dare be bold to
say, It Is such a flail as there can never be fence for.

The quick-sighted Mr. Barlow coping with Nazarius, who had rightly laid down
body and space to be the same, and that the worlds being in room is being in
its own selvedge, has thence raised this further Objection; to wit, That the
world being thus in its own selvedge, may by God Almighty be thrust into
another room; and, as it follows, the room in which now it is, is another thing
from it; and that room into which it is thrust, must be the same outworldish
scope that we have been all this while falling out with.

What answer Nazarius would give to it, I cannot tell; but from the grounds
laid down by us, it is as easy to answer as to name. For as the Argument says,
the world may be thrust out of the room in which it is into another, our Answer
says it may not be: that is, without God should also make another room for it
to be thrust into. And though the may be in the Argument came starveling alone
without any thing of proof to back it, yet the may not be in the Answer shall
be thus shouldered up. Unto motion it is not only behooving that the thing
stirred be bulkie, but that the thing through which it is stirred be also
roomthy. Thus as a ghost, because no bulky Being, cannot move through the
world, though a bulky throughfare or medium: so the world or whole clutter of
bodies, though a bulky Being, cannot stir any way; for why, it has no bulky
throughfare to stir in: Whatever stirs must stir in somewhat. And if it seems
odd, that motion, which is an all-reaching affection or belonger to each bit of
the world, should yet be denied to the whole, it is full as odd, that
cleavesomness, which is as all-reaching a belonger to body, should be withheld
from a least piece, which is as truly body as the greatest. But as that would
partake of sundering, if it were not the least that can be: so would the world
of stirring, if it were not the greatest that could be. From the leastness and
mostness, not from the things themselves, it is, that this befalls them. The
world is made as much for stirring in its kind, as any share of it, if it had
but a wherein to stir: and a least bitling is made as much for cleaving, if it
had but a wherewith to be cloven; its leastness, not its bodiness forbidding it.

But it would not be out of the way, it may be, to put one thing more to this
Answer before we go from it, and that is this, That when I say, God must also
make another room for the world to be thrust into, if it starts at all, I would
not be understood, as if I meant a room without body; which is the thing I have
been so much blaming. For, to me, room and body are all one, that is,
altogether; as ghost and thinking are: And I can no more understand how room
can be by it self without body, than I can how a thought may dwell by it self
without a thinking Being. But the room that I mean, is a roomthy yielding body,
big enough to shift places with the world. For to me the very life and soul of
motion is shuffle or sawing, and all stirrings one and other are nothing but
go-byes or shiftings of bodies. So that if one body had not another body to
slide by and make a sawing with, that it might be, out one, in another, that
way one, this way the other, it would never stir while it is a body. Whence, that
one world may stir, another must be made for it to stir in. Whatever moves,
must do it somewhere, or in somewhat, besides it self too. For nothing can stir
its whole self within it self: All stirring being out of, into. And it is easier
to think, how, if this world were all marble, that piece in the middlemost
might slide it self to the outside, than how a world, which has no room about
it, should stir any whither. It Is easier crowding into a full room, than into
none at all. The middle piece here has body about it, but only it is too stiff
and sturdy to yield or shift rooms with it: but the world we speak of, wants
both yielding body and body too; and cannot stir into a somewhere, because all
besides it self is a nowhere.

Now because ghost cannot hand the saw thus with body so as its sliding into
the room of body, should make body slip into the room of it, Thence it is, as I
make reckoning, that ghost cannot rightly be said to move. For it cannot be,
out body, in ghost, as it is in motion, out one body, in another; but body in,
or body out, it is all one to ghost. A bodies standing in the way, cannot
slacken its speed; nor a bodies making way, quicken it. And all motion, being
either speedier or slower, that which stirs neither the one way nor the other,
stirs not at all. We find that all stirring is as the thing stirred is
withstood; if more, it is easily, if less, it is fast. But because a ghost cannot
be withstood at all by body, (every body, but where it is ensouled, being alike
throughfaresom to it,) it does that in one now, at once, that body does in some
time, by steps. For want of which stepping or gradation, it cannot well be
called motion, (any more than its being out of this plight, can be called
placing in some room, or standing still.) But it is somewhat else that we have
no right name for, (unless skipping or canting may in a low sort speak it;) as
we have none neither for those odd wights, (to name one of a thousand more,)
that ran down a steep place into the Sea, with our Lords good leave. For they
were neither Hogs nor Devils, no devilish Hogs, nor hoggish Devils; but a
mesling of two, that we have no more name for than we had of yore for that
medly of three which we now call Gunpowder: their being called Swine, is such
a vouchsafement for the Folks sake, as calling the Devil in a Crawler, a
Serpent.

The last Argument we shall need to name, for width or room beyond the world,
is from the same worthy Gentleman, and stands thus. If God be in very deed in
it, then such a thing is: But, that God is indeed in it, may thus be made out;
that is to say, Because he may frame another world standing off from this, and
then be in both of them as in this, otherwise he should not be everywhere. And
if he be in both, the must be in the room also that lies between both,
otherwise he should be two in both, not one, this crossing his one-foldness as
much as the other did his all-fillingness.

Answ. Had these Bugbears comen in the Van, they might have put on the show of
a forlorn of Bravoes: But having grapled already with so many Battalioes, and
wrought our way through such strong fastnesses, we are not to be worsted by the
reermost and very leavings. We say then in short, That all this wast arises
from a mistake, that God is everywhere in the world so as to be coextended
with the world: Whereas the truth is, Were there no space at all, neither real
nor counterfeit, (as none was, before he who made all things, made that,) God
should be as immense as he is for all that: As if there had never been any
time, (nor was there, till God made timesom Beings,) he had been as eternal as
he is. As God by making of a body and real space with it, everywhere in which
he really is, is thereby no more really in space himself than he was before,
or no more roomthily there than he was before; (What he really is, he was
from everlasting:) So by not making of a body, he is not less really in space,
or in imaginary scope: But let space be what it will, his everyvvayness or
immensity is the same, one not meddling at all with the other.

I say then, That God would be in those two worlds as he is in this. As he
is not here by halves, so neither would he be there. As he is not partly in
one piece of this world and partly in another; but wholy in all, and wholy
in each, wholy in East side, and wholy in West side, without having any
part of him in the parts betvveen: So he would not be partly in one world and
partly in another, but wholy in both, and wholy in each. And as for taking
up the room betvveen them, either with whole or with part, the care is
taken: for we have already made it out, That there would be no room at all;
and that which is not at all, God is not in at all. While God is so in two
worlds, that though they do not touch or abut, yet there lies nothing betvveen
them; it is all one as to the one-foldness of his Being, as if they two did
touch, or were both made one: for there can be no more than nothing betvveen
two worlds that touch, or betvveen the very parts themselves of one world;
in any of which, and in every of which, it is yet easily yielded God may be,
and be one too.

CHAP. V.
HAving hitherto treated of Bulk, How far it may be bigned? it follows next,
that somewhat should be spoken to the other hard Question, How far it may be
lessened? And the rather, because, if we have been lucky in making it out, That
body by putting to it cannot be bigned beyond a certain bulk, it seems to
follow by the laws of Analogies, That the same by taking from it cannot be
lessened beneath a certain smalness. And we have from thence this ground to set
foot upon, That that which is not boundless one way, cannot be so another; or
that that which is not infinite in its whole, cannot be so in its little part.
We must then put an end to that puzling Question, Whether a bulky Being be made
up of a throng of cleaveless shreadlings? by bearing the Reader in hand,
flatly, that so it is indeed. And that upon this score too as well as any other;
because it is impossible to put so much as one jot or dust unto bulk, beyond a
set or bounded number: this finite world being the All of quantity, and nothing
of outstretchedness being beyond it or besides it, so, at least, as to have any
thing to do with it: that it should be likewise impossible to take from bulk,
so much as one jot or dust beneath a bounded number.

Which while we are beginning to take in hand, it will well become us to show
first, what we mean by a Gr. (...), Lat. Punctum, or Indivisibile, and an
English Leasting. The crafty Magnenus new dressing his old Democritus, gives it
to be Materialis physicaeque extensionis radix and initium. Which may safely
enough be owned as it stands, bating but its belongers bequeathed it by him,
which are in no wise to be hearkened to, that is to say, Quantity under I cannot
tell what Mathematical dimensions or measures: For so he takes off the
graveller, Indivisibile junctum indivisibili non facit majus, quia tangit
secundum se totum, That His indivisibles suas habent dimensiones secundum quas
jungi cum extensionis incremento possunt: By which kind of Mathematical parts
or metenesses in a Physical point, he does all his great feats in his whole row
of Answers.

But it is to be wondered, that having shaken off Ariaga's Mathematical points,
and Suarezes way of making up bodies of parts and Mathematical points jumbled
together, he could not feel himself, whilst playing aloof off, to have wheeled
about into the selfsame snare: For he says, Neither by no means: but a natural
body is made up of Physical points, made up of Mathematical measures. That is,
it is not made of Mathematical points, but made of those things that are made of
nothing but Mathematical points. A sly kind of body indeed, that is
Mathematical at second hand, or linsey Physical woolsey Mathematical.

Wherefore we are about to say, That our atome punctum or leasting, is made
only of body. And although it may be metesom by Mathematical measures of the
minds making, yet it is not made up thereof, any more than the greater parts
are, or the whole is. But as to Physical measures, it has neither East side nor
West side, North side nor South side, top nor bottom, this nor that, nor any
thing that speaks twinship to any thing else, but is it self all that it is: and
when you have said that, you have said all. So that if you ask, when it abuts
upon another, Whether it touches secundum se totum, or not? Whether wholewise
or piecewise? It Is answered, There is no such name belongs to it. For having
maintained it to be a least part, it is impossible it should have parts in it;
which, if any, must be less than least. And it is also impossible, that that
Physical body which has not parts, should rightly be a whole, or a thing made
up of that which it has not. Every Physical whole being made up of parts, that
which has no parts, but is it self the least of parts, can no more be an whole,
than the whole nakedly taken can be a part. And every whole being greater than
its parts, taken sunderly, it would follow, that our leasting were greater than
somewhat else, or greater than it self: Which would be a thwacker as
unspeakably big as that is little.

We are therefore in good sooth to understand, That having pared off from body
all its parts, we have also bereaved it of all those bedightings or affections
that belong to it, as having parts; of which the wholeness, laid in our dish
was one. And though we cannot thereby make it ghost or not body, because we
cannot tear from it piercelessness or impenetrability, which is the closest
sticker to a body, as a body lessened; yet it comes so much the nearer to
ghost, by how much the more it has thrown off the things belonging to a body,
which ghost had not neither. As we found a now of time to speak out Gods
Eternity better than any other share of lastingness; because it threw off more
of those things that time had, and that had not: so here, we can no more
betemme wholeness to the one, than to the other: It being as good speech to
talk of the head or foot, right half or left half of a ghost, as of an atome.
For as in a ghost there are none of them, because there is nothing of body to
fasten them to: So neither are they in a leasting: For why, there is so little
body, that one would be the other.

What we have hitherto spoken, will seem to have less of auk in it, if we do
but pattern our leasting of body with a now of time, which has no more fore and
aft, than we say this has side and side; though it goes to the making up of
that which has the former, as this does to the making up of that which has the
latter.

And again, if we be but so good as to remember. That we have lifted our
leasting out of the kingdom of the world, and seated it in the kingdom of the
mind. For an atome by it self, unlinkt from the chain of all other bulks to
which it hangs, is no where to be found but in that of our thoughts, any more
than a now of time is, so singled out from time past and time to come.

But to speak more home or right down to the thing in hand, Whether a leasting
touches another in its whole, or by its parts? Saying only in the first place,
That the word Touch is none of the fittest that can be to come in here. For
why, many things may close that do not touch, as the soul, for one, does with
the body. We answer, That as we have said already, it touches according to
neither. For why, it is not the one, nor has the other. So we say flatly, it
touches according to its piercelesness, secundum impenetrabilitatem; it so
snugs to another, as not to be in another; and according to its seedsom length,
secundum longitudinem seminalem, so as with another to make a line of two
points. For not being a stretchling or quid quantum, any more than a now is an
onwardling or quid successivum, but only quid impenetrabile, somewhat unthrough
faresom; and having nothing in it saving the seed of bulkiness, which, so as
it is knit to more leastings, springs up; we must not look that it should touch
after what it has not, but after what it has. So put we but an atome to it, the
seed of bulksomness is so far quickened, that length is begotten; close but as
many more sidewise, up starts breadth; so again, as many clapped to, upwards or
downwards, and forth comes deepness. So that to the three meteings or
dimensions of a body, it is fit that eight leastings should be clapped together:
as it takes at least two nows of time to make fore and aft, and three to make
was, is, and is to come. Whence we gather, it is altogether from the business to
hale any of these things in, when we are speaking of one only: And nothing
better is it, than pumping of two out of one, or taking the greater number out
of the rest, in Talecraft or Arithmetic.

Not much unlike is the closing or union between soul and body, which two
together make up one man. The soul not being bulky, cannot be stretched out
with the body; and not being unthroughfaresom, cannot close so with it, as to
be shut out from being in it. As it had not the latter by it self, so neither
had it the former in booty beme, or a power in seed, (or half seed,) to biggen
the bulk of the body, or make it more as to any of the measures. The close or
oneness therefore between ghost and body, must be according to those powers the
soul or ghost has, whereby it is squared for the laying hold on or laying in
with body, and not according to those it has not. Now the soul has the trick or
power in the seed to quicken body, when by such and such laws kept down to it,
without flinching from it, neither taking up room it self in the body, or eking
out the body, by making over to it, seedwise, from it self, any thing that is
bulky or unthroughfaresom; and can withal bestead it with a fashioning or
plastic spring of lifesomness or animality, whence it grows, works, and begets
its like from an inbred power; and has another feat to move the body: Which it
does not by shoving or driving of it forwards, as a slouch does a crowd-barrow,
stepping into the room which that leaves behind it; but, as the Ingenious
Mounsieur de Cordemoy has it, By having such stirrings of the body to answer
such workings of the thoughts. Le discernement du corpse and de l'ame.
Every thing must do as it self is, and as it tools are: And certain workings
of thoughts are to a soul, what certain stirrings of parts are to a body, in
the which the soul is housed: only the soul not agreeing with body, so much as
in that one belonger of unthroughfareness, when bewedded thereunto it cannot
make it bigger; being lost in it, not lodged by it; but only better or nobler,
as to its being or working. But now our leasting, being, while such, of a lower
house, and made for the nonce to be knit unto more of its kind without piercing
or being pierced, gathers thereby to it self a fresh train of hangers on in the
body kind, or in genere Physico, which it would never reach to, but only in
fellowship with them, as making up a bulk of such a name; no more than a part
can take upon it those names or things which are suited to its whole, all
together, as an whole: it self being an unthroughfaresom whatkin, having in it
the seed of an half length, quarter breadth, and eighth of depth. Little
otherwise, one sex, though complete in it self taken, cannot by it self beget
its like; but is, as to that, the half seed of it, and enkindles it as clubbing
with another like power, from which two only that one must spring; each of
which by themselves have but the half or unlike seeds of quickening, as lock and
key has of opening.

This kind of touching of things according to some one thing that is in them,
and not according to others, puts me in mind of what is done of that sort, not
only between part and part barely taken as abutting, but between draught and
draught or scheme and scheme as meddling. Thus a certain gathering together of
bracks or atoms, make that scheme in the stomach that we call hunger or thirst;
and another unlike one, makes that there, which we call a fullness, or loathing
and spewing. Now wormwood has another draught in it, that touches or closes
with their latter, so as to make up the former; but it neither touches according
to the draught of its root stalk, branches, leaves, flowrings, seed, juice,
powder, water, mash or conserve, syrup, steepings, boylings, setlings or
extract, salt, oil or spirit: for each of these will do it, only because this
touching draught is more broken in some, and more tight in others; some do it
more, some less. Now if it does not touch or meddle according to any of the
forenamed, it must do it, as to that we have no name for, unless we call it a
Wormwoodness; it being a wormwoody stamp more or less printed upon each of
them, and like wards for such a lock, will perhaps clap in with nothing in the
world else, but that Set of atoms which is sometimes found in the maw of a
feeder. On the other hand, Asarum holds a scheme of an unlike make from
wormwood, which shall put the stomach, when in good plight, into loathings and
castings, as surely as wormwood shall still and heal such roilings; and this
either in its raw juice or powder dried in an oven: but do but boil it, and
then break up the scheme of it, and then if it changes or empties the body it is
by sweat, (says Rulandus:) this then seems not so much to be done by its
Rabaccaness, unless that of it may be boiled away, which cannot be baked away,
as by some narrow draught that lies in juice and powder, made to lock with that
other which lies in the juices of the stomach.

And now because the reason why so many great understandings have leaned to the
other side, holding the cleavesomness of a body unboundedly, is from a
willingness to be rid of those gallers that twinge the brain of the stiff
maintainer of this, it shall in the next place be tried, Whether we can afford
any rest or good liking to the mind, by facing the Objections with such Answers
as the grounds we have laid down will allow us to build upon. And they will
fall, not untowardly, under a threefold Head.

1. Such as hold to figure mainly. 2. Such as meddle with figure and motion
together. And 3. Such as have to do with motion rather than figure.
Under the first of which, we are born in hand with this, That then a Scalenum
and Isosceles would be all one: Thus. triangle

A. B. C. is a Scalenum. The same must also, from the Doctrine of leastings, be
an Isosceles, or even-sided Triangle: For fill but the Area with lines parallel
to A. C. there must be then as many pricks or points in B. A. as in B. C. there
being as many lines drawn from the one as to the other; and so B. A. would be
equal to B. C. that is, the Scalenum would become an Isosceles.

Answ. It would not be so Physically, but only Mathematically: Thus namely, The
lines drawn to the side B. C. do not touch it in one point, but the line B. C.
bends so much to a parallel with the lines drawn from B. A. to C. that they
make the angles to be altogether in a parallel with at least the two last
points of the lines A. C. so that it may fairly hold as many points again, or
be as long again.

The same Answer undoes the knot, That every triangle would be an Isopleuron,
That the diagonial lines of a Rhomboides would be equal, That the diameter of a
Quadrangle would be equal to its sides, That a Semicircle would not be greater
than its diameter, As also, That of diverse concentrick circles, the outermost
would not be greater than the inmost; inasmuch as all lines drawn from all
points of it toward the Center, must pass through as many points of the other:
With so many more of the same kind, as are not readily so much as to be named.
All which, however done in Geometry, are much otherwise, or not at all done in
Physics.

Again, it is said, A line of unequal atoms could not then be cut into halves;
when yet it is as sure as any thing in Geometry, that any line whatsoever may be
so.

To which it is answered, That it is as untrue in Physics, as it is true in
Mathematics. But because a Physical leasting comes not under the ken of sense,
according to the smartest reckoning that we can make with body, Nevertheless,
we may hold such a body to be even with another, if sense can find no
unevenness between them, whether they be so indeed or not. That is to be
reckoned even, that cannot be found otherwise than even.

But those which are harder to take off, are such as come with figure and
motion hand in hand, being a kind of mingled Mathematics.

Thus it may be objected, That a wheel of manifold rims whirled upon its
axletree, would make out uneven bows of circles, in even shares of time, the
whole wheel being evenly turned, and the circles being some bigger than others:
whence it would follow, That one atome in the inner rims, would be even to more
than one in the outermore.

Now supposing the rims of the wheel to be brought from their bow into a
straight line, the same whirling force resting in each, the Objection would
fall in with the following (figure only changed;) to wit, That all bodies would
then be moved with a like swiftness; the swiftest running but through a
leasting of room in a now of time, and the slowest creeping on even, so much in
so much.

To this killing one, there have been a great many Answers forged by the men of
brains, and fine-spun thoughts. The cunning Magnenus takes his flight to
Mathematical parts in a Physical leasting, Ariaga to rests intermingled with
stirrings. But we having shut out Mathematical parts as to the making up of
body, it cannot but be thought hugely misdone, to tow them in here for the
making out of motion; there being the same parts and no more in a body moved,
that there are in the same made. And as for rests, there being yet no reason
shown, why stirring should begin after such rests, than why a body at full rest
altogether, should of it self stir, without a quickening jostle from some other
Being, or a fresh swing or poysing from its lodging in the world; both the
contrivances will even miss of giving the mind that ease and rest which the
wittiness of them might seem to have been worthy of.

The Answer then that we have been thinking of is this, That slower motions are
made up of starts and bearings, or springsomness, (progression and elasticity):
and that the swiftest are either all outstart, without bearings, or made up of
speed and sprightfulness, (pernicity and impetus.)

For the better making out of which, we are to bethink our selves, That as the
beginning of time had not fore and aft, nor the least deal of body here a piece
and there a piece, or partem extra partem: so neither has the first spring of
motion any thing of onwardness or stirring, but only a pend or earnest strift
fromwards, which we call springsomness or bearing. A thing though not motion,
yet as much the beginning or seed of it and made for the nonce for it, as a now
is of or for time, and a leasting of or for body. And again, motion being quid
non materiale, somewhat bodiless, may-hap it ought not altogether to be scanned
and sifted by the laws that say bulkiness as such alone: As time in which all
motion is, and with which it began, has got some things belonging to it, that
body cannot lay claim to.

Thus then, suppose a body slowly moved to begin at the bear or heave, and for
one now of time to start one leasting of room, the next now neither to start
nor rest, but to be in the bearing or elater, till the bearing be wrought up so
high as to burst forth into another start of another atome, in another minute;
so holding on bearing and starting, till it comes to a full rest, after the
last start and bear: For as motion begins in a bearing or conatus, so it ends
in the same; and as the bearing took rist from rest, so it dies and falls into
the same again.

Now although this Answer may at first seem chargeable, with the same
hardnesses with that of girds and rests; yet upon a narrower search, it will be
clearly found to be far and wide from it in the making out. For we having
warily held, the stirred body not to be at rest, or in a stound or pause at
all, but always to be either stirring or bearing, which bearing is no more
rest than it is stirring; as a leasting, though it be not quantum, yet it is far
enough off from being ghost, and wants nothing but more of the same to make it
quantum; or a now of time to make it fore and aft. We cannot then be charged
with the uncouthness of bodies recovering motion of it self, after the dying or
breaking off of that which stirred it. For how can that be said to be
recovered which was never lost? Now motion is not lost, but only locked up in
the bearing or elater: Forasmuch as the bear is the wellspring of motion, as
motion is the offspring of bearing. As likewise the darting power in the hand
or soul is not motion, but the rist or spring of all that swiftness that is
given to outcasts. Now when motion is shifted or begotten in the thing moved or
forthcast, this darting force or rally of stirring springs, is shotten or
propagated also, and that firstly and nextly too; it being the breeder, motion
the child of it; the hand giving a kind of teemingness to the spring, which in
its season is brought to bed of startings. Whence it is, that until this loses
its enkindling or leavening strength, the motion into which it breaks when
swelled up to an height, cannot be lost neither; only it asks some time to
heave or pend in, before it actually starts; Whence it is that one body is
slower than another in its motion.

Because I find the meaning of the words do not square so evenly with the
notion, as I think that may do with the truth of the thing, (thoughts being
easier to come by than words,) We shall strive to imprint it on the Readers
understanding, by such likenesses as either Handicrafts or Nature it self shall
afford us.

Thus then the stirring of the hand or Index on the Dial-plate of a Watch, is
as slow as any that we need to treat of; it is notwithstanding, or ought to be,
on and on, without stops or stands; and yet it is an hour creeping from
hour-stroke to hour-stroke. Now when we see what a long thread of sand passes
the neck-hole of an hourglass in that same time; four mile long, in likelihood
at least, supposing the running but as fast again as the walk of a midling kind
of footman, (when yet to the eye it seems far speedier;) it is almost beyond
the reach thoughts, that the hand should find so many atoms or leastings of
body to step over one after other, without the least stopping between the two
streaks, not above the sixth or eighth part of an inch asunder, as to be even
with the time that the aforesaid thread of sand is posting through the
neck-plate of the hourglass. But it is easy enough to understand, that the
spring of the Watch, which is the spring also of the hands stirring, should by
its bear or elasticity hitch it forwards, not so as to be always stirring, or
at any time resting, but creeper-like, to be sometimes starting one point, and
oftener bearing toward the next; the spring asking some minutes time to gather
strength enough, (as the arm does by fetching about) to give a start or least
stirring, and some minute or minutes more to bear on toward a second hitch: In
the mean time that which bequeaths it this slow pace, and the wheels and
balance a pretty tight one, is a thing that is not so fitly said to be stirred
or in motion it self, as lodged or locked up in a bearing or pressing posture.
So agreeable is the notion that we have been advancing, that the best
key-keeper of motion is an elater or bear, where one would at first think it
would likeliest be lost.

But it may indeed be said, That this comes not home to the business of
forthcast things; the spring or principle of motion being continued or close by
the thing stirred, whereas the hand is sunder'd from that body which is thrown
forth by it.

Answ. It Is but supposing that the spring of motion or an elater or elaters, as
well as the motion flowing from thence, is also thrown off, (which ought in
dartings forth to be supposed,) and then the business is much at one; unless it
be that in things thrown, the stirring is swifter for the most part, and spends
it self sooner: it being impossible to make over motion that may be lasting,
without a spring of swiftness; and as impossible to hold on a swiftness,
without the renewing of such a spring. So the greatest unlikeness between
crowding and throwing is, That in the first it skills not whether there be
above one spring, or few springs of motion, handed over at one time; for why,
as soon as that one is, or those few are spent, another is, or more are hard by
to follow, without any let to the going on: whence it is, that I can crowd a
bigger body than I can throw, as I can give one or few springs, where I cannot
give more or many: But as to the other, I cannot put a body off, without I
bequeath it either such a spring as has another spring, or more springs in the
belly of it, or else give it so many springs to keep at its breaking off from
my hand, as it had when in it, and carried by it: otherwise it would fall down,
as soon as the crowding or gird of the hand left it; or else go on but a little
way, with a sudden breaking off, from the nimbleness of stirring which it had
before it parted from the arm that threw it.

A little further help may be gained, I think, by quoting a likeness of Natures
own, wherein the stirring power is taken aside from the thing stirred or
quicknesd, and that stirring or sprightfulness only locked up in the spring or
strift to stir, which afterward upon the taking off all clogs and stops,
advances up to those bounds that Dame Kind before had pitched upon. The Instance
is that of an egg, which we will take as a thing that sprang from the impetus
of the tread, the Harveyan tang, or contagion and egg-fry of Kerckring and de
Graaf, to be what it is, after laid by the Hen. That which it is in motion
toward as fast as it can, (the little scar I mean, or Cicatricula) is a
Chicken: But that there is no more of this stirring but what is hemmed and coopt
up in the spring, while the body that imprinted it is broken from it, is clear
from hence: For why, an egg that has been kept many days, and set under a
breeding Hen, shall be hatched no sooner than one that has been laid fewer; and
the oftener they cool by the Hens being long off her nest, the longer are they
in hatching; which is Argument enough that some stop or other was met with by
the way; and yet upon a bare warmth or brooding shroud, which only removes
way-layers or brushes the passages, so giving scope for the springs of the
scarr to leap forth into nimble freaks and brisknesses, the makings toward
animality are taken up a fresh, and carried on, after all rubs in the way, to
that bulk and quickness, which Dame Nature had cast with her self to bring
about.

That this is done, as I say, by only paring off encumbrances, and scouring the
passages, or at least not from any new springs or stirrings that are begotten,
by the hoppings and friskings about of such warm and lightsome steams, as may
be thought to have swarmed from the brooding hen, and crowden into the brooded
egg; as a Watch or a Jack, by being only wown up, without thripping the
balance or flyer, fa^l to work again: may, I think, even hence, seem more than
a little likely,

In that a Snayl or Dodman, which is not only not warm, but to our feeling,
very cold, is fain to brood its as cold sweatty eggs, nested upon a cold wet
earth, bespiewing them about with the fuzze of a cold clammy froth, in coldish
raughty weather, and all making way to a kind and timely hatching of them: And
so needful is a kind of cold and sultryness to the doing of this, that as far
as ever I could find by housing and turning of them, (when I have not only
missed of the brood, but, for want of feeding their earth and froath, with cold
and raughtiness, as it should be done* I have soon lost sight of the very eggs
too;) that I say, I dare undertake to light sooner of that warmth and reek and
air, that will hatch an hens egg, than that cold and dew and clamminess, that
goes to the hatching of a snails.

And to say there may be warmth, though no body living could ever feel it, is
as bad a put off as to say, that such a thing is sense, though all men in the
world have ever taken it for non sense.

It Is therefore somewhat likely, that a hens setting upon her eggs for
hatching, is much what, with her brooding her chickens under her wings when
they are hatched; the one being to ward off quellers from the air, the other to
shroud them from those birds of prey that are scouting and sharking up and down
in it. Whence a snail, whoseeggs have other kind of foes, besets them with
other kind of shield and buckler. Their setting being the casing or housing
such a tickleish piece of workmanship, that wind and weather may not ruffle and
snarle it, or any straggling bodies clutter up its rooms and stifle it.

From which I think, without straining, we may gather, that, if such a spring
as this is, may be tickled and roused up again, in which is bound up a whole
set or draught of springs, some shaping or plastic, some bigning or growing,
others barely stirring or twitching, and after all so long stinted and so often
checked; Well may one motion, of one sort, after sinking into its spring, or
being wown up in it, be, by its inhidden power, when unfettered, brought on
again to a kind of quickness.

Little otherwise a hoop brought to a stiff bough, and kept in it by such a
strength as can cope with it, upon some after chance the hoop getting ground of
its holdfast slips or starts, by fits and girds, keeping still its inward
springsomness, though in a lessening way, that is in a scantling to what is
spent or thrown off at every slip, until at length losing all its springiness,
it falls of it self into the stillness of a rest.

This to me also seems to be the main, if not the whole of Vegetative motion,
or the waxings and sproutings forth, which are found in all growers. For I take
the seed (till some further experiment teach me better) to be a cluster of
bubbles wryed up snug, or a bottom of hoops or springs closely girt or knit
together, which being a little loosned when sown a while, by the bedewings of
the raughty mold soaking in between its crevices, the springs swell and grow
roomthy, and which follows thereupon, the bosoms or hollows are made wider,
whence new moisture or fogginess presses in, not at random, but molded by
the hollovvs into bovvs for the nonce, bedighted or impregnated also, with a
springsomness altogether fit, both to eke out that of the vvidned hoops, and
also by a kind fermentation or bustle of the vvorking or leavening particles,
beget new springs, and then biggen the same, till the seed heaves up from a
sprouting or shrubble, to the scantling of height, bulk and growth, that
nature has cut out for it, as a plant or as a tree.

But as in springs made by the hand of the workman, if they lie too long bent,
by reason of the svvarms of insensibles, drilling through their pores or
spungholes, they may be so fast stuck by such as jump in die wise or
cubically, as to have their springs choakt or benumbed (as a piece of Iron by
lying long in an odd posture, may by the same chance light upon a magnetism):
so the seeds of most or all grovvths, kept beyond their full time, upon the
same score shed or loose their springinesses, and when sown become barren or
unsproutful.

Only herein the motion that nature gives, is unlike to that which we bequeath
to forthcasts. For why, she not only bedights them with many springs at first,
but lays in spawn also for the begetting of more, and stuff for the greatning
of one and other. Whereas when we give a dartingness to outcasts, we betemme
them but one or a few springs, which by often sturts and flashes of motion,
cracker-like, weaken themselves, till at length all ends in the calmness of a
rest.

Again, if we go up to the stock of breathers, a step above these as they are a
step beneath us, we shall find that begetting the like, is making over of
springs; and according as the begetter is hotter and smirker, or colder and
listlesser, the bows are sooner or later bent and shot off. So while the lively
eager Creatures do the business of their kind, in the while that we are
speaking of it, a Toad (to name one of the cold and clammy kind) may-hap takes
days to do the same. Thus I remember that toward the end of March at high noon
day, I was shown a he and she Toad engendring, which to be sure had lain so
from noon the day before, how much soever longer they might or would have done,
(unless the spring of the year being backward, and the mouthed and vents of
their bodies not yet opened, might happily lengthen out the time somewhat
longer than otherwise.) And as it took so much time to set the bowie frame, so
it seems he could not break off where he was very suddenly; for we had not only
slit open the body of the she, but were taking out the inwards before he could
frame to get loose of her, and yet, at that time, he hugged her only with his
two forefeet, which he had thrust so into the soft of her sides, as to make two
deep doaks there. So we see that man or beast fetching their runns with
earnestness, they cannot strike sail, or notch the wheels, and croose the
springs, at work within them, in a trice. And this also may be one cause why
earthworms are limed so much to the headward, and hold so for an whole night.
And why Slugs or Dodmans engender in the neck, and are so many hours, if not
days, in the limeing, to wit, that so the workhouse for the springs may be
nearer seated to the storehouse of the tools and stuff for that end, which is
the brain and spirits. And why both of them too play the he is part in the deeds
of their kind, each crowding into the other a roping, tough, silver-like thread
of seed: (That both do the she is work also, I cannot yet find, but mistrust
that Doctor Swammerdam might rather ghess so aforehand than know so.)

Because the quickening power of one, was not enough to rally together all
those sparks of life, that lay asunder in a clammy dew, and were to be
enkindled and hatched up into a springiness of such a set, and so thrown off,
but both of them must go hand in hand, in blowing of the bellows.

Nor is it altogether without remark, among those of our own kind, that the
man, upon the account of his being stronger and springier does more, (as it is
like will be found) toward the bequeathing of that hord of sprightfulness to
the little one that is to be, than does the woman. (It seems not to be in the
first blessing of growing manifold, for that was given evenly to both.) I know
somebody, who knows a woman of understanding enough to make the remark, and of
faithfulness enough to be believed about it, who took with child in the very
fit of a Third Ague, (not to name many that have done so, out of the fit;) the
latter being lost too, until brought to bed, for the former being got: when yet
I have not found hitherto, (I know not what I may do, or others have done,)
that a man under that disease, either in the fit or out of it, could be so much
a man as at other times; though I have made the observation, where the man has
had the blessing of offspring all the years of wedlock, before and after, and
the ground that was to be sown that year in as good tilt as in the other, only
the husbandman so much out of plight. Whence it should seem that the life that
is made over to the offspring, is but a frame or draught of-springs, leavened
into a breedingness, and stamped upon this or that which is beginning, and is
either stronger or weaker, in more or in less time made over, as it happens
that the Being which does it, can fetch them up, or slip them off. As unto the
things thrown out by the hand, there is given forth a clue of springs, or
starts, and bearings, without any such draught of them or breed in them, or
plastic might in the thrower, so to frame or rank them.

But I would not here be understood so much at warfare with my self, as if I
took the soul of man to be a thing, that might body-like be some ways moved or
thrown off; For having all along been driving at this, that motion or going on
by steps, is such a sticker unto body, that it can no more belong to Ghost,
than thinking can to that, I should wonder at my self, if I should yield that
to the soul as it is beginning to be from another, which it must by no means
have to do with, when it is it self and does like it self.

That which I mean therefore is that The soul may be so one with a breeding
frame or bud of body, as, for ought I know, to be made over together with it,
when that is made over, and yet not be moved as that then is moved, any more
than the thoughts of the heart walk when the body walks. And as a strong
breathed and well set man for wayfaring, shall foot it with greater slight and
more speed, than one who is not so made; in like manner, another man whose
plastic, shaping, or enkindling powers, are fraught with more of manhood, and
quickued with a kindlyer sprightfulness, may make over the beginnings of
manliness to the beginning birth, with a liveliness no ways unanswerable. Life
and Soul being two things with me, as are Spirits and Spirit; the first being
the springiness of the body, in such a well set frame, the other that which
sets all in man a going: both which as they are together* in the being of man,
so are they, I think, in the beginning of man; man being the son of man, as
firstman was the Son of God; the soul coming from God, nextly, to the first
man, and from God through man, to every one else. Whole man's springing from
whole man, seeming, to me at least, a main Doctrine in that Text, Abraham begat
Isaac. But, that the soul, which way soever we come by it, should be any thing
of that body which we are, I bless God, I never dreamt so much of Master Hobbes
in all my life as to think it. And if any man else has had his brain so far
blackened with that Writers Ink as to think, that body may be thoughtful too,
and any ways aware, I believe he may have it pretty well wiped off for him,
with some papers from the hand of the Learned and Ingenious Master Thomas
Tenison, in a The Creed of Master Hobbes examined.
Book, where it is hard to say, whether the arguments in the whole be more
strong, or the way of bringing them in more handsome, only because both of
them are most of all so.

Having thus far endeavored to reckon with the slow paced motion, and found,
to our thinking, that it is a kind of thing that has got the fidget; and that
bodies so stirred, do not gain for every minute of time, a point of room, but
jogging on in a jiffling way, they lag behind at every bearing, as they come up
more or less at every jetting: We shall go on to find out, whether there be not
also somewhat of likelihood, that in the swiftest hurryes, and most glancing
gobyes of the world, such bodies do not glide through more than one leasting of
room, in one now of time.

That which has put me upon the ghess is this, Time is such a thing as neither
mends its pace nor slacks it, but is always plodding on at the same rate, but
motion is a thing that may be either hugely slow, or hugely swift, or else in
the middle between both: Now it is but odd to think how such a flicketing
skipjackly thing as that is, which is always so much upon the snatches, that no
body knows where to have it, should be bound to the behavior of such a grave
stayed thing as time is. Especially having seen already that motion in its
loyterings or sluggishness cannot walk times pace, but is cast back much or
little as the strifts are.

Now that the mind may cope with this so much the better, we must look back to
some hints before treated of, to wit, That what is body and what is not body,
ought not to be measured by the same laws of worldishness, or natural
affections, any more than those reasonless breathers that live under us, are to
to be weilded by those laws Divine or Moral, that are to sway and bind the
whole stock of mankind.

But now of things not-body there are two sorts, Either such as are bodiless
and no more, non materialia, or non corporea, such as you may fancy time to be;
or else such as are not only bodiless, but over and above ghostly, immaterialia
or spiritualia; either of which may yet have to do with body, and in and
through that, give tokens to us, of its being and power of doing.

Thus we find the soul of man to have business laid out for it in the body of
man, by way of oneness with it. In which, besides a sort of mechanical or
engine-like twitchings, and animal sprightnesses which are there set on foot,
either by its power, or at its beck and good liking, it also cleaves to it in
the advance to certain workings, of so lofty and refined an alloy, as to stamp
man with the likeness and show of him that made him, and withal trim up and
fashion him for the relishings of a world after this, where it shall be his
bliss to live with God, or his woe to be banished from him, world without end.

Then again, Motion, which is another unbodily thing, though it does not carry
body into any such lofts as should raise it above its meanness when at rest:
yet in its meddlings with it, it is whisking about riding and of the so manifold
pieces of the world, that it gripes within the bounds of its wide verge all the
restlesness that we are either justling with, or other things banged about by,
within the whole scope which bodies have to play in.

Now this in its kind lying between ghost and body, partaking of neither, is
raised up by both. Thus the soul of man and other ghosts, holding upon the hand
of the first Being, beget it daily; as he of himself, upheld by none, did at
the first stir and empower other beings to do so and body also (if I mistake
not,) without ghost, give birth to it, in the rank of Beings next below man, or
at least beneath that of breathers; and this, according to the tickleness of
its lodging in the machina mundi, it does either in it self or in another body.
For I am so much of the mind, that matter or body moves it self under God, as
poys'd or postured in the frame of bulkiness, that I wonder all or most men,
that have looked much into it, are not of the same mind too, there being (or may
be) more bodies moved by body than by ghost, in the world. I see a body as
sluggish as iron, may be so clapped in with the knack of a Craftsman, as both to
stir it self, and conne its heavy neighbor a share too. And I cannot find in my
heart to deny that skill to a World-maker, that I must needs give to a
Watch-maker, not to say to that child, who has but strength enough to wind that
up, that he had skill enough to let so down.

And as it may be begotten by both, or bequeathed another from both, so it may
it self belong unto both, though in a way so much unlike, that one word cannot
well take in the meaning of it as it reaches both. For body being a stour
unweildsom thing, or at least a boaky unthroughfaresom thing, it cannot stir
without asking another bodies leave to crowd by; whence it is, that this Motion,
as such, is ever onwardly or by degrees: But a ghost being never in the least
stinted in its way by body, is here, or there, or yonder, forthwith or in an
instant. For if when it is here at this now, there be nothing to hinder it from
being there or yonder, next now, it may be there or yonder then: And if there
be nothing but body to hinder, there is nothing at all to hinder, all body
being as throughfaresom to ghost, as it is stopping to body. But now this kind
of leaping not being successive, but all together, it is but even a lessening
and underly way of speaking to call it Motion.

To apply this then, we are to lay down, That this hord of restlesness is
evenly dealt out amongst the sundry Clubs and Cantreds of bodies, while time is
one and the same to all and every one; insomuch that it may fall to the share
of some body or other, to be more quickened or leavened with degrees of motion,
than it is besteaded with pieces of bulk; and thereupon behave it self in the
world, more after the laws of unbodily beings, than of those that own body:
things working according to that which they have most of within them. Now we
having settled this, That spirits change their Beings here or there, in the All
of bodies, far otherwise than bodies do when they flit places, as being now
here, next now in the furthest corner of the world, without taking point by
point the room that lies between; and this power they have too, as being not
body.

We say then again, That motion, a thing as truly not body as ghost is, may
happily upon that score be so far quickened, by ghost at least, or so high
wrought up in its own kind, as to hale the thing stirred in the utmost speed,
beyond the steppings of atome by atome, after its kind.

So a body having bequeathed it one degree of sturt or yerk, in one now of
time, and hitching thereupon one atome of room may upon taking in ten or twenty
degrees of the same, in the next, sturt to many atoms in length. Now it being
as easy for a body to take in ten or twenty degrees of starting in one now, as
to take in one, (Start or swiftness not being body in it self, cannot be
measured as intended in degrees, by that which measures body as extended in
parts;) it seems not to bear very hard upon reason, that it should also undergo
the brunt of them as of one. As then the effect of one taken in in one now, was
a start of one atome of room in one now of time, the taking in of twenty such
degrees in such one now, should also beget a skip of twenty such atoms in one
such now.

Though the foul seems to have much the better of it, as to the body, while in
it, as doing things often against the grain of the body, and more like it self,
when the body cannot do many things against the souls will, nor any against its
kind, though the things be never so friendly to body as body: Yet this sway
that the soul has over the body, will not help us out in the showing, how body
may be carried out to the doing beyond it self, as such, when roused up by a
thing, not body, which has gotten the mastery of it. For the souls business in
the wagon or vehicle of the body, is not to ride it full speed, but to breath
it fair and soft, rather to ride in state than to ride post, ennobling the body
by its curious draughts and trails of enlivening sprightlinesses, not jading it
in the great road of bare motion, which other stirred bodies are wayfaring in.

That therefore, whence I think a little light will dawn toward us in these
mists, is this, to wit, Some instance of Gods impowering ghost, either by bare
leave, or by biding to boot, to run body so far off its legs, as to hurry it on
nearer the pace of ghost, than that of it self, yet without insouling or
inlivening of it. Thus, if any faith may be had to story, we have tales enough
to make a Thomas believe, that spirits have brought bodies into a room, in the
twinkling of an eye, and by as clever a slight wafted them away in another; and
that they have in a bodily shape told some, as at this now, what is done at a
place, scores or hundreds of miles off, which upon search have been found to
have been done there, as near as could be driven, but the moment before it was
spoken yonder: Of which, (to name one) the Devil of Mascon falls not much
short, whether you look upon the feats done, or the witness of the story that
speaks them so.

But to be sure, one who could never mistake himself, nor mistel us, has said
flatly, that our Blessed Lord was so suddenly wafted into the midst of his
Disciples, (Luke 24. 36.) that of above 22 eyes none could see him coming
thither, till they beheld him standing there. And though they might well
believe their eyes, while he stood, that it was, a body by standing there; yet
it is said they were frighted to think, that it must be a spirit in its coming
thither: they being no more able to ken the body through the glancing of the
spirit that brought it, than they could the speed of a spirits glancing, even
without body. And as his coming was thus over-quick, to be seen by those eyes
that can see from earth to heaven in a moment, so his going away from two, a
little before, was of the same kind, (v. 31,) He vanished out of their sight:
not that the body turned to a nothingness, but to an unseenness, ((...).) And
such, to end, was his farewell, While he blessed them he parted, and was carried
up, (...); in the very blessing he was carried. It was so soon upon it, that
the Spirit of God did not think meet to say it was after it. Though indeed we
read from one Gospeller, That after the Lord had spoken he was received up; yet
he does not say it was after these words of blessing, but might be only after
what he was speaking of foregoing: Or if he did take in this, he does not say
after but (...), which may be at, among, or about, there, as well as it must be
elsewhere, Luke 24. 5. And if it be said that our Lords Body was a spiritual
body, we must also say, that if it was not true body, as well as spiritual, it
could not be truly a spiritual body.

What we would gather hence is this, That if a body, whilst a body, may be so
oversway'd by ghost within it, as to brush through many atoms of room in fewer
nows of time, it may happily be that that unbodily thing called motion without
ghost, may be so far intended beyond what the body in which it is is extended,
as to bring it to a like swiftness. So that if all the motion with which God at
first quickened the world, were made over to one small body, just holding way
with time in its motion, and all the rest at a dead stilness, time all the
while holding on its even by-run, it is not methinks altogether unlikely, but
that this body which ran even a breast with time, from the motion which it had
before, should now give time the go-by, with what it has gotten since, and is
over-glutted with. But, to break off from this so great a stamme to the mind,
rather wishing we could give more light in it, than blissing our selves in that
already given, We go on to the following, which may seem to have beset the mind
as narrowly with wrack and night, as any of the foregoing.

We have it, with the former, fathered upon Empiricus, thus. Take a line of
nine points, and imagine two least bodies pacing with even speed from the two
ends to the middle, that they may meet there, it is needful that the fifth or
middle point should be halv'd between them, there being no reason why one
should engross the whole more than the other; when yet the places and bodies
moved in them, are for-taken to be altogether without parts.

To which by way of forerunner, we ananswer, That if the Argument be of any
force at all, it will hold as strongly against time's being made up of nows, as
body's being made up of leastings. For suppose we these nine atoms of room to
be run over by these leastings, in nine nows of time; each of them then must
needs have run as well four instances and an half of time, as four atoms and an
half of room, time being a thing to be halv'd as well as room: Notwithstanding
which, we hold time to be made out of nows or instances, and so may likewise
for all that, hold body to be made up of leastings or points; Only we have a
divine witness to assure us, that time had a first now, but have only reason to
bespeak us, that bulk has a least part: Whence we are not so ready to drive one
back to infinity, as we are to drive the other on to it.

But then to speak more home, we answer, That the middle point is not to be
halv'd or shared between both, nor taken up by either; but the race of both
shall end at the fourth leasting. If it be asked, What stops them there, when
there is another leasting of room between them ere they can touch? I answer
again, The laws of motion, in the round All of bodies stop them there, by
virtue whereof it is impossible for a body to move through less than a least of
room, or to strive to do it: Now the whole, or all that lies between them being
the least that can be, if both should crowd nearer, (and one must do it as well
as the other) motion would be made in less than a leasting of room: which is
but a kind of more than the most of nonsense.

That they do not touch comes to nothing: for having taken them up as
Indivisibles, such as cannot be shread, we have thereupon made them Invisibles,
such as cannot be seen; and those things that cannot be seen at all, cannot be
seen to touch or not to touch at all.

But if you make two such bodies as may be seen, so to run a tilt upon such a
line of odd leastings, we say they would meet and touch, and yet leave the odd
atome of room between them too: For there are not two bodies in nature or
handy-works so smoothly outsided, but that being clapped together, would leave as
many leastings of room between them, as those they touch at indeed, and in the
mean time should seemingly touch or abutt at all, and by us be said and thought
so to do.

Besides, we are to reckon here, That it is no unwonted thing in nature, for
motions to be checked, from a bare truckling to the laws of the world, or
symbolizing with the scheme of the great All, without the least hit or stop
from other bodies that thwart them; as we have before shown they would do, at
the selvedge of the World, and center of the Earth. Nor is this Show or
Phenomenon harder to be understood, than that of two atoms falling from the
two ends of the Earths throughfare line or diameter in even pace, and both
ceasing to stir further, with the central or inmost point between them, as here
with the middlemost. It being demonstrable, that neither of the two should
thrust into it, and shut out the other, for this reason, Because it is alike
impossible, that both should have the whole, (two leastings of body crowding
into one of room;) or that each of them should have half, the breaking that
asunder which is the least that can be already, being only a breach of sense,
and nothing at all besides.

Which laws too, are so far spread as to take in ghost as well as body. For
though we are sure that body cannot stop the glancings of a ghost, the hardest
or the stiffest matter being as throughfaresom unto that, as the softest or the
yieldingest: Yet, to go no further than our own souls, we see them bound, by
these wide reaching laws we are speaking of, to the narrow closet of a man's
body; which that the body do not lock up there for the sake of its hardfastness
or closeness, we are ensured. For why, the body is as fast and unthroughfaresom
when a carcass, as when enlivened: but when the body becomes a carcass by
timely or untimely death, we see then the soul can do after the needings of its
own kind, and fairly take leave of the body for all its cloggishness; not that
it has sprung any new leaks or starting-holes to fly out at, but only that law
which bad it stay till then, bids it go now. If you ask me then, What it is that
keeps the soul so fast within the quickened body? I answer, Because the great
law of its kind has set it no business to do any where else in the world; and
for the soul to be, and be for nothing, or be against the law of its kind,
which is as bad, would too ill tax, and too much shame the wisdom of its maker.
It Is a truth with a witness, That every thing in the world is as much stakt
down to its work (freedoms in free beings set aside) by the law of its Maker,
as the Groundsil of St. Paul's was by the tools of the Workmen. Yielding
therefore but this, That the soul was once put into the body by God Almighty,
to begin or carry on a shaping or plastic work of life, in such bounds, of
such stuff, for such a time; which must be so, or else, that the hairs of our
head are told, or our time's in Gods hand, not so: It will as surely hold to
that spot of the world, for that work, all that while, as all other ghosts may
do within the selvedge of it, or as the body would rest where it is, if begirt
in a mould of marble, to the bigness of the whole earths globe; the laws of the
All of bodies taking like place in both. The reason of the latter being, not,
that the body of man cannot drill through marble at all: For if God likes to
empower it, it may, for ought I know, do so, as well as our Blessed Lord's
could come in to such a room, as where the doors were shut. But the main, if
not the only thing in the way, is, That unless a narrower law be made for it,
there is a wider already made against it. And sure, to think of any other and
thicker way of making the body the souls inholder, as if any strings of it
could bind it down there or the closest coat of it wrap it up there, would be
all one with hedging in the Cuckoe, or laying of lime-twigs to catch the flying
thoughts of it.

And that this law is not a law like that of right reason, and settled within,
but some outward one, far above and wide of it, may be gathered from hence; in
that though we think it never so meet and wish it never so earnestly, (if it be
our mind and will only and not Gods) that we may go out of the body in life, or
stay in it at death, neither will come to pass, any more than willing to be
rich will make so; our bounded wills not being of strength enough to unhinge
Gods unbounded power: Who has withstood his will, that is, of power or
forecast?

If I agree with a Workman to build me on such a plot of ground, an house of
such a size, in such a time, with such stuff as shall be laid him in, he not
stirring out of it until he has ended it; though the doors or ways be open, he
cannot any ways get out within that time, morally or in right: For why, I have
so hemmed in that of him which is moral by the bargain, that that cannot be done
by him that cannot lawfully be done by him, though he has still the same kindly
power of going out at doors or openings that other men have. And could I now as
well bind him by laws of nature, as I have done by those of right and wrong,
(which God can do both alike,) I should then grasp all of him, as well as
before I laid hold of some of him; and it would then be as well beyond his
power to stir abroad altogether, as it is now to do it lawfully; and he would
more surely, than with chains and bullwarks, be charmed within that circle all
that time. If God Almighty had said it with himself, That I shall never set
foot in Rome; though my soul has the same power to do that for my body that
another man's soul does for him going from hence thither, or that it should do
for me if I went thither; yet I shall be as sure not to come there, as if I
were waylaid with nothing but walls and sconces gulfs and quicksands. So much
does each thing after its kind, bow to the laws of him that made it.

Much of this may be seen to in the Breathers below us, of which a bird, one of
the most quick and flitting kind, is one. At a known time of the year, one of
the laws we are speaking of, binds her to the sluggish trade of setting in a
nest upon eggs, on which score alone it does it, in the open lightsom air too,
and with more stilness than if tied with strings, or born down with weights,
and notwithstanding too, the kindly cravings of hunger and thirst, as seems
from its leanness at that season, and all this from as certain a cause as is
that, by which the runner in a Mill does not sink through the Lyingstone, that
is, a wide law of the Almighties. Afterward the same law, that for the sake of
the eggs hatching, had tied down the brisk and eager fowl so long, fore-casting
also for the young ones a coming, bids it arise; for though its fatness might
be spared, yet its life cannot. And now, though the Coethy bird should be as
much bent upon setting and starving, as it was before upon rising and eating;
yet, as then the strength of the law overbound it to set still and hatch, so
now the force of the same overswayes it to fly away and eat: All this while
she plotting no more, (without wiser than we) than the shruff, moss and hair,
that the nest was thwackt together of. In a word, it is so clear that the Shows
or Phenomenon of the world are weilded by unseen laws, even the worst of its
shocks and jumbles, and not after those thick roughnesses that sense beholds
them with, that he cannot be any thing of a Christian Philosopher (nor can he
be now adays the latter, to speak of, who is not the former,) that does not
see, that even the Beings beneath us are led to do all their tricks, by a
wisdom far overtopping that by which we manage the most weighty and crafty of
our own affairs.

The birds we have been speaking of, build nests with such an auk tool, their
beak varying too after the manifoldness of their sorts and kinds, without
either being shown or having tried, more neatly than some men would do, holding
the Apprenticeship to the craft of a Nestwright and making it their daily work,
with the meetest of tools. The Spider drives on the great business of catching
flies, by netting in corners within doors, and darting in the open air abroad,
from the beginning to the end, with far more layers of plots and traps than the
cunningest Huntsman follows his game. If the Commonwealth of Bees were but as
narrowly searched into, as it has been curiously endeavored, happily it would
shame the misadventures of the cried up Kingdoms amongst the stock of mankind.
To come more home, we find we could such better at a week old, without showing
or trying, than we can do when grown up, by the help of reason and sight of the
thing done: for when we did it as sucklings, we were steered by a wisdom in its
ripeness, too far outgoing what we laid claim to in the seeds and sparklings to
be named with it. Nay, to end, we may observe in our own elderly doings, and
those too of so low a rank as that of the bare stirring of the limbs, we are
set on work after higher scantlings of wisdom than when we put forth the
loftiest powers of will and understanding: else we can give no reason why a
Fool should rise more Mathematically from a seat, than the wisest man can fully
reckon for; inasmuch as the remark is as old as Aristotle, That no man can rise
off a seat without either bowing the body forwards, or drawing the legs
backwards: but the ground of the thing has been so much in the dark, that it
was but lately (that I know) hit upon by that great Light of Chester and the
World, (now with the Father of Lights,) the excellent Bishop Wilkins; who has
brought it so to the lever of the thigh, as to make the middle of it the prop
or thiller, the body the weight, and the leg the power; either of which being
brought by a sharp angle to a downright or perpendicular or more, with the
thiller, will by so much lessen the weight, from the yielded assumption in that
mechanic power, That that point, which is touched by a perpendicular from the
center of heaviness, is one of the terms: Which kind of way made out to a fool,
as an help to him to stand up from his seat, would sooner fit the man that
gives it to set down even such another, than him any whit the more to rise up,
for being taught so, how he should: but yet he can do the thing without
showing, and as most wise men do too, without so much as thinking how. So far
do the laws we have hitherto been upon, bind and oversway the workings of all
bodies, from the noblest beings in the world, to the tiny bestirrings of the
least atoms, which led us into all these remarks.

CHAP. VI.
HAving thus seen how far body or the world of bodies may be bigned, how far a
piece of it may be lessened, and how slowly or how swiftly bodies may be
stirred, The next thing to be handled is, Of what standing the world may be, or
might have been? Whether it might not have been so far of old, as to have had
no beginning; or may not be such a while to come, as to have no end?

To this we must say, That as we learn from holy Writ, that the world had a
beginning, so from the grounds by us laid down, it could not choose but have
so; It being as easy for God, who is without beginning, to have beginning, as
for the world which had it, to have had none. God who is every way unbounded,
may as well be brought down to the timesomness of that which is bounded, as
that which is every way bounded, may be lifted up to the alwayness of him who
is unbounded; the farness being the same, it is all one, for this to come to
that or that to this, the Hill to come to Mahomet or Mahomet to the Hill. If it
be said, That Gods coming down to the world would ungod him, but not the worlds
coming up to somewhat that he is. I say, the worlds driving up to any thing of
Gods being, would as much ungod him, and over and above unworld it self. For it
does as much ungod him who is everlasting, to make another so, as it does to
make him not so; for why, if he be not only everlasting, he is not everlasting
at all. Two times may as well drive on by each others side, and not be one, as
two everlastingnesses; and two things unbounded in bulk, may as well dwell
together in the same unbounded room, and not be the same bulk, as two things
unbounded in lasting, may dwell together in the same abiding, and not be the
self-same abiding.

If God has the whole perfection or fullness of everlastingness, then cannot the
world go shares with him, without he should ungod himself, by making himself
less perfect; and if he has it so wholly, as that whole thing to be himself
wholly, then cannot he make it over to another, without making that to be no
other but himself. Insomuch that I do think the begetting and forthstepping of
the Son and Holy Ghost could nere have been, had they not been Very God of very
God.

If any shall say as some have done already, that the world is somewhat besides
God for all his boundlessness, and has a bounded fullness or perfection, over
and above his boundless perfection, and so why may there not be infinitely more
than gods infinite whole perfection as well as finitely more? I answer,
Methinks whoever says it, speaks thick, in both meanings, as taken for hasty
and gross too. For though the world be somewhat that is not God, yet it is not
somewhat that is not Gods; it is not he but it is his; 'its perfection is his
perfection, and so his, as that it had never been his nor never been, if he had
not been Infinite or Almighty. Had the world or any thing else perfection or
being, though in never so low and scant a way, and not springing from God, I
could not tell how to think God an infinite maker; something being made, or
being, that he did not make: but that Gods making a boundedly perfect world,
from his unboundedly perfect power, should be a taking up of, or lessening to,
that his whole perfection, I no more conne, than that a man's doing a thing
wisely, should make him not to have the whole of that wisdom which he had.
Indeed if God were such a kind of Being, as some have made him, by ekeing him
out with boundless scopes, nothing could then be roomthy besides him, without
carving a piece out of him. Which he that stickles so much for should do well
to mind a little the twitchings of; For sure he must be stockt with forehead,
as well as brains, to hold it.

As that Bayard must ever be as bold as blind, that comes hobling with his
blundring houghs, on Hallowed be thy name. God is an infinite maker as well as
an infinite God, infinite in doing, as well as in being; when therefore he does
or makes, he does or makes somewhat: but that the somewhat, should end in a
thing that is not God, falls out by luck, and is not a thing that must be; for
Gods making of something into nothing, is as much an Almighty work, as making
of something out of nothing. Whence I think, that God by making any things,
does not make any new perfection besides, or out of, his own, which is the
whole infinitely; but gives a new show of it, in that, which still lives, or
moves, or has its being in him, not out of, or besides him, as when he be
nothings a thing that is, he does not benothing any perfection, it being too
hard to think how that can be an infinitely perfect deed, as all his are, but
only shift the show or sight of his own infinite whole perfection, which is not
more by doing this, nor less by doing that; (or gives the same in another
dress).

The way to drive the world up to everlastingness, is not to give it a being
sooner and sooner, on and on: For when you have driven it as far as you can
that way, you are as far off from Gods everlastingness as when you first set
out; and it is no better than if you should go about to make a man as wise as
God, by making him every day a little wiser than other. We have said it and
must stand to it, that Gods everlastingness is a beginningless, endless now;
and if you mean, to get the world to go share in it, you must turn its way of
being one now of time after another, into that of being all at once, or you do
nothing; any more than you shall make it all filling, unless you can put it out
of its wont of having here a piece and there a piece, into the way of being
altogether.

If otherwise, look for brain-breaks from such kind of killing things as these;
As an infinite tale of years to have run before the time in which the world, as
it is, began; and that is such a cannot be, that we need say no more against it,
because we have said enough already: and then a more than infinite tale now,
because more have run by now, than had then: and a more than that more, because
more are to come to the end of the world, than have already been: and then a
most behind that after more, for why there is to come an unknown tale of years
after the worlds end: and after that after as endlesly as ever were before.
Thus shall we sort out eternity into as many kinds and lengths, as the
Darbyshire huswife does her puddings, when she makes whitings and blackings,
and liverings and hackings: and it is pity for fooling sake that we cannot tie
a string at the ends of all alike. But still that which kills after all this
death is, that in this infinite tale of years, more than infinite, more than
that more, and most at the end of it, there must yet have been a more infinite
than all those infinites of months, and in that a more than that infinite of
weeks, and in that a more than that infinite of days; in that, a more of hours,
in that, of halves quarters and moments: and yet the first infinite tale, as
much as all of them together, neither more nor less.

Page 400. 402. And if any man think to come flourishing off with this, That
it is not the infinite succession but the infinity of the succession that thus
wracks the mind, and that it would bear as hard upon any other infinite but
Gods, that is. I think so my self and would have others think so too, that a
things infinity in whole, which is finite in parts, is enough to crack all the
strings in the backbone. Therefore all the hurt I wish men, is That as they
love their ease, they would never crack their brains nor rend their souls, with
thinking that there are any such things, while they live, but only in the
Mathematics, where such are supposed, but are not, nor ever were said to be.
And then, as for Gods ever blessed and only infinity, to a man who is as he
should be, it comes as full of good cheer and heart taking, as the other comes
empty of it.

Page 413, 414. Our Author indeed is clearly of the mind, the world might have
been from everlasting, and that for ought I can see for these reasons only.

It Is clear, says he, the world might have been made sooner than it was made;
and if there never was a time in which the world could not be made, it follows
that it might have been made from eternal ages?

Answ. Before world was, there was no soonerness at all: and therefore the
world could not have been sooner made than it was. And the reason why there
never was a time in which the world could not be made, is only this; Because
there never was any time at all, till the world that was the first timesom
thing, was made, and by it time was. Nor does it follow from thence, That it
might have been from eternal ages; For why, there were no ages at all, until
that which began at the beginning of the world.

Secondly, Page 415. Could not God then make the world, when he set with
himself that he would do it? What bound him up, that he could not give show of
his power, together with his will?

Answ. The words having a twofold meaning, one true, the other untrue, I say he
could, and he could not; he could in one meaning, and he could not in another.
The when has two faces, one with which it looks inwards into the decree, the
other with which it looks onwards unto the world. As to the first, it is not
true; as to the latter, it is. God could bring forth the world at that then,
wherein or when he had cast with himself the world could afterward be made,
and that was when it was made: But God could not do it then, when he was
setting with himself to do it afterward, (if I may word it so to be better
understood;) and that when only was from everlasting; for he had decreed from
everlasting, that he would do it in time, and it could be done no otherwise.

That forecast or decree by the power of which the world was, was nothing but
God forecasting or decreeing; and if the world had been of as long standing as
that was, that had been God too. That everlastingness that made one to be God,
would have made the other so. Insomuch that the Argument is nothing but this,
God was from everlasting, therefore the world might have been so too. And that
is indeed a pretty little brat, that has been so lovingly dandled by old Father
Hobbes, that it will never call other man Daddy while the world lasts.

Methinks decreeing is so much forecasting or foredooming that which is to be,
and is not, till so foredoom'd, that do but once yield that the world was,
because God from everlasting did decree it should be, and for the sake of that
alone it cannot be from everlasting. The world being no world but as it was a
decreed world, and the decree by which it was such, being from everlasting
decreed, and never a decreeing, then I say, The world must be after the decree,
not in the passing of it; for it was ever passed, never passing. So the decree
passed, was the cause of the world made. Now the decree which was passed before
it, being from everlasting, it was thereupon from everlasting before it. So
that by making the world as much as you can of old, you can make it no more
everlasting than it is; for it would always be alike after the decree, which
was from everlasting before it.

If you say the world was just as everlasting as the decree, rather made in it
than by it, or upon it: Not to say, How can that be made, that was never a
making? I say then, The world must needs be before ever God was aware of it, or
could ever decree it; and so as much the cause of the decree, as the decree of
that; and the decree as much a worlded decree, as the world a decreed world;
and that decree being God himself, he must be also a worlded God, or a begoded
world.

It Is still a truth, and owned such, That what binds up God from doing, binds
him also from willing: But as God had not a power from everlasting, to make the
world from everlasting; so neither did he ever will it should be so: but his
will from everlasting was, That it should be in time. Accordingly his power
holding an evenness with this his will, brought forth the world at that time
and no other, than we read it took beginning.

Obj. There is yet another Argument much befriended by the same hand, as also
to be met with good broadly somewhere in the Morean Philosophy, and that is,
Why could not God as well make the world everlasting a part ante, on the
behalf of formerness, as he did the soul of man a part post, on the behalf of
latterness? Why could not the one as well have no beginning, as the other no
end?

Answ. This all flows from a very great mistake about the very being of that
thing which we call Everlastingness. Gods everlastingness, and that of the
soul, are two things under one name; and so wide asunder too, that they lie
infinitely off each other, as to their very kind. As Gods everlastingness was
always without succession, so it is now, and ever shall be. And as the
everlasting soul of Adam has lived as successively since his death, as the
world it self, that we see holds on to do so still; so shall it abide for what
is to come, as it has for that which is past* it shall never wear otherwise
than it has or does. And it shall never be said, That his, or any man's soul,
has lived to an infinite number of minutes; but whatever minute you pitch upon,
in the boundless lasting of the soul, it will have a bounded tale of minutes
behind it; and it shall never live in other to come, than such as are already
past; the soul being rather indefinite than infinite in its abiding, rather of
an unmarkt lasting than everlasting; and that everlastingness or endlesness
which it has, (so called,) shall come no nearer Gods everlastingness or
endlesness, than if it lasted only for a while, and then ended: For still it
shall be rightly said, That God is every way infinitely beyond the soul, in his
way of abiding. Gods everlastingness is without beginning and without end; and
these two are so together, and bound up in one, that you can no ways halve
them, and say, This half is unbeginningly, and that unendingly; this unlike the
souls abiding, and that like it: For that is this, and this is that in God, and
both are one, and one God too, and you can no more sunder them than cut a now
in two. From everlasting to everlasting is God's whole eternity, and nothing
less can be it, or any thing of it; If it be otherwise dealt out, we must
remember, it is for our sakes only.

But now the alwayness of the soul is such a thing, as of which it may be said,
it evermore was not, as well as it evermore will be. Now as that which evermore
was, stands off infinitely from that which evermore was not, so does Gods
everlastingness, which was the former, from that of the soul which is the
latter. And as for that which is to come, the soul must creep on to it step by
step, now after now: Whereas to Gods everlastingness, as there was nothing
before it, so there is nothing to come after it; nothing to come, nor nothing
past in respect of it; but all to him is now, and he is shier out of the length
of our line, from everlasting before it, to everlasting beyond it.

Should it be otherwise than we have said, this unbecomingness would tread upon
the heels of it, to wit, That the world might as well get up with Gods
all-fillingness by growing bigger, as with his everlastingness by growing
older. For let us but suppose the world every week it lasts, to wax as big
again, (he that made this in six days, can make it as much more in six more,)
and to have the same everlastingness the soul has, or might have had; if by its
ever growing older it would reach or hold up with Gods everlastingness, then by
its ever growing bigger it would reach or hold out with Gods all-fillingness:
ever to ever, or infinite to infinite being the same.

Why could not God make the world boundless in its bigness one way, as the soul
in its lasting another way? As suppose an infinite line to cut the infinite
roomthiness in the midst, (as somebody will show you how,) might not God have
made in one half, a Being boundless in bulk one way, so as we might say, that
God were infinitely beyond the bound of its infinity one way, as well as say,
God was everlastingly before the beginning of our everlastingness one way. Its
immensity might as well have a first part as to outstretchedness, and no last,
as our everlastingness have a first now of its abiding, and no last. Extension
that is infinite as to bulk one way, is no more uncouth than an abiding that is
everlasting as to length one way.

But now should there ever be such a thing as this, it must needs share in the
half of Gods all-fillingness; but seeing that Gods all-fillingness cannot be
halv'd, but is what it is wholly, and this is what it is halfly, it follows,
That because this Being cannot reach half of it, or all of it, it can reach
none at all of it. In like manner, Gods everlastingness not being to be halv'd,
any more than his all-fillingness, the everlastingness that the soul has, must
reach the whole of it, or none of it.

Besides, the thing would be too ill matched with it self, ever to be at all. If
that which is once infinite can never be finite, it is impossible, that even
while it is infinite it should be finite too, infinite one way and finite
another, whether it be so in its lasting or in its roomthiness. Finite one way
and infinite another, is worse than man one way and horse another, or woman one
way and fish another, which yet is that Centaur and Meremaid, that never were
but in the wildest thoughts of him that sometimes roved at them.

But indeed the self-same Writer has told us roundly, (p. 399.) That Gods being
everlasting, is nothing but his having the root of it so in him, as to be
called everlasting in the self-same meaning that the soul of man is; not that
it has been together with that which is to be, but that it is put into such a
way that it must needs ever abide, and be together with every now, when once it
comes. But that God should be in actu, or already, together with those moments
that are to come, is both absurd and impossible.

Now I must beg leave to say, That however this everlastingness may set well
enough upon the thing that Mr. Hobbes has made a God of, that he might play
with him: yet I am sure it would full ill become that God who has made us, that
we might worship him. For I will be bold to say, it is proved, the soul shall
never have lived everlastingly, and that that everlastingness which the soul
has in the root, and is to come, is of the same kind with that abiding which it
has already grown up to, and is past: Nor is it any thing else but time eked
out, now after now, a lastingness that is indefinite, but not finite; for why,
a thing that is finite backwards, cannot be infinite forwards, any more than a
thing may be boundless in bulk one way and bounded another. Now, that God
Almighty should have an everlastingness that is as much finite as infinite,
growing as grown, or be only indefinite, is a thing that I will not call by its
right name: but be it as it can be, it lights full upon the head of him that
says, Gods everlastingness is so strainedly such as that of our souls is. If it
be allayed with this, That only that part of Gods everlastingness which is to
come, is akin to ours; he that shall do it, is himself more akin to Waltham's
Calf, that was to suck part of that Bulls milk that had none at all. He that
breaks asunder Gods everlastingness, breaks the Godhead; for why, his
everlastingness is no less than his very Being: and he that makes part of it
like to ours, makes the whole so; for whatsoever part you pitch on fore or aft,
it is the whole, and now for evermore.

The ground we go upon here is this, That whatsoever God is, or is in God, is
actualiter or in a readiness, and that he is not toward any thing which now he
is not, or in potentia ad aliquid. That the bare Essence or Being of God is so
in actu or forthwith, that it is as impossible he should be in potentia, as that
he should be less perfect, is owned as well by our Author as any man. But I say
then, That Gods everlastingness must needs be as much in a readiness, because
Gods Being, as it is everlasting, is as far from not being, and as every way
perfect as his Being barely taken. And if that be reason enough to make one
actually or forthwith, it is so too to make the other; the latter being bound in
the former, and Gods being alone without being everlasting, not being at all,
but as we think it, by it self. If then Gods Essence or Being, taken only as
such, cannot be made up of being and not being, neither can that his Being,
taken as everlasting; the everlastingness of it being as much of the Essence as
the nakedness, and rather too, inasmuch as one is, the other lonely, is but
thought. If then Gods being as such, shut out as well the may be, posse esse,
as the may not be, the posse non esse, Gods Being as ever being, shuts out both
too; else God should be more perfect in the being which he has sunderly in our
thoughts, than in that being which he has truly in himself. If that of Gods
everlastingness which is to come may be, but is not; then that of Gods Essence
which it is, may be also, but as yet is not. He then that says that Gods bare
Essence must be forthwith or actu, but his everlasting Essence, or his
everlastingness which is all one, must be forthcoming or in potentia, must
either say he does not know what, or he does not care what; it being true blew
Gotham or Hobbes ingrain'd, one of the two.

To make it yet out, that Gods everlastingness must be like that of the soul,
growing still more and more, our Author goes on, by showing the aukness or
great absurdity on the other side, which is, That all that which is to come
should already be.

That that which is so unto us should already be with us, I acknowledge is auk
enough; but that that which is so to us, but not to God, (to whom nothing can
be to come or past) should be now together with him, is no more odd, than that
that which is a great way off in place from us, should be at hand to Godward.
As for what we read in Holy Writ, that God was, and is, and is to come, it is a
coming down to our meanness: As when he said, Before Abraham was I am, and This
day have I begotten thee, who was begotten from everlasting, he kept as near to
the thing that he was, as he kept off from the Grammar that we speak by. And if
we should but reason from the likenesses that God has given us of himself to
other things, as it is here done from the likeness given to time, unto his being
such indeed, we might easily make as odd a thing of the Godhead* as somebody
else has done of his everlastingness.

Besides, it is owned too, That all the moments which are to come shall never
be, [p. 399.] and therefore God shall never be* together with them. Not to say
how hard it is, that that which is not at all, nor ever will be, nor can be at
all, nor can come nearer at all, should yet be a coming; I must yet mark, that
this onward everlastingness which is fastened upon God Almighty, is all along
made up of things which before were not, afterward are not, and leaves still
beyond it things that never shall be: So that Gods everlastingness, or
everlasting God, is made up of something that now is, and something that was
and is not, and something that neither is, nor ever was, nor ever will be: And
that is a something that never was something, nor is now something, nor ever
will be something: but a something that is now nothing, and always was
nothing, and always will be nothing; unless the Reader will let it be
something that is now awake, and always was awke, and always will be awke.

But we are not only to be burdened with awke, but knocked down with a Cannot be
too. For so we read, If there be nothing to come of Gods infinite succession,
then it is come to an end: but it is a Contradiction that what is unbounded
should ever be ended: it is therefore impossible that God should be in actu or
at hand with that, which is not so yet, but will be.

This indeed smells pretty strong of quirk, but relishes as faintly as may be
of reason. For it has no crutches to lean its crippled burden on, but what we
have already plucked from under it, to wit, a succession in Gods
everlastingness; whence it is thought because things are to come to us, who are
growing onwards, they must be so to God likewise, who is not, but calls the
things that are not as though they were: and I think enough has been said to
show, that neither is extendednes the measure of Gods immensity, nor is
successive lastingness the measure of his eternity. But if the man who is so
all to benighted, will needs be setting up a Will in the wisp, no wonder if the
glare of it sometimes roblet him into bogs and marlpits.

But if another gates answer must be given, I do say, that when ever any man
dogs me with this, If there be nothing to come of Gods eternity it is at an end?
Then will I say too, If there be nothing to come of half of it, that half is at
an end. So at the very time of my writing this, Half Gods everlastingness
should be fairly tript off; and though God Almighty were whole God from
everlasting, yet he is to be but half-God to everlasting; his everlastingness
being of his very Godhead, and this halving of it being a knack of our Authors
owning long since. Again I must say, If there be no part of Gods immensity
beyond the room where I now am, then it is wholly here, and if wholly here it is
wholly finite; for such is the whole room that is here: But it is a Contradiction
that boundless being should be bounded. For the rightning of all which there is
nothing in the world to be brought forth but this, that He that talks of one or
other, talks idle, and jumbles holy Ghost and body, lastingness and
everlastingness both together, which should always be kept wide asunder.
Something to come, and part beyond, have nothing to do, with Gods
everlastingness or alfillingness, but are wholly taken up by body and time. And
because we see that every body has a middle and that our lastingness has an
onwardness, we are hasty to make over these to God and his everlastingness:
Whereas nothing has a middle, that has not two ends, between which the middle
must evenly be, nor is any thing growing older that was not sometimes young, or
young that was not sometimes nothing: If then Gods Eternity has neither
beginning or end, he must be hugely out, that talks of the middle of it; and if
God were never younger than he is, he is but a brainsick wight that dreams of
his growing older. If nothing of his everlastingness be past, nothing of it is
to come, and if any be past then something of Gods being, was, but is not; and
if any be to come, then something of Gods being is not yet, but forsooth shall
be, and yet his own self stiffly and rightly holds, that Gods being as such is
altogether in a readiness or actualiter. Now do but put these two together, and
see how huge luckily and unluckily they spell absurd and impossible, which yet
are the two hard things that are cast into the Folks dish for them to gnaw
upon: Sometimes he that is busy in hurling stones at random to pelt other men's
Geese, may unluckily brain some of his own Swans.

Though the thing we are upon be so a Nonesuch, that there is no other thing in
being, or can be, to which we may fully liken it, yet some things there are by
our looking unto which, the understanding, I think, will a little the better
cope with this. One is the way of the souls being in the body, or together with
it. Let us then with Michaelius (a late Hoorns man) take eternity to be as it
were the soul of time as then the soul takes in all the body, without being
partable as that is, but being as cleaveless as if it were but the least point
of it; So eternity hems in all time, without creeping on and on as that does,
but being as free from all succession as the least now of it. Little otherwise
Gods working or knowing differs from ours, as sealing or printing does from
limning and drawing, one asking time, and the more done the more time; the
other is done in a moment, and much may be done in that moment as easily as a
little.

Another likeness may be that of the wheel, beset with a row of cogs or pegs,
in the whirling about of which, to an eye that is placed within, the stirring
of each cog comes into sight, one after other, all on a row; so that the first
looked on, must turn about to the point at which its start began, before all of
them can come to be seen; but to an eye that is seated without the wheel, the
running of the wheel is taken in the twinkling of an eye. Now God is beyond the
wheel or line of our time; for why, he is beyond the selvedge of this our
timesome world, by way of perfection, that is, not stowage, to him then the
whole wheeling about or revolution of times, is as much in an instant, as the
least now of it is to us.

Nor is it right down trifling to mark how time has a great deal of its length
or shortness, from the plight that our souls or bodies are in: for when we are
ill at ease, the shorter time is always long, and the wheel thereof drives on
heavily; but when we are blithe and happy, the wheel is laid aside for wings,
and that which could scarce go of late, now flies, and overswiftly too for us
to mark its speed. Now God who is infinitely more happy than we are, must needs
drive on the speed of this wheel to an infinite height, beyond what we can; so
that it must do no less than wind up into it self, even in a very moment. If it
can take the slowness of one now after another, from us, why may it not take
the swiftness of all its nows together from God? And though indeed many things
are to us otherwise than they are, yet so as all things are to him, even so
they are indeed.

But to make short with our Author, to whom it seems the world might have been
from everlasting, we shall only mark what an ugly train this carries after it.
His news is, That the world might have been as unbeginningly as God himself,
and then to be sure it may be as endlesly as he is; for the soul which is one
thing that God had made, being so already, the world which is another, may be
so too, if God will: So God may give away his whole everlastingness, to a world
that is as much as he can be from everlasting to everlasting: And when he is
thus on the giving hand, he may give away his immensity too. And this indeed
our Author is so forward to yield, that he has taken it up for a thing that all
men else have done; for so he lanches out, (p. 391.) Our lastingness cannot be
of another kind from Gods everlastingness; for then if God should make a body
of an all-filling, outstretchedness, it would not be all-filling, because it
would have dimensions of another kind from what God has. So he does not only
take it for a truth, That such a thing may be, but a more owned truth than that
which this is brought to strengthen. But indeed, whether he will hold so or
not, he must, or else break with himself. For if the reason why the world might
be from everlasting, was, (as p. 414. is said,) Because there was no part of
that lastingness which was before the world, in which it began to have a power
to be, but still it might have been sooner and sooner unbeginningly, then the
same gives the world leave to have been all-filling as to bulk: For why, there
is no scantling of that roomthiness beyond the world, beyond which the world
had no power to be, but still it might have been bigger and bigger boundlesly.
Besides, for fail, he has found out another way to make the world as immense as
God is, though it were made bounded from everlasting; and that is by growing
every day bigger and bigger endlesly: so having lasted an infinite while, it
must needs have grown up to an infinite bulk, though made otherwise at first;
for so he says, God is called everlasting, not that he is gotten up to all the
nows of time that are to come, but that he is hieing thither as fast as he can,
in the same road with our souls. Which is indeed a most curious, pretty, dainty
thing if you mind it narrowly: For, in likeness, Gods immensity may be called
so, not that he has filled all roomthiness from all eternity, or was
everlastingly every where; but from his growing ever more and more in bulk, he
may be said to be immense, as from his growing ever older and older in time, he
may be said to be eternal: so have we gotten a world as everlasting and as
immense as God himself. Now he that will but cut out such a God for me and make
it thus far, I Will undertake to make it up for him with stuff of the own; for now
Gods Almightiness, All-wisdom, and whatever else comes under the name of
attributum incommunicabile in the Dutch Divinity, setting no closer to the
Godhead than his everlastingness and all-fillingness, he might from everlasting
have thrown them in too after the other: or however, if he gave them but a
bounded mightiness and wisdom, yet inasmuch as there might be a growing every
day more mighty and more wise from everlasting, that Being must needs be as
infinite in wisdom and mightiness as God himself, because as infinite in those
two as he is in his everlastingness, in which he is no less infinite than in
them.

All that we want now of making the world a God Cap-a-pe, or up to the Brim, is
only this, That such a world would be made by God still, and not from
everlasting of it self, as he is. But do but put it next into that same
boundless roomthiness and abiding, whereupon it is said, they would jump into
one roomthiness and abiding; and, which are as much of themselves as God
himself is, and were and will be for all him from everlasting to everlasting;
and then I think he will have set before us such a Hoghen moghen Leviathan,
that that of Holy Job would be but a kind of Spratkin to it ward, and the
bigger one of Mr. Hobbes would never be enough to make Anchovy-sauce for it.
Though indeed I cannot think he meant no better, yet weighing these things, I
must needs say, He seems to be a setter forth of strange gods, and looks as if
he had given us Tentamina de Deo for the nonce. And for my part, if I did but
think there were or could be any such thing as springs thus kindly from the
seed which he has sown, it would give me for ever frolicking on it again, and I
should go in fear of my life on it every day I rise, and dream full dradly on it
every night I went to bed. For I being at no agreement with this same hideous
Roomster, as to the way how I should behave my self toward it while in it,
how to bespeak its forgiveness after doing amiss, or how to know when I have
done so; it may be, while I am thinking how all is well, and a coaks a coming,
I may, for ought I know, be ramping on the snout of it, and so have my harmless
mistake paid home by a vile mischance and a sudden too, with nothing less than
the dreadfulness of a grim nip, and a dead-doing gripe.

And this shall be enough to have spoken to the first part of our fourth Head,
How far of old, the world or body, has or might have been: The other part is,
How long it shall or may last. The Answer to which must be twofold, according
to the twofold state of the world; to wit, That in which it is, and that in
which it shall be. As to the latter, There sticks nothing with me, but that the
world or body may be as everlasting as the soul: For I think it is as
impossible, that that which is something should make it self nothing, as that
that which is nothing should make it self something. And when we say, the body
is dying or timesom, the soul deathless or endless, we do not mean the body
should thereby lose its bodyhood, but only its suchness: It shall be or may be
always body, but it never shall be, or at least never was it body unshifted;
but after its kind, sending forth and taking in of steams and reeks, even all
along.

But as to that plight in which the world now is, the May be of its lastingness
is not to be gathered from the inwardness of the thing; for, for ought we know,
body as now it is, may last as long as body renewed and cleansed by fire, as
hereafter it shall be: But we are altogether to look outward to the will of
God, who, as he has said to the Sea, Thus far shall thou go and no further in
room, so has he said to the World, Thus far shall thou go and no further in
time: The last day and hour of which, though no man knows, yet I think it is not
much harder to pitch a time beyond which it shall not be, than it is to find out
a scantling beyond which the roundle or globe of the earth is not, as now.

For whether we hold, That the same body which slept shall rise again, that
very flesh, blood and bones which it lay down, as Holy Church seems all along
to have believed; or whether we will have it, That the same body, because the
same Man with body beghosted, rises, as some of the uppermost seat of
Philosophers at this day have themselves thought, and won upon others to
think so too; Inasmuch as both of them are acknowledged to be made of stuff
already in being, it comes all to one: As sure as we are that the body shall
rise again either way, so sure are we that this world shall hold no longer,
than till all the stuff that is now in the world be wrought up into bodies
rising again.

But then we are not only sure that the body shall rise again, but we have the
same Word of God for it, That it shall do so in the world in which now it is,
though not in the world as now it is, but changed in its kind of worldhood, as
that shall be in its kind of bodyhood; the new heavens and the new earth being
(as we think,) but old bodies new dressed. So that we are sure too, that at the
ending of the world there must be stuff enough left, unmade up into Manish
bodies, wherewith to frame a new heaven and new earth, without making more of
nothing; and that this world shall hold no longer than till then.

Now though the heavens and the earth have dealings with one another, yet they
do not make over to each other any thing that is bulky or weighty, that we can
find so: whence we may make bold to say, over and above, That all bodies that
are to rise again, are made of the same mold or ground that the first was; that
is, taken out of the earthly world, not out of the heavenly bodies. Whence the
world is to last no longer than till the earthly stuff for rifing bodies be
spent, with leaving enough for an earthly world besides.

If then we do but know how the earths globe, or that of it that lies
fleshward, bears it self to the throng of men's bodies made out of it, we may at
length come at such a bound of time or term of years, beyond which we may be
sure the world shall not hold out. And if we were but well aware, how much the
innermost bodies enwomb'd in the earth, had to do with the making of ours, we
might come a great deal nearer the business, than otherwise we are like to do.
But, setting aside the Excellent Mr. Boil and Kircher, almost all men that
have delved into the bowels of the earth to fetch us any tales of underground
bodies, have done it rather to make themselves more rich and wealthy, than
either themselves or any body else more wise or knowing. So that we are much at
a loss as to the kind of those things that are hidden there, and whether
according to the Laws that God has set to himself, in drawing one thing out of
another, in those Workhousen which we find he has set up, the fleshly body of
man may at length be carved out of them, or Whether there be any little
spungholes or crannies by which one may soak through to the other? Again, What we
do find at our utmost depths or bores, whequarries of stone, Mines of metal, or
layers and veins of barren earths and sapless medlies, we cannot tell how far
they may be tiew'd, and dressed, and mingled, so as at length to be be made fit
for the food of body, to make it wax when well, as we see they may for the
health of the body, to make it well when sick. And yet again, The sundry
unevennesses in the depth of those layers, that are made of sapful and
growthsom earths, lead us into another Wilderness and leave us there. For like
as sometimes we find Gold (a thing that changes us much, but feeds us little)
as fleet as the roots of shrubs in Peru or the West Indies, sometimes among the
shallow waters that drill between the pebbles in the Falls of Guiny or Africa:
whilst the Gold Mine at Chremnitz is no less than 160 fathoms deep, (as we have
it from a good Hand upon the place:) So in like manner, those things that feed
and biggen us, lie in the earths globe at full us uneven depths. For while
salt, a thing that helps as much to live, and get life for others too,
sometimes floats on the top of the Sea, and is thickened in the open Beds, at
the salt-making Marshes of the Isle of The and Xantoign, Provence and Messina,
or dug in the Isle of May, and fetched up at the Wiches in England from easy
depths. We have it for truth, That near Eperies is a Salt-Mine 180 fathoms
deep, and a Sal gemma Mine in Poland no less than 200. Though for the most part
it will hold good, that you cannot dig many spades in mold or growthsom earth,
before you come at a dead soil. Supposing then (to make short of a thing that
may more easily be made long) That the wet and dry surface of the earths
roundle, to the depth of man's height, one place with another, may be made up
into the bodies of mankind, and with the well-skill'd F. Taquet, That at
Doomsday a less cantling of it than England, which we reckon above the
thousandth part of the Globe, will be enough to hold all the dwellers of it and
their children, that ever have been, or in likelihood may be hereafter till
then, though the world should last 10000 years, Then are we sure this world
shall never last beyond a thousand times ten thousand years, how much soever it
may be guest to fall short of it. Which being the whole that we think needful
to speak, under an Head that has so much room to spread upon, and so little of
boundedness to wind up in, we shall take forth to our last, which is,

CHAP. VII.
WHether there may not have been some other worlds or world before ours was; or
Whether there may not yet be some such a great way off, while this of ours is?

Answ. A moreness of worlds, and a soonerness of this world, may always be,
and often are, grounded upon a like way of reasoning; that is, the boundless
and everlasting power and goodness of the Almighty Maker: for so pleads the
avoucher, God being all way boundless in power and goodness, and every where
withal, wherever and whenever he is, he may give show of his power and his
goodness; there being nothing to hinder his making worlds elsewhere than where
this was pitched, or other-while than when this was begun, but only time and
room imaginary which are nothing; and it being good in it self for a world to
be, the more of them there were, or the sooner they began, so much the better.
Now if all this makes any thing for a moreness or more earliness of worlds, by
the self-same Argument we may hold, That this world began sooner than we are
told it did begin. Which is both impossible to be, and wicked to think: For the
Maker Almighty being everlasting as well as all-filling, and ever as well as
then, boundlesly powerful and good; and it being good in it self for this
world, as much as for any former or other world to be, Why might he not 10000
ages before the world was, give it its bidding to step forth, whilst the sooner
it was the better? But we must also note, That the Argument drawn from Gods
unbounded power and goodness, as looking toward the behoof of the Creature
will ever fall short upon this score: For why, there is not a full reckoning up
of those attributes of his that have to do in the work; boundless wisdom and
good liking being left out. For we are to know, That then only infinite power
and goodness could make the world, when infinite wisdom and good-liking thought
it meet, that such a being should begin to be. Now that was when we read in
Moses it did begin to be. Whence I think it follows. That it could begin no
sooner. For infinite wisdom pitching upon that time for its beginning, chose
out the very best time that could be lighted on for its beginning: Had it then
begun sooner, it had been better for it not to have begun so soon. But to
mistrust boundless wisdom, to contrive so, that it might have better been
contrived, is to unmake its boundlesness. And to pitch upon two or more best
times, for a thing to begin in, is to pitch upon one of the worser kinds of
awkwardness.

Hence then we gather thus much, That as boundless wisdom took in with a
moment, wherein it was deemed most meet, that Creatures should begin, so are we
to think again it settled upon a certain number of Creatures, which it was best
of all, should sometimes have beginning. For if there were no more reason, why
God should make the world, then when he did make it, than why he should make it
sooner or later than he did, it had nere been made at all, any more than it was
made sooner or later than it was: and if there were no more reason why he made
so many beings in the world, than why he should make more or fewer, he had
never made so many at all, any more than he made fewer or more than he did
make. Now the same most trustful witness that tells us when the world began,
telling us also that it was, in the beginning; that is, (if I understand the
first word in the Bible (...)) in the beginning of those things that were ever
made, or before all worlds, or the first made bodies were the heaven and the
earth which now are: and when he tells us what things were then made; tells us
also that they were made up into a world that was one. And the same argument
that makes for worlds more or sooner, proves also with the same strength that
our own world was more or sooner, or might have been. We have the same reason
to deny its force for more or earlier worlds at all, that we have to deny it
for the forebeing or morebeing of this.

Besides, To gather that God has or may have, more or earlyer worlds, because
he can do the most that can be done, and the soonest that could be done, is no
less than the very scum of emptiness. For God being as boundless in his
goodness as he is his mightiness, at this rate, would be forced to reach out
that love to all mankind at least, that we read he has bounded only to some
chosen ones: so not only the few names in Sardis and the remnant of Israel, but
the All of those Churches and mankind too, should at length arrive at
everlasting bliss. But as we find his goodness as boundless in the making some
happy for ever, as it would be in the making all so; and that God has thought
meet that his infinite goodness should have enough to do, to save some, without
saving all or most: surely we are to think too, that his boundless power has
enough to do, and begins soon enough to do, or did as much as it needed to do,
and began as soon as it needed to begin, in making one world as he did, and
beginning it, when he did. If then boundless good will and ruthfulness in
sparing some from everlasting burnings, has spared as many as it needs to
spare, for the sake of its boundlesness; in like manner boundless mightiness in
making the world or this whole Crowd of beings, as late as it is, and as little
as it is, has made it as soon and as big, as a world or number of beings needs to
be made, for the sake of its boundlessness, so as if more or sooner worlds
should be made, it would not better become, or more fully speak forth its
boundlessness. And if so, then had God made, sooner or bigger or more worlds,
he had done that which was altogether needless to be done, and what not so well
done, as that which he has already done; because what is done is the best that
can be done: And that would be an unbeseemingness, which would as much take
from the boundlessness of his wisdom, as it would put to the boundlessness of
his power.

Again, This ill weighed reasoning would put God upon the doing of things, with
a meaner forecast than we do things our selves. For should God have made
worlds, before or besides this, that so his works might hold some fuller
proportion or meetsomness with his everlasting and Almighty power; it would be
a making of God to do things, for such ends as he should never be able to
reach, nor in the least draw nearer to. For should God have made any worlds
some thousands of years before this, there would have been the same everlasting
power, before all such worlds, as is before this, and no less: as there is now
the same everlasting power before our world, that would be before such worlds,
and no more. And should God make other worlds together with, or wide off this
world, there would be the same Almighty power beyond them, and taken up in the
making of them, that is beyond, and in the making of this, and no more, as
there is in this, and no less. Upon the same account that God may make or might
have made, one world more than this, he may make or might have made 10000, and
upon the same score he may or might 10000, he may or might 100000, and when he
has made all of them, be yet no nearer doing any thing like his boundless self
than he was in the making this one; for his whole boundless power was set a
work or taken up, in the making of this, and no more than the whole could be,
in the making of never so many more worlds, or never so many more early worlds.

God did not make the world or worldly beings, that the bigness or manifoldness
of them should set forth to us his alfillingness, or that the earliness of them
should give us the likeness of his everlastingness, but that the unutterable
curiousness of its frame and workmanship, the unthinkable care and forecast in
all its evennesses and entwinings, should beget in us as well an awfulness of,
as wonder for, a greatness and wisdom so unbounded. As also that the thoughts
of those manifold layers of hallowed drifts, and everlasting well wishes for
the happiness of worthless sinful man, should enkindle in us the flames of holy
love and hearty worshippings, of a boundless goodness, so boundlesly endearing.
All which are to be done well enough, without looking at the time before, the
room beyond, or the while taken up, in the doing of the things we so much
wonder at, and bow down while we think upon. Else should we have lower thoughts
of Almighty Power and Wisdom making the world in six days, than if the same had
been done in one, or less than one. Isaac Habrechtus that cunning Handywright
who made the Clock at Strasburgh is as much talked of, and wondered at, far and
wide, for the bare framing of it at such a bigness, sometime in his life, once,
in so long while as he thought fit, as if he had made it bigger or earlier, and
had made more besides it, and in a shorter time: for, for its workmanship
alone, it is matchless, as to man's skill, and it would have been no more than so,
by reason of the rest.

God Almighty by making this one world in six days, beginning it when he did,
and bounding it where he did, has made it a Nonesuch altogether; and had he by
making it more, or quicker, or sooner, or bigger, fulfilled the minds of such
as would have it so, it had been no more still than a Nonesuch altogether. He
that cannot enough praise Almighty wisdom, and love everlasting goodness, for
the making one world of nothing when he did, would never find in his heart to
do it, for his making more, or quicker, or sooner or bigger: Boundless wisdom,
love and power brought about the first, and no more than boundless could the
latter.

The worthy Doctor More has suprizingly effay'd the infinity or boundless
manifoldness of worlds from the Head of lightsomness. For so he pleads, Either
there must be infinite Suns and Worlds or else, (which is frightful to think),
there must be infinite darkness, for nothing bounded could ever enlighten it?

To which we say first, that having taken away altogether that boundless
wastfulness beyond the world, we are no whit careful, about the light or
darkness of it; that which is nothing at all, being neither light nor dark at
all: let them say, which of the two it had best to be, who hold it. And again
we cannot but mark here, how hard a thing it is for us, to lay aside the things
which befall bodies, while we are speaking of things, which are not so. For the
outworldish emptiness before the income of lightsome worlds is owned to be no
body, and yet it seems, must needs be dark, if unenlightned, body-like:
according to which that Learned Gentleman might as well have proved the soul it
self to have been dark, no Sun shining into it, as that emptiness, a thing as
much not body (a sort of which alone are enlightened with sunbeams), would have
been so: not to say that even God himself before the making of the Sun, must
thus have been in state of darkness too; for God, who, whilst no body, is yet
something, stands fairer for being an enlightened something, than that does,
which, whilst no body, is also nothing at all, and must therefore first become
something, before it can get up to be an enlightened something.

Moreover, to say nothing how light may otherwise arise than from suns, (as may
be seen by Mr. Clayton's Diamond, the Bononian Stone, stale Sprats, the souce
drink of Mackrel, the off-scourings of an Oyster-shell, etc,) it is clear that
darkness or Sun-light, are such narrow betiders of body, that they are too
scant to cover all that are bound up under that name, unless any will be so
uncouth as to say, that a Millstone is inwardly dark; which he that does, must
see further into than I can, or any man else that I know; or that a shining
piece of rotten wood, has less of its lightsomness in the dark than in the day.

As for the lights that have been seen in Mr. Boyles Air pump, When it once be
made clear, as the lights we are speaking of, that all body is indeed and
indeed sucked out of it, that light cannot beam in that thinness where a
breather cannot live nor a bladder be blown, that the hollow side of the glass
throws in no rays or steams, nor the outside of the shining body any at all or
any but those of light, or that none of those rays of other atoms that are
shacking all over the worlds wastes come riding or drilling through both; it
will behove us to bethink our selves of some kind of Answer for it: But until
that be done, we shall think that the world cannot at all, or at least by man,
be crowded into a less room than God at first allowed it, (and that it must be,
if the empty Receiver has nothing of the world in it); and that all the light
that we see is body in body, (the world, as we think, being all over glutted
with body). So that he who at the selvedge of the world does but see light as
far as he can see any thing, he needs not take thought for that darkness beyond
which neither his eyes see, nor understanding kens. Which might be enough
wherewith to close the last thing we laid down, that is, the moreness or more
earliness of worlds.

Unless that we may put to the rest one Objection more for the plurality of
worlds, or infinity of this, from such sayings in the English tongue, as seem
to speak it a truth with us, time out of mind: Some whereof having room either
in the daily offices of the Liturgy, or in the Creed it self, the over-looking
of them without any remark, may seem so like a slight that Book, or those
things which holy and wise men have had both good thoughts of, and much love
for, that I hope we may be forgiven, while we go on to show, that their right
meanings do as much befriend these our thinkings, as their mistaken ones may
seem to lie cross to them.

The first is that which comes, as other-where, so oftenest in the Gloria
patri, -- World without end; which may seem to speak the world everlasting or
boundless. The other is most remarkably in the Nicene Creed -- Before all
worlds; which seems too to be well enough bottomed upon Holy Writ it self; For
so we read, Heb. 1. 2, By whom also he made the worlds. And 11. 3, Through
faith we understand the worlds were framed. Whence one would think, that we do
believe in good earnest, that there were worlds before this, or are besides it.

Answ. If we had but that insight into the happy speech of our forefathers
that were to be wished for, the words could never afford us the least of a
stumbling block. But so few men having thought good to meddle with it of late,
and scarce any but Mr. Somner at this day, we shall take upon us, as shortly as
we can, to give the meaning of those sayings, so as no man who has not so much
as looked back to old English, should at any time be misled by them.

We are then to understand, That the word [World] though we now take it for
that bulk of bodily beings we see, yet of old it was as well, and oftener too,
taken for ages and lastingness time out of mind. And the word with our Saxon
Forefathers, for what we now call the World, was mostly Middan eard, Middle
earth. The old word World answering to the Seculum of the Latins, as the
forenamed did to their Mundus. Which they have stuck so closely to in their
Englishings of Latin, that not only Aelfrick in his Glossary, (set forth by
the Learned and painful Mr. Somner,) turns seculum, World, (as he does aevum
yld and ece). But the word seculum being to be met with 70 times and upwards in
the Psalms, according to the vulgar Lat. the Saxon translations, (printed by
the Great Spelman,) have always turned it world; and as often as it happens in
the Saxon Gospels it is the same too. And whereas Mundus comes in in the Gospels
about 20 times, it is also read Middan eard: As also (...) in Aelfrick's
Glossary. And though Orbis terrarum be the same in sense with both, that is
Englished by neither word, but evermore, (if I mistake not,) in the Psalms and
Gospels by ymbhwyrft eorthena, or all the round-about of earthly beings. And
lastly, Though in aeternum, in perpetuum, and in sempiternum, mean the same
with in seculum, yet are they ever turned on ecnysse, unto endlesness.

But how little they thought them to differ in sense, will be shown by an
Instance or two among many. Psalm. 135, His mercy endures for ever; It being in
aeternum, it is made on ecnysse: But the very same thing, Psalm. 117, being
spoken by in seculum, it is Englisht on worulde, to or for world. Psalm. 9. 5, in
aeternum, and in seculum seculi being together, it is on ecnysse and on worulde
a worulde, for ever and ever. And Psalm. 27. the last -- life them up for ever,
being in aeternum, the Trin. Coll. MSS. reads oath on worulde and on ecnysse,
for ever and ever as we say. Whence it is clear, that with our Forefathers,
World and Evermore were often the same.

And they were so ready to make World speak seculum, that where we give a much
unlike meaning, they still hold to it. So Psalm. 89, (90.) 8, where we read, our
secret sins. The Lat. having it seculum nostrum, (and the 70 the same in Gr.)
from the Heb. (...), they have it worulde ure, our world. So they hold it in
the Ajective too: Whence in King Aethels^ans Laws, as we have them from Mr.
Lambert, we find Mess thegn, and weoruld thegn, turned in Brampton, as the
Great Seldom has it, Presbyteri and Seculares. And in K. Edm. Laws, Churchmen
and Secular men are shared into God^^nda hada and woruld^^da, and worldmanna
dome is judicium seculare.

Besides, We are to know that World, whether it be in the singular number or
plural, may betoken plurally or indefinitely, and as much adverbially as
nominally. So where we read, Psalm. 54. 21, Abides of old, ante secula,
plurally, it is atforan worulde, singularly. And in St. Luke, in secula is on
worulde, as in seculum is sometimes on a worulda, Psalm. 132. 4. and sometimes
one sometimes the other, Psalm. 117. So that world needs not be one age only,
but ages time out of mind, and hereafterward.

Again, If we compare a few Doxologies of the Saxon times, with the sayings we
before spoke of, it will yet further be seen.

Thus in the Saxon Sermon in Mr. Lisle and Mr. Fox, we read on ealra worulda
woruld, unto all ages of ages. And in the pieces of Saxon Homilies by Mr.
Wheelock, on ealra woruld, unto all ages; yeond ealra worulda woruld, beyond
all ages of ages, or times of times; a butan end, aye without end; on ealra
worulde woruld a butan end, unto all ages of ages, aye without end; a a on
ecnysse, for aye, to eternity; a to woruld, aye for ever, or for ever and for
aye. And K. Canute shuts up his Church-Laws with symble efre to woruld Amen,
always, for ever, to endlesness; after our full way of speaking over and over
what is boundless, when we say, for ever and ever.

And since we were overrun by the Normans, this way of speaking has been kept
up. Thus in a MSS. now by me of the N. T. written (as I ghess) about the time
of Ric. 1. where it is said, Romans 1. 25, Benedictus in secula, it is that is
blessed into worldis of worldis, who is blessed for ever. 1 Cor. 2. 7, Ante
secula, before worldis. 2 Cor. 11. 31, In secula, into worldis. Ephesians. 2. 7. In
seculis supervenientibus, in the worldis above coming, in the ages to come.
Col. 1. 26, Hid from ages and generations, fro worldis and generaciouns.
Lastly, in the Cordial, one of the earliest printed Books coming forth a. 1478,
quoting Isa. 34, it is said, The sinner shall be in desolation time and world
withouten end.

From all which it is as clear, that we meant in the days of yore by the word
World, time, ages, all the while that has been heretofore or is to be hereafter
boundlesly, as that we mean by it now adays, that frame of bodies in which we
live and speak it.

And indeed it is easy enough to be aware, that we still take World for that
which is vast in bulk, boundless in tale or lastingness, or any ways else that
we can think of. In those Country sayings of a world of water in the Sea, a
world of Sea-stones on the shingle, or a world of moments since the world
began; and when we say, this or that is nothing in the world, such a thing is
like another for all the world.

So then, to make an end, When we read in the Penman of the Hebr. of Worlds
that were made or framed by God, we mean (if we know what we mean) as the Gr.
and V. Lat. mean; that is, (...), fecit secula, and (...), ap^ata esse secula;
he made or there were framed, the sundry ages or by-runnings and wheelings
about of things in this world, or the whole gathering of them called world:
(...) betokening rather a lasting than the thing that lasts; and yet may
sometimes be both, as the Heb. (...) is Seculum and Mundus. Likewise when we
read in the Nicene Creed, or Maesse Creda, as in the Saxon, that Christ was
begotten of the Father ante omnia secula; we have it ae r ealle worulda, before
all worlds, that is, before all ages or wheelings about of times, and things in
time. And world without end, in the Doxology, is ages, or evermore without end,
or beyond all ages or set times. The keeping to which old saying in Holy Writ,
or about holy things, (as we do elsewhere to those of two tenth deals of
flower, reward thee in this plat, seek after leasing, go with him twain, etc.)
while we have taken in so many new ways of speaking, and later meanings of the
word World, has made those more lonesome Speeches somewhat less understood, and
more likely to be mistaken.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Robert Boulter at the Turks-head in Cornhil over against
the Royal Exchange.
FOLIO. THe Institutes of the Laws of England, in four parts, by Sir Edward
Coke. Spiritual Refinings, in two parts, by Anthony Burgess. -- His 145 Sermons
on John 17. -- His Treatise of Original Sin. The Merchants Map of Commerce,
wherein the universal manner and matter of Trade is compendiously handled; the
second Edition: by Lewis Roberts Merchant. Curia Politiae or the Apologies of
several Princes Justifying to the world their most Eminent Actions by Reason
and Policy. A Concordance to the Holy Scriptures with the Various Readings
both of Text and Margin: By S. N.
Quarto. An Exposition with Practical Notes and Observations on the five last
Chapters of the Book of Job, by Joseph Caryl. Husbandry Spiritualized; or the
Heavenly use of Earthly things, by J. Flavel. An Exposition on the first
eighteen verses of the first Chapter of S. John; by J. Arrowsmith, D. D. A
Treatise of the Sabbath, in four parts; by Mr. Dan. Cawdry. Vindiciae Legis;
or, a Vindication of the Law and Convenants from the Errors of Papists,
Socinians and Antinomians; by Anthony Burgess. The Saints Everlasting Rest; Or
a Treatise of the blessed state of the Saints in their enjoyment of God in
glory; by Rich. Baxter. -- His plain Scripture Proof of Infant Baptism.
Thesaurus medicinae practicae, ex praestantissimorum tum Veterum tum
Recentiorum medicorum Observationibus Consultationibus Consiliis and Epistolis,
summa diligentia Collectus ordineque Alphabetico dispositus, per Tho. Burnet.
Large Octavo. Scholae Wintoniensis Phrases Latinae, The Latin Phrases of
Winchester School; Collected by H. Robinson, D. D. A Discourse of growth in
Grace, in sundry Sermons; by Samuel Slater, late of S. Katherines near the
Tower. The Grounds of Art, teaching the perfect work and practice of
Arithmetic both in whole Numbers and Fractions; by R. Record. A Cloud of
Witnesses, or the Sufferers Mirror; made up of the Swan-like Songs, and other
choice passages, of several Martyrs and Confessors to the end of the 16th.
Century, in their Treatises, Speeches and Prayers; by T. M. M. A. A Treatise of
the Divine promises, in five Books; by Edw. Leigh Esquire. The unreasonableness
of Infidelity, in four parts; by R. Baxter. -- His method for getting and
keeping spiritual peace and comfort. His safe Religion against Popery.
Small Octavo and Duodecimo. A Saint indeed; Or, the great work of a Christian
opened and pressed from Prove. 4. 23. by J. Flavel. Annotations on the Book of
Ecclesiastes, by a Reverend Divine. Artificial Arithmetic in Decimals, showing
the Original, Ground and Foundation thereof; by R. Jagar. Euphrates, or the
Waters of the East; being a short Discourse of that secret Fountain whose Water
flows from Fire, and carries in it the Beams of the Sun and Moon. The Queen's
Wells, showing the Virtue and Nature of Tunbridge Waters. The Greatness of the
Mystery of Godliness; together with Hypocrisy discovered in its Nature and
Workings; by Cuthbert Sydenham. The Blessedness of the Righteous opened and
further recommended from the consideration of the Vanity of this mortal life;
by J. How, M. A. Quakerism no Christanity, clearly and abundantly proved out
of the writings of their chief Leaders, with a key for the understanding their
sense of their many usurped and unintelligible words; by John Faldo. (...).
Hesiodi ASCRAEI QVAE extant, Cum notis, Cornelii Serivelii. Idea Theologiae tam
Contemplativae quam Activae ad Formam S. Scripturae delineata, Opera Theophili
Galei.


