The Church wounded and rent By a Spirit of Division, Held forth In a short
account of some sad differences has been of late in the Church of Scotland,
with the occasion, grounds, and too evident product thereof whose wounds are
bleeding to this day.

Together with some vindication of the truth, and principles of our Church in
this present state of things from unjust revilings and reproach; And a few
words in the close with respect to what are the greatest concerns of Christians
exercise and duty in these times.

Heb. 10: 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering:
(for he is faithful that promised.) Philip. 3. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we
have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
thing. Philip. 2. 2. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in
Lowliness of mind let each esteem other beter then themselves. James 3. 16. For
where invying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. 1
Thessal. (...) Now we exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are unruly comfort
the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men. Printed
M.DC.LXXXI.

THE PREFACE.
IT will be acknowledged by all, who have any serious impression of the truth,
on their spirits, what sore, and trying times, we are now fallen in, and how
deplorably sad the present state of religion is almost every where; yea what
need seems for our being awake with some deeper apprehensions, of what may be
coming, and of so many presages, that this night, is not yet at the darkest,
but one of the sorest conflicts which the reformed Churches have hitherto met
with, may be on a very near approach: of which one remarkably sad, and most
threatening presage, is now too obvious in this late astonishing rent, and
breach, has been in the Church of Scotland, so impetuously driven and fomented
by some there, to the furthest scandal, and reproach of the truth, and giving
the adversary, such occasion to blasphem; Thus has there been so sore
woundings of religion, and the holy spirit of God greatly provoked, and greived
thereby. I confess such a trial would have been little either feared, or
apprehended in a time, when so hot a furnace has been set up amongst us, and
that the Church had smarted, and been so sore brunt, with the offense, which
followed upon former breakings; yea when it is so jointly acknowledged, how
much the honor of Christ the spreading of the Gospel, and edificatione of the
Church, is concerned, and in the highest measure prejugded herein; this is a
sad subject, which should call each to that serious inquiry, and trial of their
own work, and frame of spirit, in such a day, as may lead in to peace, and
assurance of heart, before the Lord in this matter; and to be seriously affected
with what we have seen following thereon (yea might have been feared, with the
first breaking up of this strange rent) of the spirit of error, and delusion,
in the Holy righteousness of God, now with such prevalence over some, whose
work had been, to put the Church in a flame and unsetle others, as they can
find no ground where to fix themselves, but are like to shake loose all
principles, and run that length as is incompatible, not only with Christian but
humane society. Some few things, with respect thereto I would premit now in the
entry, to be considered.

1. First what light, do thus break forth, out of the very bowels of such
confusion, both for conviction, and confirming of us in the truth; if we be but
serious observes of the work of the Lord in this day; and I would yet hope may
tend to put some Deeper impression of these things on this generation, when as
with one audible voice from heaven, so much has occurred, to seal our
instruction herein. 1. That none thus so easily adventure, after what we have
seen on such a public rent, and breach of the Church as this, and to hazard on
a precipice, and rock* on which so many has dashed, and been broke, and where
the losing of communion in love, has not long wanted a sad breach in the unity
of faith. 2. That there may be now more fear, and dread, of managing
differences in judgment within the Church, with that bitterness, and passion,
as has too visibly been of late, to stumble, and beget wrath, more then
conviction; or to make ane offering of such strange fire; the truth and cause
of God can be promot only by these means, and that spirit, which he does
himself require. 3. That Professors of the truth, be more deeply pressed about
the ground work, and for a solid founding on the great fundation-truths, and
principles of religion, when this sad want may be so visibly now read, on all
our distempers, and make us yet fear where some great pretenses, to religion
may end. Here is one of the sadest judgments of the time, much Ignorance of the
truth, and rule of the Gospel; with a louse and unstable mind, tho with
greatest confidence otherwise, amongst too many under a Profession of godliness
this day; through which the tempter has gotten such advantage, yea on some
whose affection and tenderness of spirit, I dar not question, but thought they
could not run too far at a distance from what they judged wrong, not fearing a
destroying snare on the other hand, and that corruption of the mind by error,
is no less mortal then in the life and practice; yea which is too sadly
obvious less hope of a cure, where such a leprosy is once broke forth in the
head. 4. And have we not now seen, for our furthest conviction herein, that
none lift up themselves above that which is meet, upon the repute, and credit
of their profession; before him who is no respecter of persons, and resists
the proud, to so sever a smiting, and thrusting down of their Brethren, and
fellow servants, as has too obviously been in these late differences; and
without that suitable fear, and dread, leist these whom they gave so sore a
thrust to, under the warrant o^ some opprobrious designation, be such, whom
Jesus Christ will own, and finds his servants, and messengers, thus lie a
bleeding under that wound. 5. I would hope also, that such a witness of the
jealousy, and displeasure of the Lord, against despysers and revilers of the
Ministers of the Gospel, may have more weight on the conscience of many after
this; when with so discernable and awful a voice, this I humbly judge, has
been spoke and may be applied, to all such who profess the truth, and the
generations yet to come, to fear, and dread, to give thus the authority of the
Son of God, the supreme head of his Church, so public ane affront in the
Ministry of his servants, as this party has of late done, in our Church; or
rise up in such a conspiracy again; and no pretenses when tried at that bar of
the scriptures of truth can possibly bear out. 6. And should not this clear the
spotless way of the Lord, and seall our instruction from what we have seen;
that when no answerable fruit is to such a season of the means of the Gospel,
as hes been of late, nor ane embracing the truth in its simplicity, and with
desire after the sincere milk of the word, as might have been hoped for; but a
seeking more after new and strange doctrine, and to follow these things which
tended not to edify; that so sad and dark ane eclipse should follow; Tho I
hope some blessed fruit of these times past, shall be yet found and abide with
many. O that after this a more fervent, and serious respect to the ordinances
of Christ, might yet revive in our Land, and a keeping close by this appointed
way, not only to beget, but to confirm, feed, and make the saints perfect,
Ephesians. 4: 12. I hope such as under these means has known a neir, and sensible
fellowship with Jesus Christ, with that ineffably sweet and fragant savor of
his name; and that surely he feeds his people there; cannot at so easy a rate
be taken off these breasts, as too many of late has been. It is sure the more
true growth, and livly the work of grace, is on the soul, the more felt need,
and desire will be then after the ordinances of Christ; and it may be feared
besides all we have seen, if so sad a falling off from those, be still owned as
to reject the message of truth, from such known, godly, and eminently qualified
Ministers of Christ, to his Church, upon that pretense of the late indulgence,
leist they lose even what they had once attained, when thus out of the way of
the Lord, and from under his promise for protection, and being kept, from the
prevalence of that spirit of error, and delusion, which by the very same entry
has now got such visible power on others. I nothing doubt but many has been
ingadged herein without fear or apprension of such hazard, and as judging it
duty; and that some whose appearance this way has had most weight and credit
with others, their heart would have trembled, at what has been now seen to
follow thereupon, whilst the tendencie and product of such things has out-rune
so much their intent; but it should be matter of grief to all what ground we
have thus lost, and what the great adversary of the Church has gained, to
prejudge the interest of the Gospel.

2. I must premit this further to be considered, that it is not so much want of
light, as of practice, which is the greatest let to the Churches cure; and I
would humbly offer some few, things where both unquestionable duty, and the
remedy of these sore distempers now amongst us, are jointly obvious, as we
might yet hope to see another appearance on the Church, when these are in
earnest followed. 1. To keep closse by the scripture, with a sincere humble
inquiry for light there, and a more entire reference, to its alone decision. It
is sure the conscience must be no rule to us, nor can alter the nature of
things, to make that good, which is evil, but must have a rule for its selve;
nor is it further the voice of God, then it is truly enlightened; yea nothing
hes been more threatening to the Church, then the strong impulses of one erring
conscience; which seldom keeps within any bounds. And tho I would desire with
the furthest tenderness to speak in this present case, so far as a necessare
owning of the truth can admit, yet I must say, it has been to me, one of the
astonishing things of this day, How such violence in driving this sad rent in
our Church, and on these grounds as has been pretended, could seek shelter
under this patrociny, of the Scriptures of truth, or plead its warrant from
that blessed rule of the Gospel, which is so express, plain, and full herein;
and what should mean this strange halting, if the Lord be God let us follow
him and subject wholly to his word, for at that bar only, I hope it is, we
desire to appear and be tried: what a sweet testimony will this then be on the
soul of a dying Christian, that the truth was so dear to them, as no
preingadgment, nor any interest of their supposed credit, did interpose between
the authority of his word, and their conscience, or betwixt their conscience,
and a declaring the same to the world both for giving glory to the truth, and
the advantage, and edification of others; yea this from some of greatest repute
in the Church, has tended to transmit their memory with a most sweet savor,
and credit to after times. 2. A serious inquiry and trial by all of their own
way with much fear, and jealousy of themselves should be a blessed ingredient
in our cure and relieffe this day, when snairs and hazards are so thick spread:
and I think it may be now further convincing, that whatever be the case of our
Church, such a way and method, was no suitable cure, as did visibly tend to
inflame the wound, more then to heal, nor that the wrath of man, works the
righteousness of God: I hope a second inquiry, and trial, by any of a serious
spirit, will let them yet clearly see, that such pretenses they founded on, can
never justify this late rent, and falling of thus from Church fellowship, where
not only they could continue without sin, but with much hope of a blessing.
3. And does not here both the rule of duty and our relieffe in this sad case,
convincingly meet, in a seeking to overcome evil, and private injuries with
good. It is true this is a specialy pungent trial and will not want some
conflict, but I am sure is found one of the choicest opportunities of a
Christians life, for theirafter peace, yea the more wrestling may thus be upon
special provocations and with some peculiar aggravating circumstances, to reach
this blessed victory over themselves, the more comfort and joy will be, upon
their after thoughts heirof, and I am sure thus is greater advantage, for a
just vindication by Christians of themselves whilst pressed thereto, as this is
with least bitterness or recrimination followed. 4. It is clear that the spirit
of God expressly calls for keeping a distance with such things as may tend to
engender striffe, and debate in the Church, and not to edify, as our duty;
and I think it may be too seen, how sad influence this has had, to break the
comfort and edification, of Christian fellowship, where once professors of
religion has been involved in such a way. There was no such practice, or
custom, in these first pure times of the Church, whilst the Apostles lived,
and was specially adverted to then; but if any be contentious we have no such
custom in the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 5. It is duty also, for the furthest
convincing tenderness to be used by such, who through grace, have been kept
fixed, for restoring of others with the spirit of meekness, and according to
the rule, of some putting a difference; great peace should thus follow upon a
tender bearing with the frowardness, and revilings of any, under these
saddistempers, upon this design, and for being thus all things to all; to
gain one from the error of his way, is a greater victory then to gain a city.
I find in the life of blessed musculus, this followed with much success in
dealing with some at Ausburgh, who were then under a sad sad prevalence of the
spirrit of error, by seaking first to gain on their heart and affection and
then to deal with their conscience, which proved at last effectual. 6. It is
sure we are now called in this present trial not to be secure as to what
further growth so strange a contagion may have; when the Apostle shows a
little leaven leaveneth the wholl lump, 1. Cor. 5, 6. Which as a destroying
plague, may thus quickly spread from one house, to a city and thence through the
wholl land yea it is known how small the rise of Quakerisme was within these
few years in the Churches of Britain. Nor are these light or small things has
been now with a strange confidence owned by some of that way, or what may be
feared of its further prevalence if the Lord do not graciously prevent and
rebuke such a spirit which has thus troubled the poor Church. 7. There needs
much advertence also on the other hand, that there be a continued fear, and no
coolness, from this sad extreme, in our watching of the Churches hazard from
open adversaries, and to what assault may be yet made to the rights and
liberties of the Kingdom of our blessed Lord, the alone supreme head, and King
of his Church; but that thus an equal fear, and jealousy be kept up, so as
the truth lose no ground upon either hand.

Reader for this present public appearance I shall us but a few words it may
be easy to judge how sad a part it is in a time when al humors are so much
aloft, and what may be expected this way if there be not from another airt to
suport against the contradiction of men; but this I must say I have been
stated under circumstances, and with some surprising call hereto, as I hope,
could obviat the most sharp reflections of any who are this day unbayased in
such a case, but I forbear herein to speak more particularly; only as to the
occasion of my moving further upon this subject, was from that which is
contained in the first Section which upon some desire and aim for a serious
and sober communing upon these differences in our Church, was directed to some
few friends; and did choice that way by writ, to prevent any erruption might be
of heat, as too usually there is hazard of, in verbal reasoning upon such
things; and since I found it so frequently challenged how any could oppose
themselve to what is owned and asserted in that History of the Indulgence, as
that which they judged enough to answer al; in such a case, I was enforced to
touch it a little, tho in a very few words, which I design as far as possible,
and now in such ane unpleasing essay; yet I humbly judge with that evidence of
the truth, as may show the mistake and invalidity of these grounds, on which so
strange a superstructure when seriously pondered and weighed, has been
raised; Nor have yet found more urged upon the matter by any on this head then
what is made use of there. It is sure no times past has been ever with so
entire ane onnesse in judgment as no occasion of difference did fall out
amongst the truly godly in some concern of the truth; but it is sad that so
dreadful a hazard of occasioning a breach in the Church this way, is not yet
credit upon trial, until some have once tried it themselves. My great unfitness
to move in such a case, was just ground of fear, besides much aversion
otherwise to intermedle with so sad, and unpleasing a subject, but being
pressed herein, I hope I may say, it was, with a serious aim, and inquiry after
the truth; and to be confirmed by Scripture Light in a matter of such great
public contest; and with some desire to prevent the stumblings of many as may
now be much feared on these amazing and shaking things, that have since
followed on this breach; for what incongruity may be judged, in the close anent
some thing practical, and the Churches hazard from Popery, with such a subject;
I thought was so far suitable, as I am sure a greater weight thereof, would be
found ane effectual mean to take off these sad unedifieing debates.

There are some considerable mistakes at the press both in words, and in the
pointing, but I hope are such as the discerning Reader can notice, without
darkning the sense, and will pardon.

SECTION I.
THough I have much aversion to move in any controversies, especially where
friends so truly dear on every side are thus interested, and when our
distempers so sadly prevail, as most seem not in case to bear mutually freedom
in these things, so as this present breach would seem almost beyond hope, if
some blessed touch of the great healers hand do not marvellously surprise us in
this day, beside the crowd and noise now may be feared, is so great, as to shut
all access for a being heard on such a subject. And for my self I may say, I
have been struck with that terror of these sad imbittering animosities, and
heats now amongst us, as to judge it no less desirable to find an hiding place
from the strife of tongues, than from the pride and violence of men; yet since
it is sure, true friendship and love gains more by freedom and openness of
heart with others, than to keep at a distance. Besides that sad impression of
this deplorable breach and rent in our Church has pressed me to write these
few lines, not for debate or contending, I may say, in the least; but for the
truths sake in a sober and humble reasoning, with some exoneration of my own
spirit in a few proposals, with the grounds thereof, which without prejudice or
offense I would desire, yea obtest to be seriously pondered. And I hope, I may
humbly adventure to say, it has been with some desire to prove my own heart in
this matter, before him who is the grear searcher thereof, and under some
present constraint of light have now write this, as I durst not (though they
were my dying words with peace or quiet of spirit retreat here) But before I
offer these proposals, I would desire to premit some few concessions, which I
hope on every hand (what ever be the present differences) will be acknowledged.

1. That there must be no coolness or indifferency in any interest of the truth
under the greatest hazard, this being so invaluable, as there cannot be too
dear a purchass thereof; yea that truths comparatively small may be great in
their season, so as a testimony thereto, with greatest respect is then
necessarily called for, when a public opposition is made to the same.

2. That this great truth of the visible Kingdom of Jesus Christ over his
Church, and its independance on the Magistrate, and his being the alone supreme
head and Lawgiver thereto, is of such high concern and elevation, as we should
not count our life dear (if called of the Lord to be offered up as a Sacrifice
thereon) yea that a public testimony should be then more specially owned
thereto, with a clear and distinct sound, when so visibly opposed, as in this
day.

3. That is must on all hands be confessed a sad decay of a true public spirit
now amongst us, and of that zeal, integrity and watchfulness for the things of
God, and deep impression of the Covenant with God these nations are so
solemnly engaged to, as has formerly been with too sad and unsensible a
wearing out from under former impressions of duty in this long continued trial
now in the Church, and that success which seems to wait on a sinful course,
for which all of us have cause for being deeply humbled before the Lord this
day.

4. I would hope also this will not be under debate, that an endeavor for a
safe union (and without any prejudice to the truth) amongst these who have been
helped in this day to witness and suffer against prelacy, and are one in the
great concerns of truth and godliness, is both a commanded and indispensibly
necessary duty, and will be found as expressly charged upon us, as any duty I
know in the Scripture.

5. That there may be differences in a purely Reformed Church in matters of
truth consistent with mutual edification, and without any division or breach
amongst such, yea that such will be still here, whilst we know but in part.

6. This concession I hope may not come under question, that it is a part of
our guilt this day, our not being more suteably affected with both the sin and
judgment of this present rent and division, as we ought: when our Master has
so expressly told, that a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, and no
less thus threatened than the utter dissolution of such a Church.

7. That there is now need of more closs correspondence, and personal freedom
with greatest tenderness to be managed in this present difference with other,
since they may thus tear one another at a distance, before they understand
them, and that prejudice thus entertained with personal reflections, and
alienating of affection must necessarily tend on every hand to widen the breach.

8. That this deplorable rent now amongst the godly has that sad gravamen
therewith, that it is a striving and devouring one another in the furnace,
whilst so sore pressed otherwise under the cross, yea in the public view of
all our Adversaries, who so eagerly thus watch for our halting.

9. That there is a great hazard in credulity, and easy entertaining reports to
the prejudice of others in a time, when too many seem designedly to tread in
the dark this way, as if it were to promot a party, rather than to seek the
truth, and follow an interest on the ruin and fall of the repute of others,
who have had a most sweet savor in the Church of Christ, and been much blessed
for the edification of many: this we may fear is one of the provoking evils in
this time, and as a smoke in his nostrils, who has said, such as sow discord
amongst brethren are an abomination unto him Pro. 6: 19. and has cursed such
as smites his neighbor secretly Deuteronomy. 27: 24. which may be no less sad and
sore by smiting by the tongue, than by the sword.

10. I hope this also will be mutually granted, that a safe managing of
differences and rents amongst the godly in so breaking a time as this, is one
of the most difficult things in Christianity, so hard it is to get our own
spirits kept out, to reach that tender and due regard to present circumstances
for public edification; yea to be kept in an humble and spiritual frame in
such a case, and to have the life of grace kept in vigorous exercise, so as
thus to have pride, wrath, and bitterness of spirit made to melt down in
meekness, humility and love. Having premitted these few, Concessions, which may
be found of some weight in this sad case, we are now in, I must humbly offer
these following Proposals to be considered.

PROP. I. Should we not with greatest fear and trembling look on a breach and
rent of the Church, and amongst the truly godly in this day on these grounds?
1. That it so expressly controlls the authority of our great Master, who has
enjoined by such reitereated commands, love and concord amongst his Disciples,
so as I can find no duty in the New Testament with more frequent obtestations
and arguments pressed than this. And though it is unquestionable, that some
must be more culpable in the cause of the difference than others, yet does he
press thus with such vehemence, and without any such reserve, to sist, until
there should be an entire onness in judgment amongst themselves, else there
were no such difficulty or neid of it to be thus pressed. 2. That it was his
dying charge Joh. 15: 17. to love one another, and to guard against any breach
amongst themselves, and seems to have been the thing his heart was most fixed
on, when he was to leave the world, as a witness of their being his Disciples,
and that the world might know him to be sent of God, Joh. 17: 21. and thus be
for a testimony to the truth of the Gospel, and to enforce a conviction of the
excellency of Christianity and doctrine thereof on the greatest Atheists. 3.
And may we not see these prejudices, which follow on a formed and growing
breach of the Church, are often such, as the cause and occasion thereof do bear
no proportion thereto, when brought to the Test of that great rule of Christian
love in its due latitude, as prescribed by our blessed Master; yea that thus
there is a being so sadly engaged in disputings and sidings with parties, with
such exasperation of spirit, and neglecting of these offices of love we ow to
others. 4. That we may see such a sad rent, the more it is followed, the more
it becomes a labyrinth and maze, and no way found thus to get out, but that by
which they first entered. 5. That conspicuous beacon also, which in all ages
has been set hereon, may make us tremble hereat, and how this has resolved
not only into strife, debate, confusion and disturbances both public and
private, but to hazard the very ruin and dissolution of such a Church. We find
Salvian showing that this was one of the saddest presages of that desolating
stroke, that came upon the Affricain Churches, and we may see the very first
visible degenerating of Christianity in the primitive times begin here, for it
is at such a breach the envious one waits to sow his tares; and how rare is a
stop, or fixing found in such a current, but like the breaking in of waters,
does carry many a further length than they ever intended. It is known on what
grounds that sad breach by Labadie and his party began here in the Belgic
Church, with whom many went in the simplicity of their heart, and by such a
designed cure to the offense was then taken by them, did but heighten the
distemper, and occasioned so much prejudice against the power and truth of
godliness in this land.

PROP. II. May we on any safe ground break up Church fellowship and communion
so far with those who have accepted the late indulgence, as not to hear or
receive the public ordinances from them as being such: I must propose this on
these grounds. 1. That hereby no approbation of the Indulgence can be
necessarily inferred, and the ground of offense can never be owned such, as to
pollute the ordinances, or make communion with these in the least sinful to
us. But it would be adverted on what side the most dangerous and destructive
inconveniences are, and hazard of the greatest offense hereby to the Church. 2.
That we must still own these as our brethren (what ever be the present
difference) with whom we are one (we hope) in Christ, and in the great
concerns of truth and godliness, in the same doctrine and principles of the
Church: for in these we differ not in Thesi, what ever the application hereof
is matter of difference; yea should be tender to judge, in so far as they
profess (whom we so assuredly know to be both serious and godly) in their
opposition both to the Prelatick and Erastian Adversary. 3. That they are such
we must own to be the undoabted Ministers of Christ, clothed with a
Ministerial power to preach and dispense the ordinances, ere ever this
Indulgence was on foot, these being Acts of their office, which flows from no
convey or grant of the Magistrate to such places; and that be virtue of their
office and calling, the peoples tey stands still in force to hear them, with
respect to that primary relation they were under, as Officers of the Church
universal. 4. That this cannot be made practicable, except we take the very
Government of the Church off its hinges, without a declarative sentence; since
upon the matter it is to draw out one of the highest censures against so
considerable a party of the Ministry, yea to exercea critic and juridicall
power some way, not only over these who are indulged, but over must of the
whole Non-Conformists, who are still free and enforced in conscience to own
such in their Ministry. 5. That this should be a departing from an union once
acknowledged in our fellowship and communion with them in the public
ordinances. It has been hitherto publicly owned, that if the whole Church had
been so far left, as to some sad compliance for a time that way, and thus the
peoplefixt under the Ministry of such, that even on an after discovery of the
evil thereof, there would not be allowed the same necessity, or expediency of
separation, or for refusal to hear them, as there is now in our case for a
noncompliance with that party, and keeping thus at a continued distance, which
was a ground had such weight with our worthy Ancestors in the former times of
prelacy, when it was not brought in at once, but by degrees into the Church,
and thus found it not safe and easy to break up so far, as not to have Chruch
fellowship in receiving the public ordinances then from such, though a most
vigorous opposition to the sinfulness of that way was still followed, 6.
Because this might quickly tend to a casting off of most, if not the whole of
the standing non-conforme Ministry now in the Church, who have been helped to
stand and withstand against Prelacy, and to open such a door for any of the
people at their pleasure to quite or turn off the Ministers of the Gospel,
without any fixed or previous cognition in such a case. And Oh! how hard, or
difficult will it be found to set bounds, or fix new landmarks, when once the
old are taken up, may be easily judged.

PROP. III. Is such a refusal to hear these Ministers who are indulged, now
owned, because it is simpliciter unlawful, or on that ground of its
expediency, and for edification? I would hope, none yet dare come to own the
first; but for the second of expediency in such a present case, I must humbly
judge such a practice would seem very unanswerable thereunto, on these grounds.
1. That this sad effect has so visibly followed thereon, to break up that
sweet edifying fellowship, which was formerly amongst Christians in many
places, so as these who were wount to walk together, and keep Christian
converse, for building up one another in the truth, can now hardly join or pray
together, 2. That none seem to have gained by this late heightened breach,
except the public Adversary, yea (...)ad a dash to these public meetings in
the fields thus given, which here to fore were so eminently blessed, whilst
thus such open contradiction of late in preaching has too evidently brought a
stumbling to the weak, and a reproach on the way of the Lord, as we may fear
shall not in haste be taken off. 3. That thus the prelatick party seems more
hardened, and to have less reckoning of that heavy charge of perjury and
defection from the truth, when so great a part of Non-Conforme Ministers they
find publicly classed with them, who yet are otherwise known to be both able
and godly; yea which has been sadly regrated, that the edge of that wounted
zeal which was against Prelacy and the common Adversary, has been thus blunted
in a more hot pursuit of the other party. 4. The shaking and stumbling of many,
which I must here write with a sad remembrance of a Christian, who I durst not
but say but was truly serious, who spoke to me almost weeping, when I was last
in our Country, of being put to that through this late breach and visible
contradictions in public preaching; yea that some had openly declared there
were scarce four faithful Ministers of the Church to be found, that they knew
not what, or whom to credit, but like to be shaken in the very foundation. And
I must humbly judge, if this breach should grow, I know no gain will ever
recompense the Kings damage herein, I mean of our King and head in the
edification of his people. Yea who are there, if not fixed and established by
grace, that can look on these devouring heats and breakings amongst both
Christians and Ministers in this day, but are in hazard to take prejudice at
the whole of Religion, and must needs judge that these cannot be the fruits of
the Spirit of Christ. 5. I must yet add on this ground of expediency, if it
would seem to engage the multitude in these controversies, and make this their
business, ere many such know what the solid work and exercise of godliness is,
or what either the principles and power of Religion means, and why is that so
expressly commanded Romans 14: 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not
to doubtful disputations. It is sure, that it much concerns all who preach
the Gospel, to know the message they deliver be suited for solid edification,
and in bearing testimony to the truth in this day, which is so unquestionably a
duty, that yet it be with such a grave ministerial seriousness and Christian
wisdom, as it may commend the truth to the conscience of the people, so as
this duty be neither neglected, nor unsuteably managed, otherwise a light and
too ordinary a way in speaking on so grave a concern, or on public
differences, without some convincing and suitable weight herein, and when it is
with personal reflections, we may fear would stumble much more then convince,
as would seem a thrust rather at the persons of some, than at their way, and to
gain an interest to a party more than for the truth.

PROP. IV. Are not such expressly called, yea with an intense study to unite so
far for the truths sake, and in following clear uncontroverted duties, who are
otherwise like minded in things of the Lord, what ever now may be in difference
amongst us, so as that union should not, nor ought to sist, until a through
onness of judgment be attained in this present controversy (which were so much
to be desired) upon these grounds. 1. That the Scripture clearly determines
this; so far as we have attained, to walk by the same rule, and mind the same
things, however even in some matters of truth not one, Phil. 3: 15. 16. and
with hope, that the Lord in due time may graciously convince such who are in
the present difference most culpable. And I should hope, that more tender and
affectionat condescendence in the way of dealing with such might tend more to
reclaim and recover, than any violent and peremptory way. 2. Because, if such
an uniting in unquestionable duties should cease, until there be a full union
in judgment amongst the truly godly, what times of the Church have been
favorable, that we could then ever hope, or essay any concord in duty. 3. That
it is sure, the most eminent Instruments in the work of the Gospel, both in the
primitive times, and since the Reformation, have been often at a very sad
difference amongst themselves in the matters of truth, whose concurrence
otherwise in carrying on the work of the Lord, has been most remarkeably
sealed with a blessing. 4. That a bearing and forbearing in many differences of
judgment amongst the godly for the Churches peace, and without any involvement
in the sin of others, has not been hitherto questioned by the greatest lights
and witnesses to the truth in these late times, especially where both the
doctrine and Government of the Church has been in the great and weighty
concerns thereof adhered to. Thus blessed Calvin does so pressingly obtest the
English Congregation at Francfort for a tender bearing and mutual forbearing
amongst themselves, in that present difference was then, with respect to the
circumstances they stood under, and for the truths sake, though he was far from
owning that party in that wherein the rest of their brethren had been sohighly
grieved.

PROP. V. Is it not one of the great concerns and trials of Christian wisdom
in the Church, how to apply the rule in things lawful and commanded, with a due
regard to edification in such a case. I propose this on these grounds. 1. The
express warrant of the Scripture, 1 Cor. 10: 23. all things are lawful, but
not expedient, all things are lawful, but edify not. 2. That this has been
one of the greatest depths of Satan to turn men over in the managing of a duty
on another sad extreme, as the very way to break it, but he that handles a
matter wisely shall find good. The way of the Lord, and a closs adhering to his
truth does never of it self occasion a breach in the Church, but what our
corruption, and unsuteable following of duty does on either hand occasion; nor
is there any jarre, except what is from our selves betwixt zeal and Christian
prudence, since these are both expressly enjoined, and equally obliging by the
holy Ghost, nor can they ever part, but with a sad prejudice to the truth.
There is a holy contemperature of zeal, meekness and love, all which being from
one and the same spirit, do with a sweet onness necessarily concur for the
same end. Nor can I possibly reconcile a being professedly hot in the one, with
being cold and unconcerned in the other, except I should quite the revealed
rule of our duty for both. 3. Because the truth may get a very sore thrust by
the manner of our contending for it: the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace, and both should be seriously adverted to, that the cause of God be
neither neglected, nor yet prejuged, through a non-suteable following thereof.
A wound needs both a tender and skillful hand to handle it, else it were easy
to destroy, where the case and present constitution of the patient is not
considered a right. O! if that Scripture were more practically owned, for a
humble tender condescendence in our dealing with others for the truths sake, I
was all things to all, that I might gain some. Our bitter, hot and unadvised
expressions may some times wrong the interest of our blessed Master more, than
we may find easy with our furthest work to recover.

PROP. VI. Is there not ground both to fear and watch against a giving any
thrust at the credit and repute of the Ministers of Christin our Church, who in
this hour of tentation, and after many sore wrestlings and differences, have
yet obtained mercy to stand and suffer against prelacy, what ever cause they
may have to weep before the Lord over themselves for saddest failings and
unanswerableness to the work of their day? I most propose this on these
grounds. 1. Though I would be far from judging it to be designed, yet ex
intention operis, is it not too visibly inductive concurring with the same
end, and interest both of the Prelatick party and Quakers, and thus may give a
sadder thrust, than is apprehended, at the prophetical, as well as the kingly
office of our blessed head? 2. That this upon the matter is some way all one,
as to silence them and cast them out of the Church: since it must needs tend to
disable and render them useless in their Masters work, what ever tends to break
their credit, as Ministers of the Gospel. And should it not be deeply
considered, if the charge be such, and of that necessity to follow for making
them in a manner contemptible to the people, as the labor and fervice of such
this day in the vineyard of the Lord may amount to. 3. What help thus can the
poor ignorant and impenitent sinners have for their cure, if thus impressed and
taught to turn their back on so many serious and godly Ministers, whose work
has had a convincing seal on many? And I hope with greatest desire would seek
the saving of souls, yea when the profane, drunkards, swearers and worldlings
shall thus flee under such a patrociny, that many if not most of the
non-conforme Ministers of the Church are neither to be heard, nor owned, how
sad should this be? Or if they go that length, as to hear, yet with having them
in such contempt, as without any dread or fear to slight their ministerial
exhortations. And Oh! the souls of many thus in hazard to be undone, and to run
to their own destruction, and take such advantage, when so much is given to
revile Ministers known to be unquestionably godly, and fixed in the Government
of the Church, when they would seek to draw them to repentance. This is no
personal interest, nor will it be found a light or small matter, pretend who
will to the contrary, to give a public thrust at the credit of a Minister of
Jesus Christ, who may yet have some service for his Master under his hand, and
whose sin being blotted out shall be for ever hid in the day of their
appearance before the great judge. Or thus rake up what we may hope he has
covered. I remember what I heard pressed in the time of the late difference
about the public resolutions after a communion before a most solemn auditory,
and by one of the greatest Ministers of Christ I know then; yea when to the
conviction of all he was owned with greatest evidence of the presence of God. I
think, says he, as to the sad differences now in the Church, we should with
Shem and Japhet take the mantle, and with our eyes shut go backward, and lay it
upon Noah, yet was he in his judgment fixed against the resolution. 4. Has not
the greatest strength which error and seduction have got in the Church of
Britain, most visibly followed on the reproach and subtle breaking of the
credit of the Ministers of Christ? And what does the Popish Adversary more
visibly design than this? As Conzen a Jesuit Polit. 2. cap. 18. writes, that
the surest way to reduce the Church to Popery, was to have their great aim
against the Ministers of the Reformed Churches, by blasting of their
reputation, as well as persecuting of their persons. 5. And how sad may this be
judged for such, after many years tossings, and being exposed to many sore
difficulties, to be made to suffer at last more from friends, than public
Adversaries, and thus be under both these rods at once. I write this, I hope I
may say, without the least countenancing of whatever has been matter of grief
or offense in the practice of any; but that I am pressed from that due respect
I ow both to the persons and Ministry of known able and godly Ministers, and
straiching the principles of the Church. 6. I must further add, that I fear it
be found a guilt lying heavy on Scotland, and on many Professors there, beyond
most of the Reformed Churches this day, a high and daring contempt of the
Ministers of Christ there, without respect to their former sufferings,
integrity and weight in the Church, with a designed spreading and agreaging
their infirmities, because of the differences from them: for which we may yet
fear this sin be write in our judgment by the Lord his recalling further his
despised Messingers. And now whilst it seems the plague of the time for many
to hate and revile the Ministry of Christ, need they be thus further killed and
hardened with prejudice against such a remedy, and that these even by their
friends should be thus put to do their work with grief and not with joy?

I shall but further add, that it would be deeply pondered, how far the credit
of the truth, which is of more concern than our souls are worth, has been
exposed to saddest reproach; how much real exercise of soul in the serious and
internal work of Religion has been made of late to resolve in imbittering
debates, and as it were a drawing into parties. Oh! how must our care be yet
further write in letters of blood? That Rabies Theologorum, as it was termed
in the German Church, was such as made some eminent Ministers of Christ then to
long for death, to get out of such a flame into that land of peace. We may not
quite the least of truth for the peace and concord of the Church, nor can these
be ever in opposite terms, but as we make them, and I may with some
confidence say, that what is now here written, has been with a serious desire
in respect to both; but I hope some may speak in the words of Bucer, that for a
safe healing, and to have it made effectual to a broken and rent Church now,
they would judge it of that concern, as if called and helped of the Lord
herein, to lay down their life for the same, and thus for their brethren.

I have been in some measure pressed to write this, if I could with that single
regard to the interest of the Lord thus deal with my own conscience, and
others. And though I designed in as few words as possible, to speak my heart
herein, yet must add a few things more on a subject, though very sad, yet of
much weight and import.

1. That it may be too visibly the great want which is this day in the serious
work of Christianity, and gives the saddest rise to these high distempers now
amongst us, that if these graces of the spirit were in more lively exercise,
the love of Christ, humility, patience and meekness, a putting on of bowels of
mercy, tenderness and compassion, as the Elect of God toward these we differ
from, with more severe self judging, and suitable fear in judging, and
condemning others, we are commanded to have; this present difference should
never have come to a formed breach in the Church; yea thus more advantage to
the truth, and a more clear testimony kept up thereto by a spirit of love. It
has been astonishing to see imbittering heats and animosity, with such sore
thrusts at a distance to break the credit of others, which are so visible
corruptions of corruption, yet plead a patrociny for the same. O my friends,
why is it so? The zeal of God must be for the Churches edification, and also
bring us thus under a constraint for union: the wisdom that is from above, and
is pure, is peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, without hypocrisy and
without partiality. And do any feel the comforts and sealings of the spirit
with a dividing and imbittered temper? It was a sad rebuke the Disciples of
Christ got, though on a just resentment they had of the wrong done their
Master, but that tended more to destroy, than to gain, you know not of what
spirit you are.

2. Have we not hitherto seen, that on a small remove and secession in our
Church fellowship, such have made more haste than good speed, nor have found it
easy after to fix, until they have been a length their heart would some time
have trembled at; yea thus besides the wounding the heart of the godly,
darkning the glory of (...) Gospel, and shaking the faith of many, have been
forced to run on saddest inconveniences and new principles to maintain their
way. What ever length the difference about the public resolutions of late came
to (which was a visible presage of the stroke that after came) yet was there no
dashing on such a rock as this is now. And we may know, that what ever tends to
divide amongst the godly, or betwixt people and Ministers, gets but too easy an
hearing often amongst many, it is so sib to our corruption, and one of the
strongest lusts of the flesh.

3. Is there not an undoubted necessity this day to essay to the farthest an
union and healing in the Church, when of no less import, than the keeping up of
the worship of God, the salvation of the people, the credit of the Gospel, and
a preventing the stumbling of many now in such visible hazard, which are more
than our souls are worth? And can we see how these shall be safe, if this
breach be still widned? The longer continuance will make it the more difficult
to heal, when on all hands we are made to mourn, and see the issue, which we
would not formerly believe; and is not this a strange rent and distemper in a
day, when the Lord has cast us all down, that our great work should be to bear
down others, with such a pronness to take offense, as well as there is in
giving it, is one of the high provoking causes of wrath and judgment, which as
in greatest letters, I must say, has been write before our eyes in the late
providence of this time.

4. Since each is concerned to prove his own heart and work herein, and what
may be his accession to so highly a provoking guilt and stroke as threatens no
less than an utter quenching the light of the Gospel in Scotland, and to be
overwhelmed with Popery, Atheism, and all ungodliness, which so much gain
ground by our breach. It were well, if there could be so impartial a search
herein, and trial more of our selves, than by rolling it over on others, what
may be our part therein; and if these things bring not a sad involvement in
such a guilt. 1. When there is no tender abstaining from harsh censuring of
others. 2. When there is a pressing more of that which tends to divide, than
what there is to unite, and in how far we are still one in our former
principles. 3. When high prejudice, and alienation of affection is not closly
watched against, which like the predominant humor of the jaundice, will
quickly present all things in the same colors, and make it difficult to judge
of the way of others we differ from, without a sad by ass. 4. When contendings
even for the truth are more passionat and breaking, than with humble
seriousness to be rationally convincing and healing, which is so unlike the way
of the Lord, and in being defamed, yet to entreat. 5. When there is not some
study to walk closs together in so far as we are one, and mutually convinced,
which I am sure would help to come more near in what is now the matter of
difference, I must here confess for my self, it has been heavy on my spirit,
that I did not with more seriousness, and according to my small measure move
herein, when last in my own country, and had so near a prospect of these
deplorable confusions, nor have been under that suitable weight, as such a time
calls for, when the Church there is as struggling betwixt life and death, though
I may say, it has often made me covet a hiding and more abstractness from so sad
a noise: but O blessed they, to whom it it shall be given to stand in such
(...) breach this day, so as it may be convincingly evident the zeal of God,
and a healing spirit do most sweetly concur.

5. And what can we possibly answer to our own conscience, and to all the
Reformed Churches this day, yea at the appearing of Jesus Christ, that now the
poor Church of Scotland, when in the furnace, and so long in a suffering
condition, is like to be more ruined by our selves, than by other Adversaries;
and such a sore rent now amongst these, who are still one in doctrine, worship
and Government, and we hope have access to the Father by the same spirit, as
have in a sad measure broke up Church fellowship in the Gospel ordinances, and
in the most concerning duties of Christian society amongst many; yea this to be
still growing, and yet no essay nor endeavor to prevent such a ruin, that is
like to be entailed even on the offspring, and what may be the thought of the
generation that succeeds, when so deplorable a history shall be put on record.

SECTION II.
IT may be strange and matter of astonishment this day, what so severe a
stretching of that controversy about the late Indulgence, in our Church, and
bringing things to such ane extreme, can possibly mean? As though no party
else were to contend with, when the whole of Religion, is like to be swallowed
up betwixt Popery, Prelacy, and Atheism, and that the peace and true
edification of the Church were now so low and cheap, as to sacrifice them upon
such ane account; yea, while so many are in that hazard to be shaken, as they
are like to lose all setted persuasion of the truth: but since such stresse
has been by some laid on these grounds adduced in the late History of the
Indulgence, for not hearing, or receaving the ordinances of the Gospel, from
such Ministers as have accepted thereof, to a further widening thus of the
breach; and, that I have been expressly referred thereto, as a full answer to
what is held forth in the forgoing Paper, or whatever can be said to the
contrary; I was pressed to some perusal thereof, so far as to know whence a
conclusion so strange, and of so high and universal concern to all the
Churches, could possibly be inferred or established by any, who admit the Truth
and Authrity of the Scriptures, and these principles wherein we have hitherto
walked. But ere I touch this more particularly, I must, to prevent mistakes,
premitt some few things in the entry.

First, That it is sure the question of Separation is one of the most difficult
things, and lies more in the dark, then most things that are controverted; and
that all acts of extremity, such as this, should be with greatest reluctation,
and on convincing and necessary grounds followed; nor can we ever see such away
has in any time been blessed, (how favorable soever it might seem in the eyes
of some) which has tended to perplex and precipitantly to break a poor Church
and how sad a mark is put thereon, by the holy Ghost, may be read Jude verse. 19.

Secondly, Though some seem too visibly unconcerned, and in stead of being
sutably affected, to account this growing breach rather ane ornament and matter
of boasting; yet, when seriously considered, of such import is it, and that
question anent Church fellowship and communion; as this may be truly called,
Articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, and upon no less hazard now, (if
grace do not marvelously prevent) then the dissolution of a National Church:
and is not that James 3. 16. written in greatest letters this day before us,
that where strife is there is confusion and every evil work, and that thus
both the work of conversion and interest of the Gospel is most visibly
obstructed.

Thirdly, We must take no measure of present duty, from the event, but whatever
proposalls or essays should be for any composure or healing now in the Church,
I hope, I may say, it is no sinful tampering, or with any ceding or latitude
in the least, in the matter of God; but let truth still have the first place,
for I should reckon any such peace with greatest terror, which might cause a
breach with God: have salt in your selfs, and peace one with another.

Fourthly, It is not the case of the Indulgence, or the acceptance thereof by
any of our Brethren, that is now the controversy amongst us, nor is here
touched further, then a necessary opposing, so strange and unjust inferences,
as has been made thence, to make this difference seem greater then it is; and
for renting the poor Church; but it is known when that design of the Magistrate
was set on foot, what suitable and serious freedom (in the opportune season)
was used to prevent any dividing among us, and to keep of any concurrence
therewith, yet with that due and tender respect to there Ministry, with whom we
herein differed, to prevent any public rent or breach, and as we judged these
most sutably consistent, so it is sure, the thoughts of such things, we now
see, and of such a spirit as is now aloft would have made our hearts then
tremble.

Fifthly, I doubt not that this great duty will be acknowledged by all, if it
had a suitable weight on us, in such a day, to adore the holy and spotless
righteousness of God in what he has done, and ly in the dust before him,
against whom we have sinned, and be much in humble and serious selfjudging; for
we should tremble either to justify or extenuate the sad declinings which has
been in our Church, in these later times, from that first love, tenderness and
zeall for God, and the great concerns of his truth; yea mourn, that so sad a
faint has been among us, and despondency of spirit, for such a suitable, unite,
and solemn appearance, as was called for in bearing testimony against these
invasions made on the Kindome of our blessed Master, whilst many opportunities
has been too visibly lost of this great duty by us al.

Sixthly, Yet upon the other hand we must not shut our eyes, nor conceall such a
ground of hope, and token for good, that the Lord will not destroy, but dwell
in our land, that he has accepted a testimony by the sufferings of his poor
people, even of all ranks now for these years past, who have cheerfully
endured, with much long-suffering, some unto death, banishment, imprisonment,
and the spoiling of their goods, as I may adventure to say, upon this account a
greater testimony has not been given to the way of the Lord, and his truth in
our Church, since the first begun Reformation from Popery; yea, that what ever
be these sad deplorable differences now amongst us, yet are they not stated
upon a public disowning of any principle of truth either in doctrine, worship,
or Government; and hopes, that many of these who are most severly reflected on
by some, would through grace, (if called to public confession, of the glorious
headship and supremacy, of our blessed Head, King, and Lawgiver to his Church,)
not account their life dear unto the death, to be offered up as a sacrifice
thereon: Wherein I judge as is meet, and with more peace of mind now when I
write this, then to judge with that severity, and peremtorinesse, which have
been by some, against their Brethren, and fellow servants this day. I shall but
add, that what is here touched, has been with some desire and aim, to keep a
distance from any personal reflections, or to provoke and give a thrust at the
repute of any; but Oh, if a delivering ourselfes up to the truth, were reckoned
to be the greatest Victory, and however provoked or injured, yet by
manifestation of the truth to their consciences, in a humble, tender, and
convincing way to deall with such; surely, this should be matter of peace and
joy in the shutting up of our days, and not to have recompensed evil with
evil, but to have thus endeavored the gaining the soul of their Brother, by
overcoming evil with good.

Having premitted these, I must touch alittle some grounds laid down in that
history of the Indulgence, for not hearing of the indulged Ministers; and such
measures as seem to have been taken, for a stretching this difference so far,
as to break of Church communion and fellowship with these, whom yet they dare
not but own as the Messengers of Christ to his Church; which I must say upon
some serious reflection, has been astonishing to see, so high a charge and
arguments adduced there, and with such confidence followed, which, if fearched
unto, by any serious and unbyassed Reader, may enforce them to see, the
conclusion would seem to have been established before the premises; though in
this as to the tendency thereof, and these sad and deplorable consequences that
are like to follow, I hope, was neither designed, nor forseen by the Author, to
whose memory, (if such as is pretended to be) I do own great respects, and to
have no further reflection on what is there, then the truth, which must have
preference to all, indispensibly requires.

First, We may see in stead of Arguments, some high and confident assertions,
where I must say, the enditement goes above the evidence; and that (1.) There
is both ane imposing of a sense upon their Brethrens practice, and a being
judge also themselfes; and such a sense, as these who have been known most
averse from any acceptance of that Indulgence, yet can neither see nor admit;
but how hard is it, in a dividing time, when all humors are so much aloft, to
censure without slander. (2.) Here is a pressing of that sense on this
practice, which themselves do with a professed abhorrence disown; whose
candor and sincerity otherwise, in the greatest concerns of Religion, I hope,
none dare debate; and how sad is it, when deductions, and inferences, are
rather forced, then found, from the way of others, and a design more to
defame, and make things worse, then they are to reclaim: and to urge things
beyond their due weight: there is a rigide and severe prosecution even in
things lawful, that brings much scandal on Religion, and the way of the Lord,
so as to make many scarr and take a judgment thereof by this practice, which
yet, is so full of a holy sweetness and condescendence. (3.) What is held
forth there, as it too obviously exceeds, so it is a divesting of the matter,
of these just extenuating circumstances that it is capable of, whilst no
censure should extend further according to the rule, then what necessarly must
be inferred from the fact: for that 1 Cor. 13. commanded Charity, which
thinks no evil of our Brother, so also reasons no evil, so as to put ane
harder construction then it can justly hear, as if there were some desire, to
have such ane advantage to speak evil, and interpret doubtful things in the
worst sense.

Secondly, For these multiplied divisions of many arguments, and a strange
empeachment of ane accumulative defection from the truth, and falling in with
Erastianisme; I confess was astonishing, what such a heaping up of these should
mean, with so visible a coincidence upon the matter, as if to repeat the very
same thing, though in another form twenty, or thirty times over, could thus
have the more weight: but we know, arguments must be weighed, and not numbered.

Thirtly, And is there not to visible a tendency of all these high
aggravations, and reasonings there upon, to cause a further breach, and stretch
this difference, beyond, either what was needful, or expedient, for
edification, in making that a stumbling block for many to break themselfes on,
which was not so before; and thus in shunning one extreme, has rushed both
themselfes, and others, one another, as is like, (if the Lord prevenr not) to
cause a further stated division in other points of truth; and to what a sad
extreme now are things thus come; when it is so expressly declared in the
preface to that History, that he can pray for nothing else in behalf of the
indulged Ministers, but repentance, and until that, may have no suit else to
God in their behalf; which is ane express denying to pray for the success of
their Ministry, and edification of the people, until they be once convinced,
and have changed their judgment: yea, thus could not join with such in prayer,
upon any other suit that they should put up for themselfes, before the Lord. I
should wish this had been so cautioned, as any safe or warrantable sense, could
have been put on so strange ane assertion, otherwise the communion of the
saints, and the doctrine of the Church herein, must undeniably be made void.

Fourthly, That here is a most sad, and unwarrantable overstretching of this
controversy, (in so high a charge, as is thus brought, of Erastianisme, and ane
express formal, receiving of their Ministry from Magistrate) I must humbly
judge, is unanswerable on these grounds. (1.) That thus, is charged upon them
and their practice, for having yielded up more to the Magistrate, then is so
much, as once sought or required by them, in that Act of Indulgence; since that
which is expressly showed there, is, that they allow and permit such the
public exercise of their Ministry, in these respective places where they
should be confyned, to be without hazard of law. (2.) Because, (and, I hope,
none will question it) their Ministry, and the validity thereof, and that they
did also exercise the same, notwithstanding of any hazard from the law, before
any such Indulgence was, is sufficiently known. (3.) Whatever difference has
been in the application, yet their public adherence, to the same principles,
in the point controverted is undeniable, only they judge their practice herein,
to be consistent therewith, whilst questioned by others, which is the very
state of this present case. (4.) I hope none dare judge these our Brethren
(whatever difference of judgment be herein) or charge them with wilful error,
or controuling their light and conscience in this matter, but that they have
walked accordingly; (and I must so judge as is meet) but if any will assume ane
authority both to judge, and pass sentence on the conscience of such, whom
they know to be serious, tender, and judicious, in the matters of truth; I
cannot answer this, but must leave them to answer that great infallible rule of
the Scriptures of truth herein; but I must say, the putting of so a strange a
gravamen, and exaggerating of this practice so far beyond all bounds, has
seemd strange to me, how possibly such could be without some fear and dread,
(how light so ever it seem now to some) of being found guilty of a sad breach
of the ninth command: and since all should prove their own work, I humbly
think, they should be as competent judges in the truth of their profession, and
of what they have so solemnly declared, as any else. (5.) Here also is a
visible opposing of them to themselfes, in so far as their declaration before
the Council, and set down in that History is evident, and has these very
words publicly, before the Magistrate: (We have received our Ministry from
Jesus Christ, with full prescriptions from him, for regulating us therein, and
must be accountable to him,) and if these so publicly owned this, and spoke
the same in truth, and sincerity; then these strange assertions so frequently
renewed there, even to the readers nauseating, upon such ane account of there
having taken their Ministry from the Magistrate, must be undenyably false:
besides its known (and should we deny what is just to our Brethren upon such
ane account,) their practical witness, and counteracting of any instructions
imposed on them by the Magistrate.

Fifthly, There seems much endeavor to invalidate any declaration, which was
then given before the Council, upon the omission of that clause, only, and
that though they owned their Ministry to be from Jesus Christ, and to receave
directions from him for the exercise thereof, that, yet, this clause, only, was
deliberatly left out, and the Authors of that History seems the more pressed
herein, else their whole scope were frustrate, since none could debate this to
have been then, a full and clear confession of their Ministry, as from Christ
alone, and independent on the Magistrate, and therefore are concerned to prove,
that this, only, was a deliberate omission, which I must confess a strange
reasoning to any discerning Reader, that page 130. argum. 12. they with such
confidence say, it is apparent the indulged did deliberatly shun to say, they
had there Ministry only from Christ, and yet page 24. when they give the reason
why this was deliberatly done, because it was designed by some, (says the
Author) if I be not misinformed: and must the whole stresse of most of their
arguments, be laid over upon their design, and intention herein, and no less
then a judicial for faulture of their Ministry thence inferred, whilst they
are, yet, put to confess ane uncertainty, whither they were rightly informed
anent this, yea, or no, or if this omission was truly deliberate: and since
this is a public fixing, a most high scandal on so many Ministers of Christ,
it would have been expected to be with the furthest evidence to convince
others, and that they are in case for the full, and judicial, out making
thereof, when required; if they would give that measure they expect from
others, and which the Scripture indispensibly requires in such a case.

Sixthly, It is strange, so sudden a determining, and publishing the private
judgings of some, in a matter of such weight and universal concern, without so
much as a previous communicating in Council herein, with the must tender of
their Brethren, whom they would in charity judge to be serious, and have the
Council of God with them, yea, this without laying down any such convincing
grounds, as were necessary to justify so strange a practice, as the departure
from fellowship in the public ordinances, with so great a part of the Church;
as though this had no weight in this day, for the spirit of the Prophets being
subject to the Prophets. I must say, though some should own an revelation, or
extraordinary impulse in this, yet, so far, it might have been judged, they
might have keept of, as not to vent the same in ane disorderly and unsuitable
way; or adventure to bring in so strange a practice, and of so public concern
in the Church, without the Church; or to exerce their private judgment, over
the whole of their Brethren. The Apostle Paull, tho immediately called by
Christ, yet would go up to Jerusalem to confer with the Brethren; nor would
Paull and Barnabas together, adventure to determine in that difference at
Antioch, until it was brought to the Apostles: the same spirit which leads
unto all truth, does also lead unto Humility, and to the furthest tender
condescendence in Brethrens dealling with other; nor should it be light,
whatever may be the private thoughts of some, in a matter of truth, to do any
thing precipitantly which may disturb the Church: and now when it is struggling
as if between life and death, was this a time to drive with such heat this
present breach, and in a way to defame, more then to convince and gain, and
with such a height of severe reflection on all that comes not to their measure
this way, as if to be pious, and peacable at once, were wholly inconsistent.

Sevently, And what should it mean, or is it suitable to that candor and
tender respect, which we owe to the Author of the late Apology, to set down
these arguments which he has there for not hearing of the Curats, for not
hearing the indulged; and herein, to oppose him to himself, and his own
expressly declared sense to the countrary, whilst now by his death he cannot
answer. But his own words there, I hope, will not be denied, which you may read
page 128. and there also see, a vigorous opposition to the indulgence yet
without any breach or dividing from these worthy Ministers, who have accepted
thereof, are no ways inconsistent. Amongst the many designs aimed at, (said
that Author) in this indulgence, and in part obtained, we know the breakings
and dividing of our party was a principal one; but, we hope, without the fruit
our Adversaries expected; for whatever difference there hash been, and yet is
among us, in our practice in relation to the indulgence, we are all agreed in
our preceding exceptions against it, and if there had been access for
representing the same to the Rulers, our unanimity and concord in these had
been more discovered and known to the world; there is no change with us, of our
known and professed judgment anent the Government of the Church, in its
distinction from, and independency on the Magistrate; some who take hold on all
occasions to reproach us, are pleased to represent their acceptance of this
indulgence, as contradictory to, and inconsistent with our former professed
principles in Church Government; yet, any that considers what was shortly
hinted at in the Council, at the receiving of this indulgence, and what was
more largly declared by them, to their congregations at first entry, will be
sufficiently convinced of our constant adherence to former principles, which by
this acceptance is not at all changed: thus for he.

Eighthly, But if the declared judgments, and authority of some may influence
any to a more implicit falling in with this way; I must yet further crave
leave, to oppose the judgment of one, who, I suppose, may have the same weight
and authority in this case, it is the Author of the true Nonconformist, who in
his clearing the duty of forbearance to hear the Curats, has these words which
I cited, in the first Paper, Page 196. I freely acknowledge, that if God had
permitted this whole Church to slide into the present evils of Prelacy, and
thereafter had blessed it with a discovery; yet, I would not admit in that
condition the same necessity and expediency of separation, that I now find, to
plead with for a non compliance, in as much as our present non-complyance, was
not only a more seasonable and safe duty, but also was attended with a
faithful and edifying adherence, to our true and sent Teachers. And page 194.
has these words, that separation is a departing from ane union, once
acknowledged, even in these things, that are in themselfes not condemned, and
thus does most expressly determine, the unwarrantableness of falling of from
Church fellowship with the indulged Ministers on that head, after so known and
acknowledged union with these in the public ordinances, even after the
acceptance of the indulgence, till of late, but that you may know, what is the
sense and declared judgment of this Author, in this case, I shall give you now
further his own words, page 487. opposing himself herein to these sharp
reflections of G. B. But you do not only make your Nonconformist to cede as
it were to your reasonings; but in a manner to own the late pretended
indulgence, as flowing from the supremacy, as on purpose to fix on these few
Ministers of ours, who have been thereby restored, at least a constructive
approbation of this evil. And there in the following page has these words. But
not to lose time in these triflings, I differ from your Nonconformist, and am
so much against the supremacy, that I abominate the indulgence under this name,
but that God has disposed the King to restore in any measure what was so
sinfully taken away, we account it a great blessing, wishing that he may be in
such manner satisfied with the fruits of this course, as may more and more
convince him of its righteousness, and encourage him to its prosecution. But if
you, or any think, by this poor and scant restitution, to bribe the Lords
people, to the rest of your usurpations; we trust the Lord will deliver his
own; and that as hitherto, our Ministers has looked upon themselfes as such,
neither of Man, nor only by Man; but by Jesus Christ and God the Father; so
they will accordingly acquit themselfes, and in a special manner testify for
his right and ordinance, against all invasions; and that so much the more, as
the hard condition of the present times, has engaged them to an seeming
allowance of that of which they ought to purge themselfes in the first place:
thus you see what is the declared judgment of that Author in this present case,
yea, how far he is a length herein; and I hope non will question his speaking
his light, and judgment in this sincerly; but that we may see different
judgments and apprehentions in this case should not seem so strange now in the
Church.

Nintly, But since so great a weight is laid on this, that the indulged
Ministers are in the same class, and case, with these who are Prelatick, yea,
seems rather to hold them out as worse; I must now affer some few things on
this head, for any discerning Reader to considere. (1.) How visibly this has
tended, to a sad heightening the present breach; that the just grounds, whereon
we have keept such a distance from the hearing of such, has not been more
weighed, and understood; and how these can give no possible warrant, to make
the same inference in this present controversy. (2.) That the stretching of
this by some to so great a height, as to take arguments hence, for forbearing
to hear, so many eminently godly and able Non-conformed Ministers, upon this
head of the indulgence; would truly seem, as if designed, rather to weaken its
strenth against the Prelatick party, and give such, to sad ane advantage
against us, in this day. (3.) Since it is not in thesi, or without a due
consideration of these special grounds, and just concurrence of circumstances
in the complex case now of our Church, this can be understood for not hearing
of the Curats, but as such, which in a special way must be stated by it self:
(for it might otherwise tend, to a sad prejudice to the truth, and public
interest of the Reformed Churches, and run unawares on a very evident
precipice) I must therefore beseech and obtest, that this may be more adverted
to, and that we may know how sutably to give a reason, of our light and
practice herein, upon clear and evident grounds for which I shall offer these.
(1.) That with the late erection of Prelacy, there was then no departure from
any acknowledged union with such, but a simple Non-complyance, and a public
owning and adhering to these faithful Non-conformed Ministers, under whom they
had been formerly sed; though it is true, that not a few after, when their
heart was touched by the word, fell more of from hearing of such, upon so
discernible difference, they found among them, and the Non conformed Ministers.
(2.) That here is no dark or controverted case, in our Church, as to the evil
and dreadfulnesse of Prelacy, and of any accession to strengthen that interest,
but that wherein we are explicitly sworn to by the oath of God, to endeavor,
in our several places and stations, the extirpation of, and thus, should be
pressed to keep at furthest distance from any tendency, to strenthen the same;
yea, while such severe acts and threatenings of the Council, has been issued
out there upon, does make this the more a case of confession, tho they should
be easily satisfied this day if all should forbear to hear the indulged. (3.)
That forbearance now to hear the Curats, is in a case, wherein the previous
cognition, and authoritative judgment of the Church of Scotland, and general
assemblies thereof, has by a judicial procedure, been so express and full
thereanent; yea, though not the same individual persons, yet in the very same
case, conformity to Prelacy has been upon a clear, public, and judicial
trial, most solemnly judged and sentenced, by the indicatories of our Church;
which shows the great disparity betwixt this, and a few private persons,
taking on them, to judge and sentence their Brethren, upon a practice under
such debate this day, among the most seriously godly in the land, yea, this in
express opposition to the judgment of most of the Non-conformists in our
Church. (4.) This discernible difference is here also, and may be convincing to
all, as we are on all hands so fully one in acknowledging of the truth, as we
can debate these sad differences among us, upon common principles which are
mutually consented to, and does not divide in the same center, whilst by the
Conformists there is so public and professed among of Prelacy, as both there
principles and practice are stated in ane express opposition. (5.) It is
undeniable likewayes, that the intrusion of most of such as are Conformists,
amongst these where they fixed, can have no place here; since, so far as I
know, none that accepted the indulgence, have wanted some express call from,
and consent of both the Eldership and people, and however, that act of the
Council was antecedent thereto, yet, were they neither commanded nor obliged,
to any election of these more then of others, by that act; but has it left to
their own consent, whether to call them or not. (6.) Nor can it be said, that
such who were indulged, (except these who has that liberty to their own
congregations) did come under any further relation, but to exerce their
Ministry there, upon mutual consent, where they had more free and peacable
access, and without prejudice, to any former relation, or tie, to their
congregations.

Lastly I must further add, with some astonishement at what is declared intent
of these arguments, adduced there that it is to vindicate the practice of such
as scruple to own or hear any indulged Ministers, and thus to fix them who were
bot hesitant before, to a further falling of from the hearing of such, the
tendency of which and whether this would lead, I must judge has not been
apprehended or advented to, and that these sad consequences would necessarily
fallow thereon; first to lay a stumbling block in the way of many thousands of
the people, who had no such scruple herein so far as to prejudge, and weaken
their edification by their Ministry; yea thus frustrat that success and fruit
their work of the Gospel might have; and Oh! must the scrupling of some few be
thus publicly vindicated, at so dear a rate as the too visible hazard of so
many immortal souls in taking them either wholly off or marring their profit
in the public ordinances dispensed by so many able, and serious Ministers of
Christ; and how very sad a consequence is this also to fix perpetuat a formed
rent in the Church, by laying thus down dividing principles (I must say not
according to the doctrine of Christ that we have received) to salve a dividing
practice, which otherwise we might hope, should have ere now worn out; but
there they expressly fix the unlawfulness of hearing any of these, so long as
that case exist of their being indulged except upon that supposall which I hope
through grace shall never take place of there being no preaching Ministry else
in the whole Church, and thus does lay down a new rule, and precedent buit
with that disadvantage that I humbly judge its greatest weight, and inforcement
most be from the authority of the imposers, though of such ane import as upon
the matter it is noe less then to sentence; yea, some way unchurch all these
congregations who own and adhere to their Ministry. I thought it a grave remark
of a choice and eminent Minister of Christ, in their late times upon this head;
I could, says he, relate many sad stories of persons professing godliness, who
out of dislike begane at first to separate from our Church meetings, and after
many changes are turned now some Quakers, some Ranters and Atheists, these are
his very words with this reason he did give thereof, that such as fall off from
the public worship are like a Man tumbling down a hill that never leaves, till
he come to the bottom.

SECTION III.
BUt that there may be, upon such sad differences, a right understanding of the
question, and a moving on clear grounds; which has been rendered so perplex
and dark, by to visible essays, for making things seem greater then they are:
I must come more near, to touch this present controversy; and Oh! what can this
mean, the poor Church all in a flame, yea, almost to a being utterly broke,
and the cause so little understood, but many thus thrusting at others in the
dark, and I am sure, when men's eyes shall be opened, and these muddy waters
become clear, that such, as shall be keept from a being swallowed up, in that
whirlepit of error, and delusion; will then wonder, how their spirits should
have been thus entangled, in so high breakings, and animosities, on such a
ground as this; and be enforced to see, that it was not so much, upon the
matter of any difference, in light, and judgment, as a dividing spirit, which
in the holy righteousness of God, is now too much aloft: this is indeed, a
great and boisterous wind, which is renting the poor Church, but the Lord is
not there; except that we may see it, one of the saddest tokens of his
displeasure. But, since on a clear stating of this controversy, the issue, and
a right judging thereof, necessarily depends; and that we may understand,
wherein the present difference does mostly; I shall offer some important
questions, on this account, to be considered.

QUEST. I. What the indulgence is? About which, so high, and continued a
breach, is thus in our Church: for I have found a strange noise and clamor, by
some, upon this account, who did not yet understand, what this truly was;
besides, that astonishment that it causes to strangers abroad, about what the
Church of Scotland, is this day, in such a flame. I shall give but this short,
and plain account of it. It was ane order, and appointment of the Magistrate,
to some Non-conformed Ministers, who were expressly named; to repair to such
places, and remain there confined; permitting, and allowing them to preach,
and exerce the others parts of their ministerial function, in the said
respective places, or parishes, where they were thus confined. This is the very
substance, of the last act of indulgence, of date Sept. 3. 1672. and the former
Act of Indulgence, which preceeded some years before that, being upon the
matter, one, and the same, only without any sentence of Confinement, I need not
further mention, that about the acceptance of this, there was some difference
in judgment, amongst the most serious both Christians and Ministers in our
Church, and with some free, plain, and tender communing among themselfes, upon
such ane account; but, I may say, without any designed tendency, to any such
breach, as some of late have made it their very work to promote.

QUEST. II. It may be needful to know, how far there is yet, ane undeniable
onnesse and agreement, among the true Non-conformed Ministers, and Professors
of our Church, notwithstanding of this present difference, about the accepting
of the Indulgence, to which I must answer, in these few. (1.) That we are one,
in a joint confession, and public owning of the same doctrine, worship, and
Government, as formerly: whatever by all of us, should be sadly regrated, as to
the want of that freedom, in such a public testimoy thereto, before
Adversaries; as these sad encroachments has been made, upon the Government of
the Church, established by our blessed Head and Master, did in this day
require. (2.) That whatever has been thus wanting in practice, (Oh! that we
could truly mourn over the same) yet, are we still one, and agreed upon both
sides, in a declared, and, I hope, serious disowning, both Prelacy, and
Erastianisme as contrary to the Scripture. (3.) In this also are we one, that
whatever the Magistrate has assumed; yet, that he has no just right and
power, or is in the least proper for him, to judge of the spiritual condition
and state of the people, as to the fittednesse of Ministers for laboring
amongst them; and thus to make application of persons to particular places, for
the exercise of their Ministry there; which is alone proper and competent, to
the ordering and cognition of the Church; this, so far, as I know, is upon no
side either owned or approven. (4.) Herein likewayes, do we jointly agree,
that to none it belongs, but to our blessed Head and Lawgiver, to prescribe,
and give rules to his servants, for the exercise of their Ministry; and that
these rules, we can only own and acknowledge, which he has given, for the
same, to us, in the Scripture.

QUEST. III. I know it is of greatest weight, now to be considered, and,
wherein the state of this controversy much lies; if there be ground, or warrant
from the Scripture, and doctrine of the Reformed Churches, to break of Church
communion with these who have accepted of this late Indulgence, and refuse such
as the Ministers of Christ, and by his authority, dispensers of the mystery of
the Gospel, upon this present difference, now held forth. I know, they do not
assert in that History of the Indulgence, this to be simpliciter sinful, to
hear either such, or the Curats, but it is only in case, that no preaching
Ministry were else in the land; otherwise does most expressly allow, and
warrant a forbearing to hear such, as these, who has fallen under no less,
then a judicial forfeiture of their Ministry, in so far, as they have accepted
of that Indulgence: and herein, does in effect impose upon the conscience of
the people, to rack and disquiet their mind; so as many through fear and
ignorance upon this account, knows not what to do. Now to this question, I
must give this plain and express answer, that it seems a most convincingly
sinful, and offensive practice, without any just cause, or warrant followed;
which, I here offer, to demonstrate, from these following grounds.

I. That no Scripture command, or warrant is for the same, from the example of
our blessed Lord, nor was ever taught by his Prophets, and Apostles, and
therefore ane unjust and offensive rent. I hope, this none dar debate, that the
Scripture is the alone instrument, and Rule of Church Government, and to this
Law, and Testimony, we must take ourselfes, under every debateable case
theranent; yea that any ministerial power given to us, is only executive, and
declarative, to apply the revealed will of the Lord unto his people, by a clear
discovery thereof; and what is not according to that rule, none may admit,
though under the patrociny of ane Angel: but that, for this practice we have
no Scripture warrant, is most clear. (1.) From the example of our blessed head
himself, while he was here, upon the earth, and that respect, he did expressly
own to the prescribed worship, of the Jewish Church; yea, that such was his
blessed way, as no visible rent was by disciples, from the public ordinances,
even then, when the dreadful declinings of that Church, was so great a length.
(2.) We see what both the Prophets and Apostles taught, and what was their
practice in this case, that as on the one hand, they sought to keep the people
at furthest distance from all idolatry and false worship; so upon the other
hand did give no warrant, but expressly to the contrary, as to any departure
from the public worship, where it was not corrupted, notwithstanding of these
sad declinings of the Church otherwise; and I crave any to show ane instance to
the contrary. (3.) Nothing can be more evident, then the care the Apostle had
to keep the Church of Corinth from dashing on such a rock, to such as do but
seriously read and consider these Epistles: nor does our blessed Master, to the
seven Churches, give the least ground or warrant, as to any falling of, or
secession, from the public assemblies, notwithstanding of so sad a charge, as
is there given against some of these Churches: but we may see, how concerned
the Apostle was against this, as one of the public evils and scandalls, then
breaking up in the Church, Heb. 10: 25. the forsaking of the assemblies, for
the public worship of God, as the manner of some was then: and Oh! what can it
mean? thus to rack the consciences of the people, and impose such new terms and
conditions of Church communion, as neither the Scripture, nor examples of the
purest Reformed Churches since the Apostles time, did ever warrant; for which,
I must here humbly challenge, any, who are otherwise minded, to let us see,
where the signature of one Scripture command is, for what they impose; or what
divine precept is violated by hearing the indulged; or if such a cure, and
remedy, was ever taught by the great healer, as this practice, of admitting no
composure and uniting in controverted duties, until there be a full onnesse of
judgment among us; or thus to break and disquiet a poor Church, (as though some
had no work else) almost outwearied with these sad, and perpetual contendings,
for making void their Ministry, which has been and, I hope, yet shall be owned
of the Lord for his peoples edification.

II. Ground, to demonstrate the unwarrantablenesse of this practice, is this;
that it is expressly contrare to that established order of Christ in his Church,
as the proper remedy, and releife, for any public offenses, Matt. 18: 15. and
which is so express a rule given in this case, as can admit of no alteration;
as also to that, 1 Cor. 14: 40. that all things should be done in order and
decency: nor can there be any hesitation herein, whether this practice and way,
which is thus taken by some, does not control the same; thus to withdraw, and
impose (upon the matter) so high and public a censure on others, by their
private judgment and authority, except they will adventure to determine on the
rule, and these ancient Scripture bounds which are there set to us; but as it
is sure, the things of Christ, must be by his warrant only, and no latitude
else given us, but to observe he whatsoever commands Mat. 28 last: yea, that no
healing or cure will ever be to the Church, but by his appointed means; so it
is undeniable, that to withdraw from Church fellowship, in such a manner as
this, is a most high and spiritual censure. Yea, not to eat with a scandalous
Brother, must be understood as ane act of judgment, and does suppose some
previous trial, else, there should be no fixed rule; but for each to be his
own judge in pulling of his Brother to shame; and, thus no bounds could be
fixed, to prevent endless breakings and rents in the Church. Its true, a
public releife is not, as formerly, now accessible, but as there is yet,
through grace, a faithful Ministry in our Church, who has the authority of
Jesus Christ, to cognosce and judge of the matters of his house, and to whom,
the power of the keys, both of doctrine and discipline, is by his own warrant
committ, (whatever essays has been, and still are, to make such contemptible
before the people, yea, some way, I must say, no less thus to exauctorate
them, and control their commission this day, then has been by public
Adversaries.) So is there also, some suitable exoneration that each Christian
may have, in the case of public offense, (when there is not such access by
the Church) to spread forth the same before the Lord, to endeavor in their
capacity and station how to convince, gain, and restore such with the spirit of
meekness, and thus use personal freedom and tenderness in dealing with
others; wherein, I am sure, both more peace, and advantage to these they deall
with, should be thus reached; then by any such highly disorderly way, and
unwarrantable severity, as is now adventured on by some.

III. Ground, to clear the unwarrantablenesse of this practice, is, that it is
so expressly contrare to that approven and commended practice in the Church,
Rev. 2: 2. that they has tried such who called themselfes Apostles, and were
not, but had found them liars; where as it is most clear that this was a
judicial trial, and in a legal and orderly way, of such, before any
declarative sentence, and for this end is adduced by the greatest interpreters,
to prove the necessity thereof, but this, as I have formerly touched, can give
no advantage, in that case of the Conformists, to Prelacy, where besides other
grounds mentioned, the antecedent judgment of our Church, has been so full,
clear, and harmonious, there upon: whilst I touch this, I must cite the words
and authority of blessed Mr Rutherfurd, in his divine right of Church
Government page 378. We grant, says he, that each should eschew false
Teachers, and all that walk inordinatly, but that every one, should shun these,
whom in his private judgment he conceives to be such, before he rebuke, and
labor to gain, and in case of obstinacy, then to tell the Church, is
forbidden Mat. 18. and Lev. 19: 19. for if this says he, should be allowed,
that I might unbrother, and cast out of heart and fellowship, every one whom I
offend at, and conceaves to walk inordinatly; were first a pathway to
perpetual Schisms. 2. A violation of all Laws of Christian fraternity and
communion. 3. A dissolving and breaking all Church communion; and, it is
strange, says he, that some would have Christ's order kept, in private
offenses done by one Brother to another, and not the same in public offenses
where one may offend a whole Church.

IV. Ground, this is a practice which is stated against the very rule, nature,
and end of Church communion, in falling of from hearing upon that head of the
indulgence, which may be demonstrable to any on these grounds. (1.) That
according to this rule, the sin nor notoriely of corruption in Church offices,
does not corrupt or defile the ordinances, because these are the ordinances of
Christ; otherwise they should have a necessary dependence on, and be of more
or less value according to the dispensers: but I grant, that may detract from
our joy and comfort in partaking thereof, which yet does no way reach the
validity of the ordinances. (2.) That it is sure, sad differences both in
judgment and practice in the Church, may be consistent with the nature and ends
of that blessed unity, which Christ does require there, and with a keeping of
from partaking of the sin of others. (3.) That Church Acts even of these, who
are not Pastors according to Gods heart, tho externally called, may be to
themselfes unprofitable, and yet edifying to the Hearers; nor can a greiving
and offensive practice make their authority or acts void, since such may have
authority, who have not approbation from the Lord, in dispensing his
ordinances; and will any adventure to say, that Jesus Christ has either
disowned, or withdrawn from the Ministry of our Brethren who are thus deserted
by many; which, I confess, is to me both sad and astonishing, to see many now
withdraw, and rather keep their own house, then concur in public worship
with such, where Christ in the power and efficacy of his word is yet to be
seen; if this be the cure, that some pretends for our present distemper, I must
say, its more sad then the disease. (4.) If Church fellowship be truly
understood, it will not be so easy to break of there, as many judged, since all
other safe means must needs be first essayed; nor may we fasten a public
scandal on others, especially upon officers of the Church, without the
furthest advantage to make it evident both to themselfes, and convincing even
to the conscience of others, 1 Timothy 5: 19. it is not a privilege of order only,
but of office, that Ministers have to speak in the name of the Lord, who has
said, he that despises you, despises me; and to reject such, is a higher
guilt, then to reject the same word in the mouth of a private Christian, for
they are the Messengers of the Lord of hosts, and bears his impresse. (5.) This
is a practice, as has therewith a fixing of such terms and conditions of
Church communion, which has not been, nor can be found in any preceding
records, since the times of the Apostles; and I judge it on special cause of
these sad breakings now among us, and that so many contend as them that beat
the air; their mistake and ignorance of the true nature, and rule, of external
communion in the Church; for if this should be considered, upon clear Scripture
evidence, as it was in the first planting of the Christian Church, I should not
then fear any public rent on this late difference; and that which is a
necessary condition of Church communion, I hope, must plead some Scripture
warrant for its imposition. I know some will plead, that this is but a
departure in some degree, of Church Fellowship, which is both a poor and
unwarrantable Apology; since both the rule is thus far deserted, and no ground
to know where they may fix after; but we have to visible ane account this day,
where this sad course has already landed.

V. Ground, that is sad a and unwarrantable practice, which tends to cause
division in the Church, contrary to the doctrine we have received, Romans 15.
which, I am sure, may be to evident, pretend any to the contrary what they
will, upon these grounds. (1.) That whatever was the first rise, or occasion of
the offense, cannot be owned as the proper cause of such a formed rent, as this
now is; since most sad offenses has been without any such effect, especially
when it was more upon practice, then on any principles of truth; and the
killing of a patient by poison, through mistake of the true medicine, can never
be charged on this, that the body was before in a sad distemper; nor a
misapplication of the means to cure a wound, when it has caused a gangren in
the body, be justly charged on the first giving of the wound, since this
otherwise might have been safely healed. (2.) We know that for several years
after that accepting of the indulgence, that difference both in jugdment and
practice among us, yet did cause no such effect; but the work of the Gospel
did then must discernibly prosper, until such violent essays these two years
now past, has been for bringing things to such ane extreme. And Oh! from that
sad period may be too discernibly dated, some further degree of the Lords
departure from among us, and these deplorable effects of much blood,
devastation, reproach, weakening of the interest of Religion, strenthening of
the hands of Adversaries, beyond all that has been in former times, and which
has increased our bonds more, then all our Adversaries could ever do. (3.) If
so severe a stretching of this late difference, and loading of the practice of
others, with that which it could not bear; if a carnal and violent way of
following this debate, a high crying up of such in whom their own image, more
then the image of Christ did appear, and peremtory imposing their judgment,
without the least tender condescendence to these that differed from them, do
necessarily tend to engender division in the Church, and have ane undoubted
causality from the very nature thereof to this end; then it may be known, yea,
(I dare appeall any discerning Christian in the Church) at whose door this must
be laid, and who has most actively moved to put the poor Church in such a
flame, and this not upon any principle of truth, which was on either side
disowned; but upon contraverted deductions, from a different practice, and
application thereof: this may be no less amazing, then it is sad, that the way
of some now seems more how to dispatch things by censure, and revilings, then
by arguments, and by high words and invectives to exulcerate, more then
rationally to convince; but a sharp censurer and a self searcher does rarely
meet in one, though none more usually needs the tender construction of others,
then such; this has been to known an evil in our Church.

VI. Ground, this practice seems ane express violation and breach of
Covenant, wherein we are so solemnly engaged before the Lord, which, I know
not, how any possibly can evade, when we are no less solemnly engaged there,
against Schism, then either Prelacy or Erastianisme; and, if this be not ane
unwarrantable Schism, and renting of the Church, I know no such charge could
have been given against any since the primitive times, and that on these
grounds. (1.) That by Schism is not to be understood a dividing from the
doctrine, but from the communion of the Church, and that it tends to a
disyointing from the body, thus we find, even in the most pure times of the
Church, these put in a peculiar class, and looked on with no less dread and
fear, as such, who did oppose the doctrine of the Church; and it is but to
manifest, that in all times, the most destroying errors has been still grafted
on this stock, whilst on the other hand, the more near fellowship with our
blessed head is keept up, and where the life and power of godliness is much in
exercise, the more has this sad rock been keept of; as the more near the lines
are to the center, the more near are they, and close to one another. (2.) It is
clear also from the Apostles dealing with the Church of Corinth, and about
which he used such sharpness that they took a divided way of communicating and
going about other duties, as tending to make a breach and Schism then, in that
Church, whatever gave the rise thereto: se 1 Cor. 11: 18, 19. yea, does thus
rebuke them, not only that some said they were of Paull, and others of Apollos,
but even these that said they were of Christ, so far as this upon the manner
was in a contentious and divided way, since of him, and him alone must the
whole Church be named. (3.) It has not hitherto been under debate, from the
Scripture, and doctrine of the Reformed Church thereannent, to be ane
unquestionable Schism, where there is a departure from that union in the
public worship and ordinances of the Gospel in which they had formerly
walked, and thus a dividing and designed falling off from the same, without any
just cause or warrant from the Scripture, to a public disturbance of that
order appointed by Christ in his house, yea contrary to that commanded love,
tenderness, prudence and forbearance so expressly required of Church members
toward one ane other, and to his blessed authority who has so clearly
warranted such a forbearing with these, as in some things may be contrary
minded, upon different apprehensions of the truth, so far as both love amongst
themselfes, the public peace of the Church, may not be thus disturbed; it is
sure the choicest of the saints does carry to heaven with them, both errors,
mistakes and prophesieing in part, and some overclouding must still be of the
brightest stares while they shine here; Oh! if that now which is the present
cause of these differences were but once brought to that rule of the word
should it not enforce many to be a wonder to themselfes at the strange way they
have been upon, and whether they have been carried in this deplorable rent of
whose seriousness otherwise I do not question.

VII. Ground, this is a practice contrary to most express Scripture commands,
for forbearance and condescendence among the godly in breaking times, which we
may not only see, Romans 14: 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 4: 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 9: 19. 20. but that
it was for this end the Spirit of God do enjoine the same, that there may be
no breach or rent in the Body of Christ, about which he has so tender a care,
and is such a forbearance, as we find expressly commanded in this very case,
upon a controverted practice of the Church, and difference of judgment therein,
whatever upon the one side might be more culpable herein then upon the other,
as is clear in that debate about meats, 1 Cor. 11. and Oh! what can it mean?
Whiles both our duty and remedy does here meet at once, yet, this should have
so little weight with us, at this day: for if such a commanded forbearance can
have no place among these who are one and agreed in this same principles even
in the point controverted, and only differ in the application, yea are mutually
persuaded of others sincerity; I know no place then it could have ever had,
since there was a Christian Church: which has put me to some astonishment,
what the peremtory way of some can intend, and to obstruct ane union in the way
of the Lord only fought, without ceding in any truth, or being put to condemn
any thing they judge lawful, or approve what they judge sinful, in the way of
others; and if this be denied, I would desire then to know what sinful
compliance, or yielding in any concern of the truth, can be herein challenged;
or if such a suitable essay hash yet been for a tender, serious communeing,
with such they keep so great a distance with; to meet and concur in what are
uncontroverted duties in such a day. But oh! the temper of this time seems more
now in passion than argument, which is so natural and pleasing an evil, as
the most express authority of the Scripture is not like to restrain.

I must add this further to be considered, if such a departure from Church
fellowship should be admitdon this head of the late indulgence, and the
discretive judgment, of any (which can only be pretended here) stretched to
such a hight as without the Church to impose this, which is of so publik and
universal concern on the conscience of the people, these consequences of
greatest import must need follow. 1. To break up Church fellowship and
communion with most all the Reformed Churches this day; yea is a caice and
practice under these circumstances it is now stated, as will find no
precedent, even from such, who have formerly most pleaded for separation who
did never own this on any such ground as a different practice, upon various
apprehensions thereof, among such who are most entirely one in the same
doctrine and principles. 2. This also must follow to withdrauw from Fellowship
in hearing of the most choice and eminent Non-conforme Ministers now in the
Church of England, whose liberty they had for a peaceable access to their
public meetings some years now past, was of that same nature, and in als
express terms one with this indulgence. Yea it must necessarily tend like
ways to fall of communion in public with the whole Ministry of the Belgic
Church, which to the furthest conviction of any who will question this can be
demonstrat on clearest ground. 3. Nothing can be more evidently contrair then
this practice is to the known judgments of the old Non-conformists, yea of such
who have been most eminent both in the Churches of Old and New England of the
congregational judgment, whose tender respect to guard against any dashing on
such a rock as this, they have published to the world, which I forbear to set
down here only to avoid prolixity.

But I must yet speak a few words more on this so important a caice, and obtest
(I hope I may say with most tender respect) such who in some simplicity of
heart has been carried so strainge a length in these differences, and may not
be aware of the hazard, and on what a precipice they are thus led to consider.
1. If there be no cause to fear, lest their resolution be fixed before their
light, and a serious trial of their way, and motion herein, since the
sincerity of our aim can make none approven in that where a declining is in
the matter from the rule. 2. And that the example and authority of none can
bear weight with the conscience upon an after search of what they have done,
sinc each must prove his own work, yea it is sure non would take poysone upon
the credit or repute of others, nor can the wisdom of words add any weight to
the word of truth. 3. Is there not much cause to fear (that without preventing
grace) division is at such a height, as it shall at last end in dissolution.
Julian knew this to well, when as one of the greatest means he followed for the
undoing of Christianity was not only to tollerat but to foment differences
among Christians. 4. And what can such fore breakings as these mean, for sure
it is one of two that either we do not center in Christ, and are unite by the
same spirit with him, or that we are thus under some dreadful prevalence of
temptation; It is not the lines that are straight but such as are drawn crooked
from the center, which do justle and tread on other. 5. Should it not be a
strainge contradiction, for a professed contending, upon the Kingdom, and
supremacy of our blessed head, over his Church; by a visible controlling of the
authority of his Laws over our conscience and practice, and can this be under
debate where there is so sad an exceeding of these Scripture bounds set to us,
in mutual contendings in such differences as these now are, for which, I shall
but offer these express commands given in such a caice to be considered which I
may say could not possibly but restrain any such rupture and schism now in
our Church, if some suitable weight thereof were on our spirits; Phil. 2: 3.
Ephesians. 4: 31. Romans 14. 3, 4. James 3. verse. 6. Has not in all times the Churches
hazard been more from the right then the left hand, and from such a party as
lies in ambush to enter at every breach; I mean the spirit of error and
delusion, than from open assaults yea is there any mean could have been essayed
more sad for the opening such a door, then this to divide the Church, and godly
among themselfs. 7. (...) whither has this tide carried some, I am sure much
beyond their own thoughts and what deplorable effects have thus been of late in
so strainge a keeping this breach up with these who are partakers of the same
precious faith, and when much more is yet to unite, then to disjoine, shall
there yet be further dashing on such a rock whereon so remarkable a beacon in
these known sad and dismal consequences hes been set up before us, yea no
essay for a binding up of such wounds which are now like to bleed unto death.
8. What strange pleasure must it be that is more in bitter contendings (I fear)
then to live in the practice of these great truths we know; or what true gain
can be thus projected for our masters interest; it is sur such a delight, sold
be greatest pain to any serious, and tender spirit. Yea have not such
intemperat heats yet spent their strengh under these strange chainges which
have of late gone over, as might have brought some suitable cool atlast to this
fever. 9. Are professors of the truth in such a manner now pressed to adorn the
profession thereof, as formerly, and under such a weight how great, great a
thing it is for any to be eternally saved though never more cause to walk under
fear of this, then in the present age, or where more in a way of profession, and
with much of the form of godliness has been in hazard to perish, and come
short of heaven, yea with less access to be convinced or to bear faithful
dealling with their conscience then seems now; and do but consider whom you
prejudge most in withdrawing from the Ministry of these, who I hope shall be
ouned of the Lord as his messingers to the Church and darre own no other
resentment both of grief and sorrow upon the visible hazard of such as seem
not to be awarre thereof themselves. 10. You know that express command of
watching with a godly jealousy against any strainge doctrine, Heb. 13: 3. and
it is but too known how eager a grasping is by many more at what seems new and
strange, then what may edify; nor has such often apprehended the hazard of some
plausible error, until it came to a more formed complexion, as is now. 11.
What advantage is thus given to the Prelatick party for that charge of
separation against the whole Non-conformists this day, and though with clearest
evidence we can evince the injustnesse thereof; yet knows not how to ansuer on
your behalf when we are reproved. 12. Are we not both called and taught, to
try the spirits whither they be of God, by clearest Scripture light: and that
the impulse and motions of the spirit of grace, must assuredly tend to compose
and sanctify the whole frame of the soul with a humble tender submisnesse to
the trial of the word herein, and is it not expressly showed what the fruits of
the spirit and flesh are. Galat. 21. 22. 2 Timothy 1. 2. 3. verse. and how far
the way of the Lord is from any irregular or impetuous courses; yea such as may
seem incompatible with the very use and exercise of reason. These words of
Luther in the second tome of his epistles, ar of much weight: says he in your
trial and decerning the spirits ye would try whither they can prove their
calling in what is strange or extraordinary either in their judgment or
practice, for God never sent any but they were either called by men, in his
appointed way, or declared by signs, no not his own son, and in no ways, may
we accept the calling of any upon such a warrant of some singular impulses or
revelation. I must yet beseech this further, to be laid to heart; that if any
thing can be known by its native and visible effects, we may then read in
greatest Letters, what a Babel of confusion and disorder, with dividing both of
hearts and tongues has followed on this late astonishing rent, and Schism in
our Church, yea when thus taken off any certain rule, for hearing and joining
in the public Ordinances, knows not where to find themselfs, or to be in one
measure in such a caice. I desire to speak this with a tender respect to such,
who I darre not question has had a serious regard to the truth yet has not
been awarre of the subtilty of this snare, and with hope that upon serious
after thoughts some more fixed uniting both in judgment and heart may yet follow
amongst all who are indeed lovers of the truth, in our Church; with some more
suiteable fear to dash again on such a rock; yea to see how true and sweet a
consistence, may be betwixt Zeal and fervency for the Lord, and that humble
fear and tenderness in our private judgment in such a difference, as this,
where on no side the truth is denied; so as to keep of any public rent in the
Church.

QUEST. IV. Which may be yet needful to touch on these late public
differences, if it be either matter of duty, or expedient and for edification,
to bring these in public and engadge the people therein; and if some
forbearance thus by Ministers of the Gospel, be not in such a time and under
these circumstances we stand, called for. For clearing of which, I hope there
is no debate; upon that great duty of a faithful and free wairning against
public sins, and though with a suiteable prudence, yet impartially to apply
the rule against them, and to show both the duties and dangers of the time; but
I humbly judge, no justleing will be found here, with a tender abstinence and
forbearance in such a caice as this, where a different judgment and practice is
now, amongst the most serious godly and faithful Ministers, in our Church who
yet does so jointly concur and are one in the same truth; upon these grounds.
1. That this can not be pleaded as a public Testimony to the truth; as it thus
reflects on the practice of their Brethren, with whom they differ on whom no
disouning or opposing of the same. Without the furthest breach of charity can
be thus fixed; nor is this before any such as are the known and public
adversaries thereto, or upon any visible hazard, Luke 21: 12. When you shall be
brought before Kings and rulers for my names sake, this shall turn to you for
a testimony, but I must say the tendencie of such ordinare and public
reflections is rather like to darken the credit and beauty of so great and
honorable an appearance, as a Testimony indeed for the truth is; and if these
necessare requisites thereto, according to the Scripture, were this day more
understood, there could not be so ordinare a pretending of this. 2. I would
know wherein this way is useful or expedient to most of hearers who can so
little judge on these things. We are indeed called to declaire the whole
counsel of God, Acts. 20: 27. But this is most evidently qualified by the same
Apostle, verse 20. that he kept nothing back hereof which might be profitable
for them, and thus expressly shows what bounds Ministers has set herein by
the holy Ghost in their delivering of the message of God to his Church that it
be not only truth but such as may be for the edification of these they preach
to. 3. Since it is clear that positive duties do not bind ad semper. and no
cause can be now pleaded in this caice for guarding against any present snare
or hazard to the Church should not the inconvenience which the contentious
keeping up of these differences may occasion have more weight with us which the
Apostle so sharply rebukes, 1 Cor. 11: 16. But if any seem to be contentious we
have no such custom nor in the Church of God; and oh! that the loss and gain
herein were more impartially weighted, what both the Lucrum cessans and Damnum
emergens has been this way. 4. And is this so small a thing as may seem to
some, to bring in public, and before the Church so high a charge of
Erastianisme and defection from the truth against these their Brethren who are
thus as expressly pointed at as they were named, since it is sure there can be
no public rebuke and admonition before the people as this most evidently is,
but as a public Church censure and juridical act of Discipline, yea which is
no less manifest then that of excommunication, and if so public a violation
of that order which our blessed head has expressly fixed for his Church, be so
lightly regarded; where are we. Nor can this be, pretended as a doctrinal
reproof which is such an applying of the rule against sins of the time must as
still leave the particular application thereof to their own conscience who are
thus guilty, without any express designing of particular persons, where no
judicial procedour and conviction by the Church hes gone before, but here is a
most public and express fixing of so sad a scandal even before the Church,
against so many particular Ministers of the Gospel (who are still laboring in
the vineyard of the Lord) as if they were designed by name. 5. And are not
these unquestionable requisites for a public reproof, not only their calling
thereto, that it be orderly, and upon clearest evidence but that this be not
exposed to any prejudicate exception, from their way who do thus reprove, which
may be on too just ground feared this day that some have put themselves out of
the furthest capacity to edify by any such mean, from their own unsuteable
manageing hereof. 6, What if these who are thus so openly reflected upon should
take the same freedom for public contradiction? Wherein would this quickly
resolve, but a further growing scandal, to ruin the Church and make way for
the endless debatings, which as the Apostle shows does rather engender
Questions then any godly edifying in the faith. We know the Apostle Paul
withstood Peter to the face, but it is observable on what ground it was stated,
that when Peter knew the differences then amongst these of the Jews and
Gentiles who believed was such as should cause no rent or dividing thereon; yet
to please the Jews had withdrawn and separat from fellowship with the believing
Gentiles, yea that this rent was like to grow so as Barnabas also was drawn
into the same dissimulation and thus a sad and ruining breach like to follow.
7. Should we not be to the furthest tender of unsettling of the spirits of the
people when so much already shaken and in that manner now racked and tossed to
and fro with every wind of Doctrine as many are like to loss all persuasion
of the truth, yea when it is so hard and all most impossible to keep some
within any bounds; and whilst thus the triumph of adversaries and
strengthening the hands of the ungodly upon such strainge reflections, brought
in public, does visibly gain ground; and what interest can be thus pretended
for the Church of Christ in so public a going to Law with their Brethren
before so watching an adversary, whose strength must needs lie in our breach.
8. Is not also the bringing things thus to such an extreme, of that visible
tendencie, as to bring under question the validity of their Ministerial acts
amongst the people, by so public a thrust at the credit and repute of their
Ministry, which is so far an exposing of many to the hazard both of atheism
and error, besides the weakening such in the public work of the Lord, who are
so known able Ministers of Christ. I shall add no further but a humble and
serious appeal to their own conscience, who may have judged this their duty, if
on deeper reflection hereon; a tender abstinence and forbearance this way and
to keep of any dashing on such a rock as has been already touched, until
light and conviction from the Lord yet further break up should not be their own
peace, and comfort as well as the public peace of the Church in that day when
their eyes shall become dim, and the keepers of the house begin to tremble.

SECTION IV.
WHen such sad use is now like to be made of these times, as to give the truth
and credit thereof (which above all things should be dear to us) a Deaths
wound, were it possible, by reproach; I hope it will not be incongruous to such
a subject, to speak yet a few words more; for answering some high pretenses for
prejudice and stumbling, which seem now most publicly to be owned yea not only
thus to break and undo themselves but to involve others in the same ruin; Not
that the truth needs the witness or respects of men to commend the same* which
as the sun in it is strength keeps its course amidst all the dark clouds which
can interveen; but in a day of such blasphemy and reproach, we should require
justice at the bar of men's own conscience herein, if there can be any cause
for stumbling at the holy and unspotted ways of the Lord, but what is from
themselfs, and from their seeking after such a latitude in their principles, as
might sure that liberty, which they take thus in their practice. Now with some
respect their to, I shall offer these eight grounds which are at this day most
pretented.

1. These strange intestine conflicts and Differences in judgment that we are
now in the Church, and among professors of the truth as though they were not
the Children of the same house, for ANSWER, I hope these things when seriously
pondered may silence any such reflection on the way of truth, which I shall but
leave to men's conscience. 1. That our blessed Lord has with clearest evidence
laid down such sure and fixed grounds, in his own word for the peace and concord
of his Church, and followers, with these express rules and provision for the
same as there can be no known ground for such sad and deploreable breakings,
but what men's own corruption and declining from the rule does occasion. 2. It
is must clear that one of the greatest of the Laws of God to which with the
furthest reiterat inforcements our obedience is required for preventing the
Churches hazard on this rock, is that Law of charity, and love, for the Godly
amongst themselves, so as without this he will accept no man's service, 1 Cor.
13. And is such the Apostle presses, above all things to put on charity; which
is the bond of perfection, Coloss. 3: 13, 14. 3. I hope it is undeniable also
that these principles of union and love are so firmly fixed, as might be
consistent both with some various apprehensions, and difference in judgment
amongst his people here, who are unite in himself and in the great concerns of
truth and godlyness, so as upon such an account the peace and concord of his
Church should not be suspended, since it is here we know but in part; and as
all have not the same helps, so not the same capacity for understanding of many
things, which may cause some difference in the Church. Not that we should think
opinions are free, or errors in judgment not to be seriously watched against
als well as corruption in practice since it is not only through sanctification
of the spirit, but belief of the truth we are appointed to life. 4. For this
end likewayes has our blessed head set such bounds and measures to his people in
the manageing of these differences which may fall in as that there should be no
fear of any sad rent or breach where a due respect unto these is had, and to
walk according to the rule, and spirit of the gospel, and oh! that these great
commands, Romans 14: 3, 4. Philip. 2: 3. were more seriously pondered, there
could not but be some more lawful regard to keep of such bitter and offensive
breakings, as may be often seen amongst us. 5. Nor is there cause to fear any
breach from the most serious and servent contending for the truth, and closse
adherence thereto which should be dearer to us then our life and can admit no
latitude or ceding there, when the revealed rule of our duty herein is observed
that this be managed with a humble tender condescendence and cedeing in our own
things, to one another, for oh! there has our saddest contests, and a nimosity
their greatest strength this day. It were well if such a blessed contending, and
striving lawfully, as the Apostle shows were thus studied, that it be in the
way of the Lord and by means of his own appointment; by pureness, by long
suffering, by the word of truth, by the armor of God on the right hadn and on
the left etc. And where these are not men's study and practice they must live in
an express contradiction to these principles which yet they darre not disown,
yea in so far becomes not only a just matter of grief, but a spot in the
fellowship of the saints. 6. Whatever sad differences be often amongst these,
which both their darkness of mind, and contrariety of natural dispositions,
may influence, yet does not still that blessed unity of the spirit stand fixed and
sure, by which the whole race of the saints are unite in a new and spiritual
nature, In these sweet and sensible communications of the spirit, and do all
meet in one blessed center, yea so near an intercourse of souls and Sympathy does
result thence (however the sad prevalence of corruption may for some time
darken the same) as no union and concord like this is in all the socities of
the earth, and may be such a witness to the truth of christianity, as to
silence even the greatest Atheist. 7. Yea may we not have here a special
confirming evidence of the certainty of the truth, that notwithstanding of such
differences both in judgment, and practice, with so sore prejudice and
estrangement of heart and differences of natural temper and disposition of
amongst the Godly, yet this has enforced from all these an undoubted assent,
to the most great and weighty concerns of religion, yea to a joint
acknowledging of the same principle about which some difference may be in the
application thereof to some particular caice. 8. I shall but add, that it is
known what sweet harmony and oneness of heart has sometimes been among such
as did Profess the truth, of all ranks in our Church, and in a fixed adherence
to the same cause, and how it was at a sad ebb, that some differences broke up
amongst the most eminently godly both Ministers and professors there, for some
time on that head of the public resolutions, though without any formed breach
or schism, but after among such who thus differed, a most sweet concord and
concurrence in a joint opposition against prelacy and to suffer rather then in
the least to consent thereto did follow: yea though since amongst the most
serious Non-conformists, a greater freedom has been in the judgment and
practice of some, then others, for hearing of Conformists to prelacie, yet so
far as I know has it been with a due and tender respect, as was suitable, to
keep of either dividing or alienation in such a caice: but oh! it must be
confessed to what a hight have these late confusions, and breaches amongst us
come and what fuel this has been to a great increase of sin; yet is there one
ground to hope when almost there seems no comforting sign else, that he who
has seen our ways, can he all them also, by a mavelous surpriseal of grace.

2. Prejudice it, which is by some highly entertained in these times for their
own breaking is the perplexedness and hesitation they are in what way to choice
when the truth seems now involved in such a confusion of different judgments
and such visible contradictions amongst professors thereof. For Answer, if no
thing were to shake or offend there should then be no tried establishment, yet
since this seems one of the saddest diseases of the time in many's being soon
saken in mind with such wavering and unsettledness in the truth I must speak a
few words thereto to witness what greatest advantage such as desire to walk in
the light may have to hold fast the profession of their faith without wavering
and for the furthest quiet and assuring of their heart therein on these
grounds. 1. That the Scripture is so near, these living oracles of truth, which
do with so clear and distinct a sound speak if men had but ears to hear. 2.
That the Lord has given to his people a spirit of discerning in some greater
and lesser measure so as to prove all things by a serious personal trial, yea
that none needs receive the truth upon trust or to lean on the authority or
example of any herein but to judge their own eyes and conscience should be als
faithful to them as any. 3. He has given also as a special help a fixed
Ministry to his Church yea for this very end Ephesians. 4: 14. that we should
henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine,
and therefore with a divine mission has given such spiritual gifts as the
necessity and service of the Church may require for interpreting and clearing
up of what may be the counsel and mind of the Lord to his Church according to
his own word. 4. That the most weighty things of religion both as to faith and
practice are not interested in most of these sad contests, which are now
amongst but he has so graciously condescended that what we should most live by
should not cost us so dear and that the greatest subtilties and most intricate
controversies which are so often in the Church ye most out of our way, yea such
as should cause no trouble or disquiet of mind herein. 5. Is not also most
clearly sheued us, how we may know our being led and kept in the way of truth,
and what should qualify, and make us meet for the blessed conduct and teachings
of the spirit by his word, such as a holy fear, and sincere resignation of the
soul thereto, meekness, humility with a fixed and serious resolving to close
therewith, how cross however it should be to our own private affection and
credit. 6. There is this advantage to know that blessed and approven way, wherein
we may have peace, as that in which the footsteps of the saints and so
innunerable a company, has gone before who received the spirit this way, and
with greatest assurance did know the truth of that seal on their own soul, so
as after no new or strange light we need to inquire. 7. And has not the
meanest of the saints these peculiar (...), and marks whereby to discern the
way of truth in a dark and trying time, by plainest Scripture light, both for
clearing and confirming of their mind herein. 1. That we should follow these
things, which tend to peace and to edify Romans 14. 19. For thus surely does the
way of truth tend to build and not to cast down: and if many caices which some
does now agitat, with much disquiet both to themselfs and others, were more
brought to that great rule of solid edification, I should not fear that so much
time should be lost therein. 2. It is sure the way of truth, must be still
rationally convincing such as does persuad by teaching, and to fix and clear
the judgment before the will, by manifestation of the truth to men's conscience
for thus we are taught, and be always ready; to render a reason of the hope
that is in you with all meekness and fear. 1 Pet. 3. 15. 3. Such is this blessed
way as it is cautious, and advertant to hazard on each hand, and to guard
against the dephts of Satan as well as to resist his fury, a way which lies
betuixt extremes either on the right or left hand, for thus we are taught 2
Cor. 6. 7. 2 Cor. 11. 14 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. 4. It is such a way as leads us to
regard the special varying of a caice, as to some present duty with a due
respect and ballancing of circumstances: and to see that the same way at all
times is not to be followed in our practice, since what may be most requisite
and edifiing some time and in one caice, may be destructive in another, for
this has the Holy Ghost showed that all things are lawful but not expedient 1
Cor. 10. 23. 5. Thus we may know and discern the truth and way thereof which
is according to godliness, Tit. 1. 1. when it is such as visibly tend, by its
power and efficacy on the heart, to heal the distempers of the mind and
judgment, and by practical obedience to a more full assurance of understanding
in themselves; and may thus see its very native result and tendence, is to make
professors of the truth, humble, meek, sober and temperat in their personal
conversation, yea tender to provoke or excite the corruption of any. 6. Is there
not this necessare tendence also of the revealed way of truth, to walk wisely
toward such as are without Col. 4. 5. and with the furthest tender respect to
prevent their being further alienat or hardened in their aversion from the way
of the Lord, which I must say should be one of the most weighty concerns of a
Christians study, for adorning the profession of the Gospel in sueh a day. 7. I
shall but add this more, what advantage a christian may thus have for true
peace and quiet on such a reflection of having kept guard against any hid
personal prejudice or such a byasse which the preingadgment of their judgment
in the present caice, and that influence their interest in a divided party
might have occasioned, yea thus of some tender respect to the Purity als well
as the peace of their own conscience that there may be no private interest or
setting up of such a stumbling block before their eyes as to darken their
judgment herein.

3. Ground which I fear in these times may be much made use of by many for
their own stumbling is that strange spirit and to visible eruptions of pride,
bitterness and passion with which these contests and differences in judgments
amongst professors of the truth are so often followed. For Answer whatever sad
occasion be thus given of offense, yet can there be none for taking prejudice
or any reflecting thus on religion except men will put out the very eyes both
of their reason and conscience, when it is so clear 1. How visible a
contradiction any such sad appearances of pride, bitterness and wrath are to
the design and intent of the Gospel, which is for the furthest self abasing,
to subdue and mortify such lusts and thus prevent any exorbitancy that way: as
that which is not only to adorn a christian walk but is a most essential part
of our sanctification: and is not the authority of the rule herein such on
their conscience, whom you may most thus challenge, as they are even enforced
to seek a cover and hiding of these evils, which they know to be their shame,
and cannot bear the light being thus judged in themselfs and so conscious of
their deformity. 2. Is not the relief also and antidote to so dreadful a
poison most clearly held forth to us, how to watch against this which both has
so subtle and forcible an infection, and deep rooting in men's nature. 3. Or
can you challenge the least shadow of Latitude, from our blessed Lawgiver, and
the laws of his Kingdom, herein, which are so express not only against any
open eruption of such evils, but against the most secret convoy, and
intertainement thereof in the heart, yea that, on no less haz^rd then of being
shut out for ever from that Land, which is above, we must both watch and
wrestle against the same; for such is the strait and narrow way, and so many
low entries there, as none possibly can get through without a humble, and
subdued Spirit, and as little children to receive the Kingdom of God. 4. Can
prejudice so far overcome men's conscience, as not to see the excellency of a
Christian spirit, and the undoubted reality thereof, which has so brightly
shined and I hope yet does (to silence the greatest reproacher) in many
convincing examples of humility, meekness and in the conquest of their
passions and forgiving of injuries, as a convincing witness to the world of
there being thus transformed into his blessed image of whom as the great pattern
set before us we are to Learn. 5. And should not tenderness and compasion be
more suitable then prejudice and stumbling at such a sight you thus challenge,
when nothing can be more visibly contraire to the very use of reason then any
such sad eruption of pride, bitterness, and wrath, which is so sore a disease
and a fever of the mind, and causes such disorder, sad, and tumultuous
rysings there, as they are made their own punishment and the very mean to
frustrat that end they most follow, yea in no way could more gratify and give
the greatest advantage to such they contend with and to put themselfs in the
pouer of every one to become their tormentor. 6. You little know what sharp and
bitter reflections such may often have on themselfs upon any sad appearance this
way or advantage, their corruption has got under some sad assault, yea such,
as even the sense of a sealed pardon on their soul can not sometimes blunt the
sharp edge of this grief and indignation against themselves. 7. And may you not
clearly see what visible detest such are even enforced to have at the
appearance of these evils in others; which thus has a sad outbreaking in
their own practice; as convincingly shows their way must contradict both their
own judgment and principles. 8. I shall but further add, what great
incitements and clearest discovery does the Scripture afford, of that blessed
way, which was never known, nor attaind by nature, how to get such prevailing
evils subdued; yea how to improve injuries to the greatest advantage, and thus
by overcoming, to gain the most glorious and desirable victory and revenge,
on such who have injured them, by humble and tender forbearance, and what a
sueet facility might be found this way, when the first wave, and assault is
whose once broke and resisted but greatest strength still lies in the first
assault.

4. Ground and pretense for prejudic in these times, is that so little evidence
seems of tenderness and a convincing serious practice even in their way who
have a name and repute of religion with such abounding offenses, as gives
occasion not only to question the sincerity of their profession, bot to stumble
at the very form and appearance of godliness. ANSW: though nothing should be
more dreadful then for any to make the truth accessory to their sin, or take
thus shelter under its patiociny, yet since it is so great a concern to
vindic^t pure, and undefiled religion, and the spotles rule, and pattern
thereof in a day of such reproach, and when any advantage is so eagerly sought
and followed for this end, I would but offer some few things, to plead with
their conscience who thus, are in more hazard to undo and break themselfes,
then to hurt the credit of the truth. 1. If there should not be more to shake
and stumble if such offenses were not in the Church of Christ when so expressly
fortold as the Scripture else should want a most convincing seall and witness
thereto, yea when, thus you may see that not only an empty show and the
hypocrisy of some bot the recorded blemishes and falling of the saints their,
to be demonstrative and confirming of the truth, als well as the bright est
evidences, and luster of their grace. 2. I confess it were a suitable
inference, for none to engadge with the profession of godliness without the
power and how dreadful a part such acts, who live stangers thereto but how
strange, and astonishing were it for such, as are ungodly thus to justify their
own way. 3. If you stumble here, and embrace no religion until you find no
offenses amongst the professors thereof, then ye must have none, but turn
Athiest, bot your conscience herein, must needs tell you (silence it as you
wid) that the truth, and principles of godliness, binds men over with the
greatest ties and engadgments to holiness, purity, candor and righteousness,
even in all our dealing with men, under the severest threatnmgs and oh! must
the glory, and honor of the truth, which is according to godliness, thus come
under reproach and suffer from the untender, and unansuerable practice of any
who profess the same, 4. Can you posibly debate this (which might both silence
and make men ashamed of such a challenge) that under any pretenses, which have
ever been to religion, in the world it is the doctrine of Christ only, which
indispensibly requires truth and sincerity of the heart herein, and that the
conformity of our duties on the matter to the rule, is not enowgh without a
serious respect to the quality of the principles of our acting, that it be in
faith, and from the love of Christ, which is so essential a requisite thereto,
yea that this is so framed as to correspond with the inward man, to exerce an
authority over the conscience, and our most retired thougths, als well as
actings, and to put shame and terror on such whose glorying is in appearance,
bot not in heart. 5. You know likewayes that the most select societies of such
who ever yet professed the truth and since there has been a Church on the earth,
did never want a sad mixture, yea these feu choised difciples of our blessed
Master, was not only with a Judas but a falling Peter, and a misbeleeuing
Thomas among them and should this have been a ground then for prejudice at the
truth of christianity in its first dauning when by such a constitution our
great Master would have it known what his Church whilst here upon the earth
will be even in the purest times thereof. 6. Will ye not allow that measure
which we find in the primitive times, the Christians did require of their
heathen adversaries, upon any publict offenses which were then objected to
them, to give but that allouance, which they did to their philosophers, and
such as professed moral virtue, amongst them, which was not to charge the
corruption and offenses, of the practice of any, on the rule of their
profession; whilst you have these further inforcements of this, that you know
upon your own conscience what a sore burden and grief these are to such, who
are tender, and sincere in following of the truth, and how evident their
discountenance of any such appearance is, yea may not the establishment of
Church discipline, and censure, with such express rules herein by our blessed
head, convince and silence these who reproach. 7. Let some who pretend most, to
stumble on such an account, speak but their own heart, if these be not much
more their trouble, and torment whose walk does most convincingly tend, to
adorn the profession of the Gospel, whose sincere, and serious embracement of
the truth hes been with such visible outward dissadvantage, and no private
interest, to sway them herein, as they are enforced to see this, for none
possibly could conceive, how this should be on any other ground, then the known
pover and certainty thereof on their soul. 8. Are not such whose way is thus the
ground of your challenge, most visibly condemned by their own avoued
principles, yea what ever essays has been to personat serious godliness, by a
false show yet is it not most convincing, even to such as look but at a
distance, that native luster, self evidencing light, with that sweet savor and
efficacy, which accompanies the same, as no possible invention, or art could
ever reach, no more then to make a dead picture live. Oh! that such a day of
reproach as this and that sad woe the world is so unsensible of, because of
offenses, might more suteably affect our hearts and that it is with so visible
adeclining ^ow, in the Church, and men's grouing weary of the simplicity of the
truth; these sweet paths, and footsteps of serious godlyness, love and zeall
for God, self denial, and contempt of the world, seems to be all most
overgrown and worn out amongst many professors in this age.

5. Ground that I fear some may be ready this day to break and stumble on is,
these high pretenses of zeall and fervency, for the truth in the way of so me
as would seem most visibly to cross and interfer, with the most known
principles of Christian prudence, yea that due necessar use of men's reasone
which the Scripture, does so indispensibly require. ANSW. though the zeall of
God, and faithfullness for his interest even with the most convincing evidence
of the truth thereof to men's conscience is that which the world cannot bear;
yet I hope these things when seriously considered may silence any publict
reflection herein. 1. That the greatest want which may be now matter of grief
in all the Churches, is that of pure zeal and love to Jesus Christ, and his
truth and of such a spirit to follow the Lord fully, and oh! our fall has been
too great and universal from that first love which was wont to shine, and
burn in these who professed the truth to be hid this day, and seems one of the
saddest presages of a dark night, yet coming on when with a continued light,
the heat, and power thereof is so far gone. 2. But to silence any such
reflection it may be demonstrable to the furthest; that the true and native
tendence of the zeall of God, and fervency in his work, can cause no breaking
or disorder, nor has any irregular, violent motion or scorching heat therewith,
but where ever this most brightly shines, there also does a humble tender
condescendence to convince and gain most evidently appear; how by
manifestation of the truth to men's conscience, to prevent any ground may be
thus taken of offense; who is offended, and I burn not, was the temper of that
blessed man's spirit, when he was burning in zeall for God, and thus carried him
out that he might be all things to all, that he might gain some: for such
should be the greatest acrimony and sharpness, of these who should be the salt
of the earth that it may always tend to season, to preserve, and recover, and
not to destroy. 3. And is not Christian wisdom, and prudence a piece of our
sanctification, and a true and native result of pure zeall, and love to Christ;
^o as the more a Christian, the more tender thus to keep by the rules and to
walk circumspectly not as fools, but as wise (and is not men's folly still a
fruit of their own corruption) nor can the truth of godliness be vigourously
exerted, bot^o far, it will cause also snch a sweet composure, and even
temper of spirit, as to watch with an equal advertance, to extremes upon
either hand. 4. It needs be no strange thing, or give any advantage to bring
true Zeall, under discredit that there may be a more impetuo us motion, and
making haste by some when they are out of the way, then they were formerly for
the truth; it being too evident, such as are once under the influence of
delusion; are also in that dreadful hazard to be as winds carried about with a
tempest; but such is purezeal that tho it increas the stream, it does not
overflow its banks; nor will break the least command, for vindication of the
greatest truth. 5. There is such an indissoluble tie by the Holy Ghost betuixt
true zeall, and that Christian moderation; which we should make known to all,
as none may divide; but as the one tends to give life, and intensness of Duty,
so is the other to resttaine all exorbitancy, and keep this in its proper
channel; and that none be carried out, beyond these just bounds, and measures
which are so expressly set to us by the rule, but so as that it be without any
lukewarmness or abatement of servency in spirit for serving the Lord; for where
on either hand these are divided, the credit of the truth, and true interest of
the Church, must then needs suffer, and get a sor wound.

6. Ground of stumbling and offense which too visibly many are like to break
on, yea to take prejudice almost against the whole ministry of our Church, is
that these who have had greatest weight and acceptance in the work of the
Gospel and has endured so much under many assaults, these years past, in
their opposition to prelacy with some unansuerable conviction hereof; I hope to
the conscience of all, and with a continued adherence to former principles, are
yet with such reproach, so publictly thus followed even by professed friends.
ANSW. Though I hope the perusal of what has been already touched on this
subject may have some weight both for clearing, and in some measure to silence
these strange hightened prejudice of some this way; yet since this is one of the
greatest trials of a Minister of Christ, both on the account of their work and
the credit of their blessed Master, who accounted them worthy to put into his
service, and that many are thus in hazard to be shaken, I must yet further
speak but a few things thereto; 1. That what ever may be their part who has
taken most liberty this way, yet should we reckon it is our sins, that is their
strength; and much unansuerableness to so high and holy a calling; for which
the holy God does thus call to a humble, and serious self judging before him,
and more deep trial of our own hearts and way with that fear least our sins
should find us out, if we be not concerned to find them and lay the same to
heart; tho I hope such yet, darre with some confidence, leave their cause
before the Lord, to plead herein against the unjust reproach of men. 2.
It'should be no strange thing now what in all times, has been the lot of the
most serious Ministers of Christ even when they have had a most sweet, and
sensible seall of his acceptance in their work, to have no other requittall
from men, then contempt, and hatred, who yet for the truths sake, have with the
furthest tenderness sought to gain such to the way of the Lord; yea have had
the trial, of such extremes as to be reviled by these who sometimes would have
plucked out almost their eyes for them. 3. But it is sure the Holy Ghost has
with no less expresseness put a guard about the repute and credit of a
Minister of Christ, then about their calling, for which read 1 Timothy 5. 19. 1 Thessalonians 5. 12. 13. yea these are so straitely conjoined, as what ever tend to
discredit their persons, must needs tend also to weaken the weight, and
authority of their message, on the conscience of the hearers; and is this of
small regard now with many, and to be without any dread least in so far, the
blood of souls, be charged on them in the day of the Lord; who by such notour
reflections and without any just cause or calling thereto, did thus beget such a
prejudice, and contempt, as to have the less reckoning made of the word of
truth delivered by them. In this I must here exoner my own conscience upon so
publict a sin and of such sad conseqence to the Churches hazard which seems so
little to touch this day. 4. Has it been yet ever seen that where the
Ministers of Christ, has had no suitable weight and acceptance of their
persons, for their works sake, in any place bot there also was a most visible
abatement of peoples respect and love to the truth and of any true grouth
amongst them under the ordinances, nor know I an advantage which the envyous
man could more desire, to sow tares in the vineyard of the Lord, then this is
when prejudice jealousy, and disrespect, comes once to any height, what ever
pretenses it may go under against such who are in deed the messengers of truth,
and dispensers of his ordinances. 5. And I hope there is just ground to account
such the undoubted Ministers of Christ, in our Church and who shall be thus
owned in the day of his appearance; yea who have had a convincing seall to
their ministry on the hearts of many, who for ministerial abilities soundness
in the faith and being made examplary to others in humility, tenderness of walk
love and fervent desire for gaineing of souls to Christ, would have been
reckoned with the highest respect in the first primitive times of the Church,
who yet has been this day exposed to the furthest revilings of some. And tho
it is not the naked testimony or respects of men that by such would be either
sought, or satisfying, but how to have this enforced on their conscience, by a
convincing witness, and example of a serious Ministerial practice, yet should
it not be strange that such be to the furthest concerned to manitaine the
credit, and authority of their ministry, which is not theirs but their Masters.

7. Ground of prejudice, against the truth which is now highly pretended, is
not only upon the strainge and highly irregular actings, by some, as may seem
visibly inductive to greatest confusion and disorder, bot that these have been
owned and supported by such principles congruous thereto, as seem in compatible
both with the practice, and profession, hitherto of our Church. ANSW. Whatever
advantage has been given by any thus to reflect which (I may with some
confidence say in behalf of the most serious Non conformists of our Church)
have been as a sword in there bones even beyond their own personal sufferrings
because of the voice of him who reproacheth, yet since many are thus ready to
stumble and knows not, what a sore woe and judgment, offenses are to such as
make so sad an use thereof: yea which may be feared this day, are glad of any
advantage herein: and that where such a poisenous cloud of prejudice
interveens, and a prejudicat impression of the truth, and of serious godliness,
is the glass, there cannot but be very sad reflections thereon: I must yet
crave leave in a few words, as a witness to the truth of our profession, and
for a just vindication offer these things to be considered, by the conscience
of our greatest Adversaries herein. 1. That we should seek no greater favor,
but that upon clearest evidence, from the trial and judgment of the Scriptures
of truth, (which we are ready to render, to all that ask) there might be such
free access to a publict, and serious reasoning herein, as that the truth might
be heard for it self, judging it no less our concern to convince men's
judgment, for commending the way of the Lord to their conscience, then to
engadge the affections. 2. That it is, in no new, or strainge caice, we are now
stated; and do own no other judgment and principles this day, then what are
expressly acknowledged by the most purely Reformed Churches of Christ, since the
Reformation, and is that good and old way, and the same truth for which our
worthy pred^cessours did by their wrestling prayers and sufferings so
vigourously contend yea wherein so innumerable a company of most serious solid
and tender Christians have been sealed and found such abounding comforts of the
spirit of truth upon their suffering and testimony upon the same. 3. That it is
no private interest, or, for our own things no temporal honor greatness or
riches in this world that such sore wrestlings by the godly in our Church has
been, which I hope may now have some conviction and witness on the conscience
of our Adversaries, and how such have not wanted an very obvious and alluring
bait this way, may be easy to judge if some greater interest did not preponder
at of being to dear a purchase at so sad a rate of unfaithfullness, to our
blessed Lord and Master in his truth. 4. That it has been no matter of
indifference, or any small and trivial interest, such have been concerned in
these late trials to appear for, bot for the laws, and interest, of Christ,
and the rights and liberties his Kingdom, which after some blessed and
confortable possession so long yea with the furthest concurrence of the civil
laws herein we should reckon as our birth right; and inheritance, whatever sad
short coming have been by all in that measure of the testimony of our fathers
thereto, against such invasion on so great an interest as has been in these
times. 5. We have confidence to say, that we own no doctrine, or principles but
what tends to give all due respect and obedience to the Magistrate, without
detracting from his just rights and power, bot to gave unto Caesar the things
that are Cesars yea without the least denying to the Christian Magistrate,
whatever with any Scripture warrant, we may allow, of an external objectively,
ecclesiastic power such as is cumulative for the truth not against it; bot
that he can have no power formaly ecclesiastic, and what is purely Spiritual
or any immediate power of cognition in matters simply ecclesiastic antecedent
to the judgment of the Church, which is so incompatible with the order and
Government established by him, who is the alone head and Lawgiver to his own
house, whose Kingdom is not of this world. 6. We may say with a humble appeal
to their conscience w^o do most reproach, that it is for no pre-eminence or to
be Lords over Gods heritage or owning any power bot what is ministerial to
declare and execute our Masters will, and such a power which hes the inward man
for its proper object and the true edification of the body of Christ for its
peculiar end, wherein we own a special regard to be had in the whole exercise
and application thereof, and in dealing with the conscience of gainsayers, that
it be with greatest tenderness, and Christian prudence, such as may most tend
to edify and gain upon their conscjence; and therefore, are private, essays
expressly appointed to go before a publict, and judicial procedour. And if any
just ground of offense has been given in the excess of some this way let it
cause no reflection on that blessed and beautiful order in the house of the Lord
our God appointed by himself, yea which with grief upon any convincing evident
thereof we should to the furthest dissown. 7. It is evident that these sacred
ties of our oath and covenant with God, we are so solemnly engadged in,
contain no other duties or obligations, then what the Scripture indispensibly
obleidges to, and are stated on these great concerns of truth and
righteousness. 8. We can also witness with some quiet and assurance that the
great anne and concern of the most serious Non-conforme Ministers of Christ,
in our Church, in their adventuring to preach the Gospel not withstanding of
any prohibitions by the present Law has been upon no sactious or private
design, bot under constraint of duty, upon so pressing a call and necessity of
the people, as these unto whom the dispensation, of the Gospel and ordinances,
is commit, and a necessity thus laid upon them with some serious aim, and
desire, I hope, to pursne this end, and to sheu the indispensible nead of
embracing that blessed offer of reconciliation by Christ: as also to press
holiness, and give warning of any share when it is evident the people might be
in hazard thereby. Nor dare our respect to the persons of any in the least,
balance with the interest of truth here, for a public disowning with grief
what ever in their way have given just cause of offense, and stumbling in such
a time. 9. It is the revealed truth of the Scripture, which we do expressly own
as the alone formal object of our Faith; and that it is there each should come
to prove his work, bot a that it be ^ust and warrantable on the matter
according to these unchangeable rules, of truth and righteousness, and to know
our warrant and calling herein: else no security could be from the greatest
confusion and irregularity among men. 10. That extraordinare motions, or
impulses, must be no rule or warrant of duty, nor for any going beyond these
express bounds, set to us in the word, by which they must be known and tried;
for God has assigned to each their station, and calling, and that a serious
and tender regard should be against all exorbitance in the excess als well as
any sinful deficience or neglect therein. And I hope whatever be found
unauswerable this d^y in the practice of any to these known principles and
doctrine of our Church which are confessed and most universally adhered to by
the non-Conformists there as we do, with grief disown, so I have confidence
there cannot want some testimony thereto even on the conscience of our greatest
adversaries.

8. I must nere yet add on strange ground of quarrel and prejudice; that a
serious adherence to the Government and Kingdom of Christ over his Church, for
which the authority of his Laws and institution is so unanswerably clear,
should be judged incompatible with the civil interest, and security of the
state. For ANSW. if men shut their own eyes, where the Scripture is so clear;
and has thus showed us, not only what is just, but what is good, and how
assuredly this is the greatest concern of a Nation to have the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and the rights thereof established; and kept up, when the very
express intent and tendence thereof is to promote and transmit both the purity
and power of godliness to the present and succeeding ages, I confess there can
be no reasoning, then in such a caice, but if principles of self love, to our
temporal advantage and such pretended respect to the public interest of the
Land, bear any weight; I would but plead a little, with a serious appeal to
these principles, which our adversaries do yet own, and assent to; if the
truth, and serious practice of godliness and these means which are necessarily
directing thereto, be not visibly the great interest and safety of a Nation,
and to have the furthest awe and reverence thereof kept up; upon these grounds.
1. Because thus is the greatest inforcement of civil duties, by a religious
tie, and on principles of conscience. 2. That this tends to the furthest
advance and improvement of human nature; both to make human society sweet and
desirable, and for a more vigou^ous and true improvement of men's natural
abilities, for the public good interest of that place. 3. And can this be a
public grievance, which brings the greatest inforcements to sincerity, candor,
and truth; which as it is essentially necessar for the establishment of
justice, and moral righteousness, so tends to beget true mutual assurance both
in words, and actings amongst men? and how possibly can a Nation be safe; or
any true intercourse and security in our personal concerns, where truth, and
godliness has no due respect there. 4. Is it not thus the duties of our
several relations are most promote, yea which gives the greatest security to
civil Government, and sets home on men's hearts their obligations to Magistracy
as the Ordinance of God; not from fear, but for conscience sake, and it is
little known, what hid pledges, such as are truly godly are of the peace and
safty of the Land they are in. 5. Can the blessed tendencie of truth and
godliness, be under deba^e; to subdue the diseases of the mind; and restrain
these exorbitances of pride, envy, wrath, ambition, etc beyond the furthest
reach of all humane Laws, which has still so deplorable effects every where,
and raised too visibly, most of these storms, and tempests which are in the
world, and causes so dreadful disorders amongst men. 6. It is sure also the
way of truth, must needs lead men to be quiet, and do their own business, yea
for such as are in that condition; to work with their own hands 1 Thessalonians. 5: 11.
and to abide in that calling, in which the Lord has placed them; and to
painfulness and industry therein, to be no busy medlers in the affairs of
others; and that no man go about to defraud his brother, that none render evil
for evil unto any, which as they are most express Scripture commands, must
demonstratively witness this like ways, what a public blessing, truth and
godliness, is to the Land wherein it is kept up; I shall only add this more,
what regard even on politic grounds should be to that which so necessarily
brings therewith, the love of our neighbor, and to do unto others, as we would
be dealt with, by them, as also tenderness to the afflicted, a compassionat
spirit to relieve such as are in distress, with hospitality to strangers*
which must needs have a vigourous exercise there, where the love of the truth
is entertained, as being so essential a part of our obedience to the Gospel.

SECTION V.
AFter some thoughts on this sad and unpleasing subject of the late differences
in our Church. I would desire yet in the shutting up thereof to speak a few
words, on a more practical concern, that might lead in, and leave the Reader
on another sent, and inquiry, which I fear in this strange crowd and noise has
been of public debates, by too many be much lost, and shall touch this in these
4. particulars: O that with a blessing from him who can serve himself of the
meanest things it might be made a word in season to my in such times.

1. To consider what may most contribute to a Christians joy and solid peace
upon, an after reckoning with their own conscience as to their way, in this
winnowing time when such hot contendings hes been in the Church, for which I
would humbly offer these. 1. what sweet peace will then be in having been kept
closs at home with a tender and jealous eye over the frame and temper of their
own spirits, since we cannot but see where the strength of these strange
paroxismes, of heat, and bitterness, amongst Professors of the truth does now
most lie, that it is from these jarring corruptions upon the heart, more then
from any differences of light and judgment and which no eager disputes but a
tender and lively practice in being exercised to Godliness can effectually
cure, and then we might both hope for a blessed healing composure under these
different measures of light amongst Christian, and for a tender and humble
reasoning in things wherein they differ, when thus a more near conformity to
the Spirit, and rule of the Gospel, is once reached, which must needs subject
the Soul, to account it our greatest honor, to be overcome by the truth. 2.
That they have been kept from any such precipitant judgment of others, as
usually follow on such debates; and their spirit kept under some blessed aw, and
restraint, of these sudden, violent, commotions, and truptions of passions as
runs such unto most sad undecencies, to discredit the profession of the truth,
discompose themselfs, and wound their own conscience. 3. That they have been
tender of practicing that themselves which they have condemned in others by any
such aim more how to revile, then reclaim; and to a heightning, rather then
healing of this strange breach. 4. That the fleeing of one extreme, has still
been with some regard of being kept from running on any other and of there
having had impartial respect to entertain what ever is justly approveable, and
according to the rule, upon eitheir hand; yea not only with a humble ceding in
personal injuries, and such a tender managing of their own necessar vindication
upon the revilings of others as might tend to convince more then to provoke;
but that they have this testimony, they did in earnest pray for such, and seek
their mercy, and reclaming from the Lord 5. That no pretenses or personal
respects has shut their eyes upon any visible hazard to the truth, and of
having been kept on a serious watch against the dephits and subtility of Satan,
on the right hand, no less then on the left; which we might have seen too
evidently in this late amazeing breach. 1. By an overbending to break, and take
of from unquestionable duty by somes exacting on the conscience of others,
according to their measures and dictates, beyond the express bounds and
warrant of the word.

2. By such a strange coincidence of seeming extremes; that what has been
intentionally followed by open adversaries should be no less vigourously
carried on by others ex intention operis so as to run thus cross (I doubt not)
to their own thoughts; to obstruct the spreading of the gospel and bring the
truth and profession thereof under discredit, and I must add a too visible
tendence of this way, to such a precipice of resolving their light, and
confidence on extraordinare motions; without a humble enquiry, and trial
thereof, by the Scripture; so as some in outrunning, the revealed rule of duty
has stumbled on the dark mountains ere they were aware; and lost their feet,
in seeking of wings to flee; as may be for a sad warning to after times.

2. This were a most suitable study in such a day; how to walk wisely, toward
such as are without, and what might most tend to gain respect to the truth; to
convince, and prevail with men's conscience, even of known and publict
adversaries now in a time of so great reproach; and it is sure these should be
special advantages for such ane end. 1. When the truth of holiness, in
convincing and visible realities of a Christians practice, as are present
before men's eyes does appear, which was the glory of the Church in the
primitive times, who were then the first fruits of the Gospel among the
gentiles, that it was said, they did not speak great things, but live them; and
which was then specially noted by adversaries: see how the Christians love, one
another; for then did the love of Christ bear rule in his peoples heart; but
how sad an account is recorded in some ages after, that no times had been more
fertile of religions; than these and of great contests this way, but none more
barren of religion; in the truth and solidity thereof; whilst it seemed rather
the notion of religion, most conversed with in such a Day, then with the thing
it self. 2. When this does appear, under great tribulation; for it is then both
religion, and these who profess it, are at once proved; and is assuredly one
of the choicest opportunities of a Christians life to convince the world; but
oh it seems such a prospect of Christianity, is now rare, as the saints have
had in former times or; or such a conjunction, as this when they received the
word under great affliction, but with a greater joy, and comfort of the Holy
Ghost. 3. When a serious and tender way, is followed by christians, to gain
more upon men's judgment, by a humble, and rational account from the Scripture
of their hope, and practice, then by a more confident, and severe imposing,
upon their faith since it is sure, the premises, and conclusion must be still
relative, and the truth much more hurt then helped when it is not in a
convincing way, commended to the conscience even of adversaries. It is not
sufferings; but the cause that makes the martyr; that it be indeed for the
truth, and no just ground of offense, be by any given to darken the credit
thereof, and here there must be no redeming of the personal repute of any, at
so high a rate, as a public dash, and prejudice to the honor, and credit of
the way of the Lord, in this day. 4. This also were a special advantage, for
gaining respect to the truth, when in the room of sore and bitter compleanings;
the voice of joy, and thanksgiving, may be heard, amongst such as own the way
of the Lord this day; even under all their griefs and pressures other ways. I
write this under some conviction, how rare such a study, seems now to adorn
the profession of the Gospel: though it is sure, none ever sought to find the
comfort, and mercy of their lot, for an excitement to this blessed exercise of
praise; but found cause for it, and how to be faithful, in a lesser measure,
but they found more added; and how great a want this is, and hinderance to the
prayers of the Church, this day is more then we seem to lay to heart; yea how
much thus the world is tempted, to judge religion, only a dead form; and that
Christians do not in truth believe, what they believe, yea that they are few,
if any, on the earth, who walk suteably to such a hope, and assurance of the
glory, which is to come. I am sure, as no serious and wise observer, but might
find their being under some singular engadgments from what has been the way
of the Lords dealing with them; so it is sad when these are more buried almost
and forgot, then searchd out under present and new trouble. Some would judge a
suitable access, to give in their mite, to this treasure, a special
enlargement; and to own a peculiar debt, to so great a duty, for putting their
seal, to the truth, and faithfulness of God this day, and to bear a honorable
witness to his way, amidst all the changes, and remarkably searching trials,
have occurred, in the course of their pilgrimage. He is the rock his work is
perfect, and all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, just, and true, is he.
Deuteronomy. 23. 3. O that men would praise him, and that one generation, would
declare his works, to another, and transmit the memory of his goodness; yea
that such a blessed conformity to the doctrine of Christ in humility, love,
meekness, bowels of compassion and overcoming evil with good, might this day
more appear; as the world thus, might be both judged, and condemned in their
own conscience thereby:

3. This also might be a suitable and edifiing study for Christians in such a
time, for getting a clear sight, of the way of the Lord, amidst all these
strange and amazing things, which are before us, both for their own
strengthening, and to justify his holy and unspotted righteousness, and thus
to consider, that what ever, we now see yet it is so clear. 1. That the glory
of the Church militant, and greatest triumph, which the Gospel has had since
its first dawning in the world, was yet never by any outward clam, or
prosperous state here, but under tribulation, and distress, in ignominy, and
contempt, else I must confess, I have mistaken the Scripture; and that thus the
most Lucide intervals, and sunshine has been most usually short, and not only
a dark cloud but a seen necessity thereof, has still followed. 2. And how
sweet, and confirming might such a clear prospect be, now to a shaken
Christian, of the singular congruity, of such a providence, both to the
revealed truth, and infinite wisdom of God, in his dealing with his people; that
so strait, and wearysome away, should be here to an eternity of glory, in that
life; which is to come; and no getting there but through some degrees, of sore
breaking, and anguish, and going through a state of trial, before that of
enjoyment; when they consider, how unconceiveably great and excellent, that
state which is above, is; and their being trained in so sharp a a school of
tribulation here, shall at length tend to an unexpressible joy, and comfort,
that ever they had such an occasion to prove their love and adherence to Jesus
Christ and of crediting his truth against all visible grounds, and in having
with patience and hope got through such a throng of temptations, when they thus
see, the most bitter grieving, and difficult part of their warfare, was but to
make the victory more full, and triumphant. 3. Thus we might have a more clear,
and confirming look of the holy judgment of the Lord, in the product of these
sad breakings, in our Church that when so strange a spirit, has been aloft,
and a strong affection in some, without a humble and deliberat judgment, it
should at last resolve in a fervor of error and delusion, yea to come that
length of breaking down what they supposed to be bulding up, and to adventure
with greatest confidence for engadging the Holy God, to a concurrance in these
ways which his word does expressly testify against, whilst so impatient to be
touched herein, as they have been ready to turn again and tear such, who has
with tenderness, sought their recovery. But tho such sad things should deeply
affect us yet, there is no cause for stumbling to any; pure religion and
undefiled is the same this day that ever it was; and the redeemed of the Lord,
are a broken, and diseased company, whielst here by the way full of sores and
Distempers, but all under cure, which will ere long be perfyted, and I hope
through grace, there is a generation of tender, solid, and humble Christians
yet in our land (who shall be owned and accepted at the appearance of Jesus
Christ) as this day I know on the earth; and many much hid there; but what is
too visible the temper and complexion of this age, may cause much fear, upon
these peculiar hazards, professors now seem to be exposed to; beyond former
times, when a form of knowledge, and the theory of practical religion has so
far outgone tenderness and practice, and become so much a matter of art, and
Invention, whilst Christians formerly with a smaller measure of light and in a
plainer dress, walked in the love and simplicity of the truth; a bold and
professing age, where a too easy and sudden growth to a forward appearance
amongst many, has so visibly out run a solid rooting in the truth, and that
fear and serious exercise on their own soul, about their spiritual state and
the soundness of conversion as has sometimes been; an age where it may be
feared that not at a common rate many are like to adventure on the furthest
hazard of perishing amidst these strange distempers in our Church, but with
highest pretenses seem to out darre all means of conviction; even while with
greatest tenderness and love to their souls followed, yea an age when that
dreadful engine of Satan is now so discernibly on foot and in such different
forms and shape, by the spirit of error and delusion, to turn men off all
settled persuasion of the truth and give the credit and interest of the Gospel a
sorer wound, then the open violence and rage of others, has yet ever done; and
is not here one sad influencing cause of so deplorable a State of the Church
this day, that many professing godliness in this age are not more taken up
with the great and weighty things thereof, and in these retired exercises which
has the clossest communication with the vitals of Christianity; and so
indispensibly necessar to a honorable appearance for the Lord, in any publict
duty and service of the time.

4. What a choice study in so extreme an exigence now of the Church should this
be to know, and bring near, by some more deep reflection thereon, how great
these things are, which a humble and serious Christian has to converse with,
and to oppose all his griefs and fears this day, even when they seem to press
above measure; which this might not only confirm but overcome the heart with
unexpressible joy, when he but thus alone reasons with himself. 1. What ever
shaking winds now blow, almost from evry airth, yet has he firm and surest,
principles of trust for a safe founding the rest and peace of his soul, and his
security here is full though not his enjoyment, yea what ever want now be of
the certainty of adherence in resting on the truth with such full repose and
quiet of mind he is called to: yet he knows thereis no want, of furthest
certainty of evidence. 2. That not in a dream, but in the most serious
composure of spirit, he can retire into the Gospel of Christ: and there see how
unexpressiblie blessed poor lost man is made by a redeemer: on whom he has
choiced to have the exceeding riches of his grace showed forth to all eternity,
yea this in so marvelous a way when no possible help could be found in us, that
the Holy God, would take satisfaction to himself by himself, not only to save
his people but to preserve the rights of justice inviolable: yea has thus
brought us under a Law to come and be blessed in his Son, to whom he bears
record that in him is life, and an eternal salvation made sure. 3. That the
clear intent of this astonishing mystery is not only to save his people from
wrath, but to make them meet by the spirit of holiness, for that state, which
is above: since it is not pardon alone, or a heaven without us, can make any
blessed until the soul once be framed for it, and this first begun and wrought
there, and now, what has a Christian this day to converse when amidst the
multitude of his saddest thoughts, he can with such assurance retire into the
Gospel, and thence look up to an eternity of glory as that which ere long he
shall know and enjoy. 4. That this is so sure, for his confirming, that such a
signature and Impress of the Gospel, in the truth and reality of holiness is to
be seen this day in the earth, I hope yet in innumereable instances even in
these declining times with so visible an assimilation and likness to a higher
state herein, that if men but exerce reason, they might see, it is Sure a
marvelous transforming power, could ever make such a change, and that miracles
(if rightly considered) does not this day cease in the Church, whilst so great
a witness to the power and truth of godliness is continued. 5. He thus sees
that tho no resemblance of our blessed head has been left to the Church, of
his human appearance whilst he was in the earth; yet is his undoubted Image and
portraiture drawn to the life, to be seen here, in the truth and reality of
holiness; and how much should this commend and indear truth, in the inward
parts, and tender walking with God unto christians, that thus not only the
reflection of his image on such may be convincing to the world in whom as so
many mirrours he has choised to shine forth, and appear; but that in this
state of distance, whilst they see him not whom their soul loves, they may yet
still wear his blessed portrature within on their heart, and thus discerinbly
see him there, until they be taken up to himself for ever. 6. Thus he can
intertaine his soul in so dismal an hour, that he knows assuredly, there are
comforts here, which have no rise or affinity with the flesh, unexpressibly
above all the griefs of time, and seeks no credit from any on report but to be
found upon surest trial, such as no grief, pain or pressure was yet ever at
that hight in the lot of any of the saints, which the spirit of the Lord cannot
make sweet and easy to endure, yea has often looked them out of pain with a
present sensible outgate on their soul before any outward deliverance broke up.
7. He knows also that the greatest comforts within time are assuredly in the
life and exercise of godliness; when thus a sincere resignation, is reached,
and a feeling of themselfs to offer freely yea with joy their Isaac, and most
indeared indeared interests to the Lord; in having credit his truth against
visible grounds of hope, and their being helped to cross some present
desirable interest of sense, on the alone encouragement of faith and when some
remarkable sharp trial has been thus got well through; upon this sweat
reflection also of having gained a season, and opportunity for the Lord, that
may be for some fruit to his praise, and of a straight and serious aim to
please him, when the visible displeasure of men, has come in competition
therewith, O what pleasure and an abundant entry to a christians peace will be
then felt. 8. He has this to be confirming, what unexpressible delight and
pleasure is found on displeasing the flesh, even in its most impetuous, and
violent motions, in trial of their obedience, and love to Christ (what ever
pain may be for a little in that conflict) as lets him see, resistance to sin
is the most gainefull, and rational act of his life; whilst with any sinful
delight, which in a moment is gone, an imbittering sting and inward shame upon
the guilt thereof, does then only abide, yea is so tried that the way of sin,
can never cease to be a way of pain, and torment if the strenght and malignity
of the disease did not take of all sense thereof, which as a bone out of joint,
has no ease, nor does suffer the whole body to be at rest; whilst on the other
hand in closse following the rule, and resisting a present temptation, what
sweet peace, humble confidence, and comfortable access to God, with inward
rejoicing is most sensibly then found, and how here only is the way of his
relief; and a great seal thus to the truth, when he sees so firm and
indissoluble a tie betwixt peace, and holiness, as the worst of times can never
break of. 9. He knows that if no searching trial, there could be no triumph
and in so far should be shut out from the overcomers joy, to which the forest
wrestling of a christian when sanctifiingly exercising must still make way. 10.
And what thoughts might these be on a more deep reflection, upon the truth, and
reality of prayer, that here is no conjecturall thing but such a passage, is
sure, known, and tried, betwixt heaven, and a Christians soul; which has had
so wonderful effects, and certain returns, in the greatess exigence and
strait; and is not only an instituted duty, but mean of their relief, yea not
only the sweetest way of converse with God here on the earth; but is the most
effectual to prevail and obtain.

I shall but add, a few words more, now in the close, and deteane the reader no
further; that it would have been judged, the appearance of the time, in this
extreme exigence, with what may be seen of the deplorable state of the Church
of Christ, not only in Britain, but almost universally, might ere now have
allayed these high distempers, has been of late, when popery is on so present
and dreadful an approach as threatens to swallow up all, and when that mine,
which has been so long in the dark, and digging under the ground, seems so
near to spring, yea has got too visible advantage, to enter at such a breach
(as has been of late) and gain ground this way. It is true, it may seem not
easy to comprehend and is surely one of the greatest dephts of the judgment of
God this day, how in one and the same age where the truth has so brightly
shined, both in purity, and power, there can be a subjecting of so many with
their own consent, to so visible and notour an Impostur, as popery is, and
after all we have seen, this Surprising darkness, should now-come to such a
hight, as men are turned thus cruel against themselves, and the Posterity, to
deliver up all that should be dearest to them, to such a party: yea engadge in
a way that so clearly enervats the whole intent of the Gospel, and where there
is no conceiveable access for seduction, by any arguments to men's reason, and
judgment; or on other terms then to shut their eyes first on the Bible.

But what ever length this trial, may now come, and tho it should yet once
provaile against all visible profession of the truth in the Church of Britain
and Ireland, we should adore the spotless righteousness of God herein in
delivering men's reason and judgment up to so strong delusion, since as the
greatest of blessings which ever came to the world is the pure light of the
Gospel; it needs not be strange that the greatest of judgments follow on a
peoples contempt, and rejecting thereof, so as nothing is so absurd and
irrationally gross which these will not drink in who have once rejected the
truth. But since the prospect and impression of this time, is like to be more
fainting, then to confirm, or awake to duty, I would but touch this a little,
though there can be no possible stumbling, for want of light, when the truth
and doctrine of the reformed religion is so fully cleared; and tho this might
seem incongruous with the forgoeing subject, yet I am sure not unsuteable to
the time when such hazard is now of much stumbling, and men do unsensibly wear
at a distance from under these former impressions of the truth, and the way of
the Lord, which they once had; yea that a few days may come the Churches way
more remarkable for trial, then all has yet ever been in this age; I shall but
offer some special reflections now suitable to such a day, and of so known
public, and unquestionable evidence, to the Church that when brought near to
our thoughts, may let us see how far the advantage, and measure of these
confirmations of the truth, given in to this generation, does exceed that of
former times; and I should hop such an exercise, might be of use and blessed
through the Lords gracious concurrence for Christians furthest confirming, thus
but to reason with themself, and have more deep reflectings thereon.

1. What ever hight this present assault from popery, may come to yet we know
how solemn a triumph, the Gospel hes had, and that surly it is the same truth,
and cause of the reformed Church; for which so great things, has the Lord
wrought, when that blessed revolution once came, after Antichristian darkness had
overspread the face of the World for many ages; so as the full stroke, and down
fall of that Kingdom, seems not more marvelous, and above all humane
appearances, when now at a distance; then what we have already seen. 2. That it
is clear, how extraordinare a power did attend this blessed work of the Churches
rising and that astonishing swift progress thereof, as nations seemed to be
borne at once, and the earth to bring forth in one day; Churches was then both
planted, and confirmed betwixt the Year 1521. and 70. like a new Christian
World, thus brought forth and settled, yea how far this was above visible
means and how little interest instruments had therein as it may be still said,
let none fear or stager at the promise of God, though difficulties in an
ordinare way, seem insuperable; after we have now seen what the Lord has don
these last ages. 3. That it is so evident, how with the first shining forth of
the truth, and doctrine of Christ, in the purity thereof, the life and power of
Christianity came also therewith to the world, and how this blessed light, did
lead in, to greatest tenderness in the walk, and practice of Christians, which
we might see yet as still present before us, how extraordinare an effusion of
the spirit of God, this was, which caused then so marvelous a change, and
luster on the Church. 4. Have we not seen to confirm us of the truth, these
prodigies of cruelty has been acted, by the popish party such as some immediate
power and incitement of the Devil, can only answer and has so far outgone
the ordinare rate of humane cruelty, as if Infernal spirits, had then come and
assumed human shape, to act this way; yea is evident that no such measures can
be found under the heathenish persecution against the Christian Church and in
that strange way and manner followed as the French, and Irish massacre, has
been. 5. That such horrid practices also, has been consequentiall to their
doctrine, and principles, so as this has not only been dispensed with (...) by
that Church, but accounted as highly meritorious, that it may be now easy to
judge where that spirit, and way tends and what might be expected where this
long (...) fury should but once get a vent. 6. Have we not seen also no
possible m^^^ security, from such whose greatest strength has thus been to
move still in the dark; and by surprise, to make their greatest assault, yea
whose very religion, does so evidently subvert all truth, and mutual
confidence amongst men. 7. But have we not also seen, amore excellent spirit,
and invicible power, has been, to bear up against all this cruelty, and rage,
and how great a seal, thus has been to the Protestant ^^se, and doctrine in
these late times, by innumerable witnesses, who even in their extremest
sufferings, did so convincingly evidence, a joy unspeakable, and undoubted
sealing of the comforts, of the Holy Ghost, on their soul. 8. That these
likewise were rare examples, of the truth, and reality, of holiness in their
day; and of humility, and subduedness to the flesh, yea of tenderness, and
bowels of compassion to their persecutors whom the Lord did thus call and
prepare for such a sacrifice. 9. That no precipitancy, or stubbornness, in the
least was in their way, but as with great assurance of mind; so with a tender,
humble and deliberat acting, their study then was by rational conviction to
deall with the conscience of adversaries, in a willing rendering, the reason of
their faith, and suffering, with all meekness, from the scripture, with a
reference thereto before the world, to be tried and searched out in what any
could object. 10. Have we not seen the power, and wisdom of God, most brightly
shine forth, in that day, in the weakness of means, and that no special piece
of service, was then called for, but a most surprising and discernible call,
and excitement of instruments thereto, who in the same spirit, by which others
were helped to suffer, was remarkably then carried out to act in defense of the
Gospel much above themselves and their ordinare reach. 11. Have we not seen
also, that no great thing was by the Lord, then brought forth for his Church,
but some remarkable hight of trouble, went before, and how every step of her
rise, and prevailling over Antichrist has been still ushered in with some sore
conflict, and down casting like the Pangs, and throws, of the birth before a
delivery. 12. Have we not clearly seen, that no humane power since the breaking
forth of this blessed light of the gospel, could yet ever reach its end, against
the reformed Church; though no possible way, and chainge of weapons, have been
left untried, but how most visibly the work of their own hands, has ensnared
them herein, and tended more to the furtherance of the gospel. 13. And might it
not be confirming what has been so clear to see, the reformed Church of
France, get so sweet a clam, yea fixed in a settled state, with outward peace,
and legal security, by the Catholic league there, andby such a formidable
conjunction as was therein of persons and interests for her utter ruin. 14. To
see four Kings of France, successively taken away in 30 Years, all upon the
same design; and in a vigorous pursuit to destroy the Protestant interest
there, and in them that race of the house of Valois wholly extinct of whom two,
were by a violent death Henry the second, and third, and this last so
remarkably from that very airt with whom he had most concurred and joined in
counsel, as particularly with the Duke of Guise, for the massacre but both
falling and destroyed by other in a short time. 15. To see the Netherlands fixed
both in a settled state, and Church by that bloody engine of the Spanish
inquisition, set up there and severe cruelty of Philip the II., as the very
mean made most subservient thereto. 16. To see the Protestant doctrine, more
effectually promot and rooted in England, by the bloody days of Queen Mary,
then the peace full calm of King Eduard who had gone before. 17. To see the
violence and falsehood of Queen Douager, and inbringing, of the French to
Scotland, to bear down and destroy the Protestant interest there, such an
effectual mean and advantage for its rise and further establishment. 18. To see
the blood, and cruelty by Ferdinand the II. in Bohemia, in so very short a time
most visibly returned on himself, to a making Germany almost desolate, and for
many years, to sum in its own blood, by the Swedes, and their confederats. 19.
To see that horrid late Irish massacre, in a few years after resolved in an
utter rooting out almost of that cruel party, who had moved therein with such a
discernible sunshine of the liberty of the Gospel, as did follow after in that
land. 20. I must here add which may be clear and confirming this day how so
strange a falling in with popery has been now these 20. Years past in
Britain, and what ground that interest has gained there, has so visibly had
its strength from that airt of atheism, ignorance, and the getting up of a
profane Spirit, which as a prodigy, and deluge has thus broke forth in these
lands, once blessed both with the purity, and power, of the Gospel beyond most of
the Churches; and how such has indeed found it easy to quite the truth, who
yet never knew it, besides the influence, and suting of such a bait, as this
way is to the temper of so licentious a time, and for some private interest,
when that has been under so favorable an aspect.

FINIS.

