OVERTURES Offered to the PARLIAMENT In which this Proposition is Advanced.

That a small Sum imposed on the Nation, for Reforming Our Standard, and for
Repairing the Losses of the AFRICAN and INDIAN Company, etc. bestowed in the
Method proposed, will be of ten times more value to the Nation in General, etc.
To almost the whole individual Persons in the Kingdom, than the samen Sum will
be, if Retained in each Particulars Hand.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, in the Year M D CC.

THE PREFACE.
THE Errors in Laws and Mistakes in Governors, are so often Represented in
Malicious Designs, That it is some times dangerous to Propall them. Yet when it
is done with Discretion and Sobriety, and in these Methods by which they are
most probably recommended, and in order to be redressed, without Reveange, it
is not criminal. In this Method, the Proposer of the following Articles may
presume himself sheltred, not only by his good Intentions, but also by the
Nature of the things, and by the Judicature to whom he humbly directs his
Opinion, with Submission to either Approbation or Rejection: Laws cannot be
otherwise corrected then by the Legislative Power; And there are few Laws so
perfect, tho apparentlie expedient, when they were constitut, that yet may not
beget prejudicial Consequences; which may be occasioned by change of
Circumstances in Persons, and things: And no Example can better verify this,
than that of the Matter of Money, which is one of the chief Inconveniences
mentioned in the following Papers.

One of the great Ends of Parliaments, being to deliver the People from
Inconveniences; And the Laws, and true Privilege of the People, allowing or
rather requiring a Discreet Freedom, in discovering of Publict Evils,
especially in, and to Parliaments, what I now write, needs no Apology: If I be
mistaken, I shall be well pleased, that my Propositions may be rejected. But if
I shall expose publict Inconveniences, then I hope my proposed Remedies will
be allowed, or better put in their place; which shall likeways better please
me: And because* when such Matters are offered in Parliament, either time is
wanting for Mature Consideration, or else it is bestowed perhaps on lesser
Matters, if they be proposed by greater Men; And some things contained in these
Papers, may be weighty enough, and deserve more Deliberation, than the
shortness of a Sederunt can allow. And several things, will have a very far
different View in serious Reflection, from what they had in a hasty Glimpse:
Therefore I have Printed them, and Published them, for the Use of these Members
of Parliament, who will bestow a little of their time, to study the true Causes
of our Evils, and to invite them to Redress what they shall be convinced of to
be such.

I think few, if any, will deny that our Nation is at present under many
Inconveniences, such as Profanity, Poverty, and Contempt, amongst other Causes
of the first, the Non-Execution of Paenal Laws by Inferior Magistrates, the
not Alimenting of the Beggars, who are necessarly indigent, and the licensing
of many Licentious ones who are not so; And a third Cause, the Vacancy of
Numerous Churches, and their long Continuance in that State.

As to our Poverty, amongst many Causes I hint at these three, the Baseness of
Current Coin, and to that Excess that it were sufficient to depauperat the
Richest Kingdom in Europe, in proportion to its Product and Trade. 2do. Our
Luxury, unsuitable to our Religion, and unproportionable to our Fortunes. 3tio.
The Consumption of our Estates Abroad and not at Home.

And how necessarly must we be contemptible, whilst in the great Concerns of
Peace and War, we alwise intrude Our Selves into the Misfortunes of England;
whilst they never allow one Ray of their Prosperity to glance on Us. being
always under the Sinisttruous Influence of their State, but never under the
Benign,

I am far from supposing or intending an Enumeration of all our Evils, and as
far from thinking that I touch all the Causes: But although I cannot do much,
yet my Duty calls to do apart; And I leave the greater Burdens on Greater Men,
and better Heads. And it will be some Satisfaction to me, if I contribute in
the least to any Amendment; And the lowest of my Hope is, that what was
undervalued by some, when I offered my private Thoughts on prior Occasions, may
be more noticed, if not more respected by the Body of the Parliament; And
however, in magnis voluisse sat est.

In the following Papers, I advance my Opinion for some Measures to remove
Prophanitie, by planting of Churches: And where that is neglected, thereby to
raise a Fond for entertaining of the Poor; For which End also, I offer some
other Mediums, And for our Poverty, I expose the Mischiefs of our Coin with
the Remedy, and offers both my Opinion and my Wish, for Reforming our Luxury;
And in Order thereto, to direct our Trade to its profitable Subjects.

If they be not digested in fit Method and Order, this may excuse me, that
having litlte share in public Trust, I am not Debtor to it, in so much time,
as those are whose Province does oblige them to manage it: And I hope they will
Supply all my Defects: But when at any time, what I have write* occur to my
Thoughts, I bestow that time to write it down; And for my Goodwill, all that
(...) require, is, that the Reader may take it in good part.

A PROPOSITION For Remeding the Debasement of COIN IN SCOTLAND.
IT is evident that the Raising of the Denomination of the Standard of our
Coin above the Standard of England, by the Act of Parliament 1686. and what
has followed on the said Act, is not only expressly contrair to the Mutual
Contract betwixt the two Kingdoms, Anno 16 -- but is in it self one of the
great Causes of the Nations Poverty; For, by it all our Goods are sold at an
unperceaved Undervalue: in so far, that we own and receave the English Crown
(and so every Species of their Money proportionably) at 5 sh. 5 d. sterling. which
is 8 more than its Value in England, and when we give back that Crown to
England, they will receave it only at 5 sh. So we give our Goods for 8 less
than we are aware of; and when we Buy, we loose 8 of what Money we pay in
English Coin. I Know it is thought that the Raising of the English Crown, etc.
will induce People to bring in many more of these Crowns, etc. than other ways
they would do; which is a Mistake: For, any who was to bring in 13 of these
Crowns, to Buy Scots Goods, if the Crown did pass at 5 sh. sterline, needs only
now bring 12 of them; because, the 5 d. raised on each one, makes up the 13th.
And so it is evident it occasions a fewer Number of Crowns to be imported. And
if it be said, that yet it invites People to bring more 12 Crowns, because 12
gain 1 to them, and so it will occasion more of our Goods to be bought. This
Thought creeps in on men who do not examine things; for, 1o. The Evidence still
proves, that in Place of 13, there are but 12 imported. 2o. It proves, in Place
of 5 sh. and 5 d. we get but real 5 sh, 3o. The Merchand who needs our Goods
will Buy what he needs, or so much of it as he knows of Market for, albeit his
Crown were received at no more than 5 sh. And albeit his Crown were taken at 5
sh. 6 d. He will buy no more than will answer his End, and suit his Market, 4o.
If Money be raised only to invite Merchands to buy greater Quantities of our
Goods, we have an easier Medium for that End: viz. to Sell a Crowns worth at 4
sh. and 7 d. and so the Merchand has our Goods cheaper by 5 d. and by the
raised Crown he has no more. And as this is easier, so it is safer than the
raising of Denominations, as will appear by the following other Mischiefs of
our raised Standard; viz*

The raising of Money, in one Species, has naturalie obliged us to raise all
other Coins proportionablie, not only our own, but all Foreign Coins; So that
now, from whence soever Money is brought to buy our Goods, they bring in 8 less
Money than they would bring in, were our Standard as formerlie. We also Sell
all our Goods to every Nation or Person at 8 less than they paid to us
formerly, and whatever We buy from any foreign Place or People, we must add 8
more of Money to ^uy it than we did formerly; For as was demonstrat in the
English Crown, so it is as plain in the ordinary Dollar, for who formerly paid
at 58 d. Sterling. in Cross-Dollars or Patacoons, behoved to give Us 2 d. to make
up the 58 d: But now he pays Us 58. and keeps his 2 d. to himself. And in like
manner, he who paid us 60 d. in Bank or some Imperial-Dollars, behoved to give
Us a Bank-Dollar, and 2 d. more, now he pays us 60 d. by the Dollar alone, and
keeps the 2 d. So in Ducatons, he who paid us 74 d. behoved to add 4 d. to
make up 74 d. Now the bare Ducatons pays 74 d. and he Retains 4 d. to himself.

And as we loss so much, by what the Importer of Money brings in, less than he
would have done, had our Standard stood as it was formerly; so when ever we pay
58 d. to a forreigner for his Goods, we must add 2 d. to the Patacoon, to make
up 58 d. When we pay 60 d. we must add 2 d. to the Bank-Dollar. And when we pay
74 d. to a forreigner, we must add 4 d. to the Ducatoon.

But it may be said, we will raise the Price of our Native Goods in proportion
to what we want by the Coin. The weakness of this Argument will appear, if you
Reflect, that in the first place, before we raise our Goods, we are cheated,
and until their price rise, and rise from this cause; for if the price rise by
other causes as by the scarsity of our Goods in other places, or other emergent
causes; then the forreigner behoved to import the Money at the former Standart,
and as much more also, as our Goods were more valued abroad, than formerly. but
this Solution refutes what was argued before for raising the Standard, viz.
that of raising the Denomination, people were invited to import Money, for if
he must still pay as much Money as he did formerlie, what Invitation does He
get, from raising the Denomination?

To what is thus argued against raising the of the Standart, add these yet more
Weighty Arguments;

10. Money gives no more abroad by our raising its Denomination, So that Money
employed in Trade by Cambion, is in other places, especially with all prudent
Nations; The same it was, without any Alteration, by our raising it.

So that, as less is brought in to us for our Goods, so we must send out the
same in Value and more of our Denomination than we sent out formerlie.

20. That Money is of no more use than dead uncoyned Metal, unless it be
employed in Merchandice, Trade or Cambion.

30. When I sell my Estate at 20 Years purchase paid in new Denomination, in
Order to Employ it, as a Merchant or Bankier, when I Transfer it to these Uses;
my 100 is truly, and will prove to be, But 91 and so much I have lost of my
Heritage. If I get 100 paid me of my Yearlie Rent, in the new Denomination;
when I employ this in Trade or Cambion, I shall find I have but 91

40. The King, whatever he gets of his own Revenue, or new Taxes, Though he get
100 from the Subject, and what is truly 100 out of the Subjects Estate, yet to
any use for buying of foreign Goods or manageing of foreign Affairs, or paying
his Forces by Sea or Land abroad, he gets but 91

50. And which demonstrats all the rest, to all, who understand Trade, when I
would have Money to do my business in Trade or otherwise in England, Holland,
or any where (But in Ireland, our Neigbours in Error, as well as in situation)
I desire Money, Ex. Gr. To be answered me at London, viz. 100 lib. The Bankier
he tells me, this 100 lib. which you give me here, is short of the Value of my
Money at London 8 of the 100, so I must pay in to him 108 for 100 lib. at
London, and that beside the Rate of Exchange, or other Accounts, to be
hereafter mentioned.

And it is the same thing, whether Money be raised in Denomination, without
altering, or debasing the Standard, or to keep the former Denomination, and to
give more Allay, and so to debase the Standart, or to give the same
Denomination to a lesser weight of the Coin.

Add yet to these Considerations, the sad and sensible Experiment of the state
of Money in Scotland, which has allways been diminishing, and the Nation
descending insensibly toward Poverty, since that Era of our Mistake, which
neither written Representations to The Lords of the Articles in that
Parliament, could prevent; nor printed Informations since, could redress, does
experimentaly evince to our shame and Hurt.

And which (in the Proposer's humble Opinion) is no other way to be redrest,
than by restoring our Money to the same Standard, in Weight and Fineness, with
that of England.

And in place of many Arguments to persuade this Remedy, the sole Example of
England's useing the very same Cure against the like Evil, lately to their
Honor, Profit, and declaration of their Generosity and Prudence, whereby their
state has escaped from Consumption which ceded to no other cure. All the other
Remedies of Banks, Loans and such like Raggends of wit, were [as the wonderful
Lord Burleigh in Q. Elizabeth's time did aptly name them] Monte-Bank Recepts for
State Evils: so that the Reputation of their Coin, the Credit of their
Merchants, the true Par of their Exchange, the solidity of their estates both
in Lands and Money* are established; and if after their Example, the Loss be
Rationally computed and imposed on the Nation in general, it will prove to be
our safty from greater Evils, as it has been theirs: it were easy not only to
Prove but to compute how much less every one will pay of Cess imposed for that
end now when there is so little real Cash in the Nation, than they will Loose
if the Standart continue in it is Lowness or rather in it is Overvalue (which on
the matter, signifies the same thing) and our Mischiefs thereby increase.

The other Consideration and Proposal for Remeiding of the swelling of our
Exchange, and Consequently the Ruin of all our Trade, by Import of
Superfluities of many kinds; will appear more particularly in some other
Proposalls hereafter: Here I shall only take notice, that by our buying more
Superfluous goods in London, France, Holland and other places, than we send of
Goods thither; it necessarly falls out, that our Merchants need more money
there; than the Merchants of those places do need Here; and therefore we must
pay more to them for money in any of these places, than they will give to us
for money here; and that in proportion ef^ering to the different values, 'twixt
what We Import from these Places and Export to them; which by the now current
Exchange at 15 per Cent: is vast; and enough shortly to drain our money
altogether from us; for if a Merchant change his Money, Six or Seven times, it
is evident, that ^e most Loss six or seven times the Exchange; that is; the
whole stock; and all that we can hope for supply, to this Wast, is the little
that our Highland Cows, Linen, and some Salt, and Fish Exported do yield: for
the other branch of our Export viz. Woolen Manufacture, is now by the illegal,
though too much tolerated Export of the material of that Trade, altogether
lost, to the Starving of 50000 Christian Work-People, and to little gain, even
of those who seem to reap it, For if a Ship sink, a close Cabine will sink with
it; if there be no Money in the Nation, these who gain by the Wool of their
Estates will soon loose more by inlack of their other Estate and Species of
their Rents.

To evince that it is the Nations Interest to Imitate England, in their Prudent
measure of Remeding this Mortal Wound, if not hastily Cured: viz. To estimate
what Sum may Pay the Debasement of all the Cash now in Scotland, which by
probable conjecture does not amount to 300000 lib. ster. the loss whereof
amounts to about 24000 lib. ster. viz. to six Months Cess, and add a half for
any Fraction, and to defray the Expense of the Committee for money, is in all
27000. lib. ster. viz. 4 Months and a halfs Cess; Now, every Subject looses (as
is above proved) the 8 th. Part of his Rent. and valueing the Total Rent very
low, viz. at 600000 lib. ster. The 8 th part of that, which is 75000 lib. ster.
does exceed the Cess by 8000 lib. ster. even in one Year: but in two Years time
the Debasement of the money, will be of more loss to every Particular man, than
thirteen Months Cess: And besides every man who sells his Lands or houses will
certainly loss the eight part of the stock, or Price of the Lands Sold: and if
one per 100. of all Annual-Rent be paid in, for a part of the loss (which
Moneyed men have best Reason to pay) then 3 Months Cess and a half may make the
remedy in all,

FINIS.

