The true Settlement Of a CHRISTIANS FAITH, After shaking Assaults, by its own
evidence; and by the internal sealing Work of the Spirit;

Pointed at, in some special Inquiries thereon, in a LETTER to a Friend.

WITH Some serious Reflections on the present times we are in, and those great
Vicissitudes of Providence, which have been in the public State of BRITAIN in
this last Age, in a II. Letter.

By a MINISTER of the GHOSPEL.

Printed in the Year 1692.

READER,
THe publishing these few sheets, has had no rise or call from the desires of
any, or the least motives of such a nature, but it was with a serious desire
that they might have some interest in the Service of the Truth in so sad and
trying a time, and for him to whom I stand under the highest engadgements of
Duty, in improvement of a little Season, which must ere long be shut up. It is
true, the writing of the first Letter had a very providential and unexpected
rise, with respect to a Friend who I knew had as great assistances in the way
of means as any, suitable to his case, yet finding the weight and exercise of
his mind, have such strong influence to obstruct that enjoyment of ane entire
rest and fixedness of his Faith, which is the Christians Allowance, I was pressed
to offer some thoughts, in a directive manner for being a Helper to his Joy,
and now if by such a Providence through the good Hand of the Lord, this might
be serviceable to any in such a case. The Subject of the II. Letter is of a
much different nature from the first, where somethings may possibly seem a
little strange, and the spirit and temper of most in this day not so easily
bear, but they are spoke in the Words of Truth and Soberness; and in writing of
both I have humble confidence to say it was with the furthest of light and
persuasion, yea that the most serious part therein, was with my own spirit, to
have that evidence in things of so high concern, as I might have peace and
assurance herein before God, yet if I knew, there were any thing in the least
to prejudge that great Interest of Truth and Edification as the utmost aim I
hope is proposed herein, I should count it my honor to retreat the same; but
under some serious prospect of an eternal State, and of appearing before the
great Judge, I have desired to know his Counsel, and rest my soull on his
approving Testimony alone.

An excessive desire in such an Epistolary way to speak things in as few Words
I could possibly, I fear may at the first view render somethings more dark. The
Reader also will tenderly notice and construct Mistakes in the Printing.

HONORED SIR,
IT was a sweet surprisal in such a time as this to meet with a friend on whom
I found a more then ordinary sense and weight of the greatness of the
Christian Faith; and to have ane other prospect of such ane attainment, to
enjoy ane entire rest and assurance of mind herein then most seem to have; even
of the more serious part of Christians; which did render it the more desirable
to offer some thoughts to you on so weighty a concern, not only to answer a
special promise and engadgment I was under; but with hope, through the good
hand of the Lord, that such a service may not be wholly lost for the end it is
designed. But on so great a subject I must go a little out of an Epistolary way
both in the method and measure; and what in the first place I would speak to is
this, that I durst offer nothing to divert, or take off any thing of the
suitable weight of so choice ane exercise as is so rare in these times, under
which your spirit is so much pressed, but were it needful rather to add thereto
on these grounds.

1. That it is surely the greatest design can fall under the consideration of
mankind for men to have such ane assurance of divine truth, as can both answer
the greatness of that adventure they have thereon, and can fully quiet and
comfort the soul when visible refuges, and humane assistances, seem wholly to
succumbe; and since we must either have ane entire rest, and settlement herein,
or none at all, I know not how to judge otherwise of that ordinar sense, and
implicit credit on so great ane account as this, then as a degree, and evidence
of the sad Atheism of this day we are now in. 2. If ever I knew any thing of
the way of God in truth, I must reckon this as the highest enjoiment of a
Christian, where the security, and quiet of his mind, upon the truth, answers
to so great a Revelation hereof, and to know he is thus on sure terms with God,
on the whole adventures of his trust; when it is so near to adventure on the
trial thereof in the last decision of there eternal state; yea when thus they
know how to enjoy a promise for there support in this state of warefare, under
a long deferred hope, tho the whole course of providence would seem to control
the same, knowing the ground they anchor on cannot possibly faill: since this
should be the ultimate Inquiry about the event, that it is sure they have a
divine testimony to warrant there confidence, and if the highest joy and
comfort o^ our life be not stated on such an account it i^ strange. 3. If it be
understood what it is to be a Christian in earnest, and what is called for of
such a^midst the numerous trials and temptations of this militant state; it
must need some higher degrees of assurance, and inward establishment, then
seems by most to be either apprehended or sought after; and that, such have
some proper stock of his own, of these special aides and assistances as may be
at hand in ane hour of trial, for how can the life, and serious work of
Godliness, be conceivable under such common and transient impressions, as most
have of the truth and certainty hereof. 4. Do men know what Christianity
means, and the high consequence of such a distinguishing profession, from the
residue of mankind, or is there any suitable exercise of reason about the
greatness of that hope of the Gospel, which we have set before us, and yet be
a subject both of ordinary thoughts, and assent hereto, which may still be as
though it were a new discovery to us in the present day since it might be
judged, that if there were a Methuselahs age to pass within time, this should
be a suitable, and continued exercise therein both to enquire, and admire on
the assured hope of ane eternity with God, which they have before them, and
that they are to enter into a state, where they shall be in the same Class
with the Angels of Heaven, and made equal unto them; I have known such who for
many years have been dazzled with ths glory, and greatness of that Mystery of
Christ and of life, and immortality in a future state, as has made it there
continued and highest exercise, to have a further, and new strenthning of there
faith herein, who yet all that time knew not what it was to be sh^ken, or to
have any inward fear as to there own personal interest herein; but still found
the Revelation of the Ghospel, so great a thing, and there spirits so deeply
seized with the wonders of our Religion, that whatever did tend to a higher
strenthning of their faith herein, was also the greatest addition to their joy,
and in that sense did most understand such a saying, nunquam satis magna
securitas in re tanti momenti ubi periclitatur aeternitas.

But in the next place what thoughts I would humbly offer to one of so knowing
and judicious a spirit, and where so great assistances you may have access to
improve otherways, ^ssiall be most in a directive way upon a sevenfold inquiry,
that may be of greatest weight for a Christians laying the ground work of their
profession on solid and clear grounds, which lies first here.

1. To know that rare and peculiar order that is suitable in a Christians first
entry on Religion, under a serious weight of the same on their spirits since as
in any great study, there is an entrance, and a progress, and that it is sure
in the whole frame of Christianity there is so entire a correspondence as
nothing stands alone by it self, but in a line of mutual respect, which in that
manner runs through the same, as ane entry aright upon one step, must make way
to render a further progress clear and unavoidable, so here I must judge.

1. That a Christian should once make it such a proper and solemn business, and
work by it self, to attain a solid founding, and settlement of their faith on
the truth, and to sist his soul in such a manner, as if he were then to enter
on the Christian profession, without respect to example, education, or
influence of any humane authority, or whatever any external motives could have
weight herein, since in a case of that high concern men should in the greatest
recess and composure of spirit, have some distinct special time, such as may be
matter after of sweet reflection to them, how they did then prove themselves,
with respect to so high and discriminating a profession, from the residue of
the world, and did thus with full inward consent join in with the truth purely
on its own evidence, as though there were none of that profession in the bounds
and place they lived in.

2. As the natural order of things should require that the foundation be sure
laid, ere we begin to build; so is it sure that the first entry on serious
Religion, must be on the Faith of the divine nature, and existence, and that
men have assuredly a God to trust to, and to make them happy, as Hebr. 11: 6.
he must first believe that he is, etc. and in the same order, John 17. 3. must
believe him to be the only true God, ere he come to believe Jesus Christ whom
he has sent: O how uncomfortable a thing should humane state be without God,
and ane absolute dependence on him, who might see his life to be rather a
curse, and torment, then bl^ssing, if there were no supernatural help above
himself, against the e^il, and miseries of time, and to subdue the distempers
of the mind, and the fears that should thus sease upon him both as to his
present and future state; but what possible comfort could there be in the light
of a Deity, or enjoiment of a Godhead, if we know not with assurance also, the
Excellencies of his blessed nature, and what a God we have to adventure on.

3. Thus by ane unavoidable constraint there must be a further progress, and
inquiry upon the certainty of a revealed rule of correspondence, betwixt God
and man here, both in order to duty, and what we may exspect, and hope from
him; and if it be sure this day that there be ane express, and clear revelation
of his will herein to be found in the earth; that comes with full and
infallible evidence to men; for here is it not possible to stand or fix until
our faith be once settled, on the truth of such a divine record, when we see in
what estate poor mankind were in if such a sure way of commerce were not
betwixt the invisible God, and this visible world we are in, since then we
should have no certain, and fixed boundaries betwixt good, and evil, by that
unchangeable difference, which the holy nature of God has put herein nor could
we ever know that rule of subjection, and relation we stand under to him; then
heaven and earth were shut up from correspondence together by any established
rule for the same; then should the most excellent and essential part of man,
his immortal soul, have no directive or comforting light as to his future
state, and safe passage thereto, whilst the visible creation has a sun to
shine thereon; when such is the way to life as by the greatest improvements of
nature it can be neither found nor followed; then should that rare structure,
and workmanship o^ grace here, and of glory and blessedness to come, be a terra
incognita to poor mankind, and as man only in this lower creation is capable of
moral Government and humane laws, which yet can extend no further, then their
visible work, and actions, if such a blessed record were not, there should be
no establishment of laws to the whole inward man, no rule of regulation to the
heart, and this inward world, would be subject to no Government, and tho the
ruined state of humane nature may be as discernable as the truth of it is
existence, yet should we neither know its true original, and rise, nor any
relief for the same, we might discern the truth of invisible adversaries, and
of some great design they have against us, as clearly as any object of sense,
but we could know no security from them by ane invisible guard, or the way how
to resist such a party, then should the work and conduct of providence be
wholly unintelligible to us, and have our eyes shut on these wonders hereof
which exceed the sphere, of created nnderstanding, if this great luminary of
the Scripture, did not continually shine thereon which we cannot see, and not
see also, that no way besides this was ever made known to recover poor mankind
out of that gulf of bondage and misery he is fallen into; and as this glorious
light of divine truth has its proper sphere where it is fixed, and shines
forth in the Christan Chureh; so the whole world beside, is a place where
horror, falsehood, and impiety does visibly reign.

4. But this must lead men of a serious spirit to a further enquiry, upon that
essential difference, which is betwixt the revealed rule of our Religion, and
any other way, that pretends thereto as there is betwixt light, and darkness,
which is not founded by positive institution only, but in the immutable nature
of these things themselves; and tho I design to speak more fully to this
hereafter, yet should this be of highest use to strenthen the Christian faith,
to look in with the serious use of reason on the whole frame of Paganism, as
it was in ancient times, or of Mahumetisme in this day, where even under a
sense of the law and dictates of nature such a sight were enough to expose the
very name, and form of Religion, to be just matter of abhorrence, and to be the
highest reproach of mankind, and thus see whither so brutish, and horrid a
thing could ever claim a reception either on the purity of its rule, or any
internal evidence of truth, or possible consistence with its self; so that to
have no sense or belief of the glorious being of God, is not worse, or more
dreadful, then to have the highest contumely, and affront, thus put on the
divine nature, and which tends rather to justify Atheism. This enquiry were it
suitably improven could not but render that dilemma unansuerable, either a
Christian or of no Religion at all; either that which we enjoy according to the
Laws, and constitutions of the Christian faith, or else an absolute nullity as
to all Religion, and that no such sacred thing had a being on the earth.

INQUIRY II. But as it is not possible to hold by the truth of a Godhead or to
have any true enjoiment of Religion, without a further and unavoidable
progress to the Christian Faith; so must the first entry hereof be on the old
Testament, and by a necessar result upon this inquiry, if the God of truth gave
such a promise of a redeemer to mankind after the fall, and that on this great
assurance, the faith of the ancient Church did entirly rest; that so glorious a
person as the Messiah should come, and be anointed to that work of
redeemingman, and bringing him again to God; since t^is must be first cleared,
and our faith fixed on the same ere we can enter on any enjoiment of the
Ghospel, for the faith of the new Testament, is not attainable else, but in
such an order and settlement of our faith in the old, and has ane absolute
dependence on the same; wherein the weight of this enquiry lies. 1. To see the
truth, and nature of that promise, which was the first immediate object of the
Churches faith, to be irrevocable, and absolute, and given to be declarative of
the immutable purpose, and counsel of God herein, and not dependant upon any
condition in man. 2. How this one great promise was given to be the original
right, and warrant of all other promises, which do wholly center in him, in
whom they are yea, and amen. 3. As a promise of such a nature that reason must
stand amazed at the greatness hereof, and cry out can this possibly be, yea the
more deep enquiry herein must highten such ane astonishment, and make the soul
of a C^ristian sink under the thoughts of such a thing that God will in very
deed bear such regard to man; this being a truth of that concern as it might
seem strange how one day should pass over men, without some fresh reviving of
such a reflection. 4. To see how high a value, and account God put upon that
one promise, by so long a delay, and procrastination of the same, as a promise
worthy of the Churches waiting, and expectation of the same, for 4000. Years.
5. This enquiry must lie here, to see the first entry of the Christian Faith on
the world in its precise time, and date, and how such a light did not shine on
Adam, and Eve in the state of perfection, whilst they stood in a state of trial
upon a perfect obedience to their God, but with the falling down of that dismal
night of there fall, did the glory of this light first dawn (that there might
be no utter darkness in the state of mankind as in that of the fallen angels,)
whereby the final condemnatory sentence on the one, and releef for the other
were made known, and promulgate together, and the room of the first Adam,
filled up with a higher glory by the second. 6. How this blessed light (tho
with a gradual increase,) did never cease to shine on this world since it began
to dawn, nor has there ever ceased a peculiar people in a Church relation, who
were distinct, and separate from the residue of men, whose profession was
founded in the alone faith of a redeemer, so as one day has not been, since
the first entry of that promise, wherein, the sun did shine on the earth, when
the sun of righteousness did not shine also by vital influences of light, and
power, and where the Churches head, had not some part of his body here to
converse with as the peculiar objects of his complaisance, and love, and did
rejoice in the habitable parts of the earth; tho that some ages have had, a
higher glory assigned thereto, and a larger extent of the Church; yet would he
not restrict the ingathering of his elect to any special periods of time; or
let each age want a share of this glory, and of a seed to be as salt to the
earth. 7. But this enquiry goes further, to see these measures of evidence, and
divine condeshendence, which was given to support the faith of the ancient
Church, on that great promise even by an ocular discovery, to the outward
sense, as in the whole frame and successive course of the legal sacrifices, and
these numerous figures, and types in that long preparatory service; wherein he
did not let his people feed on ashes, naked shadows, and where nothing was
inept or usless, but was expressly significative, of that highest mystery of
Christ, and could possibly bear no other sense, or intent; and since the whole
stress of the Christian Faith lies upon this one promise, or what can make the
state of man valeuable, in any true enjoiement of his life here, its on this
head should be set the first settlement of our faith; for I know no releef,
but in a promised redeemer, and if it were not for the old Testament, I could
not possibly be a Christian; if the morning, and growing-light, of that
glorious mystery, had not gone before its meridian hight, and as a clear
conduct to the next step, I shall enter on

A III. INQUIRY, to know that this fundamental promise of a redemers coming to
the world is assuredly made good, and is no more a matter of faith, but of
sense, that its sure our eyes see such a day, and long expected period of time,
and can be no dark or doubtful thing now to be a Christian, but may enter on
its profession in the open light; but to clear how with the same evidence of
the certainty of the promise, we may see its performance also, and if we be
sure of the one that it is not possible to be in question about the other, is
thus visible. 1. Because we must then part with the old Testament, and cease to
credit its divinity, and no comfort could be from the same; if it had yet
failed in this great event, and what is the main intent thereof for if the
promised Messiah were yet to come, I could then look for none, since all these
proper circumstances, which are so expressly foretold, whereby to know and
discern him, must be wholly made void, and ane utter nullity should be in that
faith. 2. Because I could not possibly look for the accomplishment of that
promise, according to the whole tenor of the old Testament, in another way then
what we have hereof in the revelation of the Ghospel; yea were it supposable
that the Messiah were yet to come; is is sure I could only look and expect for
his acting the same part and in the same appearance. 3. Let us but compare the
ancient creed of the Church herein, with that which is ours, now under the
dispensation of the Ghospel, and see whither they be not entirely on in
substance, and center in the same redeemer, with this variation only, that the
one was on the credit and assurance of what was promised, and the other on the
certainty of its accomplishment, so as that may be as applicable, to Moses,
Isaia, and Daniel with other of the Prophets, as to the Evangelists, what is
spoke by John Chap. 20: v. 31. But these are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you might have life
through his name; where we may see there could be no humane contrivance, in
this joint concurring for the same end, and by the same spirit: but yet more
specialy lies the weight of this enquiry, to see, 1. how the most solemn times
of the old Testament was still a waiting, and expecting time, and that their
highest enjoiments, lay in hope of that glory to be revealed in after ages,
when the seal should be taken off that great P^ophesy, then sealed up, and how
the whole dispensation of that time was preparatory, and as a prelude to that
great design of grace, which was to be brought forth. 2. How the breaking up of
Ghospel, and its first entry on the world, had its precise time, and date, as
that which was so absolutely necessare, for a more clear settling of the
Christian Faith, this being a matter of fact, and of the highest import that
ever was, and was ane external object of Sense, in the view of the World, which
laid an inevitable constraint, on the whole Christian Church, then to have it
keept clear, and under the most exact and punctual circumstances. 3, As Isreal's
coming out of Egypt in a typical respect, was a night, and time of such great
observation, and that the Lord did put hereon, so special a weight, with
respect to the punctual and precise time hereof; so was this in a more eminent
way, to ^e matter of highest regard, when and in what time, the great universal
good, and blessing of mankind, our blessed redeemer, was revealed unto the
World, which should begin a new week, and that solemn Epoch, whence we reckon
the Churches entry on the highest glory of time, and on a new state. 4. Hereon
has that solemn observation of the first day of the week, as the Lords day
both its rise, and right; tho it might seem not possible this could ever come
under forgetfulness when it was thus fixed, upon the highest certainty, and
precise time, both of the sufferings, and resurrection, of the Lord, in matter
of fact; as that day and time was, which had a glory put thereon, that none
else could possibly claim, and no time ever since that glass, set up to their
creation, was like unto this, yea which was wholly impossible to fix the
Christian Church on the observation hereof otherways, but that this was so
public and famous in the view of the world, and had so great a weight on the
primitive Christians, then, when these morning stars sung together, and the
Sons of God shouted for joy, at the first entry of this new World, and it may
be specially remarkable, that our Lord did the less enforce the same in an
authoritative way, both to try and trust the love of his people herein, that
what he had done for them, put so strong ane enforcment and imposition, to a
frequent and solemn remembrance of this blessed day from internal motives; and
tho its divine authority be clear, yet the less is of positive institution this
way, the more strenthning might it be to our faith, and more excitment also for
our love herein, were it seriously considered, 5. And of what weight should
this enquiry be still on men's spirits, that our hope leans now no more on a
promise, on which the Saints of old did both live and die, when this makes so
essential a change in the Christian Faith, that what ane Abraham and Moses was
saved by cannot possibly save us, to believe in a Redeemer to come, which would
now be absolutely mortal, nay not in general terms to believe that he is come,
but to know and be sure, that this is he whom the Fathers sealed, and sent
unto the World, and he alone who in the days of Tiberius, and Pontius Pilate
suffered at Jerusalem.

A IV. INQUIRY, which suitably follows here, is to look in upon the glory of
that time under the new Testament, which was peculiarly reserved thereto; and
on these public declarative signs to the World, whereby our Redeemer was
declared to be the Son of God, with power, and by the spirit of Holiness, so as
it may be said the Lord did then set up Signs and Wonders to this very day,
with a more eminent luster then these at the Churches outgoing from Egypt; but
since in the times we live in, you may find more to shake and stagger then to
strengthen your spirit in the way of truth, when it is not in an ordinare
degree, that a real Apostasy may be seen from the Christian Faith this day in
the Reformed Churches, whilst that choice spirit of the Bereans seems rarely to
be found in the earth, I shall touch but a little this great subject in some
instances, wherein our blessed Redeemer after his Ascension has still made
himself visible before the World in the glory of his divine Power, and are of
such kind, as no distance of time can take off that irresistible evidence of
the same from a serious spirit, as if they were still present.

1. That tho in his bodily presence, since he left the World, he is no object
any more of humane sense, yet has he been no less visible in his goings forth
to conquer and establish a Kingdom to himself out of all Nations, Tongues and
Languages, even to the utmost parts of the earth; and since I know you can
improve some Reflections on this Head, bejond what I can speak thereon, I shall
the more briefly point at a few. 1. That it is known and sure, how most of the
habitable World besides Judaea, was in times past Pagan, and a place of horror
and darkness, and these parts we now live in were once the dark places of the
earth, full of the Habitations of Cruelty, where our Ancestors of whom we are
come, did Sacrifice to the Gods of the Heathens. 2. It is evident and
undeniable in the matter of Fact, that within less then sixty Years after the
Ascension of the Lord, the visible extent of the Christian Church among the
Nations which had been then Heathen, did exceed what it is this day; and since
any extraordinar effect when it comes in our sight, should cause a deep Inquiry
upon the cause hereof, is not this a matter of the highest concern, that ever
was, even in the present day to be taken up with that made then so stupendous
a change on the face of mankind, and was as the bringing forth of a new World.
3. And here is it possible to question, that this wonderful thing which did so
visibly then change the whole face of the earth, was by the alone evidence and
virtue of Sacred Truth, and the pure Revelation of Christ in the Mystery of his
Death and Sufferings, wherein no humane Power could boast that their Arm or
Sword did bring this about; as I know it will be sweet and convincing thus to
see under what influence, the Christian Church was both planted and propogate
in the earth and most savage parts thereof, so that whatever respect Princes
and visible Powers have given to the Kingdom of Christ, yet is it fully
demonstrable that it is true interest and conquest was never beholden to humane
assistance, or that any temporal inducements made way thereto, but when the
World begun to smile most in the primitive times, then also did the Glory and
Luster of the Christian Religion begin to darken, and decline. 4. As it was
surely reserved to the Ghospel State of the Church, to be the Theater of the
greatest Wonders both of Providence, and Grace, bejond all that had been known
to the World before, and that in the times of the New Testament, these great
things which should be matter of highest observation, and out of the ordinare
road of Gods dealing with his Church then was to be expected, so you can see
with full evidence, that this great and extraordinare appearance of God unto
men, had been never known on the earth before, or any such outgoing of his
Power since the beginning of time, which was only reserved to follow the day of
Christ, and his Ascension, as the first entry of that glorious Scene, which was
to be acted under ^he Ghospel. 5. And here also this Reflection is anavoidable,
how the God of this World was not easily put off his visible Throne, which he
had so ^ong kept over the Nations, but the last strugle ^f these infernal
spirits ere they were cast down was then very strong, and put forth to the
utmost, who yet were made to fall before the Divi^ity of our Redeemer in such a
manner, as the ^hole frame of Paganism was then razed and ex^inct, and their
Gods after whom the earth had for so many ages wondered; for when you peruse the
Records of the first times, you can see the enmity and rage of the World
against Sacred Truth, was never before raised to such a prodigious height, as
was then aloft upon the first display of the Ghospel.

2. But it is yet a further Inquiry should be made on this Head, to see not
only the outgoing of the Lord Jesus in the Glory of his Power since his
Ascension, for setting up his visible Kingdom in the World, and extent of the
Christian Profession, but in the reality of that vital influence on the souls
of men, with so great and wonderful a change thus made on them from the residue
of mankind. This, I doubt not, will be a subject of great thoughts and
reflection to you, and should be a matter of higher concern to any of a serious
spirit, then the temporal interest and transactions, which are about the
greatest Kingdoms on the earth. 1. To see how no reality in nature, or the most
visible objects of sense, can be more sure, then that under the times of the
New Testament, there has been innumerable example of the truth and power of
Holiness, successively from one age to another, in whom it might be no more
discernable, that they walked in the virtue and power of a humane soull, then
that they did truly walk before men in the light and power of Christianity, and
under that visible influence of inward Grace, as all might see to be above the
possibility of natural causes. 2. If this were more deeply searched into, to
see what does estentially belong to the frame and constitution of one real
Christian, and what a marvelous Power must be put forth herein, it could not
but be in another manner affecting, and afford a Seall to the Christian Faith,
as does exceed the greatest external Miracles; when it is sure one example of
such, who is truly converted by grace, and made partaker of the Divine nature,
is so stupendous a work as does far exceed both the power and comprehension of
Angels, yea that the Glory of the Godhead does more eminently shine forth in
the first frame, in the conduct, and persiting of one Christian, then either in
the first frame of man in his state of perfection, or of the illuminate Angels,
since this is to make Saints of Sinners, to turn such from a state of enmity,
and inbred opposition to the Holy God to be Lovers of him, and subdue their
soulls in that manner, as with inward delight can make them part with what was
their predominant and endeared Interest, and what has been as their right hand
and eye. This is one of the great discoveries of the Ghospel to let us see how
one converted Christian is a higher demonstration of the Christian Faith, then
a thousand ordinare Professors hereof, and may fully silence such a Question,
why it is, that the Saints are not more numerous in the World, comparatively
with the great bulk of mankind, yea with these who go under the Christian
Profession, when It might be rather just matter of wonder to see that such
numerous Examples yet are to be found of this kind in the earth, of whom each,
is one of the greatest of the Works of God, and infinitely becoming the
exceeding greatness of his Power put forth herein; yea are such Examples, where
the Truth and Excellency of Grace does in any eminency shine forth, as may
justly supply the Room of Miracles, which were given in the first times to be
confirming to the Christian Faith; that these has assuredly been, and I hope
are this day not a few, who do with desire choice to prefer their Services
for God, to the greatest comforts and enjoyments of this earth, and are helped
not only to keep ground, but gain, under such conflicts and assaults in their
spiritual course, as go above the possibility of nature to withstand. 3. And
what a wonder may one Christian be, who does converse with God here on the
earth, both to himself and others, who has such near enjoyments of the divine
presence, has such astonishing hopes, has ever the Elect Angels to be both
their guard and observers; and tho the Saints above return no more to converse
with us, yet is it not questionable, but that they have the same prospect of
the outgoings of providence toward the Saints yet militant, and as to their
services, trialls, and victories, which the Angels have to whom they are now
made equal, and in the same state of perfection; and that they know the return
of their prayers in behalf of such who are on the earth, for whom they had
wrestled with God whilst they were upon it; yea that the joy which is in
Heaven, and in the presence of the Angels, on the conversion of sinners
respects the whole Church triumphant; and I humbly judge even in that sense may
the in^ent of that Scripture be understood Hebr. 12: 1. as to such a cloud of
Witnesses etc.

3. Let me referr you to one great instance also, wherein our Redeemer has in
ane eminent way made himself visible before the World since his Ascension,
which is in the greatness of that seall of Martyrdom, where you may see with
joy and admiration that as he did alott the highest discoveries of his love
unto lost man to the day of the Ghospel, so did he reserve unto these times,
the highest Testimony and trial of the Love of Mankind to him. This is a great
Subject, tho it be easily past without a suitable weight and impression of the
same, how high an interest this has in the Christian Faith; wherein 1. the
truth of such a wonderful seall in the matter of fact is not possible to
question. 2. And that it is sure there was no personated show in these
unexpressible sufferings of these Saints for Christ, nor did the World in such
a persecuting work, through most of the times of the New Testament conflict
with a sh^dow herein; and if a real Miracle be such as exceed the sphere and
possibility of nature; it has thus the most full and undeniable evidence; nor
were it possible that the most excellent of the earth should upon choice act
such a part of embracing death under the greatest torments, when their life and
the enjoyments of time was set before them, if they had not been acted by a
Divine Spirit, and knew these unexpressible comforts and joy, which was then
given in for their support, and matter of present sense, and fealing, to be no
illusion of mind herein. 3. It is on this Head you can see and compare what a
difference was betwixt the Legal Sacrifices under the Old Testament, which were
figurative and typical, and these freewil offerings and oblations of love by
Martyrdom under the Ghospel, which were offered up as a public confirmatory
Seall to the Divinity of Christ, and that the desire of all Nations was now
come; how the one did in a mystery, and under a veil confirm the Churches
Faith of a Redeemer to come, the other with the highest evidence of power did
attest his being come, and seall this Testimony with their Blood, the one from
a temporary and positive Institution, the other not only under a constraint of
light, but an imposition of love, by the Spirit of Christ, and of Glory resting
on them was thus offered up, and as to the quality of these Sacrifices: how
great a difference was herein? the one only of Beasts, wherein the Lord would
admit no humane Sacrifice to be typical, but now after the great propitiation
was offered up, these Sacrifices of Love was not only of men, but of the most
excellent of humane race, who in purity and holiness were the greatest ornament
of the earth in their day, the number whereof since the Ascension of Christ, is
of that extent as can be only known by him who counts the number of the Stars,
so innumerable have they been; yea as to the expense and allowance of so high a
service, men can not exerce reason, and not see it did not only answer but
exceed the measure of their sufferings, and how these Flames of Love in which
they were offered, was more prevalent then these of the Fire. 4. And is it not
matter of sweet Reflection herein, that as the incomprehensible Love of God
unto man is the admiration of the elect Angels, so this illustrious testimony
of humane Love unto God, is not only made conspicous to them, but is both the
foil and torment of the Powers of Darkness, to see such a triumph of the Power
of Grace amongst men here on the earth made visible; wherein my soull desires
to rejoice that as our blessed Head has assigned such a measure of his
sufferings, as a testimony to the truth to be filled up by his People, under
the times of the New Testament, and to take a higher trial of the love of
mankind herein to him, then he would take even of the love of the blessed
Angels, so has this Testimony with the clearest and undeniable evidence been
made known.

But there is a 4. special Instance of the out goings of our Redeemer in a
visible discovery of himself to the World since his Ascension, which is in the
successive course of the Ghospel amongst the Nations, and these remarkable
Periods of the rising and setting of this blessed light on different places of
the earth; on which a few things I would speak for your further clearing
herein. 1. That it is undeniable, the Gentiles have their appointed times,
which must be fulfilled, Luke 21: v. 24. wherein the fullness thereof must be
brought in Romans 11: 25. which Scriptures bear expressly the same intent, but
it is now many ages, since these times of the Gentiles has been fulfilled both
in Asia and Africa, where the Ghospel in its course at the Sun, has had its
first upbreaking, hen in the East, and its progress to the West and Northern
Parts of the Earth. 2. That it is clear, these times of the Gentiles, and the
fullness thereof, is to be only understood in a distinct and separate State from
the Jews, so that as the Jewish Church once had their proper times allotted
them in a separate state from the whole residue of the World, so have the
Gentiles had their times under the New Testament, peculiar to them only; and
the Spirit of God has there expressly showed, that this great Revolution in the
incalling of the Jews to the Christian Faith, is not to be expected until these
times be once accomplished, when there shall be then no more distinguishing
names of Jew and Gentile, and no proper interest owned by them in a divided way
as formerly, but that the Lord shall be one, and his name one, in that blessed
frame of his universal Kingdom; it is in the faith hereof my soull does rest. 3.
How far these set times of the Gentiles, and of the coming in of the fullness
thereof, be accomplished, will in due time be disclosed, and with humble
sobriety we must judge hereof, but it may be so far evident, that then some
singular withdrawing of the Spirit of God in the Power of the Ghospel will be
discernable from the Gentile Church, with the shutting up of these times, and a
very low ebb, and great darkness on the whole Western Churches, before the
rising again of the Glory of that Light, and return of the Sun to the East
again; and how it stands now with the public State of the Gentile Churches any
where, you can more fitly judge and discern.

There is a V. INQ: yet for a more full settlement in the Christian Faith, that
I would seriously commend, which is on the whole frame and nature of that pure
and excellent Religion we profess, and the intrinsic perfections thereof;
which beside the Authority of divine Institution, you may see founded in the
immutable nature and essence of the same, and thus have your soull raised to
admire and rejoice in that God, whose Excellencies are with that evidence
herein displayed, as it is not possible for men to be more blessed in the earth,
then in this way. It is here I may say has my spirit been often drawn forth to
see with admiration the Divinity and Perfections of the Moral Part of our
Religion, so that if men would see in a true mirror what the Hoiy invisible God
is like in his blessed Resemblance, lo here is it clearly presented to them,
and since any discovery of such a Light, I know you prefer much above the Light
of the Sun on this earth, as that alone which renders the state of man to be
desirable; I would touch this a little as may afford some reflections o^ so
great a Head, which may be, in the very notion thereof, rarely the subject of
men's thoughts. 1. That which is of the highest concern in the first place, to
fix your spirit on, is to see in what manner the great design of the Ghospel,
for the saving of lost man is laid, in that mystery of the Humiliation and
Sufferings of our Redeemer, and how this way the Majesty of God would take
satisfaction to himself, and his infinite Justice, by himself, which otherwise
was not attainable; I know that to look in an ordinare manner hereon, might be
ready to shake your spirit with astonishment, that the Divine Majesty should
ascribe to himself such an abasement, as to join in the humane nature in an
union with the Deity, yea thus to be exposed to the highest ignominy of
sufferings, that could possibly be allotted to the most Criminal amongst men,
but it is in such a choice enquiry you will find your establishment and
admiration grow together, and thus have a share in the same exercise of the
Angels on this subject, who look in hereon with joy and wondriug. 2. You must
see herewith also, how of such a nature is this blessed Religion you enjoy, as
can never be known or enjoyed by men until it be enlivened from Heaven, or be
possibly taken up or understood in a natural way, as humane sciences are, but
must have another teacher then men, and a faculty and power supernatural, to
know and discern the things of God herein; yea how in its whole coustitution
it is made up of these great Excellencies of Light and Life, which do
inseperably meet here; whose evidence lies in seeing, and not in report or a
naked testimony to the ear, but is in the same manner as the Sun is made known
by its own beams and light; and it were indeed sad, if the Sun of Righteousness
did not this day shine with as full evidence to men in this Lower Orb of the
Ghospel, as the Meridian Daylight is to our natural sense, to let us see both
the greatness and security of our hope, yea that we are designed for an Eternal
State, and must therefore seek after a Blessedness as will last as long as our
immortal souls that cannot perish. 3. But this will necessarily carry your
thoughts further, to see how the Christian Faith does not only with full
evidence manifest it self by its own Light, but does the more brightly appear
by the opposition of darkness, and of every false way and pretense of Religion,
and how the essential Differences betwixt the same are as fully evident and
visible, as is betwixt the day and night, betwixt truth and falsehood, which are
founded in the immutable nature of these things themselves; and how the way of
truth has surely that vital air and fragrancy herewith, and such a native
luster, as is no more possible for humane art and invention to represent, then
it were to draw a living man on a broad, or for one to draw forth the natural
sent of a Violet or Rose. 4. It is here also you will find it specially
strengthening to see the nature of these services, which belong to the Christian
Faith, how here is nothing that is servile, or to affright any to come under
such a blessed yoke, which in its whole constitution is so full of a Holy
sweetness to allure, and imposes no Law of Bondage on the spirits of men, but
what has inward motives to render it both easy and comforting, does prescribe
no duty to be a task, and no service but from love, and where the Moral Law is
purely Evangelick, and administered to us in the Hands of Mediator, yea of such
a nature is the whole obedience and services of the Christian Faith, as you may
clearly see that duty on the matter, is not anough, where there is not a
suitableness thereto in the manner of following the same, that the leading
motives and principles be purely for God; nor can the way of his service be
truly followed until his revealed Law have an internal efficacy on men's soull,
and ^he Moral Rule of Ghospel Obedience be turned unto living and inward
principles; this is a Reflection I should commend much to your thoughts, that
has such irresistible evidence therewith for your establishment in the truth,
to see, how that blessed way, which God has established to bring man again to
himself, is such as no length in any external part, or the outworks hereof can
bear weight, if there be not a vital influence on the soull, nor does its
interest ever subsist in the World by humane Power or Authority, but by an
internal establishment of the same from its own evidence on the spirits of men.
5. It is here you may see likewise, how the whole Constitutions of the
Christian Faith are such, as its highest Glory and Triumph here on the earth,
is still most conspicous in the darkest night of Affliction and Trouble, and in
the most remarkable depths thereof; this is surely a great discovery, and a
strange riddle to nature, which stands in an express opposition to the
universal sense of mankind, how this way the Lord does put the highest honor on
men here on the earth, in the passive valor of Christianity, yea thus puts the
most distinguishing marks of respect on his choicest Favorites;

But there is a VI. INQUIRY, I must further direct you to without which no
evidences of the truth, can be truly effectual on your soull; which is on that
wonderful part of Christianity, that lies in the truth of inward experience,
and is the very life and soull of our Religion. The greatness of such a Subject
makes it more difficult to speak hereon, now in a short Epistolary Discourse,
but it shall be in as few words as is possible, only to point at such things as
may tend to more clear and solid impressions of this Mystery, and make way for
your own search and trial of the same; and I hope I may say they are things,
which have not been taken on report. or have found it easy to be satisfied
herein, as to a full acquiescence in the truth and assurance thereof; but it is
to a few special ends I would refer your serious improvement of this great
Inquiry.

1. For this end that a clear notion and Idaea of spiritual experience of the
things of God, may be more deaply settled on your spirit, and how in these
respects it is to be understood: 1. that God has directed his Sacred Truth
unto men not only for trust, but for trial, which is a trial of that nature,
and stated on so great and wonderful things, that the whole vital part of
Religion should be a strange and dark thing until you be once entered hereon;
they are blessed who beeleve and have not yet seen what relates to the State of
Glory above, but they can never be blessed who do not see, as well as believe
what belongs to the life and enjoyments of Grace within time, in the truth of
inward experience. 2. It is here must be understood the first Acquaintance of
men with the Spirit of God; which is ane acquaintance of that concern, as the
Lord has laid over the weight of his peoples spiritual joy, refreshment, and
support, whilst they are within time, on the same; and is the first entry on
converse with spirits, and with God, the Father of spirits, which shall be
eternal. 3. It is such, as has a distinct evidence from any moral influence by
the Word or light to the judgment; and is the proper object of spiritual sense,
which no humane power, or Angels can impart, but God has reserved only to
himself, who can only make his own love known to the soul, and no report, or
testimony of men can do. 4. It is hereby Christians enter on possession in
some degree of divine truth, and these great things promised, as a earnest in
hand, to assure them that the rest shall not faill tho it adds no security to
the truth of the promise, but for a more abounding assurance to such who
receave the same. 5. Tho here be a common, and joint interest amongst
Christians, yet must each have his proper, and distin^l part in the truth of
inward experience, which is his peculiar interest and talent, and it is sure
nothing does more work on men's souls; and afford more sweet thoughts then what
this way is made there own, to know in themselves the internal demonstrations
of the truth they profess, in the power and virtue thereof; and to know what
great things has passed between God and their own soul, and what remarkable
times has gone over them, and special remarkes herein of divine conduct, and
his immediate appearance, in the course of their life. 6. It is of that kind as
none possibly can take on trust, from the testimony of others, or will satisfy
without personal trial, tho this be more known to such who by reason of use
have their senses exercised to discern good and evil Hebr. 5: 14. 7. But
whatever singular use is hereby to the support of our Faith, yet are they not
the grounds thereof; since these are only, what God has spoke in his word, and
not what he has done in his work; tho they are at a great loss who have begun
late to observe the same: it is true the greatest talent, which is by inward
observation, and experiments which have been most deeply affecting in the
present time; does not abide in the same sense, and fealing, and mayly as a
dead stock upon a Christians hand, without fresh, and immediate supplies; yet
are they still the same in the truth thereof, and does ever evidence, how far
the enjoiment of grace, and of a spiritual estate does exceed the greatest
enjoiments of nature. 8. This also must be understood not only by the testimony
of inward sense, but what comes under the most exact, and judicious trial, as
to the principles it leans on, without which, there could be no true enjoiment
of the same, if they were not as fully satisfied of holding their experience by
right, as in possession, and that these great things are no shadows or
appearances, but what is of the highest truth, substance, and reality. 9. It is
sure that God is not known in the earth, or enjoyed in truth, but in the light
of inward evidence and experience, except in such a manner of Balaam, to see
him but not near; but not in the knowledge of converse, and fellowship with
that God, whom they profess to know, or what it is to have their soul inward,
and familiar with him, in the experience of such a thing. 10. It is by inward
experience upon the souls of men, that God does in a more special way secure,
and preserve, that sacred record of his truth in the World, then by humane
Laws, or authority; by ane internal conforming of the spirits of his people,
to his revealed truth, whereby the inward man becomes as a repository thereof,
for when men once become Christians in truth, they are then the declared
Epistle of Christ by ane indissoluble union of the truth, and their souls
together. I shall but add, that the experimental part of Religion is not
perfited here, but within a little, there will be ane entrance on ane eternity
of experience of what once with admiration, and desire, was hoped for, and the
enjoiment of that state above will be no object of Faith, but of sense and
purely experimental.

A Second Intent of this Inquiry, should be to clear, how the enjoiment of one
Christian in the way of experience, may be no measure, or rule to others in the
trial of their state, upon these grounds. 1. That the least real evidence of
the Sanctifying virtue of the truth, bears witness to the truth of a new life,
and of spiritual sense, and discerning herewith, as a few grapes does
difference between a vine, and a bramble. 2. Because the real Work of God, may
be long without the witness thereof, and the first giving of the new life, and
a discerning of the same, are distinct acts of the spirit, which do rarely go
together, so as to know when the pulse of this life does begin first to beat.
3. As there are different sises, and grouth amongst the Saints within time; so
does the talent of experience and inward observation, much differ in the state
of some, in respect of others; and does answer to higher conflicts and assaults
in a Christians warefare, and higher improvements of grace herein; whence it is
that patience brings forth experience, and as it has so great a room, and
service for God; bejond other graces of the spirit, so has it a great income
of reward; by the most rare, and enriching experience of a Christians life;
thence is it that these of the highest form of Christians and of the choicest
spirit, has been put to a higher exercise thereof, then others, and made to be
a more public blessing by example herein to their Generation. 4. It is clear,
the experimental part of Christianity may have respect to some special times,
and Periods of men's life, so as one day may be more memorable, then as they
have ever known before; yea to such times, when they are put to a higher
service in the trial of their Faith, and led unto paths of providence, that
might seem untrodden, which has been usually a time of great observation as to
a higher light, and evidence on the experimental trial of Religion. 5. This
different measure has respect also, to the first entry of Christians on some
very dark paths of providence, when the Lord is to lead, and incline them into
a wilderness, by giving in assurance with a double measure on their souls, like
Elijahs call to arise, and eat, and Joseph's dream twice given, when his
conflicts, and trials were to be doubled upon him; yea this may be also on
this ground, as it is peculiar to some Christians above others to be kept more
closs on such a Scent, in that rare exercise to discern the workings of God on
their soull, and to try the certainty hereof from the natural work of their own
Spirit; and who may be more exact then others, to lay up, and record the same,
and not lose the least fragment of such assistances to their Faith.

3. This Inquiry should be of special use likewise to know what great things
these are, to which, the experimental part of Christianity does relate, wherein
they of the lowest sise of Christians have a common, and joint interest
whatever difference be in the degree; but it is a very short touch I can here
give on so great a subject and on some few Heads.

1. The translation, and entry of a Christian unto a new state, and world, here
in the earth; is one of the greatest things of experience (tho it has not a
like clear evidence, nor the precise time, and entry can be in the same manner
known) for men to know so marvelous a change in themselves, and that here is no
illusion or dream, and how it is sure this was never told to mankind but in the
Bible, which none ever did foresee, or project to themself; yea which in the
very notion thereof, was once a terra incognita to them; and could have no
possible rise from nature whose proper work is to overcome nature. I know this
may seem astonishing, and not easy for many to bear, that professed
Christians may have the same need to be converted to Christianity that Pagans
have, or perish, that the letter of the word only, or any length in exter al
duties can save none, who know nothing of internal evidence, or the spiritual
Powers of Christianity.

2. It does relate to this Head, to know that God and his People here in the
World, are no strangers to other in the truth, and enjoiment of communion with
him, for as this is ane essential part of our Faith, and one of the most sure,
and established constitutions of our Religion, by ane unalterable rule, so is
it matter of undoubted enjoiment, without which a Christians course, and
passage through time were unpassible; it is true this is so great a thing as
may make the most experienced Christian to be a wonder to himself, and is not a
subject of ordinary thoughts.

3. To this belongs also the truth; and enjoiment of supernatural comforts here
on the earth such as peace immediately from God, and the joys of the Holy Ghost,
which can have no possible rise from nature. and was never known to men, but on
this trial of experience, that such a thing is sure, with respect unto which
the highest experiments of nature are low, and of mean concern; yea which are
comforts of that kind, as can be only known by its contrary, and has been
still more ouweing to the sorest conflicts, then to the sweetest calm of a
Christians life, and such as the elect Angels did never know or partake of.

4. The prevalency of prayer with God, and to know with assured evidence both
the acceptance hereof in Heaven, and the returns thereof upon the earth, is
also one of these great things of experience, and can never be known else as a
subject of contemplation only, which has been direct of the Lord as a
prescript for such ones where no humane wisdom or power could possibly answer,
and is not bounded by the most desperate case, which would seem to shut out all
hope and encouradgment. But as to this I must say how little seems that part
of our Religion, tho one of the most wonderful parts thereof to be improven in
that manner now as in former times, and in the most extraordinare exigences
which Christians have been in, yea how low a trade is it which by most this day
is carried on, in so marvelous a way as this, which the Lord has established
betwixt heaven and earth, and has such immediate correspondence with the whole
inward life, and vitalls of Christianity, to preserve and strenthen the same.

A 5. Head on this Subject to be matter of great thoughts and reflection is
this, that here on the earth there is such a thing to be enjoyed in the truth
and certainty of experience, as an earnest and seall of the Spirit of God 2 Corinthians 1: 22. who has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit
in our hearts Ephesians. 1: 13. in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed
by that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance etc. 2 Corinthians. 5: 5. now he that has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who
has also given us the earnest of his Spirit. I know there has been much
inquiry on this Subject, as to a clear sense, and judgment thereof, both by
Schoolmen, and Practical Writers, tho it is such a thing as must needs be a
strange, and dark riddle where the Spirit of God is not the Interpreter; and
some near intercourse with this great teacher, that in his light we may see
light; but that it is surely promised of God, and could never have entered on
men's thoughts, if it were not purely a divine Revelation, none will offer to
question; and that the experience of the same in all times of the Church, has
no less tendency to confirm and seall the truth of Christianity, then it has
to confirm a Christians state; but though I doubt not your acquaintance
herewith is bejond many, yet this being a truth of such high concern, so far
as I have attained, I would offer some light hereon, wherein my soul has found
rest and settlement, as to a clear sense and conception of the same. 1. That
how rare soever the experience of this may be this day, yet is it not the
peculiar privilege of some few, select, and eminent Christians, or what God
does rarely impart and on some singular account to his people, but is the
settled privilege of all who are led by the Spirit, and under his conduct. 2.
This is ane experiment of the Christian Faith, which no humane testimony or
vocal evidence can express, that which is inward, and a secret betwixt God and
the soul, or what taste that hidden Manna has Rev. 2: 17. which none knows
but he that enjoys the same; for this is not the promise, which is given to be
the object of our Faith, but is the seall of the Spirit of promise, and the
proper object of spiritual sense; it is an internal work which goes above
words, and such as God alone can impart, who only can reveal his own love to
the soul, and Shed abroad the sense hereof, and has reserved this to himself;
it is that also which gives a distinct evidence from any moral influence of the
word, tho it can never be disjoined, and divided from the same, but is such ane
internal application hereof, as puts their souls to rest and quiet thereon. 3.
It is here must be understood a more near and solemn approach of God, and some
higher enjoiment of Spiritual Sense, then is usually known which will make such
a time remarkable, and sweet to a Christians after remembrance, tho some in, a
more extraordinar way, and higher degree, may have this imparted then others,
as the trial of their Faith has been more heightened, and has attained to
higher actings of grace under the same, according to that settled Connection
Isay 57: 12. I doubt not, there may be high pretenses to this Seall and
earnest, who know little what in the way and order of grace is required to
prepare, and qualify for the same, but except the settled constitutions of the
Ghospel, should be changed for their sake; it is then sure that God did never
seall the comforts of his Spirit, or his respects and approving testimony on
such, who are of ane untender, unhumbled, and vindictive spirit, and is no more
possible, then as Job 18: 4. That the earth should be forsaken for them, and
the rock removed out of its place. 4. It is true this is more clearly
understood by such, who by reason of use, have their senses exercised both to
discern good, and evil Hebrews 5: 14. and have thus attained a more deep, and
judicious reflection, for the trial of the same, since this is usually one of
the most searching exercises of a Christian, to discern the voice of the Spirit
of God, and know the same, from that of a Stranger, and to come to the light
herein, to see that such a seall, or any rare enjoiments of that kind, are
assuredly from God, and wrought in him John 3: 21. It is clear also how, many
sharp conflicts, and a hotter ware fare allotted to some of the Saints, then
others, under griefs, troubles, and oppositions in their Christian course, has
made way at so dear a rate for their acquaintance with the same, so as the
gradual difference, in the truth of this experiment, may be strange, and
marvelous, and cause fear to impart the same, nor be ever known within time. 5.
Tho it is sure, that all who are entered in a reconciled state with God, must be
sealed by the Spirit, yet is not this to be understood as the ordinar food, and
diet of a Christian, but as some more special restorative, and cordial, so as
one enjoiment of this kind, has been sometimes so remarkable, that through the
whole course of a Christians life after, it has been a continued strenthning
to their Faith; yet is it no rare thing to these who are kept in a more near
intimacy of converse with God, to whom, the truth of this seall not once, but
in innumerable times, has been known, who, on the other hand does know also,
how long, and sensible restraint of this great enjoiment may be, when the
choicest promises of the Word, can afford no comfort, but when the premises are
clear, the conclusion is often suspended through hid jealousies, and legal fears
of the spirit of bondage. 6. It is sure this blessed seall lies here also, in
some special directive work of the Spirit of God, to make use of light, in
particular cases with assurance, and quiet of mind, and in sealing instruction
with that evidence, and power on the soull, as leaves such a print and
impression thereon as the seall leaves on the wax, this can be no strange, or
unknown thing to these who in a close adherence, to Scripture light has been
specially tender to try the same thereby, and under a just horror, and dread of
Enthusiasm^ or the smallest dasshing on such a rock 7. But it is specially
discernable, where this seall and earnest has been more abundantly let forth
to some bejond others; that it was for some higher support to their Faith,
where a long interval of delay was to be between the promise, and performent,
and such a trial of a deferred hope herein, as might be ready to make their
heart sick into death, if the Lord had not given such a pledge and part in hand
to assure them that the rest shall not faill in due time, now this is so
manifest in the conduct, and methods of grace, about the Saints under the old
Testament, and in how singular a way he did first seall, before he entered them
upon any great trials, and which were to be of a long duration, as there needs
no particular instances to clear the same. 8. It is here; the sense of that
hundred fold, which Christ has so expressly secured to his People on the
adventures of their Faith may be understood, as that which assuredly lies in
these rare enjoiments of the spirit, and inward sense of the love of their God,
in the shinings of his face on them, which are the first fruits of the Spirit;
more then in any external providence, or these things which are of the highest
value with men; since as this is the most sure and greatest evidence that we
are Christians, so is it the most notable sign how dear such are to God, and of
his love and favor, then if he had given them the whole World. I know nothing
will seem more strange, and disrelishing to the spirit of most this day then
such a thing, but wisdom is justified of her Children, and with such let my
soul be joined in. 9. As it is known and sure that here is no illusion or
imaginary thing, where any fallacy or deceit lies, to the most judicious and
observing Christians, who knows herein, what makes them glad, and whence it is,
and how no assistance of their own spirit, or in the power of nature could
possibly impart such a thing; so may it be astonishing how such who live under
the Profession of Christ, and has any design on ane eternal stare in Heaven,
can take this on report, or be so little inquisitive about so wonderful a
truth, that there should be such ane enjoiment here on the earth, which without
any natural cause, can put the soul of men into ane entire rest, and
settlement, and when under greatest shakings and fears other ways, cause them
know the truth of pardon, and peace with God with a sure evidence, yea at so
low ane ebb can immediately revive and raise with so discernable a change in
their inward case; for if this be ane undoubted matter of experience it should
be not easy for men to live without trial hereof themselves. 10. Let me add
further, here is a part of that communion which Christians have within time,
with the most excellent of the earth; and such who in all ages of the Church
have been the greatest lovers of God, and adventurers for him; such with whom
he has been most familiar, and has admit not only to the allowance of
Subjects, but the regard of favorites, who has known how great a Rewarder he
is of his own grace, yea such, who have made the most exact inquiry and trial,
upon the truth and security of their comfort herein, and has put to their
seall that God is faithful and true, in that he has thus promised.

4. There is this special use to be made of such ane enquiry on the truth of
inward experience, to see how great, and wonderful a Subject we have for
reflection hereon; and of what singular advantage this should be for
strenthning the soul of a Christian, against the workings of unbeleef, and to
give a more full security of mind in the adventures of hope and relyance upon
God, for things to come. It is sure the reflex faculty of man is one of the
greatest wonders of nature, and if the spiritual use, and improvement hereof
were more understood on this Subject, and what it is to dive in to these still
and deep waters, it might make such be often as a wonder to themselves. I shall
but point at a few reflex acts of a Christian on this great mystery of
spiritual experience, to show what manner of enjoiments, these are admit to
herein, which the whole residue of mankind knows nothing of 1. To have such
great supernatural truths of the Scripture, which did once exceed their faith,
and reason, to be now matter of undoubted experience in the truth, power, and
efficacy hereof on their own souls; and thus to know what belongs to the
enjoiments of spiritual sense, which formerly seemed so dark and
incomprehensible a thing, yea how great a difference there is betwixt the
clearest Acts of the Judgment, and understanding about divine things; and a
real fealing of the same in the power, and virtue thereof; betwixt the most
sublime apprehensions by theory; and the sensible impressions, by the Holy
Ghost, and what a present, and marvelous change this makes on the soull of a
Christian. 2. To enjoy the same no less under a full evidence, and certainty of
the truth thereof as the alone, and immediate Work of God, then in their felt
power and sweetness; and that here was no casual thing, or matter of
doubtfulness or uncertainty, but where they can clearly see the object of their
faith on the truth of divine Revelation, now to be the object of there inward
Sense, and enjoyment; and are sure that what God has spoken, he has done
according to the same; for if this be not clear; Spiritual comforts would be of
low value if it were not with that evidence, and assurance of being Gods seall,
as they could adventure their eternal state on the truth hereof. 3. And how
sweet a part is it, when they can thus reflect on their own experience, and
enjoy the same with no less evidence of the proper cause, and original, then of
the truth of its effects, which is one of the greatest helps to give stability,
and assurance to our Faith; to see how the power of Religion is never barren of
new experiments of the truth hereof, how the greatest objective means in the
way of light cannot do, if there were not an Internal effective cause, that
works powerfully herein, and as in nature, so in the way of grace, how the same
cause, which makes us live, must make us move, and act, yea to see how the same
spirit that confirms a Christian on the truth of his state, and of the
enjoiments of grace here, does confirm Christianity, and the enjoyments of
glory, which must infallibly follow the same, and ere long be a matter of their
experience also. 4. To know this way, that surely a nearer intimacy is to be
enjoyed with God, and of a higher kind, which is by the communion of the Holy
Ghost, then by the immediate ministry of the Angels, yea a greater evidence
thus given to a Christians soul, then by any external miracles; since this is a
seall of that nature, as is given to none, but such as are the objects of the
divine complacence and delight; and its sure the alone greatest evidence of
divine love lies in the internal part of Christianity, and these immediate
operations of the Spirit of God, more then by any external providence. 5. To
see, how these great things of experience, come under a present trial, and
given to be experienced here on the earth, and are not some rare contingency,
or what may be stated on an extraordinar account, but does keep closs with a
tender walk, and near entercours with God through a Christians whole course;
and thus knows what such an anointing with fresh oil means Psalm 92: 10. by
innumerable reiterated times of such enjoiment; yea how the sense and sweetness
thereof comes not then by the power, and workings of reason; but the
immediatness of the divine presence, tho even then it does not exclude such a
discursive work, in the clearness of Spiritual reason, and light, as can fully
quiet the mind, that here is no illusion, or deceit; but lets us see, that the
Spirit of God can make use of an argument to settle, and secure the soul when
all essays, whither from themselves, or others can give no releaf. 6. Thus are
they admit to see herewith, how deep the foundation of our comfort, and
security, is laid on the faithfulness of God in his revealed truth, so as the
whole frame of Christianity must be dissolved, and fall ere one special act of
trust, and adventure on his hand, and under the assured warrant of his truth,
should be frustrate; and that the safe conduct also, and security of one
Christian, in his passage through time, is of that consequence, and so
essential a part of the great frame of providence, that this should not be
entire, and perfect if it should fail, as to the meanest of the Saints, to make
so great a nullity herein. 7. And is it not, in such a reflex work on the truth
of experience, that such can only know the sweet enjoiments of times past, and
what that peculiar comfort of remembrance means; which I must reckon one of the
rarest, and most unknown enjoiments this day under the Sun; since it is sure,
this can never be from the greatest delights of the earth, when once passed,
which as they return no more, so does ever leav a bitter sting, and
remembrance, by a native result of the same; whilst that which has been
experienced in the way of God, can neither perish, nor lose its sweetness, but
will render the most afflicting part of their life past, which was most bitter,
and sore then, to be the most comforting part thereof to their remembrance,
when they can see herein both what they have designed for God, and he has done
for them. 8. If there be any comfort of love, in the Communion of the Saints
here within time, they may see how this is not attainable, but in the light of
inward experience whence they know, what it is to meet, and have fellowship in
the same Savor, and relish of the things of God, when in a spiritual frame,
and to be mutually disclosed as they can discern something of the excellency of
one another spirit, and of the power, and lively workings of inward grace, by
that native luster, and evidence, which thus follows the same; so as under the
sensible power of such attractions their souls are more closely unite, and
joined together, yea are mutually strenthned by other conflicts, and what
experiments they have made of divine truth herein as to their releaf. And I
must say where this is not understood, that great mystery of the Communion of
the Saints, is but a strange and dark notion; nor without this can that special
design of the Lord in the settlement of Churches in a visible state, be either
known or answered, which is to have external ordinances carried on with life,
and power amongst men, and enjoying communion with our blessed head herein.

The VII. and last INQUIRY. I would make as to a more full assurance of
understanding on the truth of our profession, and for further clearing of this
great Subject of the experimental part of Religion, is to know the quality of
the witnesses thereto, which is an Inquiry of a higher concern and import then
seems to be apprehended, or of what weight, and necessity this is, upon these
grounds.

1. Because the whole truth of Spiritual experience is matter of fact, and
founded on a certainty of sense, it is truth in the event and performance, and
not what God does speak, but what according to the same he has done; so that
this is not upon any principle of Faith, but on men's personal trial of the
same, according to that Isai. 43: v. 10. ye are my witness says the Lord, that
ye may know, and believe me, and understand that I am he; for tho it is of
divine, and infallible truth, that whatever God has assured by promise he will
do; yet the experience hereof, since the Canon of the Scripture was sealed, is
of humane record, and a testimony which could bear no weight from the greatest
of men, if the quality of such witnesses were not tried, and considered herein.
2. Because the highest pretense to spiritual enjoiments in the way of the
promise is but a false testimony, where there is no tender regard herewith to
the precepts of the Ghospel, when this connection is indissoluble Act 9. they
walked in the fear of God, and comforts of the Holy Ghost; do not my words
good to them that walk uprightly Mica 2: 7. It is true, that choicest
Christians may be much hid, and in the dark herein to others, and upon such an
account should have a sad part, if they were tried, and judged by men; only
this is sure, there can be no more in the conclusion then is in the premises,
and that a Christians testimony to the truth lies more in what they are, then
what they express to others. 3. The quality of the witnesses is of such weight
here, and to be specially regarded, as one of the highest services for God
within time under their hand, to put too their seall, and testimony that God is
true in what he has promised; who are as it were judicially sisted in behalf
of his truth and faithfulness; since his declarative glory before angels, and
men, does more peculiarly ly here then in the whole Structure, and frame of
this Creation. This is a trust and debt also upon each age of the Church, that
the truth and faithfulness of their God may be transmitt to the generations to
come with such a confirmatory seall. 4. This Inquiry is the more called for, to
know what these are who bear such a witness to the truth, upon the exceeding
greatness of these things which belong to Christian experience, since this might
awake the most sublime, and inquisitive spirits of the time to search herein,
and be a Subject of great thoughts and reflection, that such are on the earth,
yea an innumerable part of men, who do verily enjoy so marvelous a light as is
immediately out of Heaven, and shines upon none else; and knows such an
enjoiment, as an immediate communion with the Deity, and his sensible presence
with their Spirits, with returns from Heaven to their suits in most real
effects; since if this be sure, then must men seek for another Idea of
Christianity, and have other thoughts about the same, then what most seem to
have, then is there a higher glory put upon men's souls in the way of grace, and
their being partakers of the divine nature, then what all humane grandeur can
ever amount to, or is upon the Sun, and the Stars of Heaven. 5. The credit, and
quality of the Witnesses on this great head of Spiritual experience, and the
whole internal part of Christianity is of such weight that the spirit of this
age, and most predominant part of men within the Church is stated in so visible
an opposition thereto, not only to oppose the power, and spirituality of
Religion, but to deny its principles, and give a lie to this testimony, of the
most eminent workings of the spirit of God on men's souls, as if it were some
illusion or imposture; which is in effect to take of the greatest seall that
God has given to the Divinity of the Scripture in the whole internal
demonstrations of its truth: this is the great prodigy of this age bejond any
times past, and may be feared if our Faith stood not sure otherways, that the
light should be quickly extinguished, and the candlestick taken away from most
of the reformed Churches; when most, under such a profession yet never knew,
the power, virtue, and efficacy of the truth they profess on their own soul,
and that there is another evidence or teaching, then by moral swasion only, or
another key to open the heart, then external means; and thus must either oppose
themselves to so tormenting a light, or be unavoidably condemned hereby.

But with this Inquiry as to the credit and quality of the witnesses, who in
all ages of the Church bears the same testimony to the truth from their
experience, it is undeniable also, but that there are some in a more singular
way sisted, and under more peculiar engagements then others to appear on such a
testimony, and who may be admit to enjoiments of experience, that are out of
the ordinary road of Gods dealing with his people, tho this must in no other
sense be understood extraordinary; then from so judicial a time as this, and
the great decay of the Power of Christianity with this generation why these are
so rare, and not in being any way cross to the firm and settled constitutions
of the Ghospel, or without that precinct of the promise of God to war and the
same; and I hope the Church of Christ is yet to enter on such enjoiments of
experience that would not be easy to believe in this day we are in, were they
told us at a distance. But what I mean hereby of these, who may be in a higher
capacity then others for such a witness I shall breefly touch.

1. These who through grace has been admit to some higher intimacy of converse
with God, and to know his dealing familiarly with men here on the earth, then
may be ever known in such a degree to other choice, and real Christians; tho I
judge this may be more rarely known, that where it is most in truth, there also
is a humble concealment, and being hid in the same, their usual study, who
finds more sweetness in such enjoiments the less air they take; and I have often
thought such may be least known on the earth in this day who may be the
greatest favorites of Heaven, and have had most rare, and immediate testimonies
of the love, and respects of their God; but as this is not the standard by
which the truth, and reality of grace is to be judged; so should this witness
be to me no further strenthning, then it has some greater height in humility,
and tenderness of Spirit in the ways of God going along herewith, and some
more singular eminency of grace as does answer to that Isai 57: 15. John 14: 21.

2. I must judge these also have a higher room in this witness for God on their
experience of his truth, who have in a more singular way then others known the
truth of supernatural assistance, and sustaining grace under extraordinar
trials. I mean such Christians as have been tried not only in the truth, but
in the strenth of divine grace, at another rate then others, whom I must reckon
amongst the greatest witnesses for God in this day, when 1. This renders their
testimony to be of a higher value and evidence according to the height, and
measure of their conflicts, and trials, whom thus the Lord has choised, and
separate as Joseph was from the residue of his brethren, for such a service of
example, that the excellency of his grace might here more brightly shine forth.
2. Because the deposition herein, is in a matter on which most do stumble at
the ways of God, upon that scandal of the cross; and on this account it may be
said; they are sent as messengers, and spies, to witness what manner of
allowance he does then impart, to bear the expense of a more extraordinare time
of affliction, and suffering, and what immediate support is then found above
the allowance of ordinary times; that with Caleb, and Joshua, they might bear a
honorable report for God unto others. 3. The credit of this testimony rises
the higher, as it has cost them so dear, who bear the same, and has not been
easily attained, nor is an offering unto God of that which costs them nothing,
who have been helped bejond others to glorify him in the fires. 4. They are
such above the residue of Christians, who has usually a record of more special
confirmations, and great remarks of the way of God, in the Journal, and History
of their life; I know most would fear to have a room in such a testimony, but
as I doubt not there are many such witnesses this day in the earth, so I must
reckon it, one of the most honorable services for God upon it, and will ere
long know the full sense of that truth; when he has tried them to bring them
forth as gold Job 23: 10.

3. And are not such specially sisted as witnesses herein, and under more
singular engagements then others, who upon greater Services for God assigned to
them, has also had more then ordinare allowances, of immediate divine
assistance for the same, to witness that they have not been sent hereon on
their own charge, and expense; this is one of the great discoveries that the
Lord gives unto men of his being God, and is a clear, and demonstrative
evidence of that real, and near communication, which the Churches head has
with his body here on the earth. I know this has a special respect to such, as
are called of the Lord on that Service of the Ministry of his Word, who has
some peculiar, and distinct part allotted to them as witnesses, and put on a
more public theater before the World, to witness that absolute dependence,
which the work, and service of that station has on their great Master, and the
outlettings of his Spirit both for support, and success, and what thus is found
in the way of an immediate relyance on him; for I must judge that none knows a
near intercourse with God, and to be purely acted for him, on this great
service, but has some peculiar advantage bejond any else for more fingular,
and rare confirmations of the truth on their own soul, and of a known, and
sensible seall from God both in fruit, and acceptance of their work; and tho
such who look at a distance, cannot discern, what may be betwixt God, and his
Servants, in some public administrations of his service, as may be then
evident to their soul, yet is it often made so far discernible, as to serve an
awful sense and impression on men's spirits, of God in the Assemblies of his
Church, and of the truth of supernatural assistances, and something more then
humane herein; nor does such a witness ever cease, tho it be now more rare then
in times past, in this sad and judicial period of time, we are fallen in, when
almost all sense, savor, and discerning of the Spirit of God, with public
administrations of the Word, seems lost, and the wisdom of Words, or what may
appear more neat or polished that way, is come in the room hereof, as though
the alone end, of so high a service were to act a scene handsomely on a theater
that may carry the applause of the Spectators, but not men's hearts unto God;
this I have looked on with no less horror then on the most visible Atheism, and
profanity of these times, and one of the most dismal Signs in the public state
of Religion.

4. These also may have some higher access for such a witness, who know with
evidence, the truth of immediate, and supernatural excitments, to engadge upon
some special work, and service for God, and to be acted forth herein under the
power, and irresistible discovery of ane inward call, when under greatest
oppositions from their own spirit thereto, and furthest a version of mind. This
I have known in the truth hereof in most eminent examples, but the credit of
such a testimony, tho in it self, founded on divine Revelation, does necessarly
require such ane evidence of the quality of the witnesses herein; that they be
of a known tender, humble, and judicious Spirit, who are skilled both in the
deep things of God, and in the deeps of Satan, who this way does often act in the
greatest deep, and mystery of delusion.

5. There is yet something more singular in the experience of some Christians
bejond others, and in such a witness, as to a special confidence, and assurance
raised on their soul, of events of providence, and the issue of some remarkable
case of trial, when it has been contrare to all humane appearances, and no
reason from any visible airth could be given for the same; this I know may seem
a strange thing in the eyes of many, nor can it possibly have that evidence, or
in that manner work to others, as it is to these, who know, and have
experienced the same, but we see, and are sure there has been great
seize of such a Faith, both in Scripture examples, and uncontroverted
experiments, made hereof in after times, which has met such in the road of
their duty* and in ane express harmony, and correspondence with the Word, since
the extent of our Faith in any particular case, must keep with the same exent,
and measure of divine Revelation herein, and the Lord will be trusted for no
more then he has made warrantable by his promise. But this is a Subject, on
which I may not insist further then to clear the evidence and truth of the same
on these grounds. 1. That Christians may be at such steps in their way and
passage through time, and on so dark ground; yea the tide of difficulties, and
amasing fears swelled to so great a hight, that if there were not a support of
this kind, by ane argument of power, to their soul, they should otherways be
ready to sink. 2. This experiment how rare so ever it may seem to many, is no
dark, or distinct thing from that seall of the spirit of promise, which we
should look after; or from that promised earnest, which sometimes the Lord
gives, with respect to a special mercy, and deliverance within time as well as
their great interest in Heaven, tho it be not in the same degree imparted to
some as to others. 3. It is also of no other kind then that settled allowance
on the Saints, of the peace of God in such a measure as can raise, and fully
quiet their spirit, above any sinking fears, and above the present assault they
may be under, tho with such evidence then, as is not possible to attain at
other times, nor can be kept clear, and comforting to themselves without much
tenderness of spirit and fear. 4. Where this is known, and enjoyed in any
higher degree by some then may be the allowance of others, it is assuredly
found on a special and near intimacy with God, and to follow some discernable
access, and special gale of the spirit of intercession in prayer, and
wrestlings; so as it thus meets them in the way of a settled ordinance, and in
the same way wherein we may see the Saints in Scripture have attained to a
confidence of this kind; for otherways there could be no comforting evidence of
its being the undoubted work of God. 5. And here must be tried, and sought
for, whither the more immediate testimony of God, does then still bring the
testimony of the renowed conscience along therewi^h so as to clear the
condition in themselves, and their claim thereto, of such a special promise,
whereon their confidence has been raised, whereby it is thus rendered to them
an absolute promise, that can not possibly be frustrate. 6. I shall but add
further as this rare experiment comes with such evidence of spiritual sense, as
is discernable from any natural workings of man's own heart, and is that wherein
the most deep enquiry and judicious trial of Christians is needful to know
that its surely from God, and has both his warrant, and seall herewith, so is
it not strange that where he takes a more singular way to try and exercise
some, and out of the ordinar road of his dealing with others, yea where support
in the way of external providence may then cease, that this special allowance
by inward evidence be something more singular also, and some higher influence
of the spirit and power of believing be imparted for such a case.

This leads me to offer some thoughts in the close upon two Proposals, which I
did not intend, if from another airth, whilst I was writing this there had not
occurred a special call herein, and that I judged it might not be unsuitable to
the intent of this discourse.

1. Whither there be any such seall to the truth of Christianity in these times
we are now in as the Faith of Miracles, or that it be warrantable to expect
such a thing from God, which lies in a particular act of trust in some special
case, where a Christian may be taken off all ordinare means, and nothing but a
divine immediate, and miraculous Power can answer thereto; for Answer it is
clear the active Faith hereof which was once given to the Primitive Church in
the workings of miracles now cease, but in this passive Sense, I know no
time, nor age, to which it does not belong, and comes not under the Promise of
God, to warrant the same in these cases.

1. When the Lord measures out such trials to any of his people in the way of
their duty, and under his special conduct, where there is no releaf, or
support, but in the Faith of ane extraordinar, and immediate appearance of God,
and no neglect in the least; of what in the way of ordinare, and warrantable
means is attainable, it is sure, there it is both warranted and requires such a
Faith, yea are put by a more singular call on the trial of the same, and in
this respect; I doubt not there has been, and may yet be in the present age
greater seize of the same, then most of Christians can easily comprehend,
whole trials were never brought to such a pitch, and in that manner assigned
to them; since these are of the Lord measured out only according to the measure
of Faith given them Romans 12: 3.

2. As none may abridge the Spirit of God in the freedom, and Soveraingty of
his work herein, whatever times men be in, so is it known and clear, that where
the Lord does allott more extraordinare cases whither to Churches or particular
Christians, when such are keeping close by him, and the revealed rule of their
duty, there also is a more extraordinare allowance for the same, yea such a
measure and increase of their Faith to be sought from the great author thereof,
as may answer the present case, to have their strength according to their day.

3. It is unquestionable that the Lord designs in all ages of his Church, to
bring glory to himself, by such a faith as has no ground to grip on, but ane
infinite and immediate power that can extend it self to the most desperate and
amasing case, nor is a believing in hope, when it is to be furthest against
hope, a strange and dark thing in this day, either as to the warrant hereof, or
these proofs, which have been made of the same in the issue. And herein I must
judge the appearance of God no less wonderful to some of his people in that
which he works in them, and in that deliverance from their fears where no
humane Reason or Secondary causes could concur, then in that which he has
done for them in the most stupendous acts of Providence, nor does any time
want some share and proper talent of this kind, if such great appearances of
God were more observed, that might be singularly strenthning to the Christian
Faith.

4. Is there a real Christian this day, who is not called to such a Faith,
that he shall once upon himself experience a greater miracle by a divine
omnipotent Power then was yet ever wrought in the earth, which is of the
Resurrection of his body, after it has been for some ages dissolved into dust,
wherein it is, by the undoubted Faith of miracles to be wrought upon himself,
that his greatest support and comfort within time stands; yea if there be such
a Faith in the earth, which is now still warranted, as that we have Ps. 46: 12.
it must then ly in ane actual trust, and relyance in a case where a miracle can
only help.

5. If possessions by the Devil were in that manner now usual as in the
primitive times, it is undeniable, that the Prayer of Faith herein for
dispossession were not only warranted, but expressly called for, tho the inward
assurance of such a Faith may not in the same manner be given to some as to
others; yet here is a special suiting from God the proof of a miracle, by his
immediate Power, which they are in faith called too; and as that Prescript
given by our Lord of fasting and prayer for this end does still stand in force
so has there been known public instances in these late times, of real
dispossessions by prayer, and solemn addresses to Heaven herein.

6. If the oppressed innocence of a Christian, and in such a case where the
honor of God were highly concerned, should be so stated, as to be bejond humane
releaf for clearing the same, there might be herein an unquestionable reference
to God, for his more immediate decision, and a warrantable ground to suit for
the spirit of faith in such a measure, as so extraordinare a trial requires,
bejond what in an ordinare case is allowable, but so as to wait for the same,
in his season and way. This I know was in the primitive times in some more
singular manner made use off, when no ordinare means was attainable for the
same, but as that could have no safe warrant so the Law of jealousy, and
trial by the waters of jealousy Numb. 5. was then temporary and is now
ceased; yet is this still moral herein and of perpetual use, that, God is the
same who has reserved to himself an immediate appearance of himself, when no
ordinar means can help; yea that promise Ps. 57: 3. is expressly given for such
ane end of his sending from Heaven immediately to save, where no assistance on
the earth is attainable, and all natural means fai^l.

7. It is unquestionable that the making use of Lots (which in such a case is
only safe, where it is rendered absolutely necessar for a final determination in
some great, and weighty concern) is such a solemn appeal to ane extraordinar
decision of God, as the faith of his appearance by a present, and immediate
sign from himself is necessarily required, tho it be not by any strange or
miraculous evidence yet is as truly to be taken from God in such a case, and
in faith subjected to, as if some supernatural sign did accompany the same, and
as no humane wisdom or counsel can have place herein as to the event, so I
must judge an entire acquiescence of men's spirits on such a determination,
shows not only a deep and reverent Se^ce of the Majesty of God, but that this
is as truly his answer, as if they had seen fire coming down from Heaven to
consume the Sacrifice, as was in the days of Elijah at mount Carmel.

8. It may be said that the truth of such a faith has in a special evidence,
and power hereof been known when things have come to some unusual extremity in
a Christians case, as could bear no delay but like that of the Disciples of
Christ, help Lord ere we perish; instances of this kind have been so clear as,
I judge, is not possible to deny the truth of such a seall to the Faith of
Christians, were things of that nature more adverted to and observed. It is a
few years past, that a famous Minister of Christ, who now is at rest in the
Lord, was under such an extraordinare pain and torment by a confirmed stone in
the gravel, as nature sunk wholly under the same, and as he showed me was
brought to that extremity, that he turned to God with such a cry, let not thy
servant distract, but help, for I can possibly bear no more, who said also that
in the very present moment it was immediately taken off, and this at once, with
a perfect ease and releaf, and did recurr no more till the day of his death,
which was sometime after: this as I had from himself, so was it from one that
none in the age he lived in, I could have credited more, and could leave no
room for doubting that such a return in the present act of prayer, at so great
a height, and extremity of pain, without any natural cause and mean, was
immediately from God, and supernatural. I knew also with assurance such an
instance, in a Mnister of the Ghospel, who was seized in the Sabath morning,
with an extraordinar colic, which grew upon him, to that height, as in an
ordinare way rendered it not possible to go forth upon the public work of the
day, which then lay upon him, and to a great Auditory at that time, so that
whilst he essayed to rise, he was pressed to take his bed again, a very few
minutes before the set time for going to Church, but whilst he presented the
case to God, upon the interest of his service, it was in a moment taken off,
not by any gradual abatement of such a distemper, but entirely at once, so as
he never had more sweet access and freedom to go forth on the work of the Lord
both at that diet, and in the following part of the public work; and this also
was, when no outward mean was concurring herein; as it is clear, that the
passive Faith, which Christ did specially require for an immediate cure from
himself Matthew 9 was this, beleevest thou that I am able to help, when no
ordinare means can do; so I doubt not this was in some measure acted in both
these instances, leaving room for omnipotency to act in such an exigence.

9. Nor has there been wanting eminent proofs of this kind, of special
applications of Faith, made unto God by prayer in behalf of others under
diseases; where ordinare means has been laid aside, and the case past all
hope, and of such returns by a present restoring, and under such evidence as
enforced the conviction hereof, upon men's conscience that we may see how in
some strange cases of this kind the true cause, and the Lords design herein
does not until then break up, according to that John 9: 3. That the work of
God might be t^us made manifest in them.

10 I may further add, if there were this day a new erection, and settlement of
some particular Church from amongst Infidells, and the commission for this end
of Ministers of Christ made evident, and clear to go forth on such a service,
where no natural and ordinare means of conviction were attainable, I doubt not
but something in a more extraordinare way, of the faith of miracles, and
immediate appearances of God herein might be expected, as in the primitive
times, when on the same ground it was let forth. Nor can it be found there
has been any particular Church of Christ without some extraordinare seall o^
this kind, especially in the first entry and erection of the same; nor is there
any time or age of the Church, wherein the clear sense of that Scripture Mark
9: 23. -- all things are possible to them that believe, does not take place:
which is that no measu^e of trial or difficulties, whither as to Churches or
particular Christians in the way of their duty, can be at such an height, as to
restrain or set bounds to the work of Faith on an infinite divine power, tho
all natural or second causes should cease, yea that there is no case so
singular, wherein the warrant of a divine Promise herein, and a Christians
Faith, should not be of the same extent

The II. Proposal that I shall breefly touch, as it thus follows upon the
former, is whither in these last times the Lord does appear by any such
extraordinare signs* that are public in the sight of the World, and bring near
such discoveries of his Godhead in any special acts of Providence, as may bear
the same evidence of miracles. For Answer; it is sure, the Lord does not reveal
himself this way but on some great and extraordinare ground, who has settled
the faith of his Church absolutely on his revealed truth, yet may it be said,
that no age is left without some witness of such a kind; if there were not a
sad inadvertence, and shutting of men's eyes, when the Lord is going by them in
any great acts of his power, but as to this Proposal I shall only point at some
instances, that seem to have least fuitable regard or notice, and to be past by
with most.

1. Can there be a serious judgment and reflection on that great and amasing
stroke of the Pestilence, and not see an extraordinar appearance of God
herein, and of its being a judgment of that kind, in some more remarkable
times wherein it is let forth, as goes above all natural causes, and all may
see the immediate hand of God herein both in its ris^ progress, and swift
spreading as a lightning, through Cities or Countries, in its passing by some
more then others where no cause can appear, so as men must see its being sent
with commission from Heaven, and a supernatural causality, as visibly as if
they had stood with David, and the Elders of Israel 2 Samuel 29: 17. to see the
Angel that smote the People between the Heaven, and the Earth; upon which
account David did choice rather to come under this stroke then the Sword or
Famine, because it was in a more immediate way the hand of the Lord, and where
there is a more then ordinare near approach, and discovery of himself unto men.

2. It is of public and uncontrollable evidence, that miraculous, and
immediate witness from Heaven in the bleading of the bodies of men on the touch
of the murderer in such cases, where no ordinare means can bear evidence. I
will not speak of the warrantable use of such an appeal where the revealed rule
of our faith, and practice is not express herein; but as its undoubted, in the
truth and reality of the same, where no humane witness could answer to this
end, so is it surely ane immediate, visible, and extraordinare sign from Heaven
given in the sight of the World, and from him who makes inquisition for blood,
in a most singular way, and a sign which in every time is made evident.

3. There is also the certainty of extraordinare Revelation, and of the truth
of a Prophetic Spirit imparted to some as to special events of Providence,
which is so known and of that evidence as no age of the Church has been
without instances hereof, what I mean hereby as to that more singular way of
the Lords revealing himself, to some of his Servants by a more extraordinar
application of his Word, is such as in the truth and certainty hereof can leave
no room for doubtfulness; tho on the other hand, as to the way and dismal trade
of divination, that has got up in the World, by seeking a Divinity either from
the Stars above or the Powers of darkness below, it may be clearly seen is one
of the great designs of Satan, not only to counterfite the way of the Lord
herein, but to bring men unto a more direct homage to himself; but I mention
this instance only as it is so great, and unquestionable a demonstration of
God, and of his giving in every age some extraordinare seall of this kind.

I shall but mention here one remarkable passage of which I am to the furthest
persuaded, that may seem strange, with respect to this late great Revolution in
the State of Britain; how it was expressly foretold under its proper
circumstances many years past; and was one of the first passages of any weight
that has been still fixed in my remembrance; of a relation I had from ane
ancient, and eminent Minister of Christ of a Prediction imparted to him by one
of an extraordinar, and Prophetic Spirit in that time; that so great, a Scene
of Providence should be acted in Britain, and change in the public face of
affairs by the coming over of a Prince of Orange, who should be the great
Instrument, and Actor therein; and tho some particulars relating thereto I
cannot exactly remember, yet this in the substance with such ane express
designation as I have now mentioned has from my young years had a settled
impression in my memory, and as I am sure and persuaded of the truth hereof,
and that the foresaid Relater had such a Prediction long before there was any
alliance betwixt the House of Britain and of Orange; yea am sure this did
exceed the reach of humane apprehension at that time, from any rise or tendency
of natural causes in the order and series thereof; so is it not now mentioned
after the event only, but what several years before, I gave ane account and
relation off to some of great quality, who still know the same, when there was
not the least appearance of such a thing, tho I could lay no further weight
thereon, which seemed so strange and improbable, but that the thing in it self
as to the truth of such a Prediction was real.

4 That there are supernatural warnings has been given to men by some special
instinct and impression not only of the approach of some great, and
extraordinar trial with respect to themselves, but of the near approach of
their death, yea to some, the precise time hereof is a truth so known in the
World, and with that undeniable evidence as might fully convince those of the
most doubtful, and suspicious Spirit in things of that nature, and were it
suitable here, I might give special instances which I have surely known of this
kind with respect to such, who were both pious and of great composure in their
judgment, who has had such persuasion fixed on them without the least presage
from any natural cause, or what in ane ordinary way could give a rise thereto,
as it did after fall out in the event.

5. That there are also extraordinare signs, and forewarnings given the World
of great Revolutions and Judgments, ere they came on particular nations by
prodigies and signs from Heaven, is of that public evidence, and certainty as
would seem not possible to question; if some methods of opposition to God both
in his Word and Works were not peculiar to this age, and the spirit thereof
this way bejond any that has gone before, for what may be supposed and
misjudged by many on such ane account through ignorance and unacquaintance with
natural causes, and the extent thereof, is not to be questioned, but from this,
will men debate or discredit a truth that all ages must witness, and these of
the most cautious and discerning amongst men, how such solemn forewarnings from
Heaven by extraordinar signs, and prodigies, has been still previous to
public changes and revolutions, and to any great calamities, and judgments.
Its sure these are no imaginary things, but are direct for some special end,
and are sometimes in such a manner visible to the experience of the World, as
has not been in like manner known for some ages past, as that late Comet 81.
yea occurr not according to the settled constitutions of nature, but come both
with an surprising aspect, and are expressly formed and directed of the Lord for
some higher end then to be an empty show, and wonder to the World; but when
the Word of truth, and threatenings thereof cease to warn or be matter of
trembling, and the Atheistick contempt, and derision of the Works of God is in
this day at such a height, its like the door may be now judicially shut on any
extraordinar presages or warnings this way until one prodigy of some unusual
judgment come, that will not be baffled by men.

Whilst I speak on such a Subject; I know there is a strange thing that comes
under the notion, by many, of a miracle, tho matter of very ordinare thoughts
with others, and of a light and common regard about the same, which is in that
strange, and astonishing cure of the Struma, or as its termed the Kings evil by
a touch of the hand only, without any application of ordinary means; that here
is no imposture in the truth of such a thing, but that many have been
undoubtedly healed by this touch of the Kings of England, is not questionable,
which is of so p^blick, and known evidence in the trial of numerous instances,
yea that here is something supernatural, and unaccountable to humane
understanding on principles of reason; when its one of the most contumacious
diseases of men's body, that in the ordinare use of means is found the most
difficult to cure; but since any extraordinar effect should lead men to a deep
enquiry, and trial about the cause hereof, and have the more weight in such a
case that a miraculous work, where it is in truth, is Gods own seall, which he
does rarely give but on some great, and important ground, where his glory and
the interest of his truth is highly concerned; yea that its sure, where he
intends such a miraculous discovery of himself to confirm the faith of his
people, he gives it with the clearest evidence of his work, and a concurrence
of such circumstances, as may serve conviction on all, whose impress and
signature it bears, to difference the same from any imposture, or its being a
diabolick sign and work, and so this calls for a just enquiry, and trial in
the present case in these respects. 1. To know its true rise and original,
which I find in the English Chronicles to be dated from the time of Edward the
Confessor, when Antichristian darkness was then at his greatest height, it
being in the 1042 Year, when he began to reign, and when that Prediction of
the Apostle Thessal. 2: 2. of a more then ordinary power and working of Satan,
with signs and lying wonders to promote the Antichristian interest, was then
taking place; and was in that sense only admit to confirm the Romish Faith by
such a strange miracle. 2. This Inquiry should be necessar herein, whither this
pretended miraculous power belong to the Crown only, or has respect to the
Quality, and Holiness of the persons who wear the same, since if it be to the
first, then tho ane Infidel, or Mahumetan were established on the Throne, if
this gift follow the same it must needs be derived to them also, and have such
a high Privilege annexed thereto, as the Throne of Israel never had, when a
David, and Solomon sat thereon tho endued with ane extraordinare Unction; but
if it respect the Quality and Holiness of the persons, it surely must render
this no less difficult, that not only such as King Henry the VIII. and his
Daughter Queen Mary, besides many others, yea Richard the III. should on this
account have the active faith of miracles, and be empoured herewith from God
for working of the same: besides this it is known that the French Kings claim
the same privilege and power as peculiar to them alone, and may not on this
ground Lewis the XIV this day be reckoned a fit instrument for such a healing
miracle, and to bring a just repute and credit thereto. 3. But whence is it
that such a hereditary gift should not faill, and be cut off by the departure
of England from the Romish Church, since the first holding hereof was upon
their adherence to the same, and as a confirmatory Seall to the Romish
Profession, or that it should now control the end for which it was given; I
know what some Popish Writers say hereon, that this miracle is not now
performed by such who have apostatised from that faith, virtute propria, sed
virtute signi crucis, but there needs no such Salvo, as to reckon its being
alienate now from serving for the same use, and end it did before, nor to have
another rise if it were seriously pondered. 4. But what interest in this cure
has the use of such a rite in applying with the touch a Medal of Gold to the
Patient therewith, or what virtue can this Amulet impart, and so great a care
taken, that they should not lose it; since it is sure this is not given out of
charity to there outward want, except it be from ostentation to show they are
endued with a gift which the Apostles had not when they cured the lame man, and
could make use of no such assistance of Silver or Gold herein Act. 3. 5. If the
application of ane extraordinar gift for healing diseases without the use of
natural means be aneugh to warrant the same, and that such a cure is wrought
without any further enquiry as to the cause and ground whereon it has such an
effect, it is then sure* the Devil, and these Powers of darkness may have a
public and easy market in the Christian Church, and exact an uncontrolled
homage and subjection to them this way. the extent of whose power for curing of
disease, is bejond our reach, but since such a miraculous gift of healing if it
be of God should be tried in the truth thereof, how it can answer to such
peculiar evidences, and criteria of the same, as by the infallible rule, and
light of the Scripture may be clear; it were suitable to try herein, if this be
indeed given to confirm and seall a divine testimony or any truth of the
written Word; if it come with that solemn and convincing evidence so as to
serve a deep and reverent sense of the Majesty of God on men's spirit, by such a
discovery of himself, and to promote piety, and more firm adherence to the
truth amongst men, as the native effect that should follow a true miracle, and
so extraordinary a seall, if it serve also to comptrol the Kingdom of Satan,
and strenthen the Christian Faith in opposition to Antichristian darkness, and
Idolatry; yea if these who are thus empoured for so miraculous a cure have
something suitable on their part of qualifications, to such whom God has ever
made use off to work miracles, otherwise it serves only to expose so great a
seall to the Christian Faith, wherein the Majesty of God in so august, and
solemn a way is revealed, unto the highest contumely and reproach. 6. Though
this has been a continued practice, and that the matter of Fact, and notority
of experience herein in the truth of such a cure is not questioned, yet if it
be essentially requisite, that such as claim to this power, should do it in the
Faith of a divine Warrant, and assurance that it is of God, with an immediate
relyance on a special outsetting of some extraordinar power from him herein,
and of his call to rest on the same, when it is without respect to any
institute, and natural means, yea that there spirit in such a case should be
suited to so extraordinare a work, I judge it should then quickly cease; as on
the other hand that these who are deseased, and apply themselves to such a
cure, should know the warrant of their faith herein, else it were as
justifiable to go to Loretta on such an account, or to such who pretend by
spells, and charms, to work extraordinary cures without any ordinary means for
the same. This is not to detract in the least from any just right or privilege
of Soveraing Princes, and I judge these who are now on the Throne of Britain
might lay as just a claim from personal qualifications thereto, as any have
gone before, but in giving to Caesar what is due unto him, we must not invade
that Royalty, and Prerogative which belongs to God only, or to pretend to his
seall, and make use of it without his express warrant. If any Protestant Writer
have spoke their thoughts on such a head, I have as yet seen none; bu some time
past, I was necessarily called by a person of great worth, to impart my light
herein, they being then much perplexed in spirit with respect to a near
relation of theirs, in order to their using such a mean; and how small a
reckoning may be made by many, yet I find it related of that Famous Christian
Mrs Honywood, that the first rise of these terrors of conscience which kept
her so long, was from consulting some mean as to the recovery of a child, in a
way that was out of the road of ordinar means, and made her fear afterward
lest Satan might have a hand therein

But I shall now cease to speak more on this subject; and only shut up with
some Reflections further which have been matter of serious thoughts to me.

1. Whence it is that such who are of the most trying and comprehensive spirit
has usually been under greatest weight and exercise of mind, about their
establishment in the Christian Faith more then any others: but herein it may be
easy to see, and discern the true cause thereof, 1. How it is sure, the more
attainment of light and knowledge is upon the greatness of their Faith, that a
higher admiration and astonishment must needs follow thereon; it was this which
above all the wonders and depths of nature, did swallow up the spirit of a
Solomon, and put him into such an exstacy, when he once begun to fix on this
Subject, but will God indeed dwell, with men on the earth, yea will the eternal
Son of God take up his abode, and dwell in such a tabernacle as the humane
nature, and become truly man which is specially there imported 2 Chronicles 6: 18.
2. It is these only who have their souls seized with a deeper sense then
others, of the high, and wonderful consequence of such a Faith, as to
themselves, and what is their personal interest herein; on which their souls
venture for eternity lies; so as it is not strange, that they can not possibly
enjoy the comfort of such a Faith under any doubtful suspense this way, or have
their souls at rest, with that manner of assent wherewith most satisfy
themselves in this day. 3. Yea it is these alone, who have another Idea of
Religion, and the wonders of the Christian Faith settled on their spirit, then
the residue of men, who thus see what great things are before them, and shortly
to come to pass, and how such a Faith is not easily attained, but that a
continued weight, and exercise herein on their spirits become unavoidable. And
tho Sir to one of such a spirit, as I know you are off, there needs little be
said of this kind, yet when I look on the face of this Generation, even of the
more serious part of men herein, it would appear that most were rather in a
sleep and dream, then awake; else were it conceivable, how they could find it
easy to bear, and stand under the weight of such discoveries, without almost
fainting under the greatness hereof, if they be indeed assured of such things
as these. 1. That within a little time, their eyes are to be for ever shut on
this earth. and in one moment opened on that entry which is into another World,
and on that hid, and marvelous passage, which lies betwixt the earth, and the
higher Paradise above, which is in the third Heavens, and will then know what
it is to see with clear, and preceptible evidence there conduct, and convoyance
by the blessed Angels, and the manner of their ascent through these Aetherial
Regions, in every step of the same, their begun acquaintance, and society with
these glorious spirits, which shall be without fear, and consternation, as when
they were in the body, and at last that unconceivable reception by the blessed
Trinity; now is it possible, that men here on the earth can with assurance
entertain their souls with such great things as before them, and near, and yet
in an ordinare way converse with the same. 2. Is it a light or small thing to
live in the Faith of such a Triumph, as is reserved to each of the Saints in
the issue of their warefare, when the God of Peace shall tread Satan under
their feet, and shall enter them into the overcomers joy, with that public
testimony, well done good, and faithful servant etc. before the whole Church
of the redeemed there, and then to be called to a peculiar assignment of their
room, and station in that blessed state answerable to their services and
seize of grace here, when they shall see the end of the Lord in his whole
conduct and methods of providence about them within time, which once seemed
incomprehensible to their thoughts. 3. Yea what is it to be in the serious
exercise of such a Faith, that in a short time there shall be a final
translation of the whole Church militant from this earth to these higher
Regions of glory, where no more distance of place, and but one Church and
Society for ever, where our blessed Redeemer shall then rejoice in his whole
puchase, whom he had bought at so dear a price, and presented without spot, or
blemish unto the Father; and where the whole elect from Abell, the first of
humane race, that entered Heaven, and the first member of the Church triumphant
there, to the l^st, who was called by the Ghospel, shall meet once and for ever
together. 4. And are there such now on the earth, who shall ere long see
themselves in the same state and class with the elect Angels, who could not in
this state of mortality bear the sight, or apparition of one of these glorious
spirits; yea shall enjoy them in the same intimacy of fellowship as these that
were redeemed from amongst men; and tho with humble sobriety, I would offer any
thoughts on so high a mystery, yet seems it sa^ely warranted to judge, that as
each of these blessed spirits, is a distinct person from other, endued with a
most excellent life, and understanding, tho in some different degree of
exaltation, as to their office and services, so are they ane undoubted part of
the Church, over which Christ is the supreme Head; wherein at that last and
great Jubilee, even in something of a glorious corporeal frame, there may be a
likness, and conformity to him, in whom the fullness of the God head dwells
bodily, and for a more near oneness, and Communion with the Saints made
perfect who shall then not only be like, but equal to the Angels, which
otherwise could not be well understood, since it is sure their bodies, though
then spiritual and glorious, will be the same in substance that they were here,
and will not be only spirits. 5. And what a wonder of our Faith should it be
that ere long this also shall be the object of men's sense, the conflagration of
this whole earth; that earth, on which most of the generations of men had
settled their Heaven, to see it all burnt up before them, and herein the final
issue of their hopes, and projects upon the same, whilst nothing to such will
then further remain, but to enter themselves into everlasting flames. 6. Is it
a small thing to enjoy such a Faith here on the earth, as that reunion, which
they shall then have with so endeared a part of themselves, their body, and
what a meeting that must be after so dark a parting, and separation; these very
bodies which had been partners with them, both in their work and services, and
in all their sufferings within time; which they can now embrace never to part
with, to partake of the same eternal enjoiments, and which will be then no let
to their ascent to meet the Lord in the air. 7. Can it possibly be a subject of
ordinare thoughts or assent, that men now on the earth, shall shortly see the
glory and state of the last Judgment, and of their blessed Head on that Throne
of His Majesty, yea thus see at once, the whole generations of men, and these
who sometime were the greatest Monarchs here, presented then to be judged; and
to see such a solemn particular, and distinct judgment past on each according
to their deeds, and work within time; and in that blessed order wherein the
whole Saints, and each personally of these, having a distinct part herein,
shall be first acquitt, approven, and accepted in the face of this great
Assembly, with the public testimony of the Judge, according to the measure of
their service and trials for his sake, whilst they were in the World; and next
in the condemnatory part of that Judgment to see the whole fallen Angels, who
first sinned have the first final sentence past on them; as it was thus
intimate after the fall of man, and the whole successive race of mankind, each
in their order, with that full evidence, of the Holy Righteousness of the Judge
herein, as shall irresistably constrain their conscience to bear witness
thereto. 8. Yea what a concern of the Christian Faith lies here, of that
eternal separation and parting, which will then follow betwixt the elect, and
reprobate World, with that dreadful dimission to these infernal Regions, and
with this sight to see sin, which made its first entry in Heaven amongst the
Angels, and has since so much overspread the earth, now for ever shutt up in
hell, both sin, and sinners together, never more to look out at the grate of
these prison.

But II. There is another thing with respect to this Subject, which has been
to me often matter of serious thoughts, whence is it that in so knowing an age as
this, we see how such as are greatest pretenders to reason, and to a higher
flight then others this way are more visibly then any else of an Atheistick
Spirit, and to be a length herein bejond any else on that design, how to weaken
both their own assent, and others to the Christian Faith, and to render the
same so far as possibly they can, to be problematick and doubtful; but it is
sure here is nothing to stumble, but what may rather be strenthning to any of a
serious spirit, and needs be no strange thing, when such are as tender as
possible, to mar their enjoiments of this present life, who has no more; or
to let their thoughts come near to what must needs torment them before the
time: whilst their reason serves them for such an use, and constrains their
conscience herein, that they must either be Christians in earnest, or none at
all, yea that under such bright discoveries of the truth of the Ghospel, they
must see it is not compatible with reason, how there should be a mids betwixt a
truly serious Christian, who believes, what he does profess; and a rosolved
Atheist whose work lies to have the dread of such a Faith wholly extinguished.
I knew a most remarkable Atheist endued with special natural accomplishments,
who on the same account said to a person of quality, if I did trul^ believe
what you profess to do, they are matters of so great concern, that I do profess
I could think upon nothing else or be taken up thus, as the most of Christians
are, with the things of this World; so as I cannot possibly credit you in the
Faith of your own Profession. And herein can any exerce reason, and not see the
Faith of Christianity, is another thing, then most this day did ever conceive
it to be, and a much higher attainment, then a Christians particular interest
herein, for where the first is assuredly attained, it may seem not possible,
but the other must follow, that men's greatest business of the earth, should be
to have a sure evidence for Heaven, and to be ripening for so great a change. I
have known some whose trials, and conflicts in their warefare has been
extraordinare, and strange, who has professed their highest releaf still lay
herein, from the Faith of divine truth more then as to any particular promise
made applicable to such a case, and would have sought no more to carry their
spirits above the present temptations that occurred though they were not
ordinary, or to be at rest as to all temporal events, but a more full
strenthning in the Christian Faith, and that their Redeemer did live, since
then they were in sure terms, as to their security for whatever he has
promised.

III. But I must add yet one thing further which seems indeed a prodigy, proper
to such an age as this, that its become so hard a work to bring men living in
the day light of the Ghospel to a serious believing the truth, and existence of
infernal spirits, and of their commerce, and traffic with this visible World;
or to bring such who seem greatest pretenders to reason, to the Faith of
Devils, lest they should thus be unavoidably brought to that Faith of the
Devils, which is to believe, and tremble, which surely is an unconceavable and
extreme horror that these Apostate Spirits have herein, whilst their assent to
the glorious being of God, to his attributes, yea to the truth, and History of
the Ghospel, is by such ane inevitable constraint, that as there is no possible
access for them to be Atheists, so is their dread, and torment heigtned being
such knowing intellectual essences, as that power, and subtilty of delusion,
whereby they deal with mankind will not work on themselves. This I must judge,
to be the last effort of the horrid wickedness of this present age, to
strenthen such a way, and since such a party can have no help or support from
faith, and reason herein, and yet find the assured truth, and being of Devils,
and of their communion, and warefare with men, does mar any possible defense
or design for Atheism, and a taking off the terror of ane infernal state, off
their soul, they must therefore move to another airth, which is to believe
nothing but what they see and feell, and comes under a sensible demonstration
to warrant the same: for this is to make sure work at once against the whole
Christian Faith, and shut the door on any way of conviction thence; thus they
keep a distance with the being of their own souls, as if it were some dark,
and abstract notion, because it comes not under their sense; they can live at
quiet, and be secure from the fear of a Hell, and infernal world, or exclusion
out of Heaven until they once meet with such an argument, as to make them both
see, and feell the truth hereof; but oh they seem not to apprehend how sore
the application of this argument will be, when they at last find its in vain to
reject the conclusion, where the premises are sure. There is one of late, who
is come forth in the day light of Christianity, in a book lately published, to
undeceive the World upon so great a delusion, as to these invisible powers of
darkness, and tho he seems to find it difficult how to annihilate, and make
void wholly their existence, yet does offer with a strange confidence to secure
men from any fear of the molestations of such Spirits, and that all inward
temptations or assaults of Satan, and his operating upon the souls of men, is
but a deplorable fascination, and bewitchment, that the Christian Church has
been so long under. It might be judged, there were little need for such a work
to take this generation we are now in off all watch, and guard against these
destroying adversaries, and to render them more secure herein, then they seem
already to be; and that this confidence, must have some strange rise, to go
forth not only in the most direct opposition to Sacred Truth, but to the
universal Sense, and reason of mankind, except he hopes to find a numerous
party, who has given up with both, and will easily grasp at such a bait tho
they should see the hook that will at last destroy them. But do these mighty
hunters, and destroyers of mankind the Devils, come so little speed in their
work this day, that they must have a Protestant Minister of the Church come
forth before the Sun to offer his assistance to help them forward herein, or if
he deny such ane intent, what security will he offer to secure men, from a
hazard that is more dreadful then the killing of their body, and is of an
eternal concern; is he empoured with authority from these infernal Regions, I
confess on these grounds he may have advantage to give such ane assurance. 1.
That the strong man whilst he keeps the house, will be very tender to trouble
their peace over whom he swayes, with an uncontrol^ed Dominion, and that he
will not affright, nor awake men out of such a pleasant dream, who has set
their heart wholly on the world, and whose portion is in this life, until they
be awaked for ever out of the same. 2 He may give full assurance also that the
Prince of this World is at no war, nor needs be with such as are joined in with
his interest, and at the same work to promote the Kingdom of darkness, and
seeks not to have them tormented before the time. 3. But there is this ground,
I must judge he specially goes on; that he will be easily credited on such a
Subject as this, and knows how small a patrociny, will serve to promote a
design for Atheism, and could fall upon nothing, which would be more grateful
to a great part now who bear the name of Protestants, but whilst he calls
them to lay aside their armor, such as Christians are expressly called to put
on Ephesians. 5: 11. will he secure them when it comes to the last battle, and
conflict, from their being seized by such infernal Spirits in their entry into
another World, whom they did once deride, and that the truce which was with
them on the earth, will not break up then: if he had restricted this new
discovery to the world, of ane absolute security from the Power of Satan, and
his molestations, to belong only to the Place, and City he lives in, it might
have seemed to be on a politic interest, to render it, as a place of such
eminent trade, to be the only safe, and most desirable part of the earth; but
he has extended it to be universal to all other places, and to be a Catholic
good, and privilege. There needs no question, but that such a person himself
must be in a deep quiet, and under no touch of these assaults and temptations
others are exposed to; tho one thing he may fear in the managing of so strange
a design, and in such a manner, that these knowing and active spirits, for whom
he acts, may not reckon their service much advanced, when there is as little of
the subtilty of the Serpent herein, as of the innocence of the dove. It is true
there is an invisible guard, and hedge about each one of the Saints over which
Satan cannot pass, but by the measures of divine permission; nor is it
expressible how much Christians of the choicest Spirits are bettered, and
improven in their graces by the worst of Spirits, and in their continued
warefare with them; and its sure they are reserved in chains of darkness to the
Judgment of the great day, but how far their chain is often let forth, and
enlarged in judgment to the world, may be too evident every where in the sad
effects thereof, and it now appears, that their chain has not been more
remarkably lengthned out these many ages past, then in this day. I wish the
Writer of such a Book might seriously repent, and so far retract what he has
published, as might thus turn such a poison unto ane antidote against it self,
for I judge he durst not put such Divinity in his Testament, that he has
written in this Book.

POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
IT may seem strange, not only the lengthning of this Discourse so far, but in
insisting most specially upon that Head of the internal Work, and
Demonstrations of the Spirit of God on men's soul; but as I may with humble
confidence say this was under the sense of some peculiar engagements to such a
Subject; so I shall make this further Apology for the same. 1. That since ever
I accounted the Profession of Christ a serious business, I have judged it not
conceivable how Christians should have ane assent to the truth of the Ghospel
or be at rest herein, until it once be brought up to a full, and quieting
assurance on that security, to which they must concredite themselves for ever,
and thus know the strenth, and sureness of the foundation of their Faith by its
own evidence; that tho it be not yet full, whilst we are here in the way of
enjoyment, yet is it undoubtedly full in the truth, and certainty of evidence;
I have judged it also an addition to the greatest joy which I could have within
time, whatever might be a further strenthning to such a Faith, and hope we are
called to by the Ghospel of Christ, so as not to lose any fragment of this
kind, which might tend to a more full establishment, and does reckon this the
credit, and glory of our Religion, that in no other way it does require
acceptance of men, but with a full assurance of understanding, and the furthest
conviction of evidence; as being designed no less to found a rational
certainty in the judgment, then to determine the will or consent for embracing
the same; yea on this account it has been often matter of astonishment, how in
the teaching, and ministerial work, which God has appointed for his Church,
the primary truths of Religion should not be more held forth to men with that
clearness of evidence and demonstration, as such great, and marvelous things
require, and the temper of this age calls for; or how the great things of God,
that are of the highest consequence, and reality, can have any possible
reception from men by ane implicit or ordinare assent; or whence it is, that
with most it seems their work seems wholly set on the noetick, when so little
on the dianoetick part of Divinity: but on the other hand I must also witness,
that if ever I knew what it was to attain ane inward assurance of the truth,
and revelation of Christ, and to be at rest herein; that the eternal Son of God
was revealed from Heaven in our nature to save lost man, and that there is a
state of grace here, and of glory hereafter; I have found that no light, or
conviction of judgment, tho with such evidence as could leave no room for
doubtfulness in the same, can effectually work without the internal evidence,
and demonstration of the Spirit of God, and a supernatural power both to beget,
and strengthen such a Faith in the soul; yea that without this, the furthest of
objective evidence to cause irresistably a clear and rational assurance of
divine truth, tho it were followed with a dispensation of miracles, will not
quiet the Spirit of such, who under some deep exercise may be haunted with hid,
and dreadful temptations to infidelity, until they know the truth of a power,
and evidence, as goes above any moral influence. It is true this is not
expressible to others, and they must come and see, who would know in what
manner the Spirit of God bears evidence to his own truth, and what strong
impression his work has on the internal Senses of a Christian, yea what
piercing intelligences are betwixt such, who surely know, and are partakers of
a divine life, and their blessed Head in this state of mortality, but if this
were not known and sure, we might say ane established Christian whose work is
to follow the Lord fully, and adventure with assurance upon him, is such as
might be sought for here in the earth, but would not be found. 2. If I be
persuaded of the truth, and Excellency of Religion, I must see this to be of as
undeniable evidence, that it has no true or solid interest in the Earth, but
in the way of trial and experience in it is power and efficacy on men's soull;
and makes no real ground or conquest, by an external profession, or can serve
to eternal ends, until once that radical principle of the life of God in the
soull be understood; that choice company who are now going through time to the
Church triumphant upon fresh and continued supplies of divine assistance, are
these alone in whom the Christian Faith is kept alive this day on the earth,
and it is one of the things I have thought most astonishing in the public
State of Religion, that in an age, when reason is so much pretended, men can
design a trial of the enjoyment of a Heaven for ever in another World, and yet
has not the same design on a personal trial of the enjoyments of grace here,
to know converse with God in the spirit, and the certainty of that trade and
commerce, which is betwixt Heaven and Earth whilst we are yet on it, that are
things so highly remote from all humane sense. 3. It has pressed me to insist
more on this subject, that this way is so visibly gathering strength, and seems
to have the greatest prevalence now in the Reformed Churches, how to divide the
moral part of our Religion in the duties and services thereof, from its
internal and vital part, so as this mortal contagion has got in on the light
and principles of this Generation, that if there were not an absolute assurance
by the promise of God, we might fear truth and piety should quickly perish from
the earth. Oh what a strange and prodigious opposition is this! against the
whole internal work and vitals of that pure and excellent Religion; wherein
both the comfort and glory of humane state lies, and how is it conceivable men
should be here capable of converse with God in the spirit, if there were not a
conformity to him in the same kind by a participation of the divine nature; yea
if there were not so rare a being on the earth as the new man, which is born of
God, and his immediate workmanship, which has its peculiar grouth and vital
acts proper thereto, and in that sense as it is contradistinguished from the old
man cannot possibly sin it self, tho it be formed in the heart of a sinner, and
has it is being therein, no more then the life of God, which is a partaking of
the divine nature, can put forth any act of sin, but has a continued conflict
therewith; and thus tends to give the clear sense of that Scripture 1 John 5:
18. we know that whatever is born of God sins not, and Rom 7: 20. It is no
more I, but sin that duelleth in me, nam unumquodque operatur secundum suam
formam; for if this stood not sure, the whole frame of experimental Religion,
were an unaccountable riddle.

A SECOND LETTER Wherein some Inquiry upon the times, and the work of
Providence about the Church; but more specially with respect to the public
State of Britain and Ireland in this last age, is seriously designed.
SIR,
I may truly say, it did raise a special value and esteem on my spirit, to meet
with one in such a day, who has so great a weight and impression of the
public State of the Church, and a sense of the present times, so far above the
ordinare thoughts of men; when they seem so rare who look further then present
things, either to what is past in these extraordinar times have gone over this
Generation, or who has another Judgment and Prognostication of what may be
near, and yet before us, then from visible and natural causes. But though I
must decline an answer to what you are pleased more particularly to propose,
under a just sense of my unfitness herein, yet so far as I have attained in the
matter of light upon a more general account with respect to the Work of God in
these great changes past, I am free to impart my self, and to offer humbly some
few thoughts on such a Subject, which has had most special evidence and weight
on my spirit in the present day.

1. I doubt not you make the same Judgment, and reckoning of this with more
advantage then I can reach, that one of the most choice and weighty exercises
of a Christian, whilst he is within time, lies in a deep and serious
observation of the times he is fallen in, not only with respect to the
administration of Providence in humane affairs, but what does more eminently
relate to the Churches of Christ, and where their lot is cast; since this is
ane essential part of Religion, as it is also one of the most choice of humane
excellencies, to discern and observe wisely the ways of the Lord. But I can
only show you some of these things in a short touch, which I have found most
engaging to such an Inquiry in this day. 1. That as each distinct age has a
proper Talent given thereto, under trust for observation of such events of
Providence, wherein the name of God is more near unto men in any singular way,
then in the ordinare course of his actings, so has the great Author of time
choised to put a higher Glory upon one age, and period of time, then another,
wherein it might be said that the measure of one is five Talents, as to more
solemn appearances of the Majesty of God in his Providential Actings, when the
measure of other times has been this way but as two Talents. Such a
differencing mark had that age of the Churches coming out of Egypt, beyond all
which had gone before; yet was this comparatively little with respect to that
glory, which was reserved to the fullness of time, when our blessed Redeemer did
appear to the World* And it is clear how in these later times, that age which
had it is first entry from the Year 1517. had a higher splendour put thereon,
then had been known for a thousand Years proceeding the same; but when I have
thought on the way and conduct of Providence, and marvelous discoveries of God
herein to this Generation, I could not but see something in a most singular way
of his appearance before the World to the same, as seems but yet little
understood, tho this may be seen, that we have surely lived in an age of
wonders 2. I have looked on such an exercise, to discern, and understand aright
the times we are in, as one of the most singular means for strenthning a
Christians Faith on the certainty of sacred truth; when with these more
immediate discoveries of God in the way and administration of grace by his
spirit on men's soull, which is whelly hid from the World, they can see in what
manner his truth does visibly take place, and is attested by an external seall
in the glory of his work before men, and I am persuaded none thus did ever
pursue a more near acquaintance with God, but has had some peculiar
strengthening remarks of his way, that have been hid from others, tho of a
serious spirit otherwise. 3. It is such who have some greater weight of this
choice study, and their spirits more fully joined in therewith then others, who
may attain more clear discoveries of light, for directing them to the duties
and work of such a time; and on this account I fear that there is much yet this
day in the dark to us, and not understood, what has been the Voice of the Lord
for answering the great ends of his Providence, tho it has been clear and
distinct, where men's spirits were laid open to entertain the same. I confess it
is not strange as to the greatest part of men this day, tho they keep at the
furthest distance from what might bring near an affecting sense of a Godhead to
their soull in the ways of Providence, who are resolute not to see, or be
persuaded of what does torment them hereby, whose great study is to live
without God in the World, and seem emulous of these who can be most ingenious
and expert, to confirm their hearts against all that is sacred. 4. But I am
sure, it is something much higher then any interest of men or of Nations, or
the greatest changes in the posture of humane affairs, which should bear the
greatest weight in this exercise to understand the times we are in, and for a
suitable observation thereof, if men could once reckon that their great
business in the earth lies with God, and in keeping sight of him in the
outgoings of his Providence, since the hidden wisdom of God in a Mystery is to
be seen and sought out in his Works, as well as in his Word; it is true public
Revolutions, and the fall and setting up of great men are things highly
observable and momentous, but they are neither seen or understood, when they
make not way for some greater sight of the Majesty of God, and the signal
retaliations of Judgment herein, and what peculiar aspects such strange
Revolutions of Providence has on the present Generation.

II. Though it might seem unsuitable to offer any special Remarkes and
Observations upon this late time, to one of so discerning a spirit, of things
of that nature; yet knowing how a mutual communication of light, about the Work
of God, and his actings in our day, is so incumbent a duty, I shall point at a
few things, wherein I have desired to admire and observe the way of Providence
in this remarkable age, but in the first place more generally touch such a
Head, ere I speak in some particular way thereto.

1. When we see the series of these times, and different measures of trial and
service assigned thereto, since that blessed rise, and recovery of the Church
from Antichristian darkness, there might be seen also a growing increase of
light, which in this age has had such ane advance, as it could not but be
expected, that the Lord was to take some higher proofs of the improvements
thereof from this Generation then of these past, after such great things he had
done for a full settlement of the Reformed Churches; when he had opened the
graves of his people, and sent forth his Prisoners by the blood of the
Covenant, and the tr^^h had made way for its self over moun^ains, which once
seemed insuperable; yea when this also is an age, where in a great concurrence
of the Prayers of the Saints in times before, was ^o meet for ^he Churches
interest; so that, unanswerableness to the expectation of God herein, and to
frustrate such eminent methods of grace, might expect some unusual work of
Judgment to follow thereon, and the Lords coming at last to a judicial process
and procedure.

2. We see how these extraordinar occurrences of this time past, has most
remarkably had a joint respect both to Sacred, and Civil Interests, and quoad
Fata Ecclesiae, and Imperii humani, so as in that sense it might be said there
has been a shaking both of Heaven and Earth, as to the Churches visible State;
yea such has these great changes from the right hand of the most high been
within the measure of one age, as men could not possibly see with the eye of
reason, without amasement, tho it brings therewith one of the most dismal
remarks of the present time, if men's spirits be not seized with a deep and
awful sense of the tremendous Majesty of God herein, and know there is no
stability of humane state this day in the earth but from him alone, who can
bring judgment on the greatest Nations, or Persons, above the common course of
nature, and influence of second causes: but oh what intertainment should a
di^pensation of Miracles find from the spirits of men now, when the Revelation
of Christ, and Redemption by his Blood from Eternal Wrath, has no greater
effects on this Generation, and so few awaked with the Glory of such a light.

3. When I have considered this age, as that which might have been judged a
time of great expectation for a further advance of the Kingdom of Christ in the
World, which does specially make a time more remarkable, yet how little access
has been herein to see the Work of God in any new planting of Churches, or
inbrirging of Nations to the Profession of the Ghospel, as has been formerly,
but instead of new Conquest, rather a losing ground, and is a difficult part
become to maintain a defensive work in behalf of the truth, and which may be a
serious remark that in this age, one tribe has as it were been cut off from
the Reformed Churches; I mean as to that dismal State of Bohem, where some time
before had been so eminent and flourishing a plantation; it is true there has
been a solemn tide of the effusion of the Spirit of God, allotted to someof the
Churches in this last age, that should be still matter of sweet remembrance,
but it is sure this day we see the ebb as low in these places, in the life and
power of Religion, and no visible reviving almost any where can be heard of the
Churches of Christ; which yet has been to me so far a hopeful sign of a near
incalling of the Jews, since it will then find the Gentile Church in so
judicial a Period of time, that it shall be as life from the dead.

4. Yet it is sure on the other hand there has been most signal honor and
glory put on this age, and with a special respect to Britain and Ireland, in as
great a harvest of serious and solid Christians by the Power of the Ghospel,
then has been in any time or place of the Earth, since the first three
Centuries; tho not under that seall of Martyrdom as was after the Reformation,
yet such who shined in the truth and power of true Sanctity, and have left a
fragrant Savor and remembrance to this day, when most of that blessed stock is
now gone, and their room rarely filled up any where.

5. Yea this further may be matter of sweet Reflection, how many such has been
in this age, in whom that ancient greatness of spirit with Heroic motions in
appearing for God, and his truth might be seen; for tho they attained not to
the measure of the first three, of our first and blessed Reformers, yet may it
be said, within the limits of this age, there has gone off the stage
innumerable instances of such eminency of induements, and with that measure of
power, and of a sound mind, as might be compared with any of the Ancients since
the Apostolic times; and this is a remark that never faills of Christ's
imparting himself in these measures of his spirit to a Church in such a time,
according to the great ends he is to accomplish there.

6. Though great changes upon a Nation or Church, does not want previous and
remarkable warnings from the Lord, we have seen with what a marvelous Surprisal
these have occurred to this Generation, that were most remote from all humane
thoughts, and once not conceivable upon the highest principles of reason, how
ever they should have taken place. It is becoming the Majesty of God, to have
his Arcana Imperii, in such peculiar and reserved cases, as the most skilled in
the ways and depths of Providence are called to be still with a silent
admiration, when he thus does arise, as in these times past, to do great things
which was not looked for.

7. But how strange and marvelous has the surprisalls been of Providence in
our day also in the way of tenderness, and mercy, as well as of Judgment, which
should be a most strengthening remark, if this had been more suitably improven;
what unexpected and seasonable interpositions have been of a divine immediate
power, in extreme exigences, both of the Church, and particular Christians, in
these great changes past; and as Oppressors have grown up to a height of
Violence, how observably have Carpenters been prepared, whence humane reason
could not have fore seen to cut the horns of such.

8. When we can not but see with what a signal evidence and commission, the
spotless Judgment of God has gone forth in these late times, to all ranks and
stations of men, especially in the Isle of Britain, there might be also some
peculiar remarke of it is design against these, who were of the highest Stay,
so as no time past did ever tend more to seal^ instruction on the spirits of
great men then of late, to have the fear and dread of God on them, when Princes
might have been seen walking on foot, and Servants riding on horseback; yea
that there is a time of Gods making inquisition for blood, of such who seemed
most secure from humane Power, and how this alone comes from a divine hand,
when men are poisoned in their own cup, and lays a snare to themself by which
they are caught; it is true a clear application of Providence past, to the
present times, is not easily attained, but I doubt not of a more full light and
discovery for this end, as will silence all oppositions, that have been to the
intent and Counsel of the Lord in these things which have occurred.

9. It has been reserved to our day, to see the Issue, and great Decisions,
which have been in these strange Scenes of Providence, in this age past, and to
have them now in our sight in the whole successive course thereof, and surely
this might be a great and affecting sight to such who are ready to think that
God has forsaken the earth, and walks only in the circuit of Heaven, when
they cannot but see what amasing events has been of late brought forth by an
invisible and unpreventable conduct of Providence; and to see also in this late
Revolution of the public State of Britain, how by one great surprisal, the
whole Popish Measures there which had been of so long and painful a
contrivance, was as in a moment broke and made void, when nothing less expected.

10. It is unquestionable, that the Lord does usually act by second causes, but
there are steps also of his way wherein he alone appears, and will have them
seen to be wholly his work, and this now has eminently appeared in the great
transactions of these late times, how bejond any humane power or might, it was
a Standard by the Spirit of God lifted up, that did visibly make way for the
work he was then accomplishing, and did serve such terror on his Adversaries;
yea how these who were acted forth to be instrumental thus on the service of
their day, were directed for that great end to the quieting of his Spirit in
such a piece of his Work.

11. And herewith what thoughts of heart may it cause now in the present state
and juncture of things, to see such a Conjunction in this Western Part of
Europe, to serve the great ends of Providence, that if it had been told our
Fathers by any, they would have been as such who mock, that in the next age,
the House of Austria, of Spain, Lorrain and Savoy, should have a joint interest
with the greatest Princes of the Reformed Religion, and take the Sword with one
consent against such a Party, whose Sword has been bathed, and yet still is
reaking in the blood of the Protestants, yea how this great instrument of
Judgment, and Patron of the Romish Interest should most actively make way to
defeat his own Projects and Counsel, by an irresistible conduct of Providence.

This is a great and unusual Conjunction in humane affairs, such as the Policy
of the Western Part of Christendom is hereby cast in a new mould, wherein we
are called to adore God, and his Dominion over all Second Causes; tho it be a
Depth of Providence, which is yet not opened up; only herewith some Reflections
on the same I cannot wholly pass. 1. What may be too justly feared of an
inordinate respect to men, and concurrence of visible means, above what it can
bear, when nothing is more effectual to cause the greatest humane succor
miscarry, and sink under this weight, the^ relyances thereon, as if they could
stand by them self, without keeping in with God alone, with that God, who is of
infinite Power both to hurt and help, whose presence is ever the highest
Security of a Nation, tho the whole World were against them. 2. But this also
looks with confidence and hope, that the Lord is near to give some extraordinar
demonstration of himself by Providence, as this Generation shall not get their
eyes shut at, yea that this strange piece of his work, is a prelude and entry
on a revolution of the public State of the World, that shall be of a higher
extent, then may be apprehended by most, and it is sure when he does begin, he
will also make an end. 3. I have looked on this remarkable silence, and suspense
as to any public Decision of Providence, this Year past, when things seemed to
be in the highest (...) of a Crisis, that hereby the Lord would yet give men
time to consider his Work, and take to heart his Voice by such a further
warning; and have still observed from the records of times past, as to his
Procedure, that when he was to bring forth some great piece of his Work before
the World, there has been as it were an interval of silence for a time, and
like some Cessation of Providence, which has preceeded the same, and made the
time of his Working, when it was lest men's Expectation; yea the sorer a stroke
has been when it came, the longer has a tender forbearance gone before, even
when the hand of Justice has been lift up, the wheels sometimes stand still,
and the public state of affairs is in a strange manner becalmed when the Lord
is in some eminent manner to arise according to that Isay 42: 14. I have long
time holden my peace, I have been still, I have refrained my self, now will I
cry as a traveling Woman etc. 4. Yea it may be a special remark, that when the
Lord has so signally appeared to make this great revolution in Britain
effectual, and to clear the sky and coast there from visible opposition, with
such rare preventing Providence for that end, yet is so little ground gained
by the unite strength of this Confederacy, but it was in the one that the Lord
did act in an extraordinar way of Providence, in the other things do run more
in the ordinare channel of visilbe means. It looks as a sign of great Wrath,
that such an Instrument of Judgment has had his chain so far let forth in this
day, who might be called not only Host is Ecclesiae, sed humani Generis, by
these cruelties more then inhumane exerced in the Palatinate; and other Parts
of Germany, but it is fit the World should know of what spirit and way the
great Persecutor of the Protestants in this age is; yea for the Nations about
to see there is no possible Moral Security for their Civil Interests from one
whom no establishments of Laws, nor that Law of Gratitude toward such whose
Fathers had brought the House of Bourbon to the Throne could bind: but as there
is an anointing and establishing men for judgment, whose hand is made strong
until that work be perfited, so is the Sin of Britain, and other Reformed
Churches, the greatest strength of this Adversary.

12. Have we not also been called to see such vicissitudes of Providence; that
these for whom God had sometimes most signally appeared in raising them to the
highest greatness and power, as all might clearly discern it was his hand
alone, that did the same; how in a way no l^ss wonderful he has made known
his power in breaking and bringing them low, whilst they did not know, and
regard God in the day of their greatness, but thought to stand by themselves,
and gave such a requital to him, as to betake themselves to another strength,
then that which raised them, and try a new Scene of opposition to his truth,
and interest; yea thus forgot the tempest they were once in, and these
engagements, which were then on their soul, when they had once got to the
Haven: It is sure this has been writ forth, as in Capital Letters once and
again, that men who run might read the same, and know how great and terrible a
party God is, when he is not for a Church or People, but against them; and how
easy it is for him by ane occurrent of Providence, least feared or thought
off, to give a check to the greatest deeps of humane Policy and Wit; and let
such know, when they judge themselves secure from any hazard on the earth,
there can be no standing, when their counsels and confidence is derided from
Heaven.

13. It has been in some singular manner also, that in this age we have been
called to see sin and judgment meet other with such astonishing circumstances,
and so visible a resemblance and proportion betwixt the same, as the stroke
herein pointing as with a finger at the cause, was unavoidable for a natural
conscience to discern, and see a just and Holy God, thus made known, and
visible in such public and tremendous instances of his Judgment, as bejond the
rate of former times have been set up, as beacons in our sight. I must join
herewith, this sad remark, which has had a peculiar respect to these times,
that as it is sure nothing, but Religion in the truth thereof can effectually
take off men from sin, so has nothing, so much as Religion been often made use
off as the grand Engine to secure them therein; and what was spoke by one of
the Ancients, has been more applicable to our day, then almost any past, that
never was ane age more fertile of Religions under a different profession
hereof, and never more barren of Religion in the power, and efficacy of the
same on men's soul.

14. It has been in this age that such a call often and alowd has sounded in
our ears to come and see, how the greatest Powers and Nations of the earth are
but as a little dust in the balance for the Sovereign God to blow off at his
pleasure, and that he has reserved to himself a dominion, and preeminence over
the Kingdoms of the Children of men, to change the greatest Monarchies. Oh what
a strange reflex work might this be to have our spirits, but going back on
these great and marvelous shakings, and utter razing has been of public
settlements that seemd most firmly laid, the bowing down and fall of the
greatest of men, and raising up such, who had been low, when the great God once
begun to contend with the Oaks and Cedars, and herewith to see the extent of
his power over men's spirits and inclinations, as well as their actings, so as
to determine their concurrence, with their hand for his ends; contrare to the
native bias, and sway of their hearts; that men might know him who is the God
of the spirits of all flesh can by one and the same Providence accomplish
various designs at once, and bring forth such contrare effects, as no humane
wisdom could ever have supposed or forseen, yea how these marvelous events
might be clearly seen, was in their day no rare and strange contingencies to
astonish men, but such as did bear a most evident signature and impress of the
Majesty of God, and of his name and truth showed forth thereon.

15. I shall but add this more upon so boundless a Subject; that we have been
specially called in this age to see some unusual variation in the spotless ways
and methods of Providence about his Church, and in the course of humane affairs
from what has been the manner of his working formerly, so as men could not
discern his way often by any footsteps or precedent of Providence in times past,
but that something has been reserved peculiarly to our day, of the Lord rising
up as in mount Peradsim, and his being wroth as in the valley of Gibeon to do
his strange work, and bring to pass his strange Act Isay 28: 21. And tho we but
see in part hereof, yet may we now know and understand upon these times past,
more then such who was then present actors on the stage could reach in
discerning the intents of providence when things were in their first mould, as
is now clear in their after tendency and result; nor could possibly have that
judgment of the Work of God in some parcels as may be now attained, when it is
in a more full and entire frame; when such a sight is set before us, as should
call to have our souls bowing down with an awful regard and homage at so
august, and immediate a discovery of the Majesty of God in his Work and actings
before this Generation.

A III. Head on this Subject, that I would offer some thoughts on, is as to the
Lords singular way of dealing with the public State of Britain, and Ireland
bejond any other of the Reformed Churches in this last age; and is indeed a
Subject of serious regard, to consider what manner of time has our lot been
cast in, and the measure of that talent for observation, we stand accountable
for upon such great and extraordinare events as has occurred: but here I have
desired to have my thoughts translate, to what has been from the first entry
on so marvelous a series of providence, about the state of these Nations, for
almost fifty Years past, for a more clear prospect how each step herein in its
successive place, and room, has tended to give light to another; which I shall
restrict wholly to the more immediate appearances of God, from what has been
men's part, and actings upon such a diversity of interests as might too visibly
be seen to influence many in their way; and offer but a few serious reflections
on the same, to one who can more clearly observe, and discern things of that
kind.

1. That it is sure Britain and Ireland has been of late a Theater of such
strange and extraordinare vicissitudes in it is public state, from the Year 38.
of this age, as in no times past can be resembled; what wonderful Revolu^ions
did then successively follow other, and were made the object of men's sense, as
could not possibly have had credit or been a matter of Faith, if the same
should have been foretold, and may justly render such a period of time unto
this day, to be matter of astonishment to any of a serious spirit. It is true
there is no time wherein the Lord has not given some more singular discoveries
of himself, and these changes of providence which are in the personal case of
Christians, and lies more close and near to their Sense, then things of a
public concern, are often so extraordinare as would be not easy for others to
credit; but it must be said what we have seen here, and may know of the work
and appearances of God in that Land can never be a Subject of ordinary thoughts.

2. It is known how ane avenging Sword, which was bathed in Heaven, had it is
commission thence, to go forth against both Britain, and Ireland, and did not
cease to pursue it is end until these flourishing Nations, was made a visible
field of blood, yea did not rest, until in the righteous, and Sovereign
disposal of God, a potent and settled Monarchy there, of a long descent having
no fear, or opposition from any foreign power, was yet broke, and made void, and
did fall in their high places; and what ane account this should have been to
the World, if it could have been possibly seen or judged in the Year 40. what
the 50 Year following was to bring forth, and was then in the bosom of so
short a time.

3. But when thus the Lord did once appear, and go forth in a judiciary way, we
might see how each of these three Nations had their proper share, and measure
allotted in the strokes, and judgments of that time* tho in some different
method and manner; there being a more singular part assigned to poor Ireland
then, by the Holy and just God in that bloody and terrible Scene, which was
acted there, yet this was in common to the whole of these Lands that it was an
intestine Sword, and not of a forreiner that was then called for, which spoke
the Judgment to be the sorer and more of divine wrath in it; where on part of a
Nation, is made the rod, and executioner of his judgment on another, and their
destruction from amongst themselves.

4. If it be considered, what manner of time, that was of so extraordinare
things, it may be obvious, how this followed a long and unusal settled calm,
and tranquillity, which had gone before in the public State of these Nations,
when so great a flame had been round about; it was immediately after a bloody
Sword had done its work in Germany, which from the Year 30. had brought with it
such dismal effects there; but what would seem most astonishing here, that tho
a time of the patience and long suffering of God, had in a singular manner gone
before, and the treaty of the Ghospel might be seen to have a small acceptance,
and such judicial effects, with most of that Generation, when the Red Horse,
and its Rider went forth to take peace from such a part of the earth, yet was
not the hight of Profanity, and Atheism nor measure of sin then in these
Nations come near to such a degree, as is now the measure of this time, or had
any such prodigious appearance; only we see not yet what is coming to answer
this.

5. It is not above 40 Years past, since we might see a powerful state, and
commonwealth both raised and formed in these Nations on so great a ruin, had
gone before, and thus such a new and wonderful Scene of Providence brought
forth on the stage, which made a Revolution in the civil state of that nature
as Britain had never before known, a State whose strength whilst it stood firm
was made formidable both by Sea and Land to the Nations about, with so strong a
tide of success, as nothing was able to stand against the same, but all essays,
which tended to an opposition then, most visibly frustrate, and no plots, or
mine laid so deep and closs, which did not spring upon themselves who wrought
therein; such was the concurrence of favorable things, and in so strange a
manner until they had stood o^t that trial wherein they were then set, how
they should answer the call, and intent of such a Providence.

6. But when the eyes of most every where was aloft, as to the issue of this
settlement, and all humane contrivance, or forecast put to a stand herein, on
what side the balance might cast amidst such different Parties, and interests
as was on foot; it was then as with ane amasing earth quake, that the whole
foundation was razed, and tho it was unquestionable that many of a serious
spirit, and design in the things of God was amongst such, yet whilst the date
of their commission was once expired, and kept not themselves in the way of
mercy, they are at last brought to know what it was to have God against them; a
God impartially hating sin before whom it is more highly aggravate and
provockting the higher Profession of his way and truth men stands under, yea
then was it that it mig^t be no less clearly seen, how in the same manner of
their raising, by a most visible series, and irresistible course of Providence,
so was there fall* and down casting made wonderful, there Councils disordered,
dispirited in their resolutions wherein the ebb did run as low, in impressions
of fear and despondency on their spirits, as it had once lowed, who sometimes
before they knew what it was to be acted above their own ordinare reach; and
thus as in a moment might it be seen how this frame and mould was broke as
without hand. This was the second overturning in the public State of Britain,
in a very short time after the former, answerable to that Ezekiel. 21: 27. I will
overturn, overturn, etc.

7. It is now that a great, and marvelous change we may see again go over these
Nations, and an other piece of the Work of God brought forth on the stage, and
new Actors made use of herein; which caused great thoughts of heart to know,
what aspect such a crisis might have on the public State of Religion; then was
the Regal Power, and Government in Britain, raised again to its highest
splendour and extent, and this change in such a manner accomplished as the most
judicious, and discerning spirits stood amassed to see over what oppositions,
and difficulties, which seemed insuperable, this was carried; and that surely
it was the same hand who threw them down, which did then lift them up, with
whom it is easy to make a way where there is none for any piece of his Work,
when he goes forth herein.

8. But when it might have been hoped and expected such extraordinare
providence should work on these who were most interessed in this great
Restoration, when it was not there Sword or Counsel, but the finger of God,
which wrought the same; and that surely this might put a more then ordinare
weight how to restore the Nations unto God, who had restored them to the
supreme Power, and Government over the same, lo then was it in the Room
hereof that these things might be seen. 1. How the Sluices were immediately let
open, for an impetuous flood, and deluge of wickedness to break in over the
whole Isle; ane unbridled license to all immoralities, and impiety, and no
restraint but what might tend to promote the Kingdom of Jesus Christ amongst
men; so as these Years past since the 60. has tended to lay a lod of guilt on
Britain bejond the measures of any times past, and is still lying upon the
same; which will be found sore and heavy in the issue if Sovereign Grace do not
wonderfully interpose. 2. As it was then that such a crisis had so dismal and
mortal an aspect there within these hights of Profanity which did go over all
banks, and bejond ane ordinare cure or relief, so there might be seen a new way
and unusual methods of sinning; and a new progress, and advance in Atheism,
bejond what has been known in any times past, yea this with such confidence in
the public light, and before the sun as might be an amasement even to the
infernal spirits to think how far they were out gone by such who were of humane
race this way. 3. But it was herewith also, when it might have been thought,
that God should stay his hand no longer or forbear, that the seall of their
commission, whose power had then the greatest influence might be discernable to
all; that they were assuredly established for judgment, and had such a judicial
work under their hand; so as the most destructive designs of that party for a
further Ruin to the Church, seemed still then to have the greatest success;
and no attempts or oppositions whatsoever could withstand the same or stop it is
course, until their measure, and the Epha was further filled up, but such who
did most hasten to brake prison as it were before the time, found their bondage
grew stronger hereby.

9. But whilst such was thus at work, and acting so dismal a part on the
public Theater of Britain; lest they should reckon that surely God had
forsaken the earth, and that the Cry of such prodigious wickedness was not so
loud as to go up to Heaven; then was it that he came down in a visible way, to
make himself known, and bring near his judgment, with a very tremendous voiee;
then was it that he gave a special commission to one of the three great
Judgments the devouring Pestilence to go to the most eminent and conspicous
part of Britain, and the public Seat of the Regal Power and Authority; and
make that great City desolate for a time, and make their dwellings void of
Inhabitants, in the Year 65. yea in ane extraordinare Conjunction did double
such a warning by putting them in a flame, that it might speak as a public
Herald to these Nations, and thus give a Second Cry, that when his Wrath was
begun to kindle a little, men might meet him in the way of his Judgment ere it
come to the utmost and a greater woe follow thereon. This surely was the voice
of God by a most stupendous dispensation, and does speak still to this day, tho
there may be few now to hear it. This was a Entry of Judgment, and stroke of
that kind on which the Lord did put a most discernable impress of his
Greatness, and Terror.

10. Yet even then after this there was a most observable Pause, and tender
forbearance, in the way of the Lord to bring Judgment a further length; the God
of Patience, who does not easily destroy the Work of his own Hand, and bears
long ere a hight of sin does extort the last Stroke of Vengeance, did then give
such a new breathing, or long intermission, as to any extraordinary Acts of
Judgment; but did herewith send new Offers, and Conditions of Peace, before the
decree bring forth Zephan 2: 2. so as the next great warning, which was given
to these Nations, was in an other way and method; to take a new tr^all how this
yet would work by a most rare preventing Providence, in the discovery of the
Popish Plot, which under the shadow of civil Authority had been so long
hatching, and ripening until this mine was ready to spring, to a visible Ruin
of the whole protestant Interest in these Nations. This was a singular step of
Divine Providence, tho the sense hereof may be gone off the Spirits of most,
wherein he made us see that he was yet still watching over these Lands for
their good, when they were not aware and would not only warn, by so awakning a
Providence, but turn that contrivance against the contrivers, if so this might
at last Work, and answer the intent hereof.

But now I must further add, what lies nearer to our sight and observation,
upon this extraordinare course, and Conduct of Providence from the Year 60. to
that late call we have been sisted under, to see what the Year 88 following did
bring forth; and here to fix our thoughts with a deep advertency, on this
strange sight and turn of providence; which the most wise Discerners could not
some time before, have ever supposed on principles of Reason, or by any natural
connection of things; a turn, and vicissitude of Providence of such a kind
where men may see the Name and Majesty of God, in some august, and singular way
showed forth thereon, and his arising to make way for his Power and immediate
Appearance in such a manner as had not been known in former times? This is
indeed a piece of the Work of God that might bring near the Sense of a Godhead
to the conscience of the most ordinare Observers, and what ever sad, and
Judicial signs be too evident this day of the improvement made by most hereof,
yet should it deeply concern us, that the Glory and Honor of God in so great a
discovery of himself be not darkened or obscured. This is a Work we see but in
part, and the first Scene, of what is yet further in bringing forth, and can
be little known or taken up by the nearest events of Providence until the
Vision-Speak, and the vail be further taken off the same* but it is sure herein
that these of the most prejudged Spirit at such a Providence has been
constrained to see, that this was by an immediate divine Hand, contrare to the
ordinary Course, and Actings of Second Causes; and how such who most eminently
acted as Instruments herein, what ever access or advantage, they had of
Resolution, Spirit, and Counsel in such a Work, yet were then only called
forth to stand still, and see a higher Power moving in the same, who did there
look down as in the morning watch to trouble the Motions of these, who were
against them, and in an instant took off their Chariot wheels, and made them
know it was in vain, either to stand, or flee, when they had God against
them, who tho they reckoned to go forth, as at other times they knevv not, that
their day, and fatal period was now come.

Tho there was nothing common or ordinare in this stupendous work, wherein such
incredible occurrences of providence, did then concur as might constrain the
natural conscience of men to see a supernatural causality herein yet did
somethings specially, meet here to render this Work of God more highly
astonishing. 1. That when the fears of most were at the furthest hight of some
desolating stroke to accompany the same, where the contrare parties, were so
stated as the one could not stand but on the ruin of the other, and their
interest on every side so extensive, and great, yea when in no times past the
harvest of the earth, and in these parts thereof, seemd more ripe for putting
in the Syckel, yet even then did the Lord in his sovereign and marvelous
disposal spare; and went not forth as at other times, with garments rolled in
blood nor did the actings of his providence appear so terrible as when presages
of judgment were more discernable; but as this was the opening of the first
scene and who sees what God is to do, who knowth his mind, as to these great
changes in the external state of this western part of the World, by such a
remarkable entry to the same; but this may be fully clear to any who does
wisely consider the Work of the Lord herein, that this was a new and higher
trial which he would yet once more take of these nations, and did therefore
hold his hand, when the stroke seemd ready to fall down. 2. It might seem
unaccountable to all reason, such a conjunction, and concurrence of instruments
as was in this work; for tho the appearance of some herein who did most
eminently appear, and act, did witness special, high, and heroic motions in
the same; yet how vast and numerous a part was embarked upon this interest, and
in behalf of the Protestant Religion, who could claim no room or title in the
very form, and visible profession of Christianity, or to have any place in the
out^er court; but it might, here with amasement be seen how upon the one side,
were such stated, who maintaind Christ's bodily presence in the earth, in that
sacrifice of the mass, as the hibboleth of their profession; and on the other
side how great a part was there who did ridicull all revealed Religion, and
seemd not to believe his real presence in heaven. But here was it discernable
what a return this was by the voice of providence, to that grand engine, and
too known a design of the Romish spirit for many years past, to take way for
popery, by destroying men, especially the youth in Britain, in the moralls of
Christianity, and to to take thus off all serious Sense, and weight of Religion
from their Conscience, that herein this deep of Hellish Policy did at last turn
against themselves, and tho they judged themselves secure from any serious
influence of Religion on such a Party, yet could they not secure them from
acting as men on principles of reason, who could not but see the interest of
Popery, and of their civil Rights, and Properties were incompatable; yea that
tho they were acted from no internal motives on a Religious Interest, it could
not be easy to join in with such a Religion, as was made up wholly of external
Rites, and ceremonial Severity, and Strictness, and had no possible
consistency with it self. But if we seriously ponder this great vicissitude of
Providence in it is Conjunction, with what has gone before, it is here we must
see a third, marvelous overturning. which in one and the same age, has been
successively in these Kingdoms, according to that forementioned Scripture Ezekiel.
21: 27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, and it shall be no more until he
come, whose right it is, and I will give it: which is to be understood there,
of such great Revolutions, as should in their proper order follow upon other.
For tho this had a respect. then to these great shakings which was to come upon
Juda, and the House of their Kings in the entry of their captivity, yet may
none bound the intent of the Holy Ghost in this Prophecy, as if there only it
was to take place, and had not a Respect to some further accomplishment of the
same in after times, which surely was since, never more clear in the event then
in this late wonderful Series of Providence, that has been in these
overturnings. But now let me speak herewith, what has been sometimes deeply
affecting, how there is something yet more solemn and extraordinare now in this
third call, then all that has gone before, to be awakening to this generation,
and that which with too clear evidence may be judged the last cry and call,
such as has no dark or uncertain sound therewith to the State and Churches of
Britain, and unto all ranks there, if there be not a resolute shutting of our
ear at the same, that this is assuredly the voice of the Lord, I will yet once
more take proof and trial of these Lands, which I did choice, and in so
singular a way deall with bejond other Churches and Nations; and will yet
respite the last stroke of Judgment; and if tenderness and forbearance in a
most surprising and extraordinare display thereof will once work; if the
actings of providence such as could not of late have been believed by men will
once reclaim, and return Britain and Ireland again unto God, I will then take
of both their fetters and fears, and give a new settlement to their civil
rights and interest, will sease their adversaries with terror and trembling,
and yet spare their blood; will set such also upon the Throne, who shall seek
the good and welfare of their People, under whose shadow ye may ly down safely
without dread either of the terrors by night or such affrightments by day they
were once under; and take off any fears of external force. But oh if this voice
can not be heard, when it is so clear and audible which if some knew ever any
thing, or had discerning of the ways of God and of the times, they cannot but
hear, this to be the present voice of the time, it then seems to be come to the
last and highest trials that these Nations ever stood under; when such
extraordinar measures of divine patience, and long suffering, and so long a day
given to repent must either be speedily answered, or it be found that the
stroke will be the more terrible, when it comes, the longer it has been
deferred; that threatened judgment shall assuredly at last come to a year of
recompense, yea to a precise day of the spotless Vengeance of God, when his
spirit will no more strive with men, when he will clear his Justice, and go
forth to see the Authority of his Laws and Sentences of his Word ratified in
the execution thereof, when no Intercessor shall be then heard tho a Noach,
Daniel, and Job were upon the earth; and it shall be then no more possible to
hold off that long threatened stroke, or turn Judgment out of his way then for
men to stop the course of the Sun to recall the day and years that are past, or
make void the Ordinances of Heaven, but then will the Works of God get a
hearing, when his Words could not.

A IV. Head, on this subject; which I must join in with the former, that is of
great weight, and consequence, is this; to know what aspect, such extraordinary
providence of these times past, now has on the churches there, and whither so
great a crisis, as has been in the publik State of affairs, has more
promising, or threatening signs, therewith. It was the highest part of Hezekiah
observation, upon that great deliverance he met with Isai. 39. not to see only
God in his immediate hand herein, but how his heart, was toward him in the
same; as is there expressed thou have loved my soul, out of the pit of
corruption, for so does the original render it. A loosing sight of providence,
in what the Lord does speak to men thereby, makes way not only for great
shakings, but to read the sense thereof, contrair to its intent; and tho there
be a regarding by all, the visible effects of providence, and what herein lies
nearest to our sense, yet few goes a further length in their observing. It is
undeniable that an extraordinare condescendence of grace, and of the long
suffering of God, might be seen in these great things here done of late, but
the next enquiry lies here, how such ane unusual application of providence does
work? It was upon some serious thoughts hereof, and this present State of
things, I set my self, for more clear discerning of the way of the Lord and
his voice to this generation in these astonishing changes has gone over the
same of late, to have my own spirit fixed herein, and some higher strenthning
on the faithfulness of his truth; but in the first place, there are some
undoubted principles of truth, which I would mention here, and must hold by, as
truths which are of ane eternal verity, and may have a clear applicatory
light, to the present day we are in.

1. That it is sure, the most notable mercies which has been bequathed of the
Lord, either to churches, or persons, have also been an entry to the greatest
of judgments, when not answered, it was with the brightest sunshine of ane
immediate appearance of his hand, and ane extraordinary course of miracles,
that Israel, entered into the wilderness; whereon so black a night of dismal
providence: did fall; and is it not the same voice which is now speaking to us,
that we have Malach. 2. 2. if ye will not lay to heart, to give glory to my
name, says the Lord of host, I will curse your blessings.

2. It stands ever sure, and unchangeable, that God will never return to a
people, against whom he is wroth, until the cause of his departure be taken
away, for both the same date, and measure, which men's forsaking of God, does
bear, the same also does his departing bear unto them, and tho repentance where
it is in truth, can never be in vain, yet may it come to late, to prevent
temporal judgment, or to regain ever again, a season of acting for God, when
there is a more eminent call thereto, at one time, then another.

3. It is ane unchangeable truth, which varies not, with the changes of time,
that there is no condition on the earth can be safe whither as to a a Nation,
or Person, were it never at such advantage, in external things; wherein they
cannot say, God is with us herein, and we are designing for him; as on the
other hand, it must be founded wholly on Atheism, where the state; and danger
of a Nation is not judged from the sins thereof, and the measure of the same,
more then from any visible hazard; for tho particular places, and people, under
a Profession of Christ, comes not to the same hight in filling up the measure
of sin; yet it must surely have it is fatal period, when deferred Judgment will
not stay on day longer.

4. What ever uncertainty be in humane things, yet is this unchangeable, and
sure, that such who inherit the same sins of others, against whom God has
appeared in any eminency of Providence shall inherit the same Judgments; which
has not only been measured out to such as has gone before, but are pledges to
after times of what may be expected. For as the way of grace, changes not, and
the redeemed of the Lord, as dear to him now, as ever; so is he immutably just,
and his ways keeps the same measure with his revealed truth, so as a Solid
Interpretation of Scripture needs no extraordinare Prophetik Spirit, to infer
Judgment, from sin, where there is no serious returning unto him, and when the
Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy Amos 3: 8.

5. It is of unquestionable evidence also, that national sins, wherein the body
of a Nation, and People is unite, and has a joint acceession herein; when it
is thus the public Sin of a Community, must meet with a Stroke, and Judgment
within time of as public extent, and cannot be laid over in this respect to
the Judgment of the great day, when once it is measure is filled up here; since
else the Glory of God in his truth, and remunerative Justice, should not have
on such an account, a Vindication before the World, in the sight of Angels, and
Men, if his spotless Judgment should not thus bear some proportion, to the
nature of that guilt; the God of truth has given his Word, and Dominion, and
Authority over Nations both to pluke up, and to plant, as well as over persons,
which can never be made void.

6. There can be no doubtfulness here also that it is simply impossible for a
church to subsist, or preserve it is station in a Church state by a naked
external form only; or in the purity of religion, without some life, and power,
of the same; since if there were no real inbringing, or building up of the
elect there, then the Gospel had no more work in the same, and no interest were
there for the Spirit of God to keep fellowship with; so that the intrinsic
strength of any particular church, yea of the politic body therein; lies not
in the number, or bulk, but in the weight, nor is it the extensive growth of a
church to a visible profession that makes, a real increase; but how great an
interest does a few such, whose way is the life, and power of that doctrine
they profess, make in the place they are in; tho this seems little apprehended,
what influence the hid part in a nation of humble, serious christians has on
the external State thereof, and on the administration of providence in the
world, who makes least appearance in it, by a near intercourse with heaven, and
by such high value, and regard which they have there, so as the Lord has even
subjected the greatest vicissitude and changes of the time to the intercession,
and prayers of such.

Let me but add this herewith, that tho the Lord does ever distinguish betwixt
the Godly, and the residue of men in times of public calamity, and Judgments,
so as not to lay them common herein with the wicked, yet on the other hand, it
is not a numerous Party, even of most choice, and Real Christians in a Land,
will stand in the way of wrath, and of some dismal stroke, when the set time
of Judgment is once come; but may be then such with a Nation, when there is no
more hearing, or intercession, but for that instance of the Lords sisting his
judgment, if there had been but 10 Persons in the Cities of the Plain: it was
an eminent return to Abraham, and extraordinar act of condescendence, that
makes no rule. There was a choice and numerous remnant in Judea, who sought the
Lord then, when that dismal night of the Captivity came on; and it is of late,
that such a tremendous instance, we have before us in the Case of Bohemia,
where so conspicous a part then was of a People zealous for God, when such a
public overwhelming stroke came on.

But now in the Second Place I must speak a few words to what seems in some
singular way, to speak to Britain, and Ireland by very sad, and monitory signs,
bejond any of the Churches about: it is, I know, easy, and usual to challenge
the darkness of Providence, more then to regard, what is clearly revealed to
us* as the intent and voice thereof; and these are indeed sad, and dismal like
dispensations, that tho they be not silent, but have a distinct, and audible
voice, yet Seals no Instruction herewith, on the spirits of men. I confess a
natural Respect, and tie, to such a Part of the earth, bejond any else, renders
this to some, to be more heavy, and dreadful that if Sovereign grace, do not
wonderfully interpose, it cannot be found in the course of divine Providence,
since the beginning of time; that ever the measure of sin, contempt of a Deity,
and oppositions to the Holy God in the designs both of his Word, and Providence
has come to such a hight as is visible in these Churches this day; but that
some extraordinare appearance of Wrath, and Judgment from the Lord has as
visiby followed thereon, to be a public monument, for after times, wherein
these Remarks, are so unavoidable.

1. To what a strange, and fatal issue, has that purest profession of Christ,
in the Protestant Religion, which has been long enjoyed there, now come, when
such public contempt, and scorn, is thrown upon the same, in the truth, and
power thereof, as a matter of their greatest abhorrence; when the most numerous
part of the multitude, every where may be seen in a stated opposition to the
dominion, and authority of God in his laws, yea such horrid tenets, as well as
practices, even in the common sense of mankind, may be discernable there, as in
pagan nations, under some aw^, and restraint of a natural conscience would be
affrigting; since every nation will walk in the name of their God; but these
are such as have at once divested themselves of all hope and cast off all fear,
or dread, of a wrath that is to come.

2. And as to one special evidence hereof, what cause may it be to meditate
terror, as to the present state of these nations, when a spirit of blasphemy
is let forth there and got such a prevalence amongst all ranks, as it is
accounted a matter of fashion, and breading, to go a length bejond other, in
tearing that blessed name of God, in whose hand is their breath, by profane,
and blasphemous oaths. This is a thing by it self, that is purely diabolick, and
has nothing humane in it, can have no affinity with the flesh, nor is as ane
ordinary degree, of a real possession by the Devil, and much sadder, then
that which has been on many by constraint, and putting a force upon their
tongue to blaspheme, which otherwise would have been a horror, and dread, since
this is by consent, and a delight, that could have no possible rise, but from
pure enmity to the Holy God, yet is it now come to such a prodigious height, as
if Britain did design a proper monopoly this way, and Pre-eminence, of the
same, above all nations of the earth; tho none more will pretend a national
love, and respect, to it is standing, and interest, to whom that saying of one
of the ancients, may be applicable, if such would once give it a hearing; si
tibi non vis parcer^, attamen parce Patriae tuae; do we thus provoke the Lord
to jealousy, are we stronger then he; but when such a contagion seems to be
past the restraint of humane Laws who declares their sin as sodom, will not
the great lawgiver, at last take it under his hand, to vindicate his authority.

3. But what a symptom, is this herewith of approaching judgments when to such
a hight, and so universalie, the corruption of the youth, is in this day, and
these parts, in so ane usual a way; and among such, a Spirit of Atheism, and
p^ofanity, is in that manner got up, as may be sadly foreseen, what a dismal
night must follow hereon, and cause these know, whose respects seem to run so
high for a national interest, that what does thus strike, at the root, truth
and Godliness, amongst men, in so strange a debauchery, of the generation
that is coming up, gives the same stroke, to the greatest security of government,
and to what founds the greatest obligations, to civil, or moral duties; yea
has a native, and unavoidable tendence to ruin the politic body, to
emasculate the spirits of men, and obstruct the vigorous improvments, of their
natural parts, and will in a short time depress, and change the very genius of
these once renouned nations, if there be no due application, of the proper, and
adequate remedy for the same.

4. And do we not with too great evidence now see, how much that old Protestant
spirit, which was in the power, and life of that profession, is gone, and
extinguished this day; before which the Romish interest could not, possibly
stand, when humane power and might did little concur therewith; so as it may be
a strange but too visible a remark, how that distinction, has got such place
in Britain, bejond any other reformed churches else, which is betwixt the
Protestant interest, and politic concerns thereof, and the Protestant
Religion, which lies in the pure doctrine of Christ, in its truth, and efficacy
on men's soul, and practice; when thus may be seen, what a throng and easy
concurrence is there to promote the one, and bear the highest respects thereto,
so far as they find a private interest, and external motives renders this
necessary, who does hate, and to the utmost oppose themselves to the other; yea
fears nothing more, then to have this get any authority over their conscience;
and oh thence it is that when priveledge and property upon a temporal
interest, are as the apple of men's eye, when these are once touched, yet are
the highest indignities, and affronts to the honor of God, and to his truth of
a small regard.

5. But if we yet look further, in to the Public State of Religion in these
Churches, there may be a more astonishing sight, and of greater abominations
still, answerable to that vision Ezechiel 8; when within the precincts of a
Christian Church, once so purely reformed, such a party is got up and growing,
whose work is not only to take men off the serious work, and power of
Christianity; but to subvert wholly the foundation of our faith, under that
late designation of Deists, and that men are now become so wearied of the
Christian Profession, as were their power answerable to their will, they would
bring in a new model of paganism, and fix themself at last there. And oh is it
come to such a day, after so bright a sun shine of the Gospel has gone
before, and after so great ane effusion of the Spirit of God, that such a party
should be upon the increase in so horrid an appearance, were it possible, to
make void the whole frame of the Gospel, to justle our ever blessed Redeemer,
who once was the desire of the nations, off his throne, to thrust the crown off
his head, the scepter of whose government is righteousness, and peace; and give,
if they could, a mortal stroke to him, who is the life, and light of men, and
by whose stripes we are healed, yea as if they could make their party good
against that rod of iron, with which he bears rule over his adversaries. But
what can these design to themselves to render humane being desirable here on
the earth, except to have a share of the same priveledge, with the beasts, of
the field, that within a little they should have no more being, and oh what a
God does such deprive themselves of who only propitious, to poor man in Christ,
and otherwise not the object of our trust, but of terror; yet is this way now
come to that length, as it would seem to despise all moral releef.

6. I must yet add here, tho it be a very sad ungrateful Subject, how we are
fallen in a day, when the greatest discoveries of God, both in the way of
Judgment, and mercy seems to have no affecting sense, or regard on this
generation, and the great designs both of grace, and providence amidst such
marvelous changes has gone before, in that manner withstood as most seems to
unite there strength herein; even when this may be in a singular way applicable
to our time, what the Lord did once speak to Israel by Moses; your eyes have
seen the great Acts of the Lord, and these great temptations, the Signs, and
Wonders, which he has done in this last age; yet if Sovereign grace do not
marvelously appear, it may be feared, that both the voice of God in his Word
and Works has discharged their commission, without any due regard to the same;
and that judgment, and mercy after such extraordinar methods of divine patience
have done their part, and is now come to such a judicial withdrawing, and
departure of that great Ambassador, the Spirit of God from his Church, that
there seems but small access to serious Public Humiliation, and fasting, or to
call for solemn Assemblies for this end, except to Personate, and Act such a
part as that of the mourning Women amongst the Jews at Funerals, and amongst
these of the most serious Spirit in this day, such a restraint may be found of
that Seriousness and fervor herein which once did appear, as renders it a more
ominous Presage that there may be nothing to follow but that last sentence, let
them alone; and must not all thus reason and judge, that as the interest of
Sacred Truth, and the Honor, and Glory of God in men's subjecting thereto is of
much higher value then any temporal Interest; so is the Vindication of the same
before the World of a greater concern then the stability or standing of
Kingdoms, yea to fear more deeply that such a time, how long so ever deferred,
must at last take place, when his spotless procedure of Judgment, shall be
then cleared fully; shall I not visit for these things, shall not my soul be
avenged on such a People.

But now in the third Place, there is one Inquiry that should ly near, and has
a more then ordinary call for the same in such a day; to know what is yet left,
and accessible in the matter of duty, that might be as a door of hope for the
Lords Returning once more, and his respiting of imminent Judgment, when so
great a Ruin is like to fall under the Hand of this Generation. I know any
such thing will be to most as matter of derision, whose fear, and hopes of this
kind goes no higher then present Objects of Sense, and it is little I can
adventure to speak hereon, but as to any measure of light I have attained, I
can no more question, that the same voice from the Lord, is now going forth to
the Churches of Britain, and Ireland; then that I read what is spoke to Juda
Ezechiel 22: 30. And I sought for a man amongst you that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gate before me for the Land, that I should not destroy
it, but I found none; therefore have I poured out my indignation upon them, I
have consumed them with the fire of my Wrath, their own ways have I
recompensed on their Heads, says the Lord God. It Is sure then wrath was near to
a breaking forth, when this last call came yet with an offer of Peace, nor is
it questionable there was a serious part then who were deeply affected with
such a time, tho it was not easy to find one of a truly raised spirit, to do
and endure something more then ordinare for God, when so great a ruin was
ready to fall under their hand; but to clear the import of such a call, with
respect to the public State of the Churches of Britain, under this allusion,
here made use off, to stand in a gape and breach, when the Church as a defenced
City is laid open to an extreme and imminent hazard; I must speak a few things
to be considered, what must follow if no Intercessor be found, to answer the
voice of this call, by a suitable appearance herein.

1. Tho it may be now reckoned, that the sky is more clear as to the State of
Britain, then for many Years past, when the breach seems to be made sure
against either Foreign or intestine Assaults, and that in the way of reason and
the ordinare course of humane affairs, things are come to a more secure and
settled State, yet is there an other aspect of things, that should deeply
affect our spirits, when the public hazard of the time is greater then from
all humane power, and the party to be most feared, is assuredly divine Wrath,
after a long interval of forbearance, that is ready to break forth in some
extraordinar Acts of Judgment, for where a day of atonement goes not before,
can no true deliverance be expected, to raise and settle these Nations; yet how
rare are they who take this to heart, or tremble within themself on the
thoughts of Judgment to be near, if it does not appear from natural or visible
causes, tho nothing be more discernable from Moral Signs.

2. What ever present calm be from these terrors and fears that have been of
late, yet may it be judged whither it be a serious business, or not to stand in
such a breach as is this day, when the greatest interest of our Faith, is laid
open to such numerous assaults; as there seems no less cause to stand, and
contend for the Christian Cause and Interest now in these Nations, against such
who are under a visible Profession of the same, then once was against the
Heathens; whilst that primitive Spirit, which was then a Spirit of Power and of
Glory, does too rarely appear, or these measures of grace in such impressions
as was then that are under a sad and judicial restraint; most being taken up so
entirely with private refentments of personal Injuries, and bitter in estine
conflicts, as the sound of such a hazard cannot be heard, until it be felt. It
was the Power and Evidence of Christianity on men's soull, that did first make
Protestants, and made way for the planting and settlement of the Reformed
Churches but it would seem now reckoned that the Protestant Interest can stand,
tho the Christian Faith, were extinct in the power and vitalls thereof, and
might easily be given up by the greatest part of this Generation, if it is
outworks could be preserved, where a temporal Interest ^enders that necessar;
whilst that magnetic power and virtue, which the Truth once had on the World
is not to be seen, or any deep sense of that Interest which Religion once had
in the Glory of a passive Testimony for the same.

3. Is not the gape and breach, we have to stand in this day. of such a kind,
that where the ancient Love of these renowned Churches, the Love of their
Youth, and Kindness of their Espousals unto God, did so brightly shine forth
after the Reformation from Popery, it is now resolved unto so dismal a change,
as with most what ever is most lovely, excellent, and desirable in the
Revelation of the Ghospel, and should have the most attractive influence on
men's soull, is visibly despised and vilified; yea which renders this breach and
gape more dreadful, that after all the cost and expense which the Lord has
wared in planting, and letting forth a vine yard to Britain, sending more
Servants then at the first with the indearing persuasives of the Ghospel, and
on the other hand with solemn and express warnings of the hazard of such
Strokes of Judgment, to come, as has been afterward felt; yet has the return
been in a continued and growing enmity against the truth, and instead of
rendering the fruits of this Vineyard in its season, has rather conspired to
deride and despitefully use such as have come to demand the same, and what can
be judged will be the result hereof, if men have not concluded that God has
forsaken the earth; can it be thought that the Breaches of these Nations shall
be bound up, but that they must widen further, if there be not in some singular
manner a standing up in this breach, to turn away his wrath; which is a service
that comes now under our hand, as may not linger or stay, when warnings of so
extraordinar a kind are reinforced; for this is a call, has a limited time and
season allotted thereto, that may have a shorter period then we apprehend when
a door of Intercession has been in such unusual manner kept open, and Grace
has so long interposed, before Judgment should come to a final execution.

4. I must add hereto what sense ought to be of the hazard of such a breach,
when a hight of all Immorality and Ungodliness is turned so open and visible,
as if Satan did essay to have an open Throne again set up, as once he had
amongst the Nations; whilst the spirit of few are seized with any suitable
impression of the same, lest this be the voice of the Lord without recalling,
shall I not visit these things, shall not my soull be avenged on such a Nation
Jer. 5: 9. and what a time is it, when the Reverence and Authority of Religion
is so far gone off men's spirits, that if such can bring up a private interest,
and have some treasure of that kind laid up, they are under no fear of
treasuring up Wrath and Judgment; it was a rare example that of Daniel, who
upon the foreseeing of a stroke which he was not to fear for himself, yet was
astonished for ane hour, and his thoughts troubled him, by reason of the
strangenes of it Dan 4: 19. That there is a most choice and serious part yet in
these Nations as is this day in the earth, is unquestionable, but even such who
in these difficult and perilous times past, have been helped to stand, and go
through a variety of dark and strange Dispensations, I suppose have not found a
time in a more singular way trying in the matters of Conscience, then is this
day; and that there was never more hazard of an insensible wearing out from
under former impressions of duty and the ways of truth, which once they had, or
a more difficult part to have that ancient fear, and tenderness of light kept
in exercise which as the apple of the eye, may be easily hurt, but not so
easily helped.

But tho it is clear that this voice and call for standing in the gape and
breach, does respect all of a serious spirit in the things of God, yet are
there some more eminently fitted from the Lord with peculiar Excellencies on
their spirit then others, to appear on so high a service; which as it is a
talent not bequeathed in vain, where this in a more remarkable way is let
forth, so is it of greatest weight to know time and opportunity for this end,
and when a season of Providence may call to some higher improvement hereof for
God, then ever again may occur; yea it may be seen in how strange a manner the
choicest instruments in the service of their day, are made to differ not only
from others, but from themselves, as they are helped to answer such a call, and
to know the Counsel of God herein. But that I may touch this more particularly,
it is requisite to know who may be at the greatest advantage, and in a nearer
capacity then others for such a service, about which I judge these things will
not be questionable. 1. That such as have a more near and intimate converse
with God in this day, has a great room also in this service, to stand in such
a Gape, yea to save a Kingdom or Nation, when Judgment is ready to break forth;
these have their Soull kept in that manner under the power and attractions of
the things of God, bejond the residue of men, as not to be affrighted or taken
off from appearing for him by the force and prevalence of example; it is these
who are at most advantage to discern the Judicial Removes of the presence of
God from the Church, and the Generation they live amongst, and the imminent
hazard of Wrath, and approaching Judgment; yea it is these who from internal
Motives can find it easy to lay their dearest things at the stake, in behalf of
the Truth and Glory of Christ in the Land they belong to, and without respect
to private interest lay themselves in the way of a public hazard with the
Spirit of blessed Bernard, as he speaks, Malo in nos murmur bominum sit quam in
Deum, bonum est si Deus me digne^ur uti pro clypeo. 2. They are in a special
way fitted to answer this call and service, who has the Sense of any singular
engagements they are under to God, much on their heart, and what hereby they
owe in a peculiar way to do for him, and for a more special service to the age
they live in, to seek the interest and welfare of their People, to whom they
have the nearest natural tie; which is that service for the Generation, and
public trust shouldly near these who have had more then ordinare receipts of
mercy from the Lord, and of these specially it might be expected that they dare
stand up for God, and the Interest of his Truth, tho they should stand alone
herein, which surely in the issue will be found a safer standing then with the
multitude, or such whose design for the public interest goes no further, then
their private concerns does influence. It is sure the Words of Mordechai Esth.
4: 13. Are still directed to this day, think not with thy self thou shall
escape, for if thou altogether holds thy peace at this time enlargements and
deliverance shall arise from another place, but thou and thy Fathers House
shall be destroyed. 3. But it is undoubted that this Service does in some
peculiar way ly to the door of Princes and Rulers, according to their Station,
who are of more public relations then others; their Authority came in with the
second Covenant, which by the fall of man was rendered necessar, and have their
Power derived from him, by whom Kings Rule and Princes Decree Judgment Proverbs
8. 15. so as the advance of the Ghospel of Christ, and Preservation of Sacred
Truth, both in its purity and power, is made the object of their highest trust,
yea what a singular blessing this is to a time, when such does eminently
interpose upon any imminent hazard to the Church, and thus bears evidence that
they have ane Unction from God on their heart as well as their Office, And it
came to pass 2 Chronicles. 34: 19. that when the King heard the Words of the Law,
that he rent his Clothes, and commanded Hilkia the Son of Shaphan etc. go, and
enquire of the Lord for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Juda,
concerning the Words of the Book that is found, for great is the Wrath of the
Lord that is poured upon us, because our Fathers kept not the Word of the Lord,
to do after all that is written in this Book. This has looked as a door of
hope to Britain in the present day, when such of a serious and excellent spirit
have come to the Throne, if the sin of this Generation, as may be feared, be
not come to that height, of a resolute opposition to any restoring means, but
if the Authority of God sold be thus taken off the conscience of men by so
publik abounding Atheism and Impiety, it shall be found that the Honor and
Authority of Magistrates will fall herewith before men. 4. They have a peculiar
access also to such a service for God, and the interest of the place they live
in, who have more advantage then others by the Repute and Authority of their
Example, to walk in a countermotion to any public and contagious evil of the
time, as are most prevalent, and thus to affright the bold and daring
countenance thereof; this should be a honorable appearance to oppose the
Kingdom of Satan, wherein it is getting most remarkable strength and credit by
the Customariness thereof. 5. But in a special way these who would aim at so
high and blessed a Mark as this, must know some higher a^quaintance with that
Mystery of Faith, then what seems to be understood by most in this day, and of
a relyance on God by a partiticular trust, yea the truth of such special
assistances of the spirit, as can raise the soull to a higher resoluteness in
the matter of duty by opposition, so as it can be born up amidst the strongest
difficulties, from no humane interest, or the greatness of a party in the
earth, but from the greatness of their God: It is true the way of believing is
an immutable Ordinance, which God has settled for the support and services of
his People within ^ime, and should be the leading principle of a Christians
Life, to go through all conditions and changes in adventuring on that God, who
is of infinite Power both to hurt and help, but it is one of the great
experiments also of Religion, to what a pitch and degree the Faith of some of
the Saints has been raised upon some extraordinar Service for the Lord, where
no natural causes could influence the same, and above what they could in an
ordinare way reach. 6. Yet is not the door for such a Service shut on any who
have an interest in the Truth once delivered to the Saints, but may still have
some share and room in so great an Undertaking for God, and the Interest of his
Truth; and should each of a serious spirit, design something personally for
answering this call, to sustain a part in so choile a service for the truth,
suitable to their Station and Talent, it should bring a marvelous change
therewith on the times, and cause another face appear in the public face of
the Church; nor is it expressible what the improvement of a little strength,
when it has been designed for the Lord, and under his call has often attained,
which in no ordinare w^y, or from any visible appearance could ever have been
expected, yea what a marvelous use the soveraing God can make of a few nay of
one, where his concurrence goes forth therewith.

But since the public State of things this day is such as seems, to control
any confidence or hope for answering such a call, to stand in the breach of so
trying and hazardous a time, I would speak a few things in the third place,
which may put some more then ordinare weight of this call on our spirits. 1.
That as it is easy for the Lord to raise and excite the spirits of men to such
duties, as in the way of humane reason would seem wholly insuperable; so can it
not be found in the Records of times past, that where grace did interpose in
any singular way to prevent Judgment, and for recovering of a Church in some
extreme case, but there has also been something more extraordinar then at
other times, in the acting forth and excitment of some instruments, to appear
for God with a more Heroic motion on their spirits, then what has been usual,
and when he has had a saving work and design to accomplish, then Saviors have
come upon Mount Zion Obad v: 21.

2. If it be a serious business to discern the times, we are in with respect to
the public State of these Nations, the voice of this call might then ly near
our spirits, since if we turn our eyes back, it is demonstrably evident that
the Lord has not dealt so with any Nation of the Gentiles under the New
Testament, as with the Isle of Britain, both as to eminent experiments of
Providence, and the dispensation of Grace and measures of light especially
since it is recovery from the Power of Antichristian Darkness; so as it is not
strange that he has gone forth in a more singular way of Procedure therewith
then other Churches, and tho nothing is new under the Sun as Solomon speaks,
yet there may be seen some thing peculiar and astonishing as to the way and
Actings of Providence there in this age, as will not be easy for the most
judicious Observers, to find a precedent for the same; and if we now consider
the present time, as things are stated after such resolute oppositions to the
voice of these times past, and when no vicissitudes of Providence has yet put
any stop to a growing hight of Apostasy, as may be too visible there; yea that
it is sure, God will not lose his Work or Intent in the great expense he has
been at for reclaiming this Generation, it may be then without a Prophetic
Light seen that something very extraordinar is near, either in the way of
Judgment or Mercy; so as this service and appearance in the present Breach
seems to be in another manner called for bejond that of an ordinare day, when
there is yet room, and the door of intercession not absolutely shut; but if
this seem light, it will be found that the longest measure of divine Patience
will come to a Year and a Day at last.

3. It is sure and unquestionable also, that the answering of this call, is the
alone way to have God interessed in the public State and Concerns of Britain
in the present day, before whom all Nations are as nothing, and the greatest
Train of Inferior Causes, when their furthest strength and activity is put
forth, of no weight, when he withdrawes his influence as Job 7: 8. thy eyes are
upon me, and I am not. It may be matter of serious remark, that in this late
time something more then ordinare has appeared in the French standing and
strength, and tho on principles of reason the Power of such an Adversary should
not be such matter of fear, when an unusual concurrence of means is to stem
such a tide, and under the conduct of so Wise and Heroic a Leader; yet on the
other hand, Ashur the rod of my anger Isay 10: 5 is a formidable Party; and it
s a threatening case when the security and interest of a Nation stands more by a
permissive Providence, and singular longsuffering of God, then by promise. The
discovery of hid Plots and Contrivances against the Government has been of
late in a special manner remarkable, but oh! there is one Plot, which is of ane
other nature, to be above all feared, that is carried on not in the dark, but in
the public light, to betray these Nations to the Common Adversary, it is such
a Plot, as was betwixt Balak and Balaam, to divide Israel from God, that their
strength might depart from them, when once there is a sad departure from him;
and it is sure these, who ever are interessed herein, has the most active
concurrence to weaken, and bring low the Politic Body of Britain, to hasten on
a dismal night, and advance the interest and strength of visible Adversaries:
But if there be no suitable appearance in this day, to counteract so dismal a
Plot, and the growing strength of such a Conspiracy herein, there may be then
too just cause for these of the most serious spirit, to long to have their part
acted, and be gone off the stage ere they see the dreadful Effects hereof: and
what ever advantage be of external means, it might be too easy then to judge of
future things, where an inordinate respect to men, and a low regard to keep in
with God, is one of the public signs of the time we are in. I know it is no
easy thing to improve the Providence of times past, that are at any distance
from us, or to bring them home by a just application to the present day, and to
compare what we now see of the Way and Workings of God, with what has already
past in these late Years, but if this were more improven and understood, there
might be another view and discerning of the times we are in. and what of the
night now it is: we have seen in some singular way, the rising and falling of
humane interests so contrare to humane reason and expectations, as might tend
fully to clear from what hand they came, and to what Issue they were directed,
we have seen such Revolutions, which the Churches of Britain has gone
thorough, and has past over the same, as seem yet little understood, and it
must be a perverse and false Judgment, if it be supposed that we have no more
to do herewith, but a naked remembrance of such things in the matter of Fact,
and what was men's way and part therein. But that I may come more near on this
Subject, there are some things that need to be further understood thereon.

1. That it is sure when such a Gape this day is lying open betwixt us and
divine Wrath, there can be no standing herein without a serious interceeding
Work with God by immediate addresses, when its unexpressible what a mighty
efficacy this has on the World, and the great changes thereof, and how far he
has subjected the Interest of Nations to the Prayers of the Saints. It is a
hopeful sign when Rulers and Magistrates do call and excite a Nation to public
fasting and prayer, but in the ordinare way it is followed this day, upon so
extraordinare an application to the Majesty of God, it may be just matter of
fear, if such essential requisites be not concurrent therewith. 1. That the
same Authority and Power be interposed for a serious and impartial Inquiry as
to National Sins, which are most prevalent in the time, where the current of
the multitude runs, and has the loudest cry to Heaven; since otherwise a
solemn address of this kind might bear a sad evidence of Atheism and Impiety,
to suit National Deliverances and Protection, and that the Holy God would be
with us, and propitious to us for the public State of the Nation, whilst we
are not with him, yea that he would not forsake us, whilst our forsaking him is
so visible, which is in effect to plead that the most settled and unalterable
establishments of his truth be made void, and rescinded for our sake; yea can
another return be expected in such a case then what is Ezech. 14: 4. 2. That
something then upon so extraordinare an address to Heaven, might be designed by
public Authority in a promissary way to be made practicable, as sold tend to
a more visible resolute withstanding the growing strength of such National
evils, and may thus bear a public testimony and appearance against them from
such who stand under so high a trust unto God for this end.

2. Where this great service is taken to heart for standing in the gape this
day before God, there needs also some clear discerning of the end and design of
Providence, in these astonishing su^cessive changes, which has of late gone
over this Generation: it is true there may be many ends at once reached in any
signal piece of the Work of G^d about his Church, yet is there surely still
some higher and great end which he has therein, that should be most deeply
enquired into, and tho I can attain little this way in respect of others, yet
may with humble confidence say, that under a serious pressure of spirit I have
sought to understand the same, and how to trace the Lines of Providence in the
strange Revolutions of this age, to the Center of that great Design of the Lord
therein, to which all these oppositions, which has been made to the same has
so remarkably brought on their own fall and breaking in that way, but this I
must further in sist on, tho there needs specially a turning our eyes first
back to times past, for discerning the Work of God in our day, and to see in
what a circuit divine Judgment did go from on part of the Reformed Churches to
another, with the very first date and entry upon this remarkable age; and when
that Sword which was bathed in Heaven, and had it is commission to Germany, and
Bohem in that sore, and long intestine War there, had once done it is work; then
did it in a successive course enter on the Churches of Britain, and Ireland,
and a c^p of trembling from the Lord put into there hand; and then did begin
that great Scene of Providence which has been since acted there, wherein, as
in all the most remarkable Steps, and Periods hereof, has the voice of the
Lord, been expressly pointing at this great end, and design in the same, for
bringing his counsel more clearly to light, if we had eyes to perceive, and
hearts to understand what is his work, and declared intent herein; which is
that the Kingdoms of this World may become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, who shall reign for ever and ever Revelat. 11: 15: and that his
Interest in these Nations, as a part of that inheritance which was in a
peculiar way given him of the Father Psalm 2: 8. be more fully asserted in the
Glory of his Regal Power, against all such who would withstand the same: for
which end may it be clearly understood what such ane appearance did mean, in so
strange ane administration of providence by the Sword to these Nations in this
age; what such unusual shakings and overturnings there, yea by such restless
oppositions to any civil settlements, since the Lord begun to shake Britain; to
make known this solemn period of time was come, and the days of the 7t.
Trumpet, when our Lord Jesus should take to himself his great Power, and Reign,
which had been so long darkened by the usurpations, and enmity of men thereto;
yea that he was surely gone forth, who has that name written on his vesture,
and thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to make good the same; and will
have this name engraven, on all the ways, and actings of Providence, who must
reign until he has putt all his Enemies under his feet 1 Corinthians. 15: 25. and
the Nation, and Kingdom, that will not serve him, shall perish, and these
Nations shall utterly be laid waste Isay. 60: 11. for thus has the Lord
spoken, and is settled, and sealed by the decree of him that chaingeth not. It
is true he has been walking in the dark as to most in these times past; and
even from his choicest people there has been often a hiding of his work, and
keeping it out of their sight, amidst these strange changes, as has put the
most discerning to a stand; it might be easy to see men's intent in their
actings, and under what influences they hake moved; yea what bitter risings of
heart, an^ quarrellings has been upon the miscarrying o^ their ends; but this
is an other sight, and of a higher concern, to see and discern wisely the Work
of the Lord, and how amidst all the realings of these strange times, his way,
and course of providence has been ever steady, and sixth.

3. It may be thus clearly seen, if our spirits were more deeply let forth on
such a study, that the strength of our day, yea the standing and security of
the public state of these Nations, does assuredly ly in a resolute
concurrence, with this great design of the Lord; so as otherwise there can be
no standing in the breach before him, to turn away his wrath. But since this
Subject, of the Catholic Right, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, over the Kingdoms
of this Earth, is so strange a mystery to many in these times, and such
different thoughts and conceptions are hereof; as I have desired to know the
way of truth, on these sure principles, and grounds, that I might have full
rest and settlement to my own spirit herein; so I may say, that in the
clearness of this light, I have found a special strengthening in the Christian
Faith, when with the furthest evidence it may be seen:

1. How that which is spoken of the donative, and universal Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus, which was given him of the Father, as incarnate, and after his
Ascension, is not to be understood of that which is his essential, and natural
Kingdom, which did belong to his person, as he is the brightness of the Fathers
Glory, and God equal with him; but is such as was promised, and by special
donation given to him, that the ends and uttermost Coasts of the Earth, sold
be his inheritance Ps. 2: 8. and his Dominion to be from Sea, to Sea, and from
the River, to the ends of the earth Psalm 72: 8. yea is the same which was
given to him Dan. 7: v, 14. when he was invested, with Dominion, Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him, etc.

2. As there can be no suspense, or darkness in this, so is it no less clear,
his entering on the administration of his Mediatory Kingdom, was reserved only
to the times of the N. Testament, to which the fall of the 4 greatest
Monarchies, which ever was in the earth, was direct, and subordinate, to make
way for the same: and lo, here may we see the first period of the visible
Glory of Christ's Reign, and his entrance on the same, when after such strong
opposi^ions, the Pagan World, was at last, made to bow down, and fall before
his truth, and submit to him.

3. But herein it cannot be understood by this special bequeathment of the
Kingdoms of the World, to be the Lords; in that sense only, of inbringing the
Elect out of the same, or of his internal Reign, on the hearts of men, but that
it lies, in a visible surrender, and subjecting of the collective body of
Nations, to the Scepter of his Government, when the Princes and Kings of the
earth should subject, their Regal Authority to his Rule and Empire; as holding
their Dominion from him, to whom all power, and judgment is committed, and can
bear that style only of being the Catholic King, and Lord of all: for this is
a truth that shines with so clear a light from the whole Scripture, as it may
be strange how possibly it should be questioned, and nothing can be more
comforting to Christian Magistrates, then to have so highly desirable a holding
of their power, as they may have the Son of God, thus interessed in their
security, and interest as a part of that inheritance, which belongs to his
Mediatory Kingdom. Nor does it evacuate the Magistracy of Heathens for the
interest of humane society, tho they have none in the Church; as it can never
make void also his Catholic Right, and Dominion over them, by whom Kings
reign, Prove. 8: 15. although it restrains the exercise thereof.

4. But there is yet a further, and growing light on this great subject which
now meet us, and to be clearly seen, how the more eminent appearance of the
Lord Jesus Christ, in the Glory, and State of his Mediatory Kingdom in the
Earth was alone reserved to the days of the seventh and last Trumpet; for
which as nothing can be more evident, then the contemporating of the same, with
that period of time, in which was the first rise, and restoring of the Church,
from Antichristian darkness, when the Lord did himself go forth in the glory of
his power, to plant and settle the Reformed Churches; and thus to make way for
his Kingdom, did with the first blast of that Trumpet sound a retreat, to his
people out of Babylon: so I have herein, been made to admire with joy, the
exactness of that correspondence betwixt the events of this Trumpet, that has
already taken place, with what is so punctually foretold hereof Rev. 11: 15.
for as it is surely there promised, that then should be an opening of the
Temple of God in Heaven, and the Ark of his Testimony be seen there, which had
been formerly shut up; lo how expressly has the God of Truth made good his
Word herein, and keept the time, which he had set for the same, in the bright
shining forth of his truth, and the way of Salvation, when for so many ages
keept hid from the World; to which are the whole Reformed Churches this day a
standing witness. yea have we not seen his appearance also in so unusual
manner, in the greatness of his power, and with garments dyed in blood, to make
way for the visible Glory of his Reign, as we can see it was there foretold,
how the Nations were angry, and by their oppositions to him, made way for his
wrath in such tremendous effects thereof, as it has had these days past, to
show the time was at last come, to let the World know, that the Lord Jesus
Christ is no titular King, he to whom all power is given in Heaven and Earth,
nor will bear that Name, and Style in vain, or admit a complemental Profession
of the same; but that it is sure his Dominion, and Kingdom, has a settled
interest and revenue, belonging thereto, which none may alienate from him, and
the greatest of humane powers must be accountable for his claim thereto.

5. But now as our day, and lot, does thus meet in so extraordinar a period of
time, which has been so long expected and prayed for in ages past, it may be a
time of great thoughts, and expectation of what is yet to come, as to the
visible Reign of the Lord Jesus; our blessed Head in the Glory and Majesty of
his Kingdom, without his personal Reign or bodily appearance unto men; which
with full assurance of faith we sold now wait for, when the voice of this
Trumpet shall bring with it, such a resurrection from the dead of these dry
bones, of the Jewish Nation, with so immediate an appearance of God alone
herein, as shall dazzle with astonishment all the Nations about; yea when its
sound and voice also shall call the whole Church that is on the earth, to that
highest gratulatory song of Moses, and the Lamb, as once was at the Red Sea,
for the final stroke and judgment on the Kingdom of Antichrist; wherein the
visible glory of his Reign will then be seen with that evidence, and
brightness, as if he were personally on the earth: and here is that true
Millennium which is now in some measure begun, and we are surely called to
expect, in a gradual increase to such a hight, that in the value, and splendour
of this blessed Reign, the light of one day, shall be as seven days in one, and
the measure of one age then answer, yea exceed a thousand Years before, and is
so before him, with whom one day is as a thousand years;

This seems to many in such a time, as a thing remote from their sense, whose
thoughts are bounded with present appearances, whilst our blessed Head is now
gone unto a far Country, to receive a Kingdom for himself, and is invisible to
men in these preparations, he is making for this higher glory of his Reign upon
the Earth; so that he is no object of humane sight, nor can we come bodily to
him, to receave his verbal commands from his mouth, as from an earthly Monarch,
and for these inward, and great demonstrations of his Reign, they ly deep, and
hid, betwixt him, and the souls of his People; but if our comfort, and hope
stand by the Christian Faith this day, and on that assurance dare venture our
soul upon an Eternal State; we should then with as full certainty of mind as of
any visible things, give faith to this, that the Son of God will not lose the
Work he has begun, and so eminently appeared in; that the interest of his
Kingdom, on the earth is the alone highest object of the divine care, and
providence; and though his Kingdom is not of the World, but is purely
spiritual, yet does the World stand thereby, so as it may be justly said, sine
praecibus and pietate non staret mundus; nor is it questionable, but that his
Work will be answerable this day, to his revealed will and intent, or can it be
in the dark to us, what he is now doing in the World, when he has made such
public intimation hereof by the voice of the last Trumpet, as should render
this the most desirable part, that men can act, to fall in with this great, and
rising interest of his Kingdom, in the season, and opportunity hereof; and it
will surely be found in this time, that where the downfall of the Kingdom of
Antichrist, is made remarkable in a Nation, where the terror of its rise, and
grouth, had so lately gone before; and the Kingdom of Christ, is not set up in
its room, nor with a higher regard subjected to; that it must then quickly
ripen, and make way, for some great outbreaking of wrath and judgment in such a
place; for the time is come, that nations, which have embraced the Profession
of Christ, must stand, or fall, according to their concurrence with that
interest on which the Lord is now gone forth, whose work carries not for men,
nor is dependent on humane Counsels, yea it is sure these great Ministers of
providence the Angels tho not seen to us are eminently joined in on this
service, who are the stated Servants of Christ as Mediator, and Head of the
Church, and have accordingly their delegate charge, and commission to
particular Churches, and Kingdoms, as that great design of Providence for the
advance of his Kingdom in the World does require; and if the giving forth of
the Law was so glorious upon that solemn entry, which the Churches Head then
made on his Regal Office over Israel, by so extraordinar a ministration of the
Angels, what a higher Glory must be on his entering on the greatest discovery
and administration of his visible Reign within time; blessed are they amongst
men who may have ane interest in this service, tho with most it comes not under
their thoughts, and apprehension, but as it was said of Dux de Alva, upon ane
Eclips of the Sun which was then, when he was in a hot persuit of the Wars,
that he had so much to do upon the earth, as gave him no leisure to look up to
Heaven; fo is the great noise, and business of this day, how things may stand
sure with us upon the earth. It is become the proverb of these times we are in,
that interest will not lie, because according to this, men will always appear,
and discover themselves; and when ever that word interest is made use of; it is
judged to bear no other sense, then of some temporal concern only, because the
scent, that most of this Generation seems to be wholly on, is how to seek
their own things, but not the things of Jesus Christ, which is truly the same,
for men to reckon that their soul, is a foreign thing to themselves, and that
they have no real interest in the great things of Religion, or a hope bejond
time: but it is well, that there is yet such a party this day on the earth,
who is way can give that proverb the lie, and are of another spirit, so as to
lay their greatest temporal interest down, that they may intensly pursue the
things of God, and the interest of his truth, and Kingdom amongst men, who
with respect to this, would account it a small thing fo be the greatest
favorites of Princes, if these should once come in competition.

4. But I must now in the last place, add somethings further on this serious
Subject; since if it be clear, and undeniable, so as to have our spirits once
acquiescing herein, what has been the great design of Providence, with respect
to Britain, and Ireland in all these great, and astonishing changes, which have
of late been there; it may be then fully undrstood, what the present day does
most call for, and where the highest improvement of such an extraordinare time
does ly, which I hope will not be questioned, to have the Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his pree^minence herein, more entirely acknowledged, and
settled in these Nations, when he is yet once again taking a new trial of them
for this end. We find under the Law such a thing, which was called the Lords
part, and tribute paid unto him Numb. 31. as a memorial, and oblation, to
witness their holding of him alone, all which they did enjoy; we see also a
national claim laid to a propriety, and part in the Lord, as their alone
greatest interest in the earth, and that they might not be shut out herein
Josua 22: 25. which would be a rare sight in this day, to see Nations
contending thus for a part in the Lord, and to have their joint right secured
this way, as was then betwixt the two tribes, and the half bejond Jordane, and
the residue of Israel; we have also things claimed by the Son of God, as his
alone propriety, which are called the things of God Matt. 22: 1. and are purely
sacred to him, which are not men's, and non^ may alienate to any private
interest, or end; yea there is a bringing presents to him, which is expressly
foretold, and promised under this blessed Reig^ Psalm 72: 10. when thus
Princes, and Kings should serve, and do homage to the Lord Jesus Christ, not as
men only, but as Kings, in giving their Power to the furthest to uphold the
authority of his Regal Power, and Dominion; and here I must say what ever be
threatening in ane unusual manner from the spirit, and temper of this
Generation; when nothing would seem more hopeless, then ane unite, and public
concurrence, to answer this great design of the Lord, and herein to stand in
the gape, before him, for turning away of his wrath; or to design a National
Reconciliation, as well as Personal; yet may there be no setting bounds to him
therein, who is able to subdue all things to himself, and who in the way of his
grace, does often exceed, what could be possibly hoped for by men, in such a
case: since now if after such signal indications of Providence, this should be
the season and time designed of the Lord, for a restoring work in these
Nations, and in other of the Reformed Churches; and that he will yet spare a
little as to the cutting down of the tree, even when the ax is laid to the
root; it is then sure, that this design shall make way for it is self, and go
over such difficulties, as at other times would be insuperable, and make the
greatest Mountains be as a plain; but if this one tide, and opportunity for
such a service be now lost in joining in with so eminent a call of Providence
for this end, it looks to be the shutting of the door, with such a judicial
bar, as should never be again opened, and the last woe be more sore, and
dreadful then all which has gone before. But now I must speak a little more
particularly, wherein it is these things do most specially ly, which in that
sense are the things of God, as purely sacred to him, since all things
whatsoever are his, and belongs to him, yea wherein that which is the Lords
tribute, and part is to be understood now in this day, that should be returned,
with a resolute, and cheerful consent unto him.

1. It does in a peculiar respect ly here, to have the same public, and
national regard, to the authority of the Laws, and ordinances of his Kingdom,
as a people who are stated in as near a relation to God, as once the Kingdom
of Israel, and Juda was: this being a truth of the most undeniable evidence,
tho not in things ceremonial, or typical, or such Laws of Government, as had a
temporary respect to that dispensation only, yet in a moral sense is it clear,
as to what does most essentially relate to a Nation, or Kingdoms being the
Lords. For it is sure these 3 Nations are this day, under a higher dispensation
of grace, have a greater extent of their Privileges, and stated under more
singular engagements, now under the Messia's Reign, then ever Israel was: and
it is in this sense, that the Laws of the Kingdom of Christ are Royal Statuts,
and Laws James 2: 8. suitable to the state, and dignity of so great a King, and
Lawgiver, whose authority will not be baffled, and has a higher power, then
that of Angels, or Men, to take account of their observance, wherein is settled
ane obligation on the souls, and conscience of men, without exception of
persons herein; in which our life as Christians, and the standing, and safety
of Nations in a public state does unavoidably ly; but these are Laws, and
Ordinances of such a kind, as they can not possible be observed, and not loved,
nor have any true regard amongst men, without internal motives make way
thereto: and what a sad account may this be, that these Kingdoms, who were
once so entirely subjected to Antichrist under the darkness of that dismal
Reign, and did give their power, to uphold that interest, with such ane unite
consent, yea did so resolutely give implicit obedience to his Decrees, and
Cannons; now under the brightness of the light of the Ghospel, comes not up to
any such regard to the Authority of the Lord Jesus, and to these Laws, which he
has established, tho with the greatest endearments of love commended to his
Church: there has been great stumblings at the Providence of the times past,
and what it should mean that this last age, with such a differencing mark
should be called the Iron age; that thus the Holy God has in so unusual a
manner made use of a rod of Iron, in these Western Parts, where the Reformed
Religion is most professed; but it should be no dark riddle, when the
oppositions there, to the Kingdom of his dear Son, has been at such a height,
that if we could wisely discern the Work of the Lord, since the first rise of
the civil Wars of Britain, we might clearly see how this was the Signal given,
that he was then gone forth, and on the way, to take account of Nations, as
well as Persons, that would oppose his interest.

2. It is sure this can not be questioned also, to be one of the great things
of God, which is alone sacred to him what concerns the public rights, and
freedom of the spiritual Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, as a visible
politic body, with the highest respect to his Royal Authority, who is the
alone Head, and Lawgiver thereto. It is known that he has given ane express
Charter for the same to his Church under the New Testament, according to which
the due limits, and bounds of that spiritual Jurisdiction, which he has
settled there, and the full extent hereof sold be both keep'd clear, and
closely adhered to, as ane Interest of the Lord Jesus. which is as the apple of
his eye, he has joined also these two great Interests of the Civil, and
Ecclesiastic Power, in so entire a harmony, that tho they are to be ever
keep'd distinct, yet are not to be divided from other, but to move jointly in
such a blessed, and desirable Union, as may most serve the great ends of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the public good of humane Society: and now when this
great promise of Christ's entering in a more conspicious manner on the Glory of
his Reign, is come to the birth, and begun to bring forth, which is that
period, where to, it may be said, has been reserved the perfections of ihe
Churches visible state here on the earth, how highly desirable should it be to
be found assistant thereto in such a day; but oh is it possible, that these who
have such raised hopes of an eternal Crown, and Kingdom in Heaven, can have so
low desires, or designs, how to be serviceable to the Kingdom of Christ here
in the earth, yea when none can want an interest and room in this service,
where it has once a weight and value on their heart: but yet it may be a
matter of hope this day, that these who by so singular an appearance of God,
has now the Sovereign Power, and Authority in these Nations, are no less
eminently fitted to appear for him herein, then they are stated under the
highest engagements for such ane end.

3. It is surely one of the things of God, and an interest which is purely
sacred to him, wherein the spreading of his Kingdom in the World, is most
nearly concerned; which lies in a serious and faithful Ministry to the Church,
and is of that concern, as it may be justly called; Indicium stantis and
cadentis Ecclesiae; for this is one of the highest Ordinances of Christ given
to the Church, and that way which he has himself consecrated for the
inbringing and perfeiting of the Elect; by which so great effects are wrought
in the World, where ever there is a divine mission for the same to any part
thereof, and the Church is in a building up there; ane Ordinance by which most
visible efficacy and supernatural influences are conveyed in a moral way under
the blessing of that iustitution: but on the other hand nothing is more
threatening to a Nation, as to the falling down of some dismal night of
judgment, then the corruption and debaesing of that which in it is own nature
is so excellent, where things that are more extrinsick and of a humane concern,
are so much looked after, but that which is Gods part in the great intent of
this erection is of so low regard; that if ane Inquiry were made through a
great part of Britain, they should find the dark places of the earth there still
amidst so bright a day of the Ghospel as is now shining, and what a multitude
is thus perishing through want of knowledge whilst it seems so ^itle desired or
designed, to have such a Ministry, whose highest study should be upon the great
Intent of Christianity, to bring men to Christ not to themselves, and to allure
and persuade their coming under his blessed dominion and yoke; to press internal
renovation of the heart and a necessity hereof, with that seriousnes as might
take hold on their conscience, and let them see there can be nothing more
highly irrational then to sist in ane exterior profession and form of Religion,
and not prove once upon their own trial the truth hereof in its power and
efficacy, and whither it has not a vital part which lies in ane inward life of
Communion with God; for as this alone is such a Ministry that should be the
blessing of a Nation, and Kingdom, so in respect of this, to be of such a
distinguishing Profession tho in its self most agreeable to the truth, should be
of no regard where this is wanting, as a test for so sacred ane Office. It is,
I hope, unquestionable, that the trust of the souls of men is greater, then any
temporal concerns of a Kingdom, or State, and how this Ordinance is that which
has the most peculiar influence to prepare the way of the Lord, in this day
for that blessed and near approaching time, of his more conspicous Reign on the
earth in the Glory thereof; I abstract here from any thing controversal as
things are stated in the present day, only as to what I hope, there may be ane
unite agreement in by all, who have a deep sense on their spirits, of the blood
and perishing of immortal souls this way, and a serious respect to that
Catholic Interest of the Kingdom of Christ amongst men. I know it was never a
harder part then in this age to stemm such a tide as seems yet on the growing
hand, of prejudice against the way of truth, when so many are in the dark,
tearing one another, and counting it desirable to have where at they may offend
and stumble, whilst that study is not more followed to prevent, so far as is
possible, men's taking of offense, even where it is not given, according that of
the Apostle who is offended and I burn not: the excess of disputing in this age
has been a piece of our judgment, and the managing thereof so little to that
end of edification; but the defect may be no less evident on the other hand for
the suitable improvements of Christian prudence, as a duty and service to God
so absolutely necessar for the regulating of duties, according to the
circumstances of the Churches case, and what the present day can bear without
coolness or indifference in any concern of truth, which is that part of our
Religion, that has been too little improven.

We are indeed blessed with an unchangeable rule of Sacred Truth, which has no
dependence on humane Counsels or Power, to change or alter the same, or on the
mutable revolutions of time, and can never vary from its self, yet is the
tenderness and wisdom of divine Condescendence, in the application thereof, to
be so far regarded, as on of the most weighty parts of Religion, lies therein,
how present duties may be with a judicious discretion, directed to that great
end of edification, since that which may be necessare in one case, as it is
clothed, with other circumstances, may be hurtful, and destructive. This is
one of the most difficult parts, that such, has allotted to them in the times
we are fallen in, who would stand in such a gape, and breach, where oppositions
now thereto are so strong; and it may seem almost hopeless to crave justice in
behalf of the truth, at the bar of men's conscience, when a latitude on
principles, has come to such a height, as the authority of light, is without
fear controlled: yet on the other hand it may be feared, that the answering of
that Command of the Holy Ghost is not suitably taken to heart, and the great
consequence thereof, which is to walk in wisdom, toward these who are without,
tho not being in that Sense, without the Church, yet as no less stated in a
visible enmity to the truth, which is according to Godliness, then such could
be: there has been much serious study, and designs by the Servants of Christ
in this age to promot his Kingdom in Britain and Ireland, and there are yet
there eminently fitted for so difficult a service, how to gain and prevail with
the furthest measures of prudence and judgment, upon the most obstinatly
prejudged as any in this day, there has been also of late a singular
improvement made and blessed, for a more unite contending for the Faith once
delivered to the Saints in so hazardous a time: but it is sure there is yet
some further length and essay called for, upon this great service, for the
Kingdom of Christ, in taking off letts and stumbling bloks out of their way,
who may be upon a sad precipice of breaking, and further alienation from the
truth, and for some more full clearing of the same, from these designed
reflections cast thereon, in such a way, as convictions might thus insensibly
prevail, and gain ground with the greatest Gainsayers; whilst we know little
what design grace may in this day have on such, and as the furthest regard
should be kept to light, upon any controverted truth, without losing ground
herein, yet should I judge it a door of hope to see these who are unite in the
great concerns of Truth and Godliness, once meet in a more joint concurrence in
behalf of these great things of God, which are not controverted, when the face
of this Generation, is so threatening as to a further revolt from the Christian
Faith, both in the pureness, and power thereof. This is to be a work by its
self, which as it is of the highest public concern, so does it require a more
then ordinare measure of Judiciousnes in following the same. My Unfitnes to
speak on such a Subject, should have restrained me herein, were it not to
witness something of a serious desire, under which my soul is pressed, for such
ane end, when the hazard of the perishing of so many who has ane Eternal State
before them is so visible this day, and yet no further trial made to gain and
recover, according to that rule, and practice of the Apostle I was all things
to all, that I might gain some. Others can more fitly judge, as to the suitable
managing of such a service, and how to fall in on the right lith of duty
herein, only somethings, I should wish were more designed, for taking off
prejudices, and to break thus one of the greatest Engines of Satan this day,
against the interest of the Ghospel. 1. In coming a greater length by these who
are of a serious spirit; to Sacrifice private resentments, to that public
Interest of the Truth, upon conceived Injuries, when its so evident what ane
influence personal prejudice this day has to keep up distance, to highten
differences, and cause further estrangement on such an account, from any
fervent appearance for God; and this is surely one of the most honorable parts
of a Christians work, how far he might overcome the distempers of others by
humility, tenderness, and love, and walk in such a countermotion to the spirit
and temper of this day. 2. It is a service this day much calls for, to have
stumblings more prevented against these unquestionable settled administrations
of the Government of Christ in his Church, so as the way and manner of his
Spiritual Kingdom might be rightly understood; the proper object whereof is the
soul and inward man, and it is great design to restore and edify; which is in
such a way, that where it is truly answered, nothing can be more tender and
healing and to attract any of a serious spirit to join in herewith; for it is a
sad measure that the truth should sufler, from the weakness or exorbitancies of
any. It was suitable for the Christian Church in the primitive times to plead
that from Heathens, that the offense, and practices of none should be charged
upon the rule of their Profession. 3. It were desirable also that further
conviction might be served on these who are prone to stumble, how in the
promoting of truth, and Godliness there is no persuing any divided interest of
a party, and that if such would once try and see, they can then judge, where
the most comprehensive interest within time lies, which all are jointly
concerned to promote, who has any design on the Christian Profession for
eternal things. 4. I shall but add this more, what ane advantage should it be
for the truth, and to conciliate a greater respect thereto, that all might see
how sweet a Contemperature and Harmony there is betwixt pure zeal for God,
which is according to knowledge, and the furthest prudence and tenderness
toward men, and how the rule and spirit of the Ghospel can admit of no
bitterness, wrath, or recrimination, which are so abounding this day in the
Church, in persuing of differences upon any concern of the truth; for herein
does the glory, and honor of our blessed Head more eminently appear in securing
the concord, and unity of his Church, under a diversity of light, and
judgment, in some lesser differences about the truth by a spirit of love, and
by its power, and efficacy upon men's heart, in subdueing the distempers of
their mind, then by imposing the most severe and absolute uniformity in all
things to be the measure of Church Communion; and it is ever found how this
has been, most easy, and practicable, among such who has made the highest
advance in the life, and power of Christianity then any else, since he nearer
the lines, are to the Center, the nearer also, are they among themselves; and I
must add herewith, that it may be little known what convictive power, might
follow in a time of such high distempers as this, on a suitable application of
that wisdom, which dwells with prudence, and comes from above, according to the
rule, given for the same James 3: 17. to make a higher interest for the Kingdom
of Christ, and to the saving of the souls of many, then now in an ordinare way,
would seem possible.

4. As the furthest tenderness, and prudence, is called for, to prepare the way
of the Lord, for a further advance of his Kingdom, in taking out of the same so
far as is possible these lets, and stumbling blocks, where the greatest hazard
may be of offense; so should it be much preparatory also for a higher service,
and a more unite appearing for God herein, and to stand in the most hazardous
part of the breach of this day in behalf of that great interest of our
Religion, which is upon the Authority of God in his truth, and Testimony, as
the alone ground, on which the ultimate resolution of our Faith must found;
since this is the very same inconvertible terms, to give to the Divine Majesty
the Glory of his Godhead, and that tribute, which is most inviolably sacred,
and essential to him, it would seem almost incredible, that fuch ane hour of
the power of darkness should fall in with the growing light of the Ghospel, as
the strange prevalence of a way, which is to commensurat the perfections of
God, and the greatest mysteries of his truth, to our understanding, and to make
humane reason, tho corrupt, finite, and limited, to be the alone Judge, and
measure of our Faith of divine things, when the highest principle of reason,
which is prima veritas, without which reason hathno principle to reston, and no
Standard else, is this, that where the God of Truth is the Revealer, and that
it is sure it is his Testimony, it must then be as infallibly true, as it is
sure he is God, since it is simply impossible, to find ever another foundation
of truth, and certainty but this. We are fallen in times of great expectation as
to a near approach of the highest Glory of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom on the
earth, and it would seem a strange prelude thereto, that so black a darkness
should fall down, with so astonishing ane increase thereof, as tends not only
to eclips the same, but to deny him his essential Kingdom, who is the only
begotten of the Father, and brightness of his Glory; yet I am sure it is a sign
of that kind, as the morning darkness, which is the darker the nearer it is to
the day. It is indeed here, we may see ane opposition to the Majesty of God, in
such terms, that we might reckon humane nature could not be capable of, and be
just matter of horror to a natural conscience, to see so numerous a party, who
claims to be Adorers of reason turned so visibly madd on their own destruction.
I know the furthest improvements this way; by rational Inquiry and Trial, has
a greater Interest in Religion, and for strenthning of our Faith therein, then
may be suitably apprehended; but it is sure the ultimate Inquiry herein can
possibly go no further in the use of reason, but that what we believe is the
undoubted Revelation of God himself unto men, and can we desire more when this
is sure, for a full quiet, and acquiescence of the soul, tho it seem wonderful
in it self, and exceed our dark, and limited thoughts, when it is impossible
for him, who is truth it self, to lie, whose word is such, cui non potest
subesse falsum; as it is no less sure that he who is infinitely good, can not
deceive, or put ane imposture in stead of truth in their hand, who trust him;
divine truth is the first groundstone of our happiness, but is not conceivable
by the light of nature, to believe his being truly God, and not the truth also
of his promises, which ever conform not only to the things signified, but to
his intent therein, who can never delude, or deceive. But whilst I have been
put to some thoughts with amasement on ane appearance of such a kind against
God this day amongst men, not only within Christendom, but by such as once laid
claim, to the Protestant Profession; some Reflections tended to give more
clearness, and settlement, to my own spirit herein, which I shall but in a few
words mention, 1. that when the darkness of ane implicit Faith, and relyance
on men under Popery has been so sore bafled, and turned out of credit in such
an inquisitive World as this, lo Satan has taken himself to the very contrare
air^h, and knew how to fall in with the temper of a br^^k, bold, and daring
age, that he might settle a new opposition against God, and the interest of his
Kingdom, wherein he has unite, and fixed his greatest strenth, so that since
he was cast down from his Throne by the Power of the Ghospel, he has not had a
greater Triumph, then in this attempt, how to bring man upon it, and set
humane reason at once both against God, and it self, in such a manner, as to be
it is own Executioner, and in subjecting the highest mysteries of truth to it is
comprehension to make it not only equal to God, but give it a preference to
him, who is the alone former thereof, which I must reckon to be the nearest
approach that humane nature yet ever made to that sin, by which the Angels did
first fall, and that it it is the master piece of that Prince of darkness, and
his ultimus conatus against the truth, who knows his time is short: 2. It may
be with astonishment, discernable under what a stroke such are as not to see,
whither this way has led them, and how far the Holy God, has thus confounded
their reason, as visibly, as once these were in their Language, who would
attempt to build a tower up unto Heaven, when this way, left to ane absolute
uncertainty, ever to fix their Faith, the Standard, and measure whereof, must
be the comprehension of reason, which has no firm or infallible ground to
settle on besides it self, and whilst they cannot make the reason, and
judgment of others, as considerate, and knowing as themself, meet with theirs,
the result thereof is to put a judicial madness in the room of reason, so as to
conceive a created, and dependent God to give divine homage to, and that at
once he should be both a God, and a Creature, and adore a comprehensible Object
with divine Worship, yea this way without a contradiction to themself they can
give no faith to the Creation as being brought purely out of nothing, or to the
Resurrection of the dead, as wholly incomprehensible to reason, they must
deride Isreal's Passage through the Red Sea, or the Suns standing still on
Josua's call to verify that Romans 1: 21, because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, but professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools, thence is such ane amasing stroke thus inflicted on their reason, for it
may be said as in the Poetic Fiction of Phaeton, that when he sought to guide
the Chariot of the Sun, for a time, he was like to burn the earth, until he was
struck with a thunderbolt from Heaven; so has this party tried how to manadge
reason, as the supreme Directour, and Judge upon all that is sacred, as they
have gone near to destroy both Reason, and Religion at once, but tho the
strongest rational Arguments, with such seem to bear no weight, I doubt not ere
long of such a visible demonstration of the Divinity of our ever Blessed
Redeemer, which he shall give before the World, that he may be known to be God,
as will for ever end this Controversy. There is a constraint on the Elect
Angels, to admire what they cannot comprehend of the Mystery of the Ghospel,
and that incomprehensible love of God to fallen man, but oh what a return, and
recompense does engaged mankind, give to him who counted it no robbery to be
equal to God, yet to become man for our sake, that in the face of the greatest
brightness of light, does bear such enmity to his Godhead, as the eye of reason
must be put out to serve this end, and when such a light is turned into
darkness, how great is that darkness! I have thought to the furthest to know,
where the strength of such a Profession could possibly ly, this being so great
a Head, whereon the truth, or nullity of the Christian Faith is so visibly
stated; and I durst appeal their reason and conscience if a resolute aversion,
to the Person of our Redeemer, in the union of the divine, and humane nature,
and to the pureness, and sanctifying virtue of the Ghospel, ly not more in the
will, then their judgment, and be not the leading principle of this strange
Controversy. For the true Interest of reason, in Religion, I may say, it has
been one of the great studies of my life, to improve the same, for a solid, and
judicious establishment in the Faith of the Ghospel (which I should still
commend with the greatest respect to any of a serious spirit) but herewith I
could possibly go no further without giving up with all use of reason, or give
a higher pre-eminence thereto, then in a full evidence, that what we are called
to believe is of divine Revelation; nor can desire more to warrant a hope and
confidence, tho against hope, as to all rational grounds, but that it surely
has a divine promise to lean on. It might be judged, Satan needed no humane
assistance to these fiery darts, which are so usually thrown at the choicest
Christians, to shake their faith on this bead, but it is not at an ordinare
rate, that its great Author has designed the trial thereof. 3. There is one
Reflection further has affected my spirit upon this Controversy, as to the
juncture of time, when it is become now so contagious and prevalent, whilst we
are to pray, wait, and hope with assurance for the renting of the vail yet off
many dark places in the earth, to make way for that higher Glory of Christ's
Reign thereon, which shall be to the gentile Church as life from the dead; yea
when it is drawing so near to that great Revolution of Providence, when Shem,
and Japhet shall yet again meet in the same Tents; how so strong a conspiracy
is on foot to oppose the same, and to shut any door whither for Jews or Pagans,
to enter at upon the Christian Faith, but where they find so venerable a thing,
as reason, standing in their way to tell them, that the most essential part of
Christianity is incompatible therewith, and that they must subject themselves
to the authority of humane Jndgment, and not to God, if they design to be
Christians. It is a famous passage, I must relate here of that great Jewish
Council, held in October. 1650. in the plain of Ageda, 30 leagues from Buda in
Hungary, to search the Scripture concerning the Messiah, and the truth of the
New Testament, where after seven days debate about the same, and not a few
Arguments offered from their continued desolation and captivity since the time
of Christ; some Popish Deputies at last were admit, who in stead of promoting
the Christian Faith, pressed them to believe the Worship of the Saints
departed, and of the Virgin Mary, upon which that great Assembly broke up in a
tumult, crying no Christ, no Images, no Woman God, and cast dust on their
heads, upon so irrational a Blasphemy: It is true, some of the Rabbis then,
did much desire Protestant Divines to have met with them, but that the Pope and
Emperor had joined to shut them wholly out, tho thousands of Strangers were
then present at a meeting of so great expectation, of the Jews coming in to the
Christian Faith; but I mention it for this end, what a cry would that have
made, if they had been told of a created and dependent God, and to subject
themselves here to the greatest contradictions to Reason.

5. I shall now in the close but add this further, what should be specially
expected upon the growing state of Christ's visible Kingdom in the World, that
as these Fogs and Mists which have been raised upon the authority of his truth,
will be then quikly dispelled, so is there a higher Tribute to be given into
him of the Glory of his Works, and the Outgoings of his Providence about the
Church in these last times. I know, the work and business of this day lies not
here, or in designs of that nature, but it were well if much of that which
makes the greatest noise this day in the way of Religion, had its room filled
with so choice a study as this is, tho it is indeed one of the peculiar
endowments of the Spirit of God, given to some more eminently then others, to
be skilled in the Methods and Deeps of Providence, and to understand aright how
the Work of God lies toward the Church, and his designs therein, according to
these discoveries given of the same in his Word, and what watch of the night we
are now under; but on this Head, I shall speak to a few grounds, whereon this
Tribute to the declarative Glory of God, from his great Works of Providence
about his Church, will in another manner be rendered to him then heretofore.

1. Because it is surely in this way of his great and extraordinar Works, that
the Lord does design a more eminent discovery of himself, then in all these
times that are hitherto past, and will thus enter his Church on that brightness
and splendour of his second coming, which belongs to the last ages; when his
going forth in the greatness of his strength will be with that evidence, as
shall sease the World with fear and astonishment; and when he is in another
manner to glorify himself in his People, then was formerly in these suffering
times, which are now past, wherein his Glory was to shine forth in the eminency
of the passive graces of his spirit; for now is the Mystery of God, in what yet
remains thereof to be finished, in another way to take place, as shall call the
Generation that is coming up to such an observing and admiring Work of the great
Acts of God, that may need a more then ordinare measure of grace to answer the
same: but we must look for great things of Judgment, coming on, to be
accomplished, as well as of mercy, the Vyalls of divine Wrath, and last
Plagues, are but in part poured out, wherein the appearance of God will be with
much terror to the World, and that last Triumph of his Justice within time,
will not be of ane ordinare kind; we are to expect great shakings of the
Nations, and times of breaking down, as well as of building up, which are yet
to come, and drawing near.

II. Because we are entered on these times, when the Lord is in a more singular
way then heretofore, to put the whole Generation of his People, on that part of
Divinity, and the study thereof, which relates to his Works, and that great
Mystery of Providence about his Church; when the Key shall then be put in their
hand for opening up, and a more full understanding the way of the Lord in these
times past under the New Testament. This is indeed a weighty part of Divinity,
which is reserved to the latter times in the perfections thereof, and these
higher improvements, to be made on that blessed study, then was attainable in
former ages, when his work now is coming to a more full point. It has been
remarkably the business of this age, to make a more accurate search, and some
greater discovery upon natural causes, and the workings thereof, but I doubt
not, that ere long the inquisitive World, shall be in another manner awaked,
and their Inquiries run in a higher channel above all second causes, to see and
admire the great Acts of Providence, in the Divinity thereof, and not what is
humane therein, but as they are by way of Eminency the Works of God, in the
brightness of his immediate appearance in the same. It is one of the dismal
signs of the present time, how much the spirits of men are at work to darken so
far, as possible the most eminent Discoveries of God in his Works, and in the
most extraordinare revolutions of humane affairs, as if they would set bounds
and limits to him, according to the course and order of second causes, and
subject, both the truth of his Word and his Works to the comprehension of their
reason, tho some civil respect, they will give, and the name of his being the
prime cause, but shut their eyes on what is more extraordinar and solemn in
any piece of his work. I would yet point at some special Heads, that belong to
this choice part of Divinity, which we are to expect, will in another manner be
opened up, and I desire to rejoice in the hope hereof. 1. As to these more
singular cases of Providence, which has been in the Churches course, since her
first translation from the Jews to the Gentiles, with the issue and
consequences thereof, contrare to the rules or principles of natural reason,
which is ane Inquiry to be more fully improven, then whatever has been
attained this way; when men shall see the end of the Lord herein, with such
evidence as shall tend to clear all bygones in his work. 2. These remarkable
Periods of time, wherein the Prophetical Part of the New Testament, has been
successively brought forth in their proper Season, as was foretold, is yet to
have the seall more fully taken off, and that vaill, which was over them, so as
it shall be clear and easy to see how the Lord has not only kept his Word and
Truth to his Church, but has kept these times also exactly, to which such
great events of Providence did relate. 3. There is a greater discovery yet to
be made, then has been hitherto, how the Church has been led in a right way,
and by a straight line in her whole course, through that long, and terrible
Wilderness, which she was to pass, under the dispensation of the Ghospel; and
what eminent services the Saints have been put on in these strange measures of
their warefare, which was then allotted to them, and in theit overcoming work
thereby; yea what a higher Triumph our blessed Redeemer has had in the Faith,
and patience of his People in so dismal a time, then in any external
flourishing state of his Church, so as it might be said it was then day, as to
the presence of his spirit, and irresistible efficacy of his truth on his
followers, when it seemed otherwise as the darkness of midnight. 4. There
belongs to this part of Divinity, some higher breaking up of light, yet to be
made on that Mystery of the Communion of the Saints here with other, in the way
of providence, and what a joint interest they have herein, as to what has been
more singular in the Lords way, and disposal about others of his People: we
have little understood what ane enriching trade, we might drive upon that stock
of these ancient experiments of Christians in following the Lord, and these
eminent trials they have made of the truth, who has in ages past gone before,
and what a Pawn is thus put in our hand, for a further strengthening in the
Faith; yea what public interest thus the whole Church of Christ has, in some
eminent acts of Providence about particular Christians, which in the import and
greatness thereof was not given for themself only, but as a public concern to
the whole Generation, that seek after God in their day, and for the times to
come, according to that Psalm. ^0: 3. Many shall see it and fear, and shall
trust in the Lord. 5. I must add, one great improvement of this special Head of
Divinity, which will yet be above the measures of times past, in the extent of
that Reference, and Appeal, before Angels and Men, in behalf of the Truth, and
Faithfulness of God, for what he has spoken and promised to his Church; and is
that Tribute of praise, which in a higher degree is to be paid in to him, now
when it is so near to the close of time, then by that great testimony of Joshua
25: 14. how not one thing had failed of all the good things the Lord had then
spoken in behalf of his Church, but had fully taken place, and was the same
Appeal, which Solomon made I. Kings 8: 56. for this with a higher glory and
evidence is to be the Testimony of the latter days, when it is drawing near to
that magnificent close and period of Prophetic Chronology, and finishing of
the Mystery of God therein; how his spotless truth has as the Sun in his
strength kept it is way and course amidst all these dark clouds, which has
spread to darken the same; and no promise or prediction of that sacred record
of the Scripture, has ever failed or fallen to the ground, now when it is
drawing so near to the perfect Day. It is true each age, has had their proper
measures of light, in order to the service of that time, and something peculiar
allotted in the dispensations of Providence, yea some greater eminency did
belong to these times past, when the sufferings of Christians did most abound,
in the adventures of Faith, and in the trial of love, then in after times, but
as to higher discoveries of the works of God and the depths of providence about
his Church, these was reserved to that period, when the Mystery of God hereon
should be more fully perfited, and in this respect it is to be said, blessed is
he that waits, and comes, to such a solemn time, and to have his lot fall
therein, as is spoken Dan. 12: 12.

III. But for a further clearing of this Subject, since the Glory of the
Kingdom of Christ is so nearly concerned in the discovery and entertainment of
his Works, in the day thereof, and now when a more eminent appearance thereof
is near, that Kingdoms and Nations in their Complex Body, shall in a more
solemn way be the Lords; It should be expected that the return and oblation of
praise upon the great Acts of his Providence shall be more remarkable, as a
public deed of Nations, and Churches then has yet hitherto been; yea that
when the Lord does in any singular way appear, for their security, and
standing, by Providence of a public and national extent, that a gratulatory
retribution, on their part must be of the same extent, under a public care and
regard. It is true, there is a settled frame of subordinat means, by which the
Providence of God does work in the great designs thereof, that we are called to
regard, wherein I doubt not, but the Ministry of the Angels has the greatest
interest, as one of the great Ordinances he has settled in behalf of his
Church, tho as to their special offices, and d^legate service to particular
Churche^ and Christians, is something that is more dark; but it may be hoped will
ere long be with a clearer evidence known in these great transactions of
Providence, which are yet to take place, when a nearer Communion may be then
attained betwixt these blessed Spirits, and the Saints here on the earth, then
is yet known, but tho there is no time wherein the Lord will not put honor on
instituted means, and on that established order of his working, yet whilst most
have such ordinare thoughts of God herein, and are so ready to fix their eyes
wholly on men, his honor is concerned to let the World know he is God by more
extraordinar demonstrations, yea such are most of the great events of his Word,
which are yet to be brought forth as cannot possibly in an other way be
expected. But on this Subject I would humbly offer some few reflections, which
should be matter of a serious regard.

1. That as its highly becoming, on some eminent piece of the Work of God, or
public deliverances, for a Nation or State to have solemn and public returns
of thankfulness to him thereon; yet is it strange how so little regard should
thus be to have the greatness of any such mercy sought out, and the same public
care extended, for keeping up a venerable remembrance thereof, so that such a
service of Gratitude be not bounded with the transient work of a day, since
otherways it is a most essential want, and with holding a proper and important
part of that Tribute, which is due into God herein, for there can be no
suitable regard to serve the end of such Providence, and what was so straightly
injoined of the Lord under the Old Testament, which was the Churches continued
practice there; yea of the same moral and perpetual use in all after times, if
it should not be still a public trust under the furthest humane care to
promote the same, tho divine Record and History for this intent does now cease.

2. But as this has ane unquestionable tie on Churches, and a Christian State
to design the most honorable respect, and entertainment of the great Acts of
God in their day, and is made their proper talent to answer to; so does a just
exoneration herein, call for the most exact scrutiny and search on the truth
and evidence thereof, on which the weight, and credit of this service does so
far depend, to cause a more full assent, by these who come after to such a
testimony, that these rare Providence, wherein the Lord did thus make himself
known, were not only in the present time sought out, and enquired unto, under
their proper circumstances, but by such of greatest weight, and advantage, for
a work of this nature; whose sincerity and judiciousness might be convincing,
and the integrity of such ane Intent, cleared from any partial respect or end,
but allennerly for exalting the Majesty of God, and strengthening men in the
Faith, by so great a seal to his Truth, and for the interest of the Posterity;
yea wherein these who in some lesser differences did not fully meet in the same
Judgment, yet might entirely unite, in such a service and testimony as this.

3. Where the Lord makes himself known in more illustrious acts of his power,
as may be called Magnalia Dei, to some particular Nation, and Church beside
others, who herein are in a more then ordinare way interessed; it might seem
equal, and answer to the highest reason, they sold be of that value, as to be
entered on a National Record, and have that concurrence of humane authority, to
make the evidence hereof as authentic, as the public deeds, or rights, which
belong to such a state. It is true, there is no want of Histories, and the
Church has been blessed with that singular mercy of Martyrologies by faithful
and impartial hands, to attest the power of divine grace, and supports of the
spirit given to sufferers for the truth, and of late it was of great use the
concurrence of Civil Authority to that Work of the History of the Church of
England, that is now extant, by an excellent Writer; but for this intent, ^^ is
something distinct by its self, with respect only to these Monuments of
Providence, relating to a particular Church, that are of public, clear, and
uncontrolled evidence, to have the remembrance thereof with the highest honor,
kept up, and secured from the prejudices and cavills of men thereat; yea to
such Passadges in that day, whereon the Signature, and Impress of the more
immediate appearance of God has had most full and bright evidence; these great
changes of a public interest, which has then occurred, wherein some
extraordinar Conjunction in the course of Providence, might be seen, above
natural causes, and the ordinare way of Gods Working, such interpositions of
his wonderful power, by which he has designed to put some eminent honor, on
acts of trust, and relyances on his truth, as might be exemplary to after
times, and serve for that end, that they who come after, might set their hope
on God, and not forget his Works Psalm. 78: 7. yea extraordinar Acts also of
divine Judgment, whereby he has appeared in some unusual manner, to vindicate
the honor of his Laws, against public and notorious violations of the same,
which may be clearly seen were not designed for that age only, but as a public
concern for after times.

4. Can it be questioned, that since that Sacred Canon of the Scripture is
sealed, and consigned to the Church, to have no more addition thereto, but that
it is now a part of the highest trust upon the Gentile Churches, to have a most
venerable respect for conveyance of the great Works of God, from one Generation
to another, and to bear such evidence thereof, as the nature of these things is
capable of, for a moral certainty; yea that this might be on such trial, as
should silence and convince the most inquisitive, and suspicious spirits of men
herein, this is of a serious and weighty import, if it were considered: 1. How
so high a concern of the Glory of God is thus entrusted to tradition by humane
testimony and record, and to the credit thereof, as that way only which the
Lord has now fixed for the convoyance of his marvelous works to after times,
on which he once put that value as to give them a special room in Sacred Writ,
and tho there is no such way now to attest the same, yet is not the weight of
that service taken off the Church, which is mentioned Isay 62: 6. to be the
Lords Remembrancers and Recorders of his great Acts, as the Original there
bears. 2. It is unquestionable that be has reserved the greatest of his Works,
wherein he will most eminently appear, to the last times, and what a loss has
it been to the Christian World unto this day, that unfaithful part which we
must charge upon former ages, in no suitable regard to have such ane interest
and treasure, with a public care, secured for the posterity, through which the
credit and honor of tradition has been so much broke as has rendered the use
thereof of small effect. 3. And it is known how difficult a part it is to gain
credit in this day, to the truth of what is more extraordinar in passages of
providence, even where the relaters thereof h^th as to their own conscience and
conviction the most full assurance, and has designed what Inquiry was suitable
in such a case; whilst the want of a more unite and public concurrence takes
off so much of that weig^t, which it might have in after times; but I have
confidence, that a higher service of this kind in the improvement of so great a
Talent for the honor of God, does yet wait on the Church, and succeeding race,
as shall tend to bring up what has been detained of such a rent and tribute of
praise, yea that these whose Lot shall be in the days that are now coming, and
fall in with the growing state and glory of the Kingdom of Christ to see these
things, which will exceed the thoughts and faith of this day herein, shall see
and enjoy such Records of these times, where the great intent shall be of that
kind Revel. 15: 3. Great and Marvelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, Just
and True are thy Ways thou King of Saints, and where the credit of such a
testimony shall not be personal only, but national in a more solemn, unite
concurrence herewith then has been hitherto known.

4. It is on this Subject, I must add further, that a traditional conveyance of
more special and momentous things of Providence, might be of much use, were it
suitably improven, to have a remembrance thereof continued in a Family Line and
Relation, which is one peculiar way, whereby the present Generation might
declare the truth and faithfulness of God to the next. It is true, there is no
serious Christian, but is thus sisted, and accountable on such a service to put
to his seall, by some explicit personal testimony, that God is true, upon his
trial hereof, and most specially to improve that season, when it is near to
the close and shutting up of time, that with his last and dying breath he might
bear the same witness to the truth of Christ, and to the advantage and
excellency of his way and service, which he did in the whole course of his life
past, and of that joy, complacence and assurance of mind, which these have
found, and now has in the way of truth; but there is something more peculiar
in this Testimony, to be understood, with respect to these to whom things in a
more singular manner has been allotted then to other Christians, in the way of
Providence, and has in the Record and Journal of their life had more
extraordinar Remarks and Confirmations from the Lord, as gives higher access to
this service, and adds to the value of such a Testimony. I would offer but a
few thoughts on such a Head, which may possibly seem a strange and dark thing
to some: 1. It was once for a long time that the Series of the Church was kept
up in a Family Line from Abraham to the 12 Patriarchs, and what a rare course
and conduct of Providence was thus transmit to after times, which is so great
ane interest, and treasure to this day, and tho that convoyance was by an
infallible spirit, yet is this so far exemplary thereby, for such a
confirmatory witness, by observing Christians, to the truth, when it comes to
their last improvement of time, and of what has been more signal and eminent
in the Lords dealing with them, that it should be one of the choicest Legacies
they could be queath to their Relations, yea a singular mean to have Religion
thus kept alive in a more venerable respect thereto in a Family State, and to
fix stronger engagements to the way of God, on their surviving Friends. 2. I
hope there be no serious discerning Christian, but has some more select
Observations of their life, and what has been most remarkable in the course of
Providence toward them, laid up, something of which might be of singular use,
besides their own personal inter^st therein, to a further establishment of
others in the way of truth; tho any improvement of that kind needs much
Christian prudence and sobriety to qualify the same; yea, were this suitably
designed in such dismal times, we are now fallen in, what access might private
Christians have, these specially who have gone through more extrao^dinar
trials then others, to be thus a public blessing to their Generation; and
how honorable a service were it for God, to advance the credit of Religion,
and fix deeper impressions of the same on men's spirits, that these who have
been admit to more special adventures of Faith, amidst the various conflicts of
their day, should in the close thereof have this as their proper work to
deliver the truth off their hand, which they had received, with their seal and
testimony to the same, as that which they had proven and tried in a more then
ordinare way, and which had brought them safe and honorably through, as was
the last Words and Witness of David 1 Kings 14. Who ha^h delivered my soul out
of all distress: this I humbly judge falls in as the last and peculiar
service of a Christian, when it has the advantage to be more valuable and
convincing to others, then in any other time of their life, and were a thing
highly desirable, that a work of this kind should be suitably prepared, to
prevent a surprisal of death, and going silent off the stage, which has been
the lot of these who have shined most brightly thereon; and as it surely has
the most opportune season in the last Scene of a Christians Work, so may it be
yet more designed and regarded in the last ages of time, when thete is to be
expected such Testimonies for God, and to the Glory of his Truth, as will much
exceed the ordinar Standard of these times past, and we are now in. The full
sense of that Scripture John 3: 33. should have a great weight herein, he that
has received his Testimony, has set to his seall that God is true, where
there is a peculiar debt, and trust on the one hand that is put on such, who
has the truth and testimony of God consigned for trial of the same; and a
discharge thereof, which on the other hand they stand accountable for putting
to their seall that God is true, which is the most solemn way of a Testimony
before men; tho some may be thus in a special manner stated by higher
engagements to fanctify God before others, and when some more singular passages
of Providence comes under such a witness and seall as a distinct part of a
Christians Testament in his parting with time, it brings the strongest evidence
that humane testimony can possibly have for conveyance of the same.

FINIS.

