His Highness Oliver Lord Protector of the Common Wealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland etc.


The Perfect POLITICIAN Or, A FULL VIEW Of the LIFE and ACTION (Military and
Civil) OF O. CROMWELL, Whereunto is added His CHARACTER; AND A Complete
CATALOGUE of all the Honors conferred by him on several PERSONS.

Qui nescit Dissimulare, nescit Regnare. LONDON: Printed by J. Cottrel, for
William Roybould at the Unicorn, and Henry Fletcher at the three Gilt ^^lips in
St. Paul's Church yard. 1660.

To the PEOPLE of England.
My dear Countrymen,
THe ensuing History properly belongs to you, in a double respect: First,
Because it was your Blood and Treasure that raised the subject of this'
Discourse to Supremacy. Then, Secondly, your Backs bore the Burden of his
Greatness; therefore it is fit that once again you look back and view with a
full aspect, this Gentleman, General, Politician, and Protector. To limn him to
the Life in all these Colors, is too much for one Pencil; therefore I only
present you the Epitome of great Cromwels Actions, from his home near
Huntington, t^ his Tomb in Westminster. The work is not unlike Homers Iliads in
a nut-shel, yet may it serve for a Memento of our ever-to-be-lamented unnatural
divisions.

The main scope of this Discourse, is a continued series of Tragical Scoenes,
with Comical* Interludes lately acted in England, Ireland, and Scotland: herein
I endeavor to keep pace with Truth, so near as possibly it may be traced. My
aim is Moderation, as the surest way to hit Affection; therefore have I chosen
it before partiality or egregious Encomiums, which do not become an Historian:
for Flattery is mere folly; no better (I am sure) can it seem to the sight of a
wise man, who knows that Panegyricks must profit the maker, or else the same
Quill will again drop Gall in a Satirical strain upon his reputation.

My Endeavors herein (I doubt not) will render some profit to the Reader;
though much pleasure cannot be expected, when the Theme is nothing else but
boxing about of Governments, as men do Balls in a Tennis-Court.

Contrymen, Read over this small Manual, and then consider how finely you
have fought your selves into LIBERTY. Vale.

I. S.

Reader,
Correct these few material erratas following, which accidentally have escaped
the Press; and if any literal happen to cross thy way, let thy pen rectify the
mistake.

Page line. 73. 5. for hand read hands. 269. 28. for 1654. read 1659.


THE LIFE and DEATH OF His late Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland.
His actions in the Wars of England.
IT is very well known, that he was of an honorable Extraction, and had
suitable Education. He was born at Huntingdon, and bred up in the famous
University of Cambridge; where whilst he was a Student, there wanted not some
Presages of his future Greatness: neither was he then so much addicted to
Speculation, as to Action, as was observed by his Tutor. After a good
Proficiencie in the University, he came to London, where he betook himself to
the study of the Law in Lincolns-Inne; that nothing might be wanting to make
him a complete Gentleman, and a good Commonwealths-man.

His Country was not unsensible of his great Endowments: for when the
necessities of those times compelled the late King to call that Parliament, in
the year 1640, (truly surnamed The long) he was elected by them to serve as a
Member therein. And now God being displeased with England, for the abuse of a
long continued Peace, and the blessings thereof, and determining to punish the
inhabitants thereof for the same, he sent an evil spirit of Division betwixt
the King and that Parliament; They complaining of his evil Counsel, and He of
their Jealousies and Fears: which Division being industriously fomented by
Incendiaries, soon brake forth into the flame of open Hostility, both parties
pretending one and the same Cause of Quarrel. But to that which is chiefly
intended.

No sooner had the Drum and Trumpet summoned the Nation to Arms, but Cromwell
was alarmed, who (tam Mart quam Mercurio) neglecting the softness of a
Sedentary, betook himself to a Martial employment, and immediately raised a
Troop of Horse for the Parliament among his neighbors, at his own charge. The
University of Cambridge being not far off him, and the place of his Education,
he had a special regard thereto; and knowing that Universities (of all places)
might be most addicted to the Kings interest, esteeming Parliaments (and this
especially) the greatest depressers of Ecclesiastical Dignity, in hope of which
they are there nurtured; to put the matter out of doubt, he secured it for the
Parliament; and that in the nick of time, when a large quantity of the
University-Plate was about to be conveyed to the King then at Oxford. And so
industrious was he in the Cause he had now newly undertaken, that hearing Sir
Thomas Connesby (High Sheriff of Hertford-shire) was at the Town of St. Albans
on a Matket-day, there to proclaim the Parliament and their General the Earl of
Essex Traitors, (according to the Kings Proclamation to that purpose) he
unexpectedly rusheth into the Town, takes the Sheriff, and sends him up to the
Parliament.

Being thus blessed with a Troop, he augments his Strength, making it up a
thousand Horse; whose Riders being stout and valiant, he took a course to
preserve, by Arming them cap-a-pe, after the manner of the German Crabats:
whence in those days he was commonly styled Iron-sides. Being thus reinforced,
he marches into the County of Suffolk; and having intelligence that above
forty Commanders, Knights and Gentlemen, were at Lowerstoft, contriving an
Association of Norfolk and Suffolk for the King, he with such secrecy and
celerity enters the Town, that he surpriseth them all.

Having settled the affairs of the Associated Counties firmly for the
Parliament, he marches toward Newark, and blocks up that Garrison; and finding
a party of the Newarkers near Grantham, he sought them; in which Encounter,
though he wanted of equality in number, yet he so far out-went his enemy in
courage and resolution, that he put them to flight, himself giving the first
Onset.

About Newark he spent not much time, but advances with the Earl of Manchester
for the re-inforcement of the Siege of York, which was then beleaguered by the
Scottish General Lesley, assisted by Sir Thomas Fairfax, and a conjunction of
other Forces in the North. Cromwell had not been long there, but Prince Rupert
approaches with a great Army, to raise the Siege: Upon certain intelligence
whereof, the Generals draw off the Siege, to fight him; well knowing, that if
they won the day, that City would follow as an Appendix to the Victory. The
Princes Scouts informing him that the Siege was raised, he sent a party of
Horse to face Lesly on Hessam-Moor, and in the mean time enters York with two
thousand Horse, carrying with him all things needful for the relief of the
Garrison: which having done, he seemingly made toward Tadcaster, but soon
returned again into Marston-Moor, and there draws up his Army in Battalia, to
the best advantage the ground would permit. Lesley was in the mean time
marching with his Army toward Tadcaster after the Prince: but hearing what he
had done, he wheels about to give him Battle. The Prince having possessed himself
of all the advantages that might be, keeps his ground. The Generals, Lesley,
Manchester and Fairfax, having drawn up their Army in as good form as the time
would permit, placing most of Lesleys and Fairfax his Horse in the Right Wing;
Manchester's with other of the Scotch Horse made the Left, commanded by
Cromwell, (who had that Charge committed to him for the day:) the Foot made up
the Main Body. Both Armies standing in this posture, Prince Rupert's Left Wing
making the first Charge, dissipates the Parliaments Right; prosecuting their
Charge with such fury and vigor, that in a trice destruction was everywhere
seen. Cromwell in the Left wing (not knowing what had befaln the Right)
courageously charges Rupert's Right wing; which soon turned the scale, before
inclining toward the Prince: the advantage he got here, by his wise improvement
thereof, soon redounded to the whole Army: for although many for fear disbanded
themselves and fled; yet the rest, as many as could be got together, being led
on by the Noble Earl of Manchester, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, (the last of whom
received in his face that day a Mark of Honor) joining with victorious
Cromwell, made the day clearly theirs. This Fight was the most bloody of any in
all the Civil wars, wherein was great slaughter on both sides, judged by
spectators to be little less then ten thousand men. Prince Rupert and his
helpers being thus discomfited, they fall out, and lay the blame of the
miscarriage one upon the other; the Earl of Newcastle and others of quality
leaving the Kingdom thereupon. This impediment being removed, the Siege of York
was renewed: which City (though governed by valiant Glemham) being hopeless of
new succors, was soon yielded.

Many other examples of Cromwels great Achievements both North and west might
be given, even whilst he was in a lower capacity: but studying brevity, we
shall pass over many things, and come to speak of him as under the New
Establishment, in which he received a greater Command.

The Parliament seeing the war to be tedious; and finding, that notwithstanding
the daily great effusion of blood, and vast expense of treasure, small progress
was made in the Kingdoms resettlement, they resolve on a new course, by
new-modeling the old Army; and to prevent the just offense of any of their
Members who might be displaced thereby, they pass an Ordinance, (commonly
called The self-denying Ordinance) that no Member of Parliament should serve in
the Army, but wholly attend the service of the House, unless they had the
Houses license for so doing. Then they recruit the Army (which had been much
wasted by Sickness, and a late defeat in the West) to One and twenty thousand,
viz. Fourteen thousand Foot, Six thousand Horse, and One thousand Dragoons;
commissioning Sir Thomas Fairfax their General.

Cromwell being then in the West, and receiving intelligence of the new
Establishment, and of the self-denying Ordinance; though he were a great and
victorious Commander, yet he had not forgotten to obey; but immediately
disposing of those under his Command, he posts toward London, to attend his
service in Parliament, according to their late Ordinance aforesaid: and
understanding that the General was then at Windsor, he took that in his way,
and went to kiss his Excellencies hand, and take leave of him. But the
Parliament being sufficiently sensible of his worth, and how excellent an
instrument he might be in carrying on the War, they would not suffer him to
desert his Military employment; and the next morning before he came forth of
his chamber, a Commission was sent him by the Committee of both Kingdoms,
whereby he was made Lieutenant General of Horse to the whole Army.

Upon this new Establishment, the Kings party were very much heightened,
thinking it an easy matter now to subdue the Parliaments Army, being thus
chopped and changed, and many eminent Commanders laid aside and discontented. But
they found the contrary: for as a fractur'd bone well set, becomes the
stronger; so this broken Army, being skilfully handled, became so well knit,
that it was thereby rendered far more vigorous and effective. But to proceed.

Cromwell having accepted of this new Command, he immediately applies himself to
action. For the Kings main Mid-land Forces under the Command of Prince Rupert,
lying then about Worcester and the borders of Wales, intending to take the
Field; they sent a Convoy of two thousand Horse to Oxford, to fetch off the
King, with the Train of Artillery, and to procure Recruits for the Army.
Fairfax having intelligence hereof, sent Cromwell with a party of Horse and
Dragoons to impede their passage. No sooner was order given, but he was at the
work: for with incredible swiftness marching to seek his enemy, he found them
at Islip-Bridge, and there encountered them, and that with so much gallantry,
that he took 500 Horse, and 200 Prisoners, among whom were many persons of
quality: here he took also (besides many other Trophies of Honor) the Queens
Standard. And knowing it to little purpose to gain a Victory, and not to
prosecute it, he therefore pursued the remnant that escaped to
Blechington-House, where Colonel Windebank kept a Garrison for the King: he
summons the place, requiring a speedy rendition; giving its Governor to
understand, that otherwise they must expect the effects of the fury of an
enraged Soldiery. The Governor being terrified by the late defeat, (it seems)
despairing of relief from Oxford, and doubting his own strength, delivers up
the House, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein; (marching to Oxford, where
he was shot to death for his pains.) So that here were two Victories; the well
improvement of the first, procuring the second.

But letting pass many of his more inconsiderable actions, (if any of his in
this kind may be so termed) we proceed to give an account of his carriage in
that remarkable and fatal Battle of Naseby; only mentioning that feat at
Bampton-Bush, where he took Sir William Vaughan, Lieutenant Colonel Littleton,
with diverse other Officers, and 200 common soldiers.

This Battle of Naseby, brings to mind the saying of that learned man, Hugo
Grotius, viz. When people fight for their liberties, the Princes Crown lies at
stake: which was verified upon the King in the effects thereof: for the scale
of his affairs was thereby so turned, that in short time after, he both lost
his Crown, and became subject to the will of his enemy; being never after
favored with one successful attempt. This Battle was fought on the 14 day of
June, 1645. near Naseby. The Kings Army lying in and about Harborough, where
Prince Rupert's Headquarters were, they had resolved the night before, to
fight Fairfax, knowing themselves to be much stronger then he, especially in
Horse. They were not more forward to engage, then the other were willing: and
thus being both agreed in the extremity of Disagreement, they both draw into a
large field by the Town side, about a mile and a quarter broad. This was the
ample stage whereon that bloody Tragedy was acted: sad to behold! and so much
the more sad, when we consider that it was English blood, shed by English
hands: here Relations were forgotten, friendship relinquished; yea, he that
perhaps but lately would have laid down his own, to preserve the life of his
friend, does now use all possible industry to destroy it: and this upon no
other ground, but the common Feud that was then risen. Behold the effects of a
Civil War! The Kings Front was made up of a gallant Body of Horse; the Foot
made a second Body: the Right Wing was commanded by the brother-Princes Rupert
and Maurice; the left, by Sir Jacob Ashley: other Commanders of great quality,
and long experience in Martial affairs beyond the Seas, taking their places in
the field. Thus being drawn out, with Reserves to second the main Body, they
took up the whole breadth of the field. The Parliaments Foot made a firm Body in
the midst, commanded by Major General Skippon, (whose actions that day deserve
an honorable mention) winged with Horse on either side: the Right Wing was
commanded by the valiant Cromwell, who (to the great joy of the whole Army) came
in to their assistance the night before, out of the Associated Counties, with
600 Horse and Dragoons; the Left was commanded by Ireton. Rupert gave the first
Charge, which he did with such violence upon Ireton in the Parliaments Left
Wing, that (notwithstanding their strenuous resistance) he was routed, and his
men put to flight, the Prince pursuing them through the Town: but having more
mind to the spoil, then to the thorow-performance of his work, he leaves the
pursuit, and assaults the Wagons; where being repulsed, he trifled out so much
time, that Cromwell in the Right wing, assisted by Colonel Rossiter, had in the
mean time quite disordered the Kings Left wing, and as it were raked the field
before him; separating the Horse from the Foot, and thereby rendering them
helpless one to the other. Being reduced to this exigent, the Horse fled toward
Leicester; in pursuit of whom, Cromwell (considering that though there had been
a Rout, there might be a Rally; and not only to prevent after-claps, but also
to secure what was already won) sent some few Troops, knowing that small force
might do great execution on a flying enemy: Himself in the interim joining with
their own Foot, so encompassed the Kings Infantry, that (notwithstanding they
showed much gallantry and valor that day, even to the admiration of their
enemies) being tired out, and despairing of succor, beholding nothing but
death and destruction which way soever they looked, they threw down their Arms,
and submitted to mercy.

The Kings loss hereby will appear the greater, if we consider it in these two
respects:

1. He lost a gallant Army, which was newly flushed and heightened in their
courage, by the late good success they had in the storming of Leicester;
presently after which, the King writ thus to the Queen: That without being
sanguine, he could report his actions to stand in a better condition then at
any time since the War began.

2. Not only was an Army lost, but all possibility of raising another; so
vigorously did the Victors husband and prosecute what they had begun and gotten.

No sooner had the Parliaments Army broken down this bank, but like a Torrent
they soon overflowed the whole Kingdom, bearing down and subduing all opposers.
Leicester was immediately regained; from thence they haste to the relief of
Taunton, which had been long besieged by Goring's Army, and held cut to
admiration. Upon their approach, Goring draws off: they follow him, and
overtake him near Lamport, where they engage him: and here Cromwell showed much
prudence, as well as courage: for the Enemy being put to flight, he would not
suffer part of the Horse to pursue, but caused them to forbear till they were
all come up together; and then himself led them on, doing the work so
effectually, that he took almost all their Foot and Ordnance. Thence they stepped
to Bridgewater, a very considerable place, which (though obstinately defended)
was soon taken by storm.

In those days there was a sort of people called Club-men, who pretending
Neutrality, would admit of no Armies within their Bounds: and so confident were
they, as to capitulate with the General, as if they intended to cudgel him out
of their Country, notwithstanding his late great successes; thinking to keep
their Clubs in their hands, when so many gallant men had been forced to part
with their swords. But Cromwell (not knowing what might be the issue of such
tumultuous assemblings) resolves to curb them betimes, and to crush them in the
egg: to which purpose, having notice of their Rendezvous, he marches toward
them with a party of Horse. They were four thousand strong, and had encamped
themselves on the top of a hill; promising much resolution in one of their
Ensigns, which had this Motto: If ye offer to plunder, or take our cattle,
Be you assured we'll give you battle.


But this vapor soon vanished: for Cromwell giving but one Charge up the hill,
routed and dispersed them all, taking 400 prisoners, whom he carried to
Sherborn; that Castle (governed by Sir Jews Dives for the King) being then
beleaguered by Fairfax, and soon after reduced by storm.

Hence the Army marches toward Bristol, a place of very great importance,
lying on the confines of Gloucester, Wilts, Dorset and Somerset-shires. Prince
Rupert was in it, with about four or five thousand Horse and Foot; who being
too much addicted to Plunder, made the circumjacent Country desire to be rid of
such injurious neighbors. At the Armies first arrival, it was advised by
Cromwell and some other chief Officers, that they should storm part of the City:
which accordingly was put in practice so effectually, that Prince Ruport durst
not run the hazard of a second assault, but immediately delivers up that great
and well-fortified City, having liberty to march to Oxford.

This great service being thus performed, Cromwell (without the least delay or
intermission) taking with him a Brigad consisting of four Regiments, hastes to
the reducement of that strong Castle of the Devizes, whose natural strength was
much increased by the ingenuity of its Governor Sir Charles Lloyd; who being
sensible thereof, and confident therein, returns no other Answer to the first
Summons, but Win it, and wear it. But as if neither Art or Nature could
sufficiently fence a place against the Stratagems and Assaults of this
invincible Conqueror, (whose very name began now to be terrible to the
stoutest adversary) he soon brought the Governor to terms, and compelled him
to yield upon Composition.

Winchester was soon reduced to the same pass, after the Governors stomach had
been a little brought down, by the Battery of great Guns and Mortar-pieces.
Here valiant Cromwell (as always) being punctual in the observation of Articles,
and being informed that some of his Soldiers had been faulty therein; no
sooner was the complaint made, but the redress was provided: for, hanging up
one, to the terror of others, he sent the rest of the offenders to Oxford, to
be there punished at the discretion of the Governor Sir Thomas Glemham; who
returned them to him again, with an acknowledgement of his great Nobleness, in
being so punctual with his enemy. His tenderness in this respect, had great
influence on others that had a disposition to yield.

But now we come to Basing-house in Hantshire, a place that knew not what it
was to yield. It was the Mansion of the Marquess of Winchester, standing on a
rising ground; encompassed with a Brick Rampart, and that lined with earth; a
deep dry ditch environing all. The House being situate and built as if for
Royalry, had this Motto, Aymez Loyalte. Here the Marquess stands upon his
Guard, assisted only at first with his own family, and an hundred Musketeers
from Oxford; but was recruited afterward by the King from time to time, as
occasion served. This Garrison had been several times assaulted, but to little
purpose; first, by Colonel Norton and Colonel Harvey; next, by Sir William
Waller, with seven thousand Horse and Foot; who (although he were by many in
those days surnamed The Conqueror) did little more then heighten the courage of
the besieged, who made frequent desperate Sallies upon him. Thus out-braving
all Assailants for some years, the place began to be esteemed impregnable: but
Cromwell soon evinced the contrary: for having seen Sir Will. Ogle the late
Governor of Winchester march out according to Articles, and settled the affairs
of that Garrison for the Parliament, he the next day marches for Basing; whither
he no sooner comes, but he falls to the work in good earnest; placing a strong
Battery against it, that soon made it assaultable; which perceiving, (for he
had an excellent faculty in discerning advantages) he orders the several Posts
to prepare for a Storm. And although the danger and difficulty of the work were
great, even enough to take off the edge of an ordinary resolution, having to
deal with so valiant an enemy, who had often manifested their high courage and
great skill in withstanding several former Assailants; yet he (accounting any
design the more honorable, by how much the more difficult to accomplish)
gives the Onset, and that to so good purpose, that the besieged saw themselves
in no capacity to withstand him.

Thus was Basing subdued: a service so much the more acceptable, by how much
the more good redounded to the Country (even to the whole Nation) thereby, in
opening a way for Commerce and Correspence betwixt the West of England and
other parts, which before had been so long obstructed by this Garrison.

Langford-House near Salisbury was visited next by Cromwell: but they within
having head what he had done at Basing, despairing of any better success then
that Garrison, yielded at the first Summons.

From hence he marches toward the main Body of the Army, who were then upon a
march toward Exeter, to block up that place. But that design being for the
present waved, they suddenly fall upon Dartmouth, and take it. Which being
done, they encounter the Lord Hopton at Torrington, where he was defeated, and
upon pursuit, received (as he was formerly assistant in giving) a Cornish Hug,
and thereupon enforced to disband. Whereupon followed the rendition of Exeter.

There remained only now in the West Pendennis Castle, which being blockt up
by Col. Fortescue, was soon yielded.

Thus Fairfax and Cromwell having thoroughly scowred the West, and only Newark
remaining in the North, the hopes of the King and his party were very low; yet
not quite dead; for they had still a Party, commanded by that gallant old
Soldier Sir Jacob Ashley: but these hopes soon vanish: for he being encountered
by Col. Morgan near Stow on the Woulds, was utterly overthrown, himself and
1600 becoming prisoners to the Victors.

And now that black cloud which had so impetuously showred upon other places,
began to gather about Oxford it self, the Kings Headquarters, and place of his
residence; it being already blocked up by Fleetwood and Ireton, and every day
in expectation of a close Siege. Here Art her self had contributed her utmost
assistance, to make the place impregnable; it being encompassed with regular
Fortifications, furnished with a strong Garrison of stout soldiers, stored with
abundance of all kind of provisions, and (which is more then all the rest)
governed by one that had given sufficient proof of his valor and faithfulness
formerly, in holding out two other Garrisons (Carlisle and York) to the utmost
extremity. But all this avails not, Oxford must yield. And the unfortunate
King, who had for some time past received no other News, but (Job-like) one
messenger of ill tidings at the heels of another, having no Field-Army left,
nor scarce a Garrison to flee to, began now to consider the danger of his
person, and to cast about which way to secure himself; and at last resolves to
personate a Serving-man, and by the Conduct of Ashburnham to escape to the
Scottish Army before Newark. The Parliament receiving intelligence of his being
there, they demand the King: the Scots refuse to deliver him; whereupon grew a
great Contest betwixt the two Nations, concerning their propriety in the person
of the King. But the Scots calling to mind, that 200000 l. was behind of what
the Parliament had formerly hired them for, thought they had now an opportunity
to hedge it in, and therefore (like the Ape that made use of the Cats foot to
take the Apple out of the fire) they vvave further dispute, and having gotten
their money, deliver up the King.

Being in the hands of the English, he is conveyed to Holmby-House in
Northamptonshire, a Princely Mansion; where we shall leave him at present, and
come to speak briefly of some transactions in Parliament, City and Army.

Wars are not only carried on by Swords and Guns, but Tongues and Pens are
co-instrumental; which as they had been too much employed formerly, were not
idle now. The distinguishing terms of approbry formerly used, viz. Cavalier and
Roundhead, were now transmuted unto those of Presbyterian and Independent, who
at this time clash with a high hand. The Presbyterians endeavor to carry on
the interest of the Covenant: but they are not herein countenanced by the Army,
who show their dislike thereof, by the impeachment of eleven Members of
Parliament, (Hollis, Stapleton, Waller, Massey, etc.) who are its abettors;
they thereupon making a voluntary secession.

Great disputes also arose in the two Houses at this time concerning the King;
some pleading his coming to London, with freedom, safety and honor, to treat
with his Parliament; others urged that no more Addresses might be made to him.
The City closes with that party in the Parliament which was for the Kings
return; and were so hot upon it, that in a tumultuous way they would needs
compel them to alter their Militia, and bring home the King. The contrary Party
in the House seeing violence offered them, they with the Speaker betake
themselves to the protection of the Army; who being thus countenanced by
Authority, and thereby encouraged, resolve upon a March for London, to restore
the Members of Parliament to their places and Authorities. Upon the Armies
approach, the Citizens (who before had made some semblance of resistance,
raising Forces to that purpose under Massey) desire a Truce: which was
granted, upon these Conditions.

1. That they should desert the Parliament then sitting, and the eleven
impeached Members. 2. That they should recall their Declaration. 3. That they
should relinquish the present Militia. 4. That they should deliver up the
Forts, together with the Tower. 5. That they should disband their Forces.
Which things being performed, the Army made a triumphant passage through the
City of London.

To return again to the King: we find him not to continue long at Holmby, ere
Cornet Joyce with a Party of Horse seiseth on his Person, and carries him away
to the Headquarters. The Army having him now in their custody, remove him from
one place to another; as to Royston, Hatfield, Causam, an House of the Lord
Cravens, (one that has had a deep share in the sufferings of the Nobility:)
here the Kings Children came to him, where they dined together. But here he
continued not long neither, before his remove to Hampton Court, where being
terrified with an Apparition of Agitators, he left that place, and
unfortunately renders himself to Col. Hamond in the Isle of Wight, where he
was secured in Carisbrook-Castle. Propositions are sent to him from the
Parliament, but with little effect. Provoked herewith, the Houses past their
Votes of Non-addresses to his Majesty, and take the Government upon themselves;
which was followed with a Declaration from the Army to stand in defense of
those Votes.

These Actions so far discontented the people, that in every place nothing
could be heard but bad vvishes, and worse threats: from whence many did
prognosticate, the ensuing Summer would be a hot one in respect of Wars. And
now the Subjects of both Kingdoms, which before had joined in Arms against the
King, begin to look upon his Estate and condition with commiseration, blaming
themselves for being instruments in bringing him into the condition he then
was: and now they petition the Parliament (after the same manner that some
years before they had the King) in a tumultuous manner; and impatient to have
the grant of their desires delaid, they press the Houses for a speedy redress
of their present Grievances; but could have no other answer, but what was
delivered by the Soldiers guarding the Parliament, and a Troop of Horse from
the Mews; these dissuaded the Surry-men with feelling arguments from coming
there any more.

These things made those that before seemed passive, to be active: the sable
cloud of War (blown by the fury of the people) had now overspread our
Hemisphere; which Alarms the Army in all their Quarters. First, a considerable
part of the Navy, with Captain Batten, sometimes Vice Admiral to the Earl of
Warwick, desert the Parliament, and put themselves under the power of Prince
Charles: Next, the Kentish-men rise in Arms, under pretense of Petitioning:
Laughorn, Poyer and Powel, seized on some strong Towns and Castles in
South Wales, and declared against them. Yet this was not all; there blew a
Northern blast, that made many men shake: Duke Hamilton (a man who had
received much of the King, but deserved little) rusheth in with an Army of
Scots, and joins himself to Langdale, Glemham, and others of the Kings Party
in the North.

Upon these Risings, the Parliament considers how to conjure these evil spirits
down again: the Valor of their Soldiers had been tried in many Fights and
Sieges before; their former good successes made them confident that Victory was
settled in their Scabbards, and that they should no sooner draw their Swords,
but their enemies would fly. To manage these Wars, Fairfax was sent into Kent,
Lambert into the North, there to stop (as much as could be) the overflowing
Torrent of Hamiltons Army, who wasted the Country at pleasure, wheresoever they
came: for Wales, victorious Cromwell was designed: before him (as forlorn)
marches Col. Horton with 3000, who engaged Laughorns 8000 raw Welchmen, and
routed them: Cromwell himself, soon follows after, with two Regiments of Horse,
and three of Foot. Now we see him in the Field again, to accomplish great
undertakings; which he did with so much facility, that it rather seemed a
Recreation then labor. Caesar's Veni, Vidi, Vici, may well be attributed to
him, who no sooner came near an Enemy and beheld him, but he overcame him: and
indeed, his quick Marches, furious Onsets, and victorious Conquests, came very
near Casars Achievements. The first place we find him at in his march, was
Chepstow-Castle, which he resolved to besiege; but himself hastening to
Pembrook, he leaves Col. Air to dispatch this piece of service, who
accomplished it in fifteen days. Cromwell on the twentieth of May comes to
Pembrook, Poyer being Governor of it; who relying much upon the strength of
the place, refuses all Conditions that are proffered to him. Cromwell not being
accustomed to despair of any thing that is possible, applies himself to the
Siege at Land; Sir George Ayscough in the mean time with a Squadren of Ships,
cast Anchor in the Road, to forbid any succors to be carried in by Sea; and,
as occasion served, to furnish the Leaguer with great Guns and other provisions
necessary.

Cromwell having taken a full view of the Castle, and considering the strength
of it, makes his way by approaches; and with his great Guns, summons them to
yield. This course he thought the safest, upon these considerations: First, for
that by certain intelligence he was informed of the small Magazine of Provision
that they had in the Town and Castle; so that of necessity they must yield:
their bodies being weakened for want of sustenance, would bring down their stout
Stomachs. Then, Divisions among themselves, which grew to that height at last,
that the Soldiers began to mutiny against their Commanders. And lastly,
(though he had Men enough to enforce them, yet) considering this was not the
last service his Forces must go upon, he would not be too prodigal of precious
blood; knowing that Victory to be the cheapest, which is won without blows.

Having thus considered of the matter, he causes strict guard to be kept in his
Trenches, that so they might be kept in from running away. This order was not
long observed, before Hunger had so battered down their Bellies, and therewith
so quelled their courage, that they desired a Parley, and willingly yielded up
the Town and Castle upon quarter, as to the common Soldiery; but Laughorn,
Poyer and Powel, with some other of the prime Commanders, render themselves
prisoners at mercy; which some of them found, but others were afterward made
exemplary.

No sooner was this considerable place reduced to obedience, but Cromwell
immediately marches Northwards with all speed possible, to disperse that black
cloud which threatened to send a scotch Mist upon those parts of England: Being
at Gloucester, he acquaints the Parliament with the necessities of the Army:
which was no sooner done, but immediately supplies were sent, to the great
encouragement of the Soldiery. Cromwell having joined with Lambert, who then
attended Hamiltons Motions, and retarded his Marches, their united Forces made
an Army in all of 8600 strong; too weak (in outward appearance) to grapple with
21000 men; but considering the courage and resolution of the Soldiers, they
were sufficient to do the business, as it proved at last. Cromwell finding an
opportunity to correct the Scotch for their insolent rapine, resolves to do it,
and drive them home, or die in the attempt. At Preston in Lancashire, his
forlorn, consisting of 200 Horse and 400 Foot, first engaged; after them,
Cromwell himself brought up the main Battle in as good a posture as the Ground
would bear, (which being enclosure and mirie Ground, was inconvenient for
Horse) he fought them through a durty Lane, and forced them to seek shelter in
the Hedges near at hand: which proved but a poor defense against the rage of
Cromwels men. After four hours dispute, they were driven into Preston with the
victorious Soldiers at their heels, who presently cleared the streets. The
Duke finding the place too hot for his cold Constitution, retreates over the
Bridge with as many Horse and Foot as could follow him: but his shirking away
would not serve the turn; they must first give an account of their business,
before the pass could be granted, which at last they had signed, sealed and
delivered. At the Bridge was the greatest piece of service, where extraordinary
courage was shown on both sides; but especially Cromwell and his Men, imitating
the Discipline of the ancient English, with Swords in hand rushed into the
thickest of their Enemies: pelting them to death at a distance, they looked on
rather as a sign of cowardice then courage: the Scotch not being well
acquainted with that manner of Discipline, did not like this rough handling;
and therefore betake themselves to their heels; accounting that the safest way
to save their lives: but this shift failed them; for Cromwell was as nimble in
pursuit, as resolute in fight. Lieutenant General Bailey finding smart blows on
his back, when he dared not turn his face, being driven into Warrington Town,
there capitulates to deliver himself and four thousand with him prisoners at
War: which was immediately done. We should here remember the Exployts of
Hamilton himself, if he had done any; but more like a Duck, then a Duke, and
General of an Army, he flees away to Vttoxeter; whither being pursued, he was
there taken prisoner by Col. Wait, and about 3000 Horse with him.

He being soon after brought to London; and not long after that, to a Trial for
his Invasion; this was one of his Plea's to his Charge, That he was invited.
But he found very sorry entertainment: for after he had been thus shamefully
beaten, he (with others) was adjudged to lose his head.

This great Battle was very considerable in many respects, as to the Victory it
self, 2000 being slain on the several places, and near upon 10000 prisoners
taken, one hundred Colors, with all their bag and baggage: then it conduced
much to the carrying on the Parliaments Designs at that time; and withal, left
no hope of relief for those stout hearts that so obstinately defended
Colchester; whose designs, although they were against the times, yet 'twas an
Honor for the Nation, that it could produce such Men.

Cromwell after this Victory, (being yet reeking hot with the slaughter of the
Scots at Preston) posts away to acquaint Monro (who was then come into England
as a reserve to the Duke with a considerable Force) what was become of Hamilton
and his great Army, which was reputed so formidable, that it is very name
terrified at a distance. Monro having notice of his coming, had learnt so much
wit in Germany, whilst he was in great Gustavus his service, as to fight with
none but them that were of his match; and knowing the English would be too hard
for him, he withdraws back again into Scotland, where presently after he was
disbanded.

Cromwell having thus rid the whole Nation in general of a great fear, and eased
the North in particular of that sad burden they groaned under by the Plunder
and Oppression of the Scots Army, prosecutes his Victory to the utmost, entering
into Scotland it self. In his way he reduced Barwick and Carlisle to their
former obedience, both being delivered on composition. Before his entrance into
Scotland, he drew the Army to a Randezvouze on the Banks of Tweede, and caused
Proclamation to be made at the head of every Regiment of Horse and Foot, that
on the pain of death no Cattle nor Goods should be forced from the Scotch
people by any of his Soldiers in their March, without an especial order; but
that in all things they should demean themselves civilly in their March and
Quarters, not giving offense to any: such care had this great Captain to
observe the same Discipline in Scotland, which before was established in
England. So taking his way directly for Edinburgh, he was met by many of the
Scottish Nobility and Gentry from the Committee of Estates, with congratulatory
Orations in honor of his worthy Achievements; acknowledging that his presence
would conduce much to the settlement of their distracted Kingdom. Being thus
arrived at Edinburgh, he was received with great demonstrations of joy, and
lodged in the Earl of Murray's House: to him resorted the Lord Chancellor of
that Kingdom; the Earls of Leven, Arguile, Cassil; the Lords, Burley, Wariston,
and David Lesley; with many other persons of honor, both of the Nobility and
Gentry. The Lord Provest, with several eminent Citizens, came to welcome him
thither, and present their service to him. When these Visits were over, he
desired the Committee of Estates to seclude out of public Office all that had
any hand in, or did in the least promote Hamiltons late Invasion. To which the
Committee condescended; making this request withal, (being fearful of
themselves, and doubting new stirs might arise* after the departure of the
English Army) that the General would leave some Forces with them, which might
be ready to quell any Insurrections; promising, that when they had raised a
Force sufficient for their own defense, then they would dismiss them, and
return them again to their own Country. This was yielded unto; and Major
General Lambert, an experienced Soldier, with three Regiments of Horse, was
appointed for the service.

Now things standing in this posture, to the content of both parties, the Scots
invited Cromwell, and the chief Officers of the Army, to the Castle of
Edinburgh, whither they all went in Coaches, and were highly treated at a
Banquet prepared for them. At their departure, the great Guns and small shot
gave them many vollies for a farewell. Thus was he welcomed by the Scots:
hereafter we shall see how he will welcome himself; for this is not the last
time which he means to visit them: his next errand I fear will be less to their
content.

Cromwell having now finished what he came about, prepares to depart. October
the 16, 1648. he leaves Edinburgh, being conducted some miles on his way by
Arguile, and some other of the Scotch Nobility; at whose parting, great
demonstrations of affection past betwixt them.

Cromwell now bends his course directly to Carlisle, from thence marches
Southerly, to compel Col. John Morris, and those bold fellows, to yield, that
held out Pontefract Castle. This place, though not very great, was very
considerable as to the strength of it; but 'twas not the Fortification, nor
Wall of Stones, but the Wall of Bones (as it were) that made it so famous at
this time all the Kingdom over. The Garrison consisted of about 400 Foot, and
130 Horse, bold desperate Fellows, as may be perceived by some of their
Actions. One day there issued out of the Castle a party of Horse, who fetched in
Sir Arthur Ingram, and made him pay 1500 l. for his Ransom, before he could get
from them. Again, afterward Captain Clayton and most of his Troop, was seized
upon by them, and made prisoners: 200 head of Cattle, with many Horses, they
fetched into the Castle, whilst Sir Henry Cholmley lay before it with his
Forces to keep them in. But the boldest trick of all, was this: One morning
before day there sallied out 40 Horse, who post away to Doncaster, where Col.
Rainsborough then quartered, who had a Commission to command in chief before
the Castle: when they were come near the Town, three of the party left their
Fellows without, and confidently marching in, enquired for Col. Rainsborough's
quarters; which when they had notice of, they entered, pretending to deliver a
Letter to him from Lieutenant General Cromwell: The Col. little dreaming that
these were the Messengers of death, confidently opens his Chamber door to
receive the Letter; but instead thereof, he received that fatal wound into his
heart, that sent him to his grave: And although his Forces were about him, and
kept guard in the Town; yet these confident Fellows got back into the Castle in
the middle of the day.

To curb these insolences, Cromwell (immediately after he had settled the
Northern Counties in peace and quietness) comes to the Leaguer; and having
ordered the several Posts for a close Siege, so that now they could not range
abroad, he left a strong party before it, commanded by Lambert (who was come
thither out of Scotland.) Himself marches up to London, and takes his place in
the Parliament, who were sufficiently sensible of the large testimony he had
given in Scotland, of his prudence in governing his Army whilst they were in
that Kingdom, and with what civility both Officers and Soldiers behaved
themselves, together with their care to avoid all causes of offense both in
their Quarters and March. They thereupon order the hearty thanks of the House
of to be given to this worthy Captain; which was accordingly done by the
Speaker, whilst he sat among them; he receiving it with great humility, (after
his manner) not taking to himself the least of all those great things that were
wrought by him, but attributing them wholly to GOD, who is the Giver of
Victories.

Now the smooth countenance of Peace having once again appeared over most part
of the Nation, the Parliament takes into consideration the punishment of the
chief abettors and promoters of the late War; and looking upon the King as a
chief Instrument, they resolve to bring him to a speedy Trial: in order
whereunto, a Charge was drawn up against him, consisting of many Heads;
chiefly, That he was the Promoter of the Rebellion in Ireland, The Contriver of
the Wars in England: and what blood soever had been spilt in the Nation in the
time of the Wars, was put to his Charge, as an Actor in and at many
engagements; with many other Enormities and Crimes which they said he was
guilty of.

To carry on this work thus begun, a high Court of Justice was erected,
consisting of some Lords, many Members of the House of Commons, and Officers of
the Army; over whom was set Sergeant Bradshaw, as President of the Court. All
things being thus prepared, the King was conducted to St. James's from Windsor
by a party of Horse, and afterward removed to Sir Robert Cottons House, in
order to his Trial, which lasted three days: in fine, he was condemned, and
presently after executed before his Palace of White Hall, on Tuesday, January
the 30, 1648.

Thus fell King Charles; a man endued with singular Virtues: temperate he was
above all his Predecessors, both as to Wine and Women, taking no more of the
first, then might well suffice and cherish Nature; and for the last, constant
to one; insomuch that none of all the preceding Kings that arrived to his
years, (except his Royal Father) could be compared to him. He was a good
Theologician, not only in the Theorick, but Practiced what he knew. None ever
undertook him in dispute, but much admired his Parts; even those Ministers
which the Parliament sent to him in Isle of Wight, besides many others: the
Earl of Worcester and Mr. Hendersen, were both silenced with his Arguments. He
was endued with much Patience, Prosperity and Adversity being both one to him,
working little else in him, but only to show that he had an absolute command
over his Passions and Affections. His Actions in the last scene of his Life,
made many pity him, who before had undervaluing thoughts of his Abilities,
looking upon him as too weak to bear the burden of three Kingdoms on his
Shoulders. In a word, he wanted nothing, but less confidence in those about
him, and more courage and resolution in himself, to be a happy King.

This Tragedy being over, the Parliament immediately changed the Government
into a Commonwealth, voting a King and House of Lords to be unnecessary and
chargeable: that the Supreme Authority should reside in the House of Commons
alone, without King or Lords: and to that effect, imposed an Engagement to be
taken by all persons, before they should receive any benefit by the Law, or
enjoy any place of public trust or profit which they could hinder them of.
This Pill many swallowed, but did not like the taste: had it not been wrapped
about in gold (their profit) few would have put it to their Mouths. The
Stomachs of the Clergy most of all nauseated it, being point blank against the
Covenant, which they had taken not long before, and endeavored still to
maintain.

Affairs of State standing thus, the Parliament find the Nation full of
Soldiers that were lately disbanded, some by force in the field, as the Kings;
and others the Parliaments, formerly in their service, but now disbanded for
supernumeraries: these for the most part were men of Fortune, who by reason of
their long continuance from their Callings, could not possibly set themselves
to work, and therefore must use their Swords to the best advantage, either upon
some new employment, or exercise arms on the Highway. Our new State being very
sensible of this (as they were not only vigilant to see, but careful in
preventing all inconveniences that might happen) found out a way to divert
these ill Humors that lay lurking in the Body of the Nation, by sending* them
to Ireland, where they might do GOD and their Country good service, in subduing
the Rebels that now were grown so powerful, that no place but Londonderry, and
Dublin it self, were able to withstand them; nor they neither, without speedy
succors from England.

This Rebellion (the most barbarous and bloody of any that ever broke out in
any part of the world, acted by Devils in humane shape, rather then by men,
murdering no less then 200000 Protestants in two Months time, without any
regard either to Age or Sex) was put in practice on the 23 day of October,
1641. which though it had been contrived with such privacie, and acted with
such violence, yet Divine Providence did wonderfully preserve Dublin, to be a
Refuge for such as escaped thither from other places, to avoid the fury of
their bloody Persecutors.

Now Ireland lying in this sad condition, weltring in blood, and overwhelmed in
the greatest Misery that Fire and Sword could inflict, many of the poor
Protestants get into England, hoping there to find shelter from the
persecuting Enemy: but this proved little comfort to those distressed Souls;
for here they find, to the great Augmentation of their Grief, that England
prepares on all sides to act the same upon one another, which had been done
against them in Ireland. But although the difference between the King and
Parliament grew vvider every day then other, they endeavoring rather to get
advantages, then compose differences; yet 'twas so agreed, that some Regiments
should be sent over into Ireland, to stop the proceedings of the Rebels: which
in effect was but as a Bucket of water cast on a flaming House, that could do
little to the quenching of it.

After some time, the King in England finding his strength every day more and
more decrease, and the Parliament to get ground of him in most places, did not
only send for those Forces out of Ireland again, but many of the Rebels
themselves came to his assistance, so that Ireland by this was in a worse
condition then ever, forsaken of all, and left to be vvorried by those
Blood-thirsty Wolves; worse by a thousand degrees then the ravenous brood
which their Country produces: yet when their condition was at the worst, it
pleased GOD (who never fails his People in distress, but makes their necessity
his opportunity) to stir up the Parliament in England with Bowels of
compassion to look on the distresses of their Brethren. Long had they fasted
and prayed for them, but did not add to it their helping hand: one without the
other can never do much good; but joined together, a small Force is sufficient
to accomplish great Designs. A desperate disease requires a desperate Cure.
The State-Physitians of England having now quite purged out Monarchy with all
its Appendants, and verified the words of Bishop Laud, No Bishop, no King; the
first (with the Ceremonies of the Church) being fallen, quickly after came the
other down also; they resolve to send the same sharp medicine to cure the
Bleeding VVounds of Ireland, which (they thought) had cured England: and to
that end they send over an Army under the Command of Valiant Cromwell; whose
Actions there, we now come to.

HIS WARS IN IRELAND.
A General ought to have these four Properties to make him Victorious:

1. A good Cause. 2. Strict Discipline. 3. Valor and Resolution. 4. Lastly,
Celerity.
For the first, none but the Papists will deny it: for the rest, no man in the
world could show more Valor and Resolution, nor Prudence to govern it, then
General Cromwell. A strict Discipline he ever observed, which is the Life of an
Army; sparing none that transgrest against the Articles of War which were
instituted for their better conduct. His Soldiers carriage and behavior,
through their Generals care, won more then his Sword. A Design being once
resolved upon, usually himself was the Messenger to bring the Enemy tidings
thereof, and then he would hardly give them leave to Arm before he assaulted
them either by Storm or Battle.

This made the old Emperor of Germany say to some of his Courtiers, upon his
hearing of News from England, That he thought Cromwell by transmigration was
possessed with the Spirit of Gustavus his old Enemy: so near did their actings in
the Wars agree.

Ireland (to speak of its condition a little before he undertook his expedition
thither) was in a manner wholly reduced by Ormond, formerly made Lord-Deputy by
the Queen; who having joined his Forces to the Rebels, and Inchequeen himself
being now fallen off from that cause which before he stoutly defended, no
visible Force remained in the Field to oppose the Enemy, who had the Kingdom
wholly at their devotion, except Londonderry, which was governed by Sir
Charles Coot; and Dublin the chief City, wherein was Col. Michael Jones, with
no great Force; and that which made it less, was the suspicion he had of his
own Soldiers fidelity, who many times deserted their Colors. The Enemy with a
numerous Army lay under the VValls of it, with many menacing Summons, requiring
of them a speedy rendition: yet through the vigilance of the Governor Valiant
Jones, it held out to the confusion of the Besiegers. But his present danger
made him reiterate his Calls to the Parliament in England for speedy Aid of Men
and Provisions, alleging, that else all would be lost: and they being
sensible of his condition, expedite their Assistance, appointing Com. Genesis
Ireton, Col. Scroop, Col. Horton, Major Genesis Lambert, with their four Regiments
of Horse; Col. Ewers, Col. Cook, Col. Huson, and Col. Dean, with theirs of
Foot, and five Troops of Dragoons, all old Soldiers of the English Army, whose
Valor had often been tried in many sharp Encounters, and found not to fear the
countenance of the fiercest Enemy. Besides these, other Regiments were raised
by beat of Drum, to make up the number sufficient to carry on the Work
effectually.

The Soldiers being in readiness, and nothing wanting but a General, the
Parliament having had experience of Cromwels great worth and valor, knowing no
man more fitting for the Employment, desired him to accept of it; who received
it with a great deal of cheerfulness; expressing how ready he was to serve in
this Employment above any in the world, not doubting but GOD would make of him
an Instrument to execute Vengeance upon the Rebellious Irish. This answer was
so highly resented by the Parliament, that immediately they constitute him
General of all their Forces in that Kingdom, and Lord Governor both as to
Civil and Military Affairs in the Nation. Col. Jones they commissionated
Lieutenant General of the Horse. This being done, the Soldiers march with
great speed (not resting above one night in a place) to the Randezvous near
Milford in Wales, there to expect the Lord Deputy Cromwell; who having
dispatched his business with the Parliament, began his Journey.

Tuesday July 10, 1649. leaving London, he set forward in great state, himself
drawn in a Coach with six Flanders Mares, attended by many Members of the
Parliament, and Council of State, with the chiefest Officers of the Army; his
Lifeguard consisting of eighty men, which had been formerly Commanders,
bravely mounted and accouter'd, both themselves and Servants. Thus he rid to
Branford, where those Gentlemen that accompanied him took leave, wishing a
successful issue to this design: which was answered again with great respect.
Away he posts for Bristol, to take order for the Train of Artillery, and many
other businesses needful for the hastening his men on Shipboard. From thence he
takes his way to Wales, having before sent three Regiments, (viz. Col. Reynolds
of Horse, Col. Venables and Col. Muncks of Foot) these as the Vaunt-Coureurs to
the Army, were shipped from Chester and the Ports thereabout; who being favored
with a prosperous Gale, soon arrived at the Port of Dublin, where they were
received with unspeakable Joy and Gladness: the Citizens spared for nothing
that might be a comfort to the Sea-sick Soldiers, hoping that the recovery of
their Health, might be an enlargement of their Liberties, who now were
wholy confined within the narrow compass of their City-walls. They were not
at all deceived in their expectation: Jones his courage being much heightened by
the arrival of these men, now scorned the Enemies Bravadoes, and resolves
(upon the first opportunity) by Gods blessing, to remove them farther off;
which it was not long before he performed: as appears by what follows. On
Tuesday, August 2. 1649. the Enemy confidently draws down (with a party of
1500 Foot besides Horse) to Baggotsrold, a place within one quarter of a Mile
Eastward of the City upon the Sea: hence they intended to run their trenches
toward the Cityworks, and thereby secure those Forts which were intended to be
made toward the water, to hinder the landing of supplies and succors expected
from England. But Jones and Reynolds, with those other Commanders in the City,
observing the intent of the Enemy, saw a necessity to interrupt them in their
design, and therefore speedily drawing out twelve hundred Horse, and four
thousand Foot, they with these quickly enter the works (which the Enemy had
newly raised) and fell upon them with so much courage, that they routed their
Horse at the first charge: the greatest part of the Foot were soon after cut in
pieces, and most of the rest taken prisoners.

This success so heated Jones his Men, that they followed the chase to
Rathmines, where Ormond's Camp was, and there they engaged his whole Army,
consisting of 19000 Men. The report of this bold Attempt, quickly reached the
General Ormond's Ears, who then (like a doughty Commander) was valiantly
playing at Tables in his own Tent; and being told the news, wished the Rebels
(as he called them) would come, that so he might have sport with them. His wish
he had, but not the wished effect: for the Tables are soon turned, the sport
proving very bad and bloody to Ormonds whole Army, who were totally routed with
a very great slaughter; 4000 killed in the fight and chase, 2517 prisoners
taken, most of them men of quality; amongst the rest, Ormonds own Brother: All
their great Guns, Ammunition and Provision, they left behind them, and withal,
a rich Camp, to reward the valiant Soldiers; who, with the spoil thereof,
quickly clothed themselves in rich Habits, and so marched into the City as it
were incognito; for many of the Officers knew not their own Soldiers, they
were grown so fine. This Victory was obtained with the loss of few, the number
not exceeding twenty.

The News of this great Victory quickly reached the Lord Governor Cromwell at
Milford Haven, who was then shipping himself and Army. August the 13, he set
sail from thence with thirty two ships, wherein was the Van of the Army: on
the 15 day, Major General Ireton followed after with the Body, shipped in
forty two sail: Mr. Hugh Peter's brought up the Rear, in about twenty sail. The
Winds being favorable, quickly brought them to Dublin, where they were
received with all the signs of Joy imaginable; the great Guns ecchoed forth
their vvelcome, and the peoples Acclamations resounded in every street. When
Cromwell (the now Lord Governor) was come into the City (the concourse of
people being very great to see him, whom before they had heard so much of) at
a convenient place he made a stand, and in an humble posture, having his Hat in
his Hand, he speaks thus to the people: That as God had brought him thither in
safety, so he doubted not but (by his Divine Providence) to restore them all to
their just Liberties and Proprieties; and that all those whose hearts
affections were real for the carrying on of the great work against the barbarom
and bloody-thirsty Irish, and the rest of their Adherents and Confederates, for
the propagating of the Gospel of Christ, the establishing of Truth and Peace,
and restoring that bleeding Nation to its former happiness and tranquillity,
should find favor and protection from the Parliament of England, and himself;
and withal, should receive such endowments and gratuities as should be
answerable to their Merits.

This Speech was highly applauded by the people, and answer returned by many
hundreds, That they would live and dye with him.

The Army being all vvafted over, the General knowing that without Gods
blessing his labor would be in vain, therefore (to obtain it) he published a
Proclamation, strictly forbidding all persons under his Command to use the
frequent practice of swearing, cursing, and drunkenness; declaring a full
resolution to punish with the greatest severity that the Law could inflict, all
those that should neglect or contemn the same. This wrought a great
Reformation; many taking warning, by the punishment of some. The Army being
now refreshed, and the Lord-Governour having settled the Affairs of the City,
both Military and Civil, he draws the Army out of Dublin to a general Muster,
where appeared a complete Body of 15000 Horse and Foot: out of these were
drawn twelve Regiments, containing in number between 9 or 1000 stout resolute
Men, for the present Expedition. This Army being provided with all things
necessary either for Offense or Defense, drawing along with them a gallant
train of Artillery, four whole Cannon, and five Demy-cannons, besides other
Pieces useful either for a Siege or the field, the Lord-Governour marches them
away, and quickly seats himself under the Walls of Tredagh. Here he finds a
most resolute enemy, that would sooner break then bend: the Governor of the
Town was Sir Arthur Ashton (who had formerly been Governor of Reading and
Oxford in England for the King) a Soldier he was, that would not be
complemented out of his Garrison; nothing ^ut force must do the fear. With him
were about 3000 Horse and Foot, most of them English. Observing the Rules of
War, Cromwell sent them a Summons; which was slighted, and looked upon rather
as a formality, then that he did believe to have the Town upon it. This taking
no effect, the Lord-Governour orders all things for a quick dispatch of the
Siege: Aiscough's ships block them up by Sea; on the Land, the white Flag was
taken in, and the Red Ensign displayed before the Town, to denounce blood and
destruction without a speedy rendition. This did not much frighten the
besieged, who expected succor from Ormond; and besides, they were unanimous
in this resolution, To expire with the Town; which they did shortly after:
for now a strong Battery being planted, it quickly levelled the Steeple of a
Church (so that it could not properly be called a Steeple-House) on the South
side the Town, and a Tower by it. The next day, the Battery continuing, after
two or three hundred shot made, the corner Tower between the East and Southwall
was beaten down, and two breaches made, which were quickly entered by Col.
Husons, Ewers, and Castle's Regiments of Foot, the breaches being not wide
enough to admit the Horse to enter with them. Here the height of Valor was
shown on both sides; they grappling with each other at the Swords point; the
Assailants fighting for the Town, and the Defenders for their Lives, (which
indeed will make a coward fight, though he fear to look upon the blows he
gives:) the breaches were not more courageously assaulted, then valiantly
defended; the Enemy within gallantly charging those that entered, driving them
back again with more speed then they came in. Cromwell all this while standing
at the Battery, and perceiving his Men's retreat, draws out a fresh reserve of
Col. Ewers his Foot, and in person enters with them once more into the Town.
The example of their General, with the shame of the former repulse, so
animated the Soldiers, that none were able to stand in their way: and having
now got sure footing in the Town, they spare none, but put all they met with
to the Sword. But though the town was thus vvon, it was not wholy subdued:
for Ashtons men desperately disputed every corner of the streets, making the
Assailants vvin what they had by inches; and at last, the streets proving too
hot, they betook themselves to the Churches and Steeples, and other places of
shelter: in St. Peter's Church-steeple were got about one hundred, who there
resolved to sell their lives at as dear a rate as possibly they could: but they
were all soon blown up with Gunpowder, only one man escaped, by leaping
from the Tower; the Wind being favorable to him, he only broke his leg by the
fall; which the Soldiers seeing, took him up, and gave him quarter. In other
places they were summoned to yield; which they refusing, presently strong
Guards were put upon them, to prevent their succor, that so they might be
starved out: which device was so effectual, that it made them soon yield to
the Conquerers Mercy; which was but small: for all the Officers, with the
tenth man of the Soldiery, were presently killed, and the rest thrust on
shipboard for Barbados. The Governor had his share also, making an end both
of his Life and Government together.

This Town was the most considerable that ever Cromwell came before, if we
respect the stout resistance made by its Garrison, and how much the having of
this place might conduce to the reducing of all Ireland: and though the attempt
was bloody, Cromwell himself giving command not to spare any one that should be
found in Arms; yet Cruelty could not be laid to his charge: for, like a
Politic State-Physitian, he here opens one Vein, to preserve the whole Body
of the Nation from a lingering War; and by this course likewise he wrought
such a terror in the Enemy, that ever after he made but short work of any
Siege, and in small time reduced the whole Nation.

The report of this great slaughter, quickly flies away to Trim and Dundalk,
(the two next Garrisons) which put them into such a pannick fear, that they
quitted the Towns: in Trim their haste was so great, that they left their
great Guns behind them on the Platforms.

Not long after this service was over, the Lord-Governour knowing this stroke
was as it were given upon the Lungs, and that a sprightly prosecution would
quickly beat the Enemy out of breath; he resolves to make use of the present
opportunity. Now his quarters were so much enlarged by his good success
Northwards, to the end he may get Elbow-room on both sides of Dublin, he
marches the Army Westward to attacque Wexford. In his March, a place called
Killingkerick (about 14 miles from Dublin) was quitted, and a company of
Cromwels Army put into it: so likewise was Arcklo-Castle, the seat of Ormonds
Family. Besides these, many other places in their March submitted.

October. 1. the Army faced Wexford, and required the Governor Col. David Synnot,
to make a speedy surrender thereof. His answer was very doubtful as to his
intentions, which occasioned many papers to pass betwixt him and the Lord
Cromwell. This delay of the Governor, was purposely used, to protract time,
until the the Earl of Castle-haven had entered into the Town 500 Foot to
strengthen the Garrison. The Governor having received these recruits, resolves
now to stand to it as long as he could, seeming to contemn the Force that lay
against him. Near the South-East end of the Town is seated the Castle; upon
that, Cromwell bends his greatest Force, knowing that the gaining thereof would
be the Towns reducement: Which fell out to be true: For many Peals of great
shot were not played upon it, but the Governors stomach fell down to a
rendition. The Soldiers being now possessed of the Castle, and showing
themselves from thence, struck such a terrible Fear into them in the Town, that
they quitted the Walls; which Cromwell's Soldiers perceiving, in a trice they
clapped to their scaling Ladders, and stormed without any great resistance. Being
thus entered the Town, none was suffered to breath, that was found in Arms:
and so cutting their way through the Streets, they came to the Marketplace,
where the Enemy (as if the blood had returned to the heart now at the last
gasp) most manfully fought for some time. This sharp encounter lasted not long,
before they were quite broken, and all that were found in Arms put to the Sword.

The reducement of this place was of great consequence to the Conquerers, being
a Port-Town, and very convenient to receive supplies from England. From thence
the Army march to Rosse a strong Town situate upon the Barrow, and far more
considerable for Navigation then Wexford, the River admitting a Ship of seven
or eight hundred Tun to ride by the Wall. Of this place Major General Taaff was
Governor, who had with him a strong Garrison; and to make all sure, Ormond,
Castlehaven, and the Lord of Ards, in their own Persons, caused 1500 men more
to be boated over to reinforce it. Of this, the Army were Spectators, but could
do nothing to impede their Entrance. The Lord Governor no sooner approached
it, but he sent the Governor a Summons, to this effect: That since his coming
into Ireland, he ever avoided the effusion of blood; having been before no
place, where he did not first send them such terms as might be for their
preservation; and to continue the like course, he summons them to deliver up
the town to the Parliament of England. To this no answer at present was
returned, until three great Guns planted before it began to play: then the
Governor fearing to fall into the same Praemuniri that other Garrisons had done
before, was content to treat; which they did, and came to this issue, That the
Town be delivered up, and they within march away with bag and baggage.

Whilst these things were in doing, Kingsale, Cork, Youghal, Bandon-bridge, and
other Garrisons voluntarily declared, and came under obedience: In the North,
Sir Charles Coot and Col. Venables were very successful: the Lord Braughal, and
Col. Huson, in other places, did very good service. I should here particularize
some of them, but that my whole design is to march along with the main Body of
the Army.

Ross being now in Cromwels Possession, he caused a Bridge of Boats to be laid
over the River Barrow, and the Army to sit down before Duncannon, a strong Fort
commanded by Col. Woggen, (who had formerly served the King in England.) This
place was so well provided with all things, that upon consideration at a
Council of War, it was looked upon to be time lost in tarrying long before it:
therefore the Army speedily rise, and march away into the County of Kilkenny,
where Ormond, having joined his Forces with Inchequeen, gave out that he would
fight, whatever came of it. His Army was strong both in Horse and Foot, far
outpassing Cromwell's, who was weakened by continual duty, hard marches, the Flux
and other sicknesses raging amongst them, occasioned by wants, and unseasonable
weather, commonly quartering in the field: yet for all this, Ormond, that Ignis
fatuus, upon the approach of the Army, (whose weaknesses at that time required
rather an Hospital to cure their distempers, then an Enemy to make fresh
wounds) vanished away, without giving one stroke: Whereupon Col. Abbot reduced
Enisteoge, a little walled Town about five miles from Ross: and Col. Reynolds
with twelve Troops of Horse, and three Troops of Dragoons, marching up to
Carrick, having divided his men into two parts; whilst they were amused with
the one party, he entered a gate with the other, taking about one hundred
Officers and Soldiers, without the loss of one man.

The news of this place no sooner arrives at Ross, but the Lord-Governour
Cromwell (who for some time had lain there sick) marched away immediately to
reduce the City of Waterford, hoping to gain that important place before the
Army should draw into Winter Quarters. No sooner was he come before it, but a
Regiment of Horse, and three Troops of Dragoons, were dispatched away to reduce
Passage-Fort: this party soon made them desire quarter, and deliver up the Fort
and Castle: in it were five great Guns, and much Arms and Ammunition. These
Garrisons, now in the hands of those that could make good use of them, were of
great importance to the reducement of Munster, and consequently of all Ireland.

The Lord-Governour being now before Waterford, and seeing the City resolved to
stand upon their own defense; it being now December, the weather also very wet,
and his Forces weak, he draws them off into VVinter-quarters, that they might
be refreshed against the Spring, to finish the work so prosperously begun.
Their quarters were at Bandon-Bridge; Col. Ewer and his Regiment, at Kingsale;
Col. Stubber, at Cork; Col. Phaier and Col. Cook, at Wexford; and Youghal the
Headquarters: in other places convenient for a quick conjunction if occasion
should serve, the Army was placed.

Now the Soldiery are taking their rest, we may look back a little upon some
Actions which fell out since their leaving Waterford. No sooner was the Army
marched away, but Passage-Fort was besieged by a party from Waterford, and
another from Duncannon, joined together: but Col. Zanckey setting upon them,
routed the whole party, killing a great many, and carrying away 350 prisoners.
Many other Skirmishes were maintained with the like success: yet little comfort
could be had in them, when the loss of Lieutenant General Jones was reflected
upon; he died of a violent Fever at Dungarven, December 20, 1649. He was a man
real to that trust which was reposed in him; a daring man, yet governing his
Valor with discretion, which makes a good Soldier* not rash, but advised in
all his attempts: a great loss he was to the Army, yet not all, for quickly
after followed Col. Wolf, and Scout-Master-General Roe; the Army had their
share of this mortality: if the Commanders fall, how can it be expected the
common Soldiers should escape free? But to salve up the business, continual
supplies were sent by the Parliament from England, which made them, as it were,
immortal: so that though many men were lost, their number was not diminished.

Whilst the Army lay in their quarters, Cromwell was not idle; he visited all
the Garrisons that were in his possession in Munster, and ordered all Affairs
both Military and Civil. Coming to Kingsale, the Mayor (as in other places)
presented him with the Mace and Keys; which he kept, (not returning them again)
and conferred the Office upon another. This was looked upon the more, because
it had not been used by the Lord Governor: but the Mayor being an Irishman,
and withal a Papist, it was not thought fit to trust such a one with the
Government of so considerable a place.

Now Cromwell, knowing that he which intends to do much business, must rise
betimes, and lose no opportunity; his Soldiers had not breathed in their
Winter Quarters fully two months, before he marched out of Youghal with about
3000, to enlarge his quarters: when they were in the field, he divided them
into two parties; himself took one, the other was led by Ireton, who marched
away to Carrick, there to reinforce himself by the conjunction of Col.
Reynolds. These were to march into the Enemies quarters two several ways, and
to meet together at a Rondezvous near Kilkenny: in order to this design,
Cromwell takes with him one party, and marches away over the Blackwater toward
the Counties of Limerick and Tipperary. The first place he took in, was a
Castle called Kilkenny upon the edge of the County of Limerick: afterward in
his march, fell in Clogheen-House, and Roghil-Castle: here he passed the River
Sewer with much difficulty, and immediately marched away to Featherd, a
Garison-Town governed by one Butler: about ten at night they got into the
Suburbs, and sent a Trumpet with a summons to the Town; which at first was
slighted; but they taking a resolution to storm, Commissioners were sent to
treat, who agreed upon Articles to deliver up the Town, and march away with
their Arms. The taking of this place much refreshed the Army, who were tired
with tempestuous weather.

Yet here they tarried not long, but removed to Callyne, a Garrison of the Enemy
about six miles from Kilkenny, where they joined with Ireton, Reynolds, and
Zankey, making up in all a considerable Body. The chief strength of Callyne
consisted in three Castles that were in the Town; these the Soldiers stormed
one after another, and carried them all, putting all to the Sword they met
with: this so terrified those that kept a House about a Musket Shot from the
Town, that immediately they sent to desire liberty to march away to Kilkenny;
which was granted. When the Soldiers had sufficiently recruited their
Knapsacks with the provisions taken in the Town, they marched back again to
Featherd; by the way, the two Castles of Knoctover and Bullynard were reduced:
presently after fell in Kiltennon, Arfennon, Coher, and Dyndrum, very
considerable places: in taking the latter, Col. Zanckey received a shot through
the hands.

The Lord Governor Cromwell had now wholly subjugated all places of advantage,
except Limerick Waterford, Clonmel, Galloway, and Kilkenny: these were strong,
and required much time; however, he resolves upon the last: but considering
that the strength he had would not be sufficient to carry on the design, he
sent for Col. Huson to march speedily up to him with his Forces; which he did,
and by the way took the Castle of Loughin; afterward he joins with the
Lord-Governours Army near Goram, a populous Town, strengthened by a strong
Castle, which was commanded by Col. Hammond a Kentish man: to him was sent an
invitation to deliver up the Castle; but he trusting to the Valor of his men,
which were Ormonds own Regiment, returned a very resolute answer; thereupon,
the great Guns quickly roared out their persuasions, which made him beat a
Parley when 'twas too late; for no other conditions could now be obtained, but
these: That the common Soldiers should have their lives, and the Officers be
disposed of as should be thought fit. These sharp conditions being yielded
unto, the next day, Hammond his Major, and the rest of the Commission-Officers
(all but one) were shot to death; and the Priest that was Chaplain to the
Catholics in the Regiment, hanged.

This place being thus vvon, preparations were made for the besieging of the
City of Kilkenny. This Garrison required a more then ordinary Force to master
it: for besides the Soldiers of the ordinary Garrison there, to it had resorted
all those that had yielded upon Articles the small Castles and Towns in that
County. Yet this did not at all discourage Cromwell, whose imaginations
comprehended all things that were not impossible; and he scorning that this
one place, though never so strong, should be a dam to stop the current of his
Victories; March 22, 1650. he dislodged the Army, sending first of all a small
party of Horse before upon discovery; quickly after, came up the Body: within
a mile of the City, there he made a stand, and sent the Governor Sir Walter
Butler, and the Corporation, a summons to deliver up the City for the use of
the Parliament of England. The next day an answer was returned, but not
satisfactory: thereupon, the approaches were made near to the Wall, and a
Battery of three Guns planted to play upon the best place that could be to
annoy the besieged, and vvithal to open an entrance to the Besiegers. All this
while, they within were not idle; but perceiving where the Lord Cromwell bent
his greatest strength, they provide there to make the greatest opposition, by
raising two Retrenchments on the inside, strongly pallisadoing them, and
placing some pieces that might play to the best advantage: but above all, there
was a crew of choice men that promised much. Cromwell hating delay, when his
business required dispatch, caused the Guns to play; which had not made fully
one hundred shot, before a breach was opened. While this was in doing, Col.
Ewers with 1000 Foot was ordered to endeavor the possession of one part of
the City, called Irish Town: and the better to facilitate the enterprise,
Cromwell gave the sign for the Soldiers to fall into the breach: which they
had no sooner done, but they were beaten out again with loss; and so
disheartened by it, that the storm was left off: yet for all that, Col. Ewers
carried the Irish Town with small loss, which made satisfaction for this
affront. There being on the other side of the River another small Town, or
Suburbs to the main City, it was thought fit to send eight companies of Foot to
possess it: which was done without any opposition. The gaining of this,
encouraged them to endeavor to force a passage over the Bridge into the City;
but it proved to the same effect as at the breach before. But these desperate
attempts made the Governor reflect upon his condition; and the rather, because
the Garrison in Cantwel* Castle, whom Butler had sent for, desired Passes of the
Lord Cromwell to go beyond Sea to serve foreign Princes, engaging to act
nothing prejudicial to the Parliament of England: which was granted them. That
was one thing that discouraged him; but chiefly this, that he must not only
defend himself, but withal must be his own relief, there being no Army in the
field sufficient to do it; and withal, the longer he held out, the worse it
would be for him. These things considered, made him hearken to a Treaty; which
being once commenced, they soon concluded to deliver up the City and Castle
upon these terms:

1. To deliver up the City and Castle to the Lord Cromwell, with all the Arms,
Ammunition, and public store.

2. The Inhabitants of Kilkenny to be protected in their Persons, Goods and
Estates, from the violence of the Soldiery; and they that were desirous of
removal, to have liberty three Months after the date of the Articles.

3. The Governor, Officers and Soldiers to march away with bag and baggage.

4. The City to pay 2000 pounds as a gratuity to his Excellency the Lord
Cromwels Army.

Thus was the City of Kilkenny (which had been the seat of the supreme Council,
and the Center where the lines of all their pernicious devices met, the
productions whereof had so malevolent an influence upon poor Ireland) brought
under obedience in six days time, (for no longer the Siege lasted) chiefly by
the industry and indefatigable pains of the Lord Cromwell, who ever was a
partaker with his Soldiers in their hardships, and never flincht from them at
any time when need required his personal valor; insomuch, that at many places
he laid by the dignity of a great Commander, to act the part of a private
Soldier.

Here he tarried no longer a time then was requisite to settle the Affairs of
the City; which having done, he then marched the Army to Carrick, from thence
to proceed upon farther Action.

Ormond, Castle-haven, and the Bishop of Clogher, being now very sensible of
the desperate condition their Affairs were reduced to, had a meeting at
Baltamore in Westmeath, with the Gentlemen of that County, to confer about some
better way to support that cause which hitherto they had so poorly defended.
The chief heads of this Debate were:

1. Whether they were able to raise such Forces as might be sufficient to fight
the Lord Cromwell, now they conceived his Men were much weakened by the Winter,
and taking in of so many Garrisons. Or,

2. In case they were not able to fight, then with all the Forces they could
make to fall into the English quarters, and there to burn and destroy what they
could.

3. If these two ways were not feisible, then whether it were not most
convenient for them all to join in some propositions of Pacification for the
whole, or every one for himself, to make his particular Application.

This last was hearkened to by some: but the chiefest of them knowing their own
guilt, thought it not likely for them to get good conditions, now necessity
compelled them to be Supplicants; and therefore to mischief the English in
their quarters, was looked upon to be the safest way for them all, to spin out
time, til they could get a fit opportunity to make an escape out of the Land.

The Lord Cromwell having well refreshed his Army after the Siege of Kilkenny,
sits down before Clonmel, another strong place, Garrisoned by 2000 Foot, and
sixscore Horse. No sooner was the Leaguer planted, but Col. Reynolds and Sir
Theophilus Jones were sent with 2500 Horse, Foot and Dragoons, to be beforehand
with Ormond, Castlehaven, and those with them that intended an irruption into
the English Quarters; but they shifting from place to place, to avoid fighting,
Col. Reynolds, to keep his men from idleness, joins his Forces with Col. Huson,
and with two great Guns and a Mortar Piece, besieged Trim. Another Party of
1400 Horse and Dragoons, and 1200 Foot, under the Lord Broghil, were sent to
fight the Bishop of Ross, who with 5000 intended to relieve Clonmel. The
Bishops Mitre being metamorphosed into an Helmet, he thought verily to scare
the Lord Broghil with the strangeness of the sight, being such a thing as he
had never seen before, a Bishop that should be the Shepherd of a Flock, now to
head an Army of Wolves: but the Lord Broghil getting to them, in little more
time then one could say two or three Creeds, wholy dissipates them, killing
upon the place betvveen 6 and 700, taking 20 Captains, Lieutenants, and other
Officers; and to bring up the Rear, the Bishop himself was taken, with the
Standard of the Church of Munster. The Lord Broghil having him now in his
power, he carries him to a Castle defended by the Bishops Forces, and there
hangs him up before the walls, in the sight of the Garrison; which wrought such
terror in them, that they delivered up the Castle upon Articles.

These successes of Parties abroad, did much encourage those that besieged
Clonmel; who now on all sides prepare to handle that Garrison, as before they
had done other places. And indeed, the Lord General used more then ordinary
industry in reducing this Town, in regard he had been informed that its
defendants were very unanimous, and that they were choice men, well armed, and
every way sufficiently provided to make a stout resistance: and besides, it was
governed by an active Irishman, one Hugh Boy O Neal, who had set all hands in
the Town on work, to cast up new Countre-scarps on the inside of the old walls,
and to do whatsoever else might serve for the defense of the place; and had so
traversed the ground with Re-intrenchments, that it seemed altogether
impossible to gain it by Assault; nothing but Hunger (as was thought) could
reduce it to obedience: but the active gallantry of the Lord Cromwell, would not
admit of that course; he used not to stand dallying before a place, (as the
Germans, French, and other Nations) trifling out precious time, and expending
vast sums, to little or no purpose: and besides, upon many weighty
considerations, this service required a quick dispatch; chiefly, in regard of
his Expedition into England, whither he had lately been sent for by the
Parliament there, to serve them in some other way. He therefore (without delay)
orders all things for a Storm, intending to try whether that would not either
drown the Enemy, or cool their courage, who were so hotly set upon the defense.
The Governor being summoned to a Rendition, and returning no satisfactory
Answer, the great Guns were planted; which were managed so well, that they
quickly opened a breach; which breach (upon a Signal given) being courageously
entered by the Assailants, they within were not wanting to entertain them with a
manful resistance, and to forbid their march any other way then over their own
bodies: but Cromwell's men (who used not to be thus checked in the career of
their Successes) notwithstanding the Enemies valorous obstinacy, made good
their ground, and maintained a Fight for four hours together, which proved so
hazardous, that the victory hovering betwixt both, it was hard to say on which
side it would light, (there being a great slaughter on both sides) till at
last, the Lord Cromwell (assisted by that good Providence which always attended
him) decided the controversy, by forcing the Enemy to quit the place, and
betake themselves to flight, wherein though they were very much favored by
certain hills near the Town, yet could they not avoid the rage and fury of the
victorious Soldiers, who in pursuit paid them home in their own coin.
Concerning this Fight, I find it thus written by an eminent Commander in the
Army, and an assistant in this encounter: We found in Clonmel (says he) the
stoutest enemy that ever, was found by our Army in Ireland: and it is in my
opinion, and very many more, that there was never seen so hot a storm of so
long a continuance, and so gallantly defended, neither in England nor Ireland.
The Reduction of this place (though at a hard hand) inclined many more to
yield; which they did in a short time after, without striking a stroke.

These Achievements being obtained, and care taken to secure what had been
gotten, the Lord General addresses himself to his journey for England, having
been in Ireland about ten months; viz. from the middle of August 1649. to the
next May following, 1650. a time inconsiderable, respect had to the work done
therein, which was more then ever could be done in ten years before, by any
King or Queen of England. Queen Elizabeth indeed, after a long and tedious War
there, at last drove out the Spaniards that came in to the assistance of the
rebellious Natives; but could never utterly extinguish the sparks of that
Rebellion. And not only did the shortness of the time render the work
admirable, but the nature of the work it self; it being against a most
obstinately-desperate bloody enemy, people that had put themselves out of all
hopes of favor or mercy, by acting the most bloody Tragedy that ever has
been seen or related, in that their universal Massacre of the English, yet
recent in memory.

There remained now only Limerick, Waterford, and some few inconsiderable
Garrisons, to be reduced; which being done, they might find leisure to hunt the
wild Irish, who were fled for refuge among their Boggs. This was left to the
charge of Ireton, whom the Lord Governor having constituted Lord Deputy, he
takes leave of Ireland; and committing himself to the Sea, arrived safely
(after a boisterous passage) at Bristol, where he was received with a
thrice-repeated Volley of great Guns, and other suitable demonstrations of joy.
Hence, without tarrying, he posts for London: drawing near Hounslow-Heath, he
is there met by the Lord General Fairfax, accompanied by many Members of
Parliament and Officers of the Army, with multitudes that came out of
curiosity, to see him, of whom Fame had made such a loud report. Hence, after
mutual salutations, congratulations, and other testimonies of high respect, he
proceeds on; and passing near Hide-park-corner, he is saluted with great Guns,
and several Volleys of small Shot, by Colonel Barkstead's Regiment, which was
drawn up in the Highway for that purpose. Continuing thus their march,
(multitudes increasing to behold him) the Lord Cromwell is conducted to the
house called the Cockpit, near St. James, which had been appointed and
prepared for him. Here he was visited by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London,
and by many other persons of quality, all of them expressing their own and the
Nations great obligations to him for his great Services in Ireland. After some
time of respite and refreshment, he attended his charge in Parliament, where
the Speaker in an elegant Speech gave him the thanks of the House. Which being
ended, the Lord Cromwell gave them an account of the present state of Ireland,
and of the condition of their Forces both in Field and Garrison, with what
designs they were now upon; what strength the Enemy had, and what Garrisons
were then in their power.

The Parliament being thus assured of the hopeful condition of Ireland, began
now wisely to provide for the security of the peace of England, which was now
in danger of disturbance, partly by open Hostility, and partly by the
underhand dealing of some pretended friends. Portugal protects Prince Rupert's
Fleet, notwithstanding the League: France domineers at Sea, making prize of all
the English they could bring under their power. About this time, the Parliament
sends Dr. Dorislaus as an Agent to the States of the United Provinces, for the
begetting and continuance of a right understanding and fair correspondence
betwixt the two Republics; where, not long after his arrival, he was basely
slain by six Assassinates, who rushed into his lodgings at the Hague in
disguise, and escaped unpunished, although the States pretended they had used
their utmost endeavor to take them. In Russia, the English Merchants were much
affronted by that Duke, by reason of his adherence to the House of Stuarts.
Virginia and the Caribes Islands revolted from their obedience to the
Parliament, being very hot for Monarchy and the Liturgy. Nearer home, Scilly,
Jersey, and the Isle of Man, stand out, and miserably infest the Seas with
their Piracie. But above all, the Scots were the most formidable, who seemed to
set their wits on the tenters, that so they might embroyl England in new
troubles, and thereby have opportunity to work their ends upon it. To this end,
a Treaty is commenced betwixt them and their King, at Breda, a famous Town in
the Netherlands belonging to the Prince of Orange. Here they propose,

1. That his Majesty recall and disclaim all Commissions and Declarations
granted by him to the prejudice of the Covenant.

2. That he acknowledge their present Parliament, and the two last Sessions
thereof, and allow of the Acts made therein.

3. They remonstrate the Motives contained in the eleventh Instruction; meaning
Vxbridge-Treaty.

4. That as soon as he comes into Scotland, and before his admission to the
exercise of Royal power, he shall swear, subscribe, and seal the National
Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant.

Their King having assented, and promised in verbo Principis to perform these
things; the Commissioners had order to let him see the Coronation Oath he was
to take; which he approving, they were to invite him into Scotland, assuring
him that he should be entertained there, with all due respect.

To all which things the King at last condescended, partly by the persuasion of
the Prince of Orange, (at whose cost and charges the Treaty was both begun and
continued) and partly, upon hopes that by this means he might gain the easier
footing in England.

The Scots being now impatient of the enjoyment of their King; presence; he, in
order to their satisfaction herein, hastes from Breda toward the Hague, and
from thence to Scheveling, where he took shipping, and not long after, landed
(notwithstanding several snares laid for him) at the Spey in the North of
Scotland.

The Parliament in England were not ignorant of these things; they having
faithful Scouts abroad in the world, who failed not to give them timely notice
of the machinations of their enemies in all quarters. And taking the matter
into consideration in the House, a great debate there was, Whether the war
(for, that there must be a war betwixt us and our dear Brethren, was taken for
granted) should be Offensive or Defensive. As to the later, (the Defensive
part) they were very sensible of the havoc the Scots had formerly made in the
North of England, when they came in as friends; so that should they be suffered
to come in as enemies, nothing could be expected to follow, but ruin and
desolation wheresoever they came. Hamilton's Invasion likewise stuck in their
stomachs, and the devastations that accompanied it. Besides, it was considered,
that to let them give the first blow, had been to make our own Country the seat
of war; and thereby an opportunity would be given to discontented spirits here
(which then were not a few) to join with the enemy. Upon these and other
weighty considerations, the Parliament resolves upon an Offensive war, and to
alarm them in their own Quarters. This Resolution was thought most
advantageous, in many respects: as,

1. Scotland (the Enemies Country) must needs be much impoverished, by being
burdened with two Armies, when it could not well maintain one; and England
would be quit of much fear and calamity incident to quartering of Armies.
Besides, in all encounters, it is good policy to keep an adversary at the arms
end.

2. By invading Scotland, the Soldiery would be much encouraged, in respect of
the benefit might accrue to them by the spoils of their enemies. Hereby also
the Territories of this Commonwealth were likely to be enlarged.

3. The Scots Levies were not yet finished, nor their Army completed; so that a
sudden march might nip them in the bud, and prevent their further increase.

4. It was necessary to have a special regard to, and warchful eye upon
Scotland, because (by reason of its contiguity) no Enemy could be so obnoxious
to England as it: and how ready they have been to lay hold on all opportunities
to disturb the peace of England, frequent examples testify, both of former and
later times. And unless that backdoor were pined up, as great mischiefs were
like to be let in thereby, now, as ever.

In order therefore to their former Resolutions, the Parliament provide for a
war: they order the Army to march Northwards, to sit upon the skirts of the
Scots. But Sir Tho. Fairfax (their General at that time) being it seems not
satisfied in the thing, (as many others likewise were not) desired to be
excused, and laid down his Commission. Which action of his bred consternation
in most, and several descants were given thereupon: the Plebeian rout (whose
tribunal nothing of moment can pass) judged the reason to be, that he durst not
venture to abide the gust of those Northern blasts. But wise men know how much
vulgar bruits are to be heeded; and that notwithstanding what was said then, or
can be said now, the trumpet of his fame shall not be put to silence; nor shall
Time it self be able to wipe his name into oblivion.

The Parliament being thus disappointed, are to seek for a General to command
their Army; but for that they need not go far, since they had then amongst them
the most renowned Cromwell, of whose prowess and faithfulness they had had
manifold experience, and who, upon their request, did accept of the Charge:
upon which, they give him a Commission, thereby impowering him to command all
the Forces raised and to be raised in the Commonwealth of England; annulling
all Commissions formerly granted to the Lord Fairfax.

Cromwell being thus invested with power, presently addresses to the work; and
in order thereunto, he took his journey toward the Army in the North, June 28.
1650. As he passed, great demonstrations of respect were given him by the
generality of the people. July 4. he arrived at York, attended by many great
Officers of the Army. No sooner was he entered that City, but the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Sheriffs gave him an invitation to a stately Dinner, expressing
how much they joyed in the presence of so renowned an Hero. But he remembering
that it was Fighting and not Feasting that he came about, tarried there no
longer then to order supplies for the Army, and expedite their Rendezvous.

By this time, the Committee of Estates in Scotland was alarmed, insomuch that
they were frighted into an Expostulation with the Parliament; thinking thereby
to protract time, till their Levies were perfected: to that end, they sent a
Letter to the Speaker by Col. Gray, to this effect:

That they wondered at the report of the English Armies advance toward their
Nation, and that many of their Ships were seized and secured by the English,
contrary to the Act of Pacification in the large Treaty, which provided that no
acts of Hostility should be used against each other, without three months
warning beforehand; and that those Forces which they were raising, were only
for their own defense: and therefore they desired to know if the Forces of
England now on their march Northward, were intended for Offense or Defense; to
guard their own borders, or invade Scotland.

Papers of like import were also sent to the Governor of Newcastle, Major Genesis
Lambert, and the Lord General Cromwell. The Parliament answered them by a
Declaration showing the Grounds and Reasons of their Armies advance, with the
equity and necessity thereof. Their Grounds and Reasons were these.

1. For that the Scots endeavored to seduce the people of the Commonwealth of
England from their affection and duty to the Parliament, and to promote the
Interest of the late King, under pretense of the Covenant.

2. In that they took Berwick and Carlisle, and put Garrisons into them, in the
year 1648. contrary to the large Treaty in 1640. and this done by the
Parliament of Scotland, even whilst English Commissioners were at Edinburgh,
offering to endeavor the composing of all differences betwixt the Nations by a
Treaty; which they refused.

But forasmuch as every quarrel that is lawful, is not necessary, (for in some
cases injuries are to be passed by, or at least to be composed by Treaty:)
therefore they proceed to declare the Necessity also of their present
Expedition; which they thus grounded.

All reparations of the damages done by the Scots in their late Invasion, have
been denied to be given in a fair way by their Parliament: whereby they have
owned the wrongs done thereby.

That they have a design again to invade us; which appears thus:

1. In that, upon the English their demanding a Treaty for satisfaction of the
injuries done in their late Invasion, they in express terms declared themselves
enemies to this Commonwealth.

2. In that, although they could not claim to themselves any Authority or
Dominion over us, yet in Scotland they proclaimed Charles Stuart to be King of
England and Ireland; and since that, promised to assist him against this
Commonwealth.

3. In that, when upon preparation in Scotland for Hamiltons Invasion of
England, the Parliament of England sent Commissioners to treat of an
Accommodation, to prevent effusion of blood; they declined the Treaty, and in
stead thereof an Army speedily marches into England.

4. In that they declared against the English Parliament and Army as Sectaries,
ranking them with Malignants and Papists.

These provocations being intolerable, and no satisfaction being to be had, but
what the Sword must procure; the Parliament resolve upon that course, whereby
(seeing no other expedient could effect it) to vindicate the Nations honor,
and to secure it against the like insolences for the time to come.

This Declaration was quickly seconded by another from the Lord General and his
Army, which they directed to the wellaffected in Scotland, and was to this
effect:

That they being to advance into Scotland for the ends expressed in the
Parliaments Declaration of June 26. they considering the practices of some in
that Kingdom, whose designs are by unjust reproaches and false slanders to
make the Army odious, and render them to be rather monsters then men:
Therefore, to clear themselves, they could do no otherwise then re-minde them
of their behavior when they were before in Scotland; what injury or wrong was
then done, either to the persons, houses, or goods of any: considering this, it
was hoped that such their former demeanor would not be forgotten, nor the
present reports affright the people from their habitations.

To satisfy them further, the Lord General and the Army declared (from the
integrity of their hearts) That such of the Gentry and Commonalty as inhabit
where the Army may come, they being none of those who by their counsels laid
the foundation of a second Invasion, or closed with him who has endeavored to
engage foreign Princes against the Commonwealth of England, and has exercised
actual Hostility, by commissionating Pirates to spoil the ships and goods
belonging thereto; to these, not the least violence or injury should be offered
either in body or goods; or if any should happen, that upon complaint made,
redress and satisfaction should immediately be had. Wherefore they desire all
persons to abide in their habitations, assuring them to enjoy what they had
without disturbance.

No sooner was this penned, but copies thereof were sent into Scotland; and the
Country People that kept Market at Berwick, had their pockets stuffed with
them, to carry home and disperse among their neighbors.

What good effects this course produced, we shall see hereafter, when the Army
enters their borders.

The Lord General having used this expedient to undeceive the Scots, and to
procure their good opinion of him and his Army; considered, that all would not
be convinced thereby; the Sword, not the Pen, must persuade many of them:
wherefore he leaves York, and hastes to Northallerton, and thence the next day
to Darnton. As he passed by this place, the Train of Artillery (which was
quartered here) saluted him with seven Pieces of Ordnance. Coming next to
Newcastle, the Governor Sir Arthur Haslerig received him with noble
entertainment. Here the Lord General and the Officers of his Army in a solemn
manner implored a blessing from heaven upon their present Expedition. After
which, upon due consideration of the affairs of the Army, he settled a way for
their supply from time to time with provisions. This business being dispatched,
and the general Rendezvous appointed, the Lord General leaves Newcastle, and
posts for Berwick. His Forces being all come up, he caused a general Rendezvous
of them to be on Haggerston-Moor, four miles from Berwiek. July 20. 1650, the
whole Army was drawn into the Field; which was no sooner done, but the General
himself came among them, being received with shouting and other signs of joy.
Having well viewed them, he caused both Horse and Foot to be drawn up in
Battalia. Which being done, there appeared a gallant Body of Horse, consisting
of 5415, bestrid by as many stout and courageous Riders; eight complete
Regiments of Foot, consisting (with their Officers) of 10249; with the Train of
Artillery, which consisted of 690: so that the Army in the whole, consisted of
16354. A sight most lovely, and very desirable, to see such an Army of men,
(gallantly accoutred, and provided with all necessaries) who for approved
valor are not to be equaled; commanded by a General, whom no example ancient
or modern can parallel, for Courage and Conduct: in a word, he was honored in
his Army, and they happy in their General. Being thus in Battalia, the General
marches them about an hundred paces toward Berwick, and so dismisseth them to
their quarters on the brink of Tweed, where we shall leave them for the
present, expecting their further advance.

HIS WARS IN SCOTLAND.
OCcasion might here be taken to admire at the long continued separation that
has been betwixt England and Scotland, that notwithstanding they are
cohabitants of the same Island, yet they should continue distinct Kingdoms for
so many Ages together. For whereas diverse Kingdoms having inferious Dominions
in them, soon subjected them to their own Rule, (as in Spain, where many
Kingdoms are concorporated into one; and in our own Nation, where the Saxon
Heptarchy was long since reduced into a Monarchy) yet England and Scotland
could never be united under one Head, till the Crown of England devolved upon
King James.

Many attempts have been made by several English Kings, to reduce Scotland to
their obedience. Edward the second (a King whose greatest honor was, to be the
son of an Heroic father, and father to an incomparable son) unfortunately
fought the Battle at Bannocks in Scotland, where (as Holinshed relates) was
lost Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, 40 Barons, 700 Knights and Gentlemen,
and about 40000 others. This defeat was great, even the greatest that ever the
English received at one time from that Nation. But in hopes to wipe away this
blur, and to salve up this wound, the King raised two great Armies for that
purpose; but with no better success: for the first of his Armies was lost for
want of courage to fight; the last, for want of food, was forced to retire, and
in their retreat lost all their Ammunition. But what else could be expected
from a pusillanimous King, who was observed in the former Battle to be the
first that fled? for it could not be expected that the Soldiers should stand,
they being bound to follow their leader.

To reckon up all the Rencounters that have happened betwixt the two Nations,
would be too tedious, and stretch this discourse beyond its intended length.
Yet I shall wade a little in these plashes, before I plunge into the Ocean of
Cromwels Conquests.

Henry the seventh, a wise and valiant Prince, was much disturbed by those two
Impostors, Perkin Warbeck and Lambert Simnel. Warbeck's quarrel was espoused by
the Scots, but to little purpose: for a Peace was soon concluded betwixt the
two Kings, on condition that Warbeck should be sent packing, and that James the
fourth the Scots King should marry the Lady Margret King Henry's daughter.
Great debate was in the Council about this Match: some were against it,
alleging, that in case the Kings issue should fail, England would become
subject to Scotland. But to this the King wisely returned: That the weaker must
ever bow to the stronger; and England being the stronger, Scotland must submit.
This was but discourse: for it could not be then imagined, (the King having two
hopeful sons, Arthur and Henry) that the Lady Margret should be the Royal Stem
from whence should spring those Noble branches which were to overspread both
Nations, as it afterward came to pass in King James. But notwithstanding the
Alliance made by the said Marriage, in the days of King Henry the eighth (while
he was busied with his Wars in France) the Scots invade England, and were
encountered by the Earl of Surrey at Flodden Field, where the success remained
doubtful a great while: but at last, the Victory fell to the English, who that
day slew the Scots King, the Bishop of St. Andrews, 12 Earls, 14 Barons, and
12000 Gentlemen and common Soldiers; only with the loss of 1500. at so easy
a rate was this great Victory purchased. By this and several other Blows, King
Henry got many of the Scottish Nobility into his custody. And considering how
their frequent incursions did impede and frustrate his designs abroad, he
thought it expedient to use a means to beget amity betwixt the Nations; to
which end, he propounded a Match betwixt his son Edward, and Mary the young
Princess of Scotland. This motion found so good acceptance at first, that it
was concluded upon, and ratified by Act of Parliament, with a special
Instrument under the hands of the Scottish Nobility; who by this means having
gotten their liberty from restraint, soon after quit themselves of their former
engagement, and espoused their young Lady to the Dolphin of France: which so
enraged our young King Edward the sixth, (his father Henry being dead) that he
resolved, Seeing the Foxes skin could not prevail,
To piece it with the Lions tail.
And to that end, sends an Army under the Duke of Somerset into Scotland, to
avenge himself on them for their perfidious dealing. This Army exceeded not
18000 in number; (too small in appearance to deal with a whole Kingdom:) but
greatness of courage supplying the paucity of their number, they encountered
the Scots near Muscleborough, where (notwithstanding they doubled the English
in multitude, besides 3000 Monks, Friars and Kirk-men, armed both with Word
and Sword) they got the day, and obtained a most complete Victory. But while
they beat the bush, the bird was flown into France.

Here many of the Scottish Nobility were taken prisoners; one of which being
brought to the English General, and asked by him how he liked the Match,
answered wittily, Very well, but not that manner of wooing.

This Battle, and that of Flodden-field, (four and thirty years before) were
both fought upon the Ninth of September; as afterward those of Worcester and
Dunbar were both upon the Third of the same month: so that that month seems to
be more ominous to the Scottish Nation, then any in the whole Calendar.

This Digression has been made, only to show what endeavors there have been
all along to unite these Kingdoms under one Head: but nothing could effect it,
until King James came in by succession, he being son to that Queen Mary
formerly espoused to Edward the sixth.

This Line was thought perpetual, and the Tie indissoluble, according to the
Motto upon King James his Coin; Que Deus conjunxit, nemo separet. But he that
rules in the Kingdoms of men, has been pleased to overruled their designs, by
a sudden cutting off of that Line, and dissolving that League which was
esteemed so inviolable. By this means, the Scots begin to play Rex, (as we have
heard in part already:) but how and by whom they were reduced under the
obedience and subjection of the English (as at this day) is our next work to
show; they being (as sings ingenious Mr. Waller's Panegyric) A Race
unconquered, by their Clime made bold,
The Caledonians armed with want and cold,
Have by a Fate indulgent to his fame,
Been, from all Ages, kept for him to tame:
Whom the old Roman wall so ill confined,
With a new Chain of Garrisons he bind.
Here foreign Gold no more shall make them come;
For Cromwell's Iron holds them fast at home.


Cromwell was the man by whom this stupendous work was wrought, who being now
constituted Generalissimo for the Parliament of England, (as we have seen
before) made this improvement of his new honor, adding this Conquest to his
former Heroic achievements. And what order he observed in the carrying on of
this business, we shall now relate, beginning where we left off before.

The Army being come up all together in a Body, and quartered upon the very
edge of Scotland, (as before is showed) on July 22. 1650, the Lord General drew
them forth to a Rendezvous upon a hill within Berwick bounds, from whence they
had a full view of the adjacent parts of Scotland, the Stage whereon they were
to act their parts in the ensuing Tragedies. Here he made a Speech to his
Soldiers, exhorting them to be faithful and courageous; and then not to doubt
of a blessing from God, and all encouragement from himself: which was answered
with loud and unanimous Acclamations from them; who going thus cheerfully about
their work, it was the more likely to prosper in their hands, as indeed it did.

Upon this, the Lord General marches his Army into Scotland, quartering them
that night in the field near Mordington; where he caused it to be proclaimed
thorowout the Camp, (for the better conservation of good order and discipline)
That none on pain of death should offer violence or injury to the persons or
goods of any in Scotland not in Arms; and withal, That no Soldier should
presume (without special license) to straggle half a mile from the Army. Hence
they dislodge for Copperspeith; thence to Dunbar, where they are recruited with
provisions from the English ships sent thither for that purpose; the Country
affording them none: for the Scotch Estates had taken a course beforehand, to
sweep all the Country betwixt Berwick and Edinburgh, of all things that might
yield any comfort or succor to the English.

But this entertainment was not at all strange to the English, it being but
what they expected; neither did it in the least appal or discourage them Their
next remove is to Handington, twelve miles from Edinburgh: and all this,
without the least opposition, not seeing all this while the face of an Enemy in
Arms. But although they could not be seen, yet they were heard of, giving out
that they would meet the English at Gladsmore. The Lord General prepared to
meet them accordingly; and knowing his adversary exceeded him in number, he
labored to possess the Moor before them, to gain the advantage of ground, in
case they should meet him; which it seems they never intended, having no great
stomach to fight. Upon this, Major-Gen. Lambert and Colonel Whalley (men of
approved courage and valor) with 1400 Horse, were sent as a Vanguard to
Muscleborough: Major Hayns commanding the Forlorn, faced the Scots within a
mile of their Trenches. The next day, the Lord General with the main Body drew
up before Edinburgh, where some bickering happened about the possession of King
Arthur's Hill, a place within a mile of that City; which the English obtained,
and soon after possessed themselves of a Church, and certain houses. But
notwithstanding all these provocations, the Scots would not forsake their
Trenches, but lay upon the catch: and according to the Proverb, Harm watch,
harm catch, so it fell out with them. For the Lord General seeing no good to be
done this way, and that his Army was much wearied out with hard duty and
continual rain, drawing off to Muscleborough, there to refresh and recruit his
men with provisions; the Scots would needs have one snap at parting, and to
that end came powdering down upon the last Reserve of the English Rere-guard,
and had like to have overrun them: but Major General Lambert, and Colonel
Whalley, with his giment, came in to their rescue, routing the Scots, and
pursuing them to their Trenches.

In this Encounter, Lambert received two wounds; and the rest came not off
altogether Scot-free: for they left behind them one Lieutenant Colonel, one
Major, and some Captains, with a few private soldiers for company. By this
defeat, the English had an opportunity to march off quietly to Muscleborough
that night, although in a wet and weary condition, expecting also every moment
to be set upon, as indeed at last they were: for Col. Straughan and Montgomery
very slyly followed them in the rere with the Kirk's Regiment of Horse, and
some others, to the number of 1500. all armed with Backs, Breasts, Head-pieces,
Pistols, Swords and Lances; as if they had intended to inflict some strange
new-fashion'd deaths upon the English.

July 30. about three or four in the morning, Straughan gave a furious Camisado
on a Body of the English in their quarters; which being sudden, did somewhat
disorder a Regiment of Horse: but the Alarm being given, raised so many English
spirits, that soon frighted away the Scots, pursuing them to their own homes.
In this encounter were killed and taken about 200 with seven Officers' of
quality: Straughan himself, because he could manage his horse no better, was
fain to trip it on foot to Edinburgh with shame enough.

Here the Lord General, to let the Scots see what a generous Enemy they had to
deal withal, discharged the chiefest of the prisoners taken, and sent them to
Edinburgh in his own Coach: which not only begot him great applause, but
tended much to the rectification of those who had harbored so much prejudice
against him, by reason of those strange reports broached of his pretended
cruelty.

Now the Armies provisions being welnigh spent, they retire again to Dunbar,
there to renew their supplies from the Ships attending for that purpose by
order from the English Parliament; who knowing victuals to be the life of
War, (money being only the sinews) took care to provide a continued course of
Recruits.

After convenient supply and refreshment, returned immediately toward
Edinburgh, to accompany the Scots in their Rejoicing, they being then very
seriously keeping a solemn Thanksgiving for their supposed great deliverance;
imagining that the English Army was quite gone; as if they had come only to
see how they did, or whether Edinburgh stood where it did when they were there
last. This unexpected visit spoiled their sport, and made them change their
none, notwithstanding the presence of their King, then but newly come thither
from St. Johnstons; who (although he had been lately crowned) had not a Crown
in his pocket; the Kirk it seems thinking him not yet fit to be trusted with
money, till he had more amply lamented the sins of his father, and put on those
Yokes they were preparing for him; which he fearing would not prove very easy,
made no haste to take upon him.

About this time, the General Assembly (with David Lesley their General) sent
to the Lord General Cromwell a Declaration (as Lesley called it) containing the
state of the Quarrel in which they were to fight, (as if they had such a mind
to it!) desiring that this their Declaration might be publicly known. Whether
their request were fulfilled then or no, I know not: I shall so far gratify
them now, as to endeavor the same, by reciting it briefly, as follows.

THat the General Assembly considering there might be just grounds of
stumbling, from the Kings Majesty's refusing to subscribe the Declaration
concerning his former carriage, and resolutions for the future in reference to
the Cause of God, the enemies and friends thereof; does therefore declare, that
the Kirk and Kingdom will not own any Malignant party their quarrel or
interest, but that they will fight upon their former Principles, for the Cause
of God, and their Kingdom: and therefore as they disclaim all the sin and guilt
of the King and his House, so they will not own him nor his Interest, any
further then he shall disclaim his and his fathers opposition to the work of
God, and the enemies thereof: And withal, that they would with convenient speed
consider of the Papers sent to them from Oliver Cromwell, and vindicate
themselves from the falsehoods contained therein.

Very short, but not very sweet; it carries a sting in its tail. The imputation
of falsehood might much more justly and properly have been kept at home, all
things considered. The Lord General Cromwell returns them this Answer: THat the
Army continued the same they had professed themselves to the honest people of
Scotland, wishing to them as to their own souls; it being no part of their
business to hinder them in the Worship of God according to their Consciences,
as by his Word they ought: And that they should be ready to perform what
obligation lay upon them by the Covenant. But that under the pretense of the
Covenant mistaken, a King should be taken in by them, and imposed on the
English, and this called The Cause of God and the Kingdom; and this done upon
the satisfaction of Gods people in both Nations, as alleged, together with a
disowning of Malignants, although the Head of them be received, who at this
very instant has a party fighting in Ireland, and Prince Rupert at Sea on a
Malignant account, the French and Irish ships daily making depredations upon
the English coasts, and all by virtue of his Commissions: and therefore the
Army cannot believe, that whilst Malignants fighting and plotting against them
on the one side, and the Scots declaring for him on the other, should not be an
espousing of a Malignant Interest or Quarrel, but a mere fighting on former
Grounds and Principles. If the state of the Quarrel be thus, and you say you
resolve to fight the Army, you will have opportunity to do that, else what means
our abode here? And our hope is in the Lord, etc.



Thus the cause of the War was stated, as if the Scots had been ignorant of
the grounds and reasons of the English Armies coming into their Country. Now
there remains nothing but fighting: and how well they quit themselves therein,
is next to be shown.

The Lord General seeing that by no means he could provoke the Enemy to an
engagement, (having sufficiently victualled his men at Muscleborough) Aug. 17.
1650, he advanced, and pitched his Camp on Pencland Hills. In this march, the
Scots drew forth several Bodies of Horse, and faced the English: but they were
so wary as to keep out of harms way, not coming within Gunshot. The Army
having taken up their Quarters on the hills, two Troops of Dragoons are sent
out, to dispossess the Enemy of Collington-House. About this time, a Sergeant
of Colonel Cox his Regiment (with three others his associates) was called to
account for plundering a house, and stealing a Cloak: which being proved, the
Sergeant was condemned to be hanged; and, notwithstanding the scarcity of trees
in those parts, the Sentence was executed on him, for an example to others. The
other three Soldiers found mercy, and obtained pardon. So careful was the
General to preserve the Country, according as he had promised them before in
his Declaration.

Then the Scots drew forth on the west side of Edinburgh, between the river
Leith and the Sea, to the number of two or three thousand Horse; conceiving
that the Army intended to possess a pass over the said River. Which the Lord
General seeing, he drew forth a Forlorn to engage them, himself in person
leading, to show the Scots his readiness to fight them. Approaching near to
their Body, one that knew the Lord General fired a Carbine at him, but
timerously: which he seeing, called out and told him, That if he had been one
of his Soldiers, he should have been cashiered, for firing at that distance.
But the truth is, these daring actions in Generals, savor more of valor then
discretion: Bullets distinguish not betwixt the meanest private Soldier, and
the most puissant General, if he come in their way. Hence it was, that the
people would not suffer David to go out in person. 'Twas upon an over-bold
discovery of Popinham's strength, that Gustavus Adolphus (the Scourge of the
Austrians) was killed, and with him the hopes of those great things expected
from him. The Head of an Army (such is the General) being once cut off, the
Body (especially in an enemies Country) must needs languish and pine away.

The Scots having done their business, which it seems was only to breathe
their horses, they returned back again to their Quarters.

Aug. 19. part of the English Army stormed Red-Hall, and took it; it being a
Garrison situate within a mile and a half of Edinburgh, having about 80 Foot to
defend it. This was done in the sight of the Scots whole Army, yet not a man
stirred toward the relief of the place.

Aug. 26, the Scots sent to the Lord General, desiring a Conference betwixt
some of themselves, and some Officers appointed by him. Which being granted,
and a convenient place appointed, the Lord Wariston Secretary of State, Sir
John Brown, Colonel Straughan, and Mr. Douglas a Minister, with certain others,
attended for that purpose. The main business of their Meeting, was to wipe off
a pretended aspersion cast upon them, and spread over both Armies, intimating
that they kept themselves in Trenches and holes, not daring to fight. And the
better to clear themselves of these calumnies, they let the English know, That
when opportunity served, it should be seen that they wanted not courage to give
them Battle.

The next morning, the Scots (as if they meant to be as good as their words;
which had they been, they had crossed a very ancient Proverb) strike up for a
march, seeming either to bend their course for Sterling, or as if they would in
good earnest (according to the purport of the Embassage they had sent the day
before, lest it should not be known) fight the English.

No sooner are they on their march, but the Lord General prepares to meet them,
thinking that although they had often dallied with him before, yet now surely
they would be serious, and show some fair play. The common soldiers were
possessed with the like apprehensions, being overjoyed at the very thoughts of
fighting; and in order thereunto, they presently take down their Tents, lay
aside their Knapsacks, and disburthen themselves of every thing whatsoever that
might be an impediment to their activity.

Being thus prepared, the English approach the Scots Army, verily intending to
engage them: but it seems they had no mind to come to it, but rather to
shelter themselves in some new lurking hole, (notwithstanding their late
confident disclaiming of any such practice.) Accordingly, when the English drew
near the Enemy, they found a great Bog and a deep Ditch to make such a
separation, as for the present cut off all possibibility of conjunction with
them, and consequently of engaging them, without running such hazards as were
not necessary at that time. The Lord General seeing he could not come at them
in person, sent a thundering message to them by the mouth of his Cannon.

All that night, both the Armies continued in Arms; and the next morning, being
the 28 of August, the great Guns roared on both sides, for about the space of
an hour. But the English Lord General seeing that this would do no good, and
knowing that it would but waste precious time to no purpose, to stand pelting
at an Enemy at that distance, he therefore drew off from thence, to try some
other conclusion, if by any means he might get the Enemy into a fair field,
where the business might be disputed on equal terms. In order to which,
marching toward their former Quarters on Pencland hills, no sooner were they
there arrived, but news came that the Scots were upon their march to possess
Muscleborough and Preston-pans, whereby to cut off provisions from the English
Army. The soldiers hearing this, begin to bestir themselves; and again taking
down their Tents, take up their Arms; holding it to be high time so to do,
considering that now they must either fight or starve.

To prevent the Enemies design, the Lord General advanced that night with his
whole Army toward Muscleborough, it being very stormy and tempestuous weather,
without any molestation from the Enemy. Being there, they are supplied from the
ships: and many of them being infirm and diseased, by reason of hard duty, and
unseasonable weather; 500 were sent on board; which yet did not clear the Army
of those distempered ones.

The Enemy all this while dogging the English in the Rere, watched all
opportunities to distress, them. But the Lord General taking into consideration
the sad condition of his Army, occasioned by sickness and indisposition of
body, resolves to retreat with them to Dunhar, and there (by Garisoning it) to
lie securely for some time, till they might recover strength, and receive
convenient recruits both of Horse and Foot from Berwick.

In pursuance of this resolution, the Army (Aug. 30.) set forward toward
Hadington. And by that time the van-Brigade of Horse had taken up their
quarters, the Scots (by a nimble march) were fallen in the rere, and put them
into disorder: But wanting courage to prosecute the advantage; and withal, a
cloud overshadowing the Moon, gave the English Horse an opportunity to
inextricate themselves of that Labyrinth wherein they had like to have been
entangled, and to recover the main Body.

Being at Hadington, in danger to be assaulted daily by the Enemy, the Lord
General caused a strict Watch to be kept, to prevent the worst. For the Scots
were sufficiently sensible of the crazie condition of the Army, and thought
they had now an opportunity to distress them, (they acting the Offensive part)
that and by degrees they should weary them out, and at last utterly destroy
them: and to that end, (conceiving that now they had a more then ordinary
advantage) about midnight, Aug. 30. they attempted the English quarters on the
west end of the Town. But notwithstanding their confidence, they were soon set
further off.

The next day, the Lord General draws out into the open Champaign on the
South Side of the Town, resolving (notwithstanding the indisposition of body in
his Army) to venture all upon the event of a Battle. But the Scots having no
mind to that sport, therefore (after three hours tarriance in expectation of
their coming, all in vain) the English prosecute their fore-intended march for
Dunbar.

The Scots being reinforced with the addition of three Regiments, yet again
came in the Rere of the English; and seeing them lodged in Dunbar, gathered
upon the adjacent hills like a thick cloud, menacing such a shower to the
English, as would wash them out of their Country, if not out of the world: and
to make sure work, (imagining they had them now in a Pound) they being well
acquainted with the Country, set a strong Guard upon the Pass at Copperspeith,
(a place where ten stout men may obstruct the passage of forty) thereby to
intercept or hinder all provisions or relief from Berwick, or perhaps to hinder
the English from running away, lest any thing should be wanting to complete
their (imagined) near approaching Victory. For (as a late ingenious R H. his
discourse of England.
Author has it, writing upon this subject) The Scots from those high hills
that encompassed this sickly remnant, and which they had possessed themselves
of, look down on the English as their sure prey. But (as the same Author goes
on) how much better had they done, had they levelled those mountains which
surrounded their wretched enemies, and which proved such slight defenses
against a virtue backed with necessity, and so made them an easier passage to
their hom^ by reason of their sickness did very ^ant it?

And no marvel the Scots were thus confident. For besides that they were stout
and hearty, in their own Country, and upon advantageous ground, (in all which
respects the English were at a loss) they doubled the English in number; they
being 6000 Horse and 16000 Foot, whereas the other were but 7500 Foot and 3500
Horse. Two to one is great odds; and yet (as the case then stood) they must
either fight manfully, or tamely give up themselves a prey to their insulting
Enemy; which the English not having been accustomed to do, knew not how to
begin now. Neither did all these straights, difficulties and disadvantages in
the least dismay the Lord General, who as a Rock remained immovable in this
Sea of dangers; and who, considering that the present necessity required more
then an ordinary courage, and that this must be his Master piece or Misfortune,
after he had well viewed the Enemy, and found that they had drawn down about:
two thirds of their Left wing of Horse to the Right, causing them to edge down
toward the Sea, shogging also their Foot and Train to the Right, (a posture not
well to be understood, unless it were by this means to make short work, and to
catch the English as it were in a Purse-net) saw that it was no time to use
many words, and that small debates must produce great actions: and therefore
after a short consultation had with his chief Officers, it was concluded, to
take such a course as might let the Enemy see it was in vain for them to go
about to abridge them of their liberty, by any power or policy that they could
use.

The better to do this, the Lord General drew forth six Regiments of Horse,
with three Regiments and a half of Foot, to march in the Van: the Horse were
commanded by Major General Lambert, and Lieutenant General Fleetwood; the Foot,
by Commissary-General Whalley, and Colonel Monk. To second these, were Colonel
Pride's Brigade, and Colonel Overton's Brigade. Two Regiments of Horse moreover
brought up the Rere, with the Cannon.

All things being thus in a readiness, the Soldiers desired nothing more, then
the coming of the time when they should fall on, that so they might show their
Valor to purpose. It was resolved (Sept. 3.) to fall on by break of day: but
(by reason of some impediments) it was delayed till six of the clock; at which
time, Major General Lambert, Lieutenant General Fleetwood, Commissary Whalley,
and Colonel Twisleton, (all stout resolute Commanders) gave a furious charge
upon the Scots Army, who stoutly sustained the same, and gallantly disputed the
business at the swords point. The English Foot in the mean time fired roundly
upon the Enemies Foot, but with more courage then success; for being
over-powred, they were forced into some disorder: notwithstanding, they soon
recovered their ground, being reinforced by the Generals own Regiment.

And now the Fight grew hot on all sides. The English Horse flew about like
Furies, doing wonderful execution, insomuch that the place soon became an
Aceldama, or field of blood. The Foot were not behind in their capacities: for
the Pikes gallantly sustained the push of their Enemies, and the Muskets seemed
by their often firings to have a design to alter the property of the Climate
from the Frigid to the Torrid Zone. Neither were the English more free of their
Powder, then the Scots (especially Lawyers Regiment of Highlanders) were of
their Bullets, until their Horse being totally dispersed, and enforced to quit
the Field, left the Foot exposed to all dangers: which they seeing, began to
shift for themselves as well as they could, throwing away their Arms, and
betaking themselves to their heels: a poor shift; it being better to fight a
day, then run an hour. To be short; the English at last so far prevailed, as to
give a complete Overthrow, by the utter routing of that Army, which had but
lately triumphed in a confident assurance of Victory.

This was the work of one hour; but it ended not here: for the Rout begetting a
Run, the fugitives were pursued eight miles from the place. Of the Enemy were
slain in all, about 3000; many prisoners of quality taken, besides 10000
private soldiers, with 15000 Arms, all their Train of Artillery, great and
small, the Leather-Guns not excepted: and for standing Trophies of this great
Victory, 200 of their Colors were sent up to the Parliament at London, who
caused them to be hung up in Westminster Hall, where they remain till this day.

As Sea-sick passengers in a boisterous Ocean, receive as it were new life and
spirit upon safe arrival at their desired Port: so the English Army, who had
been tossed up and down in a strange Country, and almost spent by hard duty and
the unsutableness of the Climate, were now revived by this miraculous Victory.
And the Lord General seeing their courage to be up, resolved it should not flat
for want of exercise; and therefore (the better also to improve this Victory,
and to secure what he had gotten) he dispatches away Lambert with six Regiments
of Horse and nine of Foot, to attaque Edinburgh the Metropolis of Scotland, and
secure Leith, that so the English ships might thence readily and without
obstruction yield necessary supplies to the Army. The Lord General himself
remained some small time at Dunbar, to dispose of prisoners, and to order other
matters as the occasion required. And the prisoners being so numerous, that it
seemed to be as much trouble to retain them as it was to take them, the Lord
General discharged near upon 5000 of them (most sick and wounded) the rest
(much about the same number) being conveyed to Berwick by four Troops of
Colonel Hacker's Horse.

Having given this account of the captives, a word or two of those that escaped
by flight. Their General it seems was one of that number, and none of those
that made the least haste neither, or else he could not have been at Edinburgh
by ten of the clock that morning whereon the Battle was fought; outstripping
his Lieutenant General, who got not thither till the afternoon. But if they had
made less haste, they might have come before they had been welcome, unless they
had brought better news; the Garrison and inhabitants being very much dampt at
their report, as also those of Leith; insomuch that Edinburgh was presently
quit by its Garrison, and Leith resolved to receive the Victors, not knowing how
to keep them out. But though the English had thus possessed the Town of
Edinburgh, the Castle remained untoucht; which being esteemed impregnable, and
commanding the Town, the Scots hoped that the English would soon find their
new quarters too hot to hold them; and so much the rather, for that the said
Castle (besides its natural strength) was well manned, had a considerable
Artillery on the walls, and store of all sorts of provisions; Colonel William
Dundass being its Governor. However, the same day the Scots deserted the Town,
the English under Lambert took possession of the same, as also of Leith; in
both which places they found several Pieces of Ordnance, many Arms, and
considerable provisions; which were too heavy for the Scots to take with them,
because of their haste. But how well the new Garrison of Edinburgh agreed with
their neighbors in the Castle, we shall hear afterward.

Upon this, the Lord General coming up with the remainder of the Army, the
Scots were in despair of nestling there again; and therefore made Sterling
their next refuge; whither resorted those that had escaped at Dunbar, to help
to piece up their shattered Army, that so in a second Encounter they might
endeavor to recover their lost credit. To this purpose also recruits were
raised by the Committee of Estates in all places under their power: their
Officers are likewise new molded, new ones being taken in, and old ones laid
aside, according as they saw occasion: this change being not in inferior
Officers only, but among the great Commanders likewise: for old Leven was laid
aside, albeit David Lesley were continued.

But this their rallying and recruiting, chopping and changing, signified
little: for (as if they had been postest with a like spirit with those
infatuated Jews in Jerusalem, when that City was closely begirt by the Romans)
notwithstanding that the English had given them that sore blow at Dunbar,
driven them from their Metropolis, and were still improving those advantages;
the Scots, in stead of joining heart and hand in defending their Country
against so prevailing an adversary, split themselves into so many fractions and
factions, that it would require some curiosity to discriminate them. The most
notable were these: Straughan and Car in the West, who declared against the
Kings party, and were called Remonstrators: another party were for King and
Kirk, as David Lesley, Major Genesis Holborn, and those in Fife: and a third sort
were purely for the King; these with Middleton keep the High-lands.

This Kingdom being thus divided, was not likely long to stand. For animosities
growing higher and higher among themselves, little care was taken to repress
the English, who ranged at pleasure about the Country. And the Lord General
having his Headquarters at Edinburgh, and observing what course the Scots
steered, lay not idle; but having refreshed his men, Sept. 14. he drew out the
greatest part of his Army for Sterling, and faced the Castle, having at first
some thoughts to storm it; but finding that the Horse could not well second the
Foot, he desisted for that time, and returned back to the Headquarters.
Whither being come, order is given for carrying all the Boats in the Frith to
Leith, for prevention of the Scots Ferrying over into Fyfe, to join with the
Enemy there.

And since (according to the Proverb) of Idleness comes no goodness; therefore,
to keep his men in action, and that they may the better acquaint themselves
with the Country, the Lord General (his work going on well before
Edinburgh-Castle, of which a particular account shall be given in its place)
marched away six Regiments of Foot, and nine of Horse and Dragoons, for Glasgow,
a City of a pleasant site, upon a River navigable for small Boats, which
usually bring up provisions from Patrickstown, ten miles thence, where ships of
good burden may ride. In Glasgow, the streets and houses are more neat and
clean then those of Edinburgh; it being also one of the chiefest Universities
in Scotland.

By the way of Linlithgow, the Lord General sent a Paper to the Committee of
Estates, to try once more what might be done by fair means: a copy whereof was
likewise at the same time dispatched away to Colonel Car and Straughan, to the
same end.

Little else was remarkable in this Expedition, then the taking of a small
Carison near Kelsith, a place famous for being the Stage whereon sometime the
valiant Montross had acted such great things, as even shook the foundations of
the Kirk; and had subverted it, if the English had not in time stretched out
their hand to support the same. This heroic Champion, notwithstanding he
wrought such great things with small Forces, (ever encountering considerable
Armies with a handful, so that not one of his men could be exempted from
continual duty) yet could not avoid the frowns of adverse fortune; wherein
nevertheless, although his body were captivated, his spirit remained free,
bearing up above the highest affronts of his enraged enemies, who loaded him
with all the ignominy that Malice it self could invent; first inflicting on him
a most reproachful death; and next, mangling his dead body, the quarters
whereof they caused to be hung up in several places, for public view. On the
Tolbooth at Glasgow hung one of his legs, which the English (remembering what he
was) took down and buried privately.

Now the Lord General retires to Edinburgh, the season admitting of no
considerable action, but only what necessity required. And a necessary work
they went about, in suppressing a company of sturdy knaves called
Moss-Troopers, who daily played their pranks with great boldness, and (by the
treachery and connivence of the Country People) murdered many of the English
Soldiers, especially straglers: nay, their confidence grew so high, as to
steal some of the Train-horses belonging to the Army. To that end, a
Proclamation was published by the Lord General, to this effect: THat finding
many of the Army were not only spoiled and robbed, but also others barbarously
butchered and slain, by a sort of Outlaws, not under the discipline of any
Army; and finding that all tenderness to the Country produced no other effect,
then their compliance with, and protection of such persons: therefore
considering that it is in the Countries power to detect and discover them; and
perceiving their motion to be ordinary, by their invitation and intelligence of
Country People; therefore he declared, That wherever these enormities should
be committed for the future, life should be required for life, and a plenary
satisfaction for the goods thus stolen, of those Parishes and places where the
fact should be committed, unless they did discover and produce the offender.



Presently after the publishing of this Proclamation, Colonel Monk with a
commanded party of Foot, four Pieces of Ordnance, and a Mortar-piece, was sent
to hunt these Beasts of prey. And upon information that Derlton-House near
Hadington was one of their Nests, Monk and Lambert bent their Force toward it;
and approaching it an evening, by the next day they had planted their Battery,
whence they plied the House with great Guns, the Mortar-piece also being not
unoccupied: but all wrought little effect, till at last one of the Grenades
falling into the house, broke the Iron bar of the inner gate, and forced it
open, throwing the Drawbridge into the Moat; it also killed the Moss-Troopers
Lieutenant. This rough handling made them cry out for Quarter, profering to
quit the House, so they might save their lives. But these beggars not being
admitted to be chusers, at last submit to mercy. Their number was thirty, and
their Captain one Wait, who (with two others of the most desperate of them)
was presently shot to death, and the rest made prisoners.

This place being thus reduced, Monk takes with him 600 Foot for Roslane
Castle; where at first he found opposition, but upon second thoughts it was
yielded to mercy.

From these less considerable achievements, the English proceed to greater.
For the heat of their courage made them insensible (as it were) of the coldness
of the weather; so that in stead of lurking in Winter Quarters, (as is usual in
such a season, in warmer climates too) they stir abroad to find out the Enemy.
And now they draw near to that grand party in the West of Scotland, sometimes
commanded by Car and Straughan, who had withdrawn themselves from the obedience
of King, Kirk and State, publishing a Declaration containing the Reasons of
their so doing; which was to this purpose:

THat that which is obvious in the first place among the sins of the Land, is
the late proceedings with the King: That they would distinguish betwixt their
duty and their sin: their duty was to use all lawful ways for reclaiming the
King, and to own his interest accordingly as he owned and prosecuted the Cause:
that it was their sin, and the sin of the Kingdom, that the King had walked in
the ways of his fathers opposition to the work of Reformation; and yet that
they should receive him, notwithstanding his peace made with the Irish, the
Commission given to James Graham (meaning Montross) for invasion of Scotland;
and after all this, to assure him by Commissioners the exercise of Royal power,
upon his bare profession to join in the Cause and Covenant, without any further
proof of his repentance, or convincing evidences of the reality of his
professions. That the Treaty was continued with him, after his dealing was
discovered in the actual invasion of the Kingdom. That the King himself did
still continue the Malignant party in the Kingdom, cleaving to them, and
following their counsels: and this not done only in the Kingdom of Scotland,
but also abroad, by keeping correspondence with the Lord of Ormond and the Earl
of Newcastle. That he refused to sign the Declaration offered to him by the
Committee of Estates and General Assembly, until it was extorted from him, and
he of necessity enforced to take it. That he still pursued the same designs
since the Treaty as before, endeavoring to have the Malignants of the Kingdom
in power and trust, as it appears in his frequent conversing and correspondence
with them, notwithstanding they were discharged the Court by Act of Parliament.
By these things it is manifest, that the King has not prosecuted the Cause of
God, but rather in opposition to the work of God and the Covenant. They
therefore according to the Declaration of Kirk and State the 13 of August 1650.
disclaim all the sin and guilt of the King and his house, both old and new, and
declare that they cannot own him nor his interest in the state of the quarrel
betwixt him and the enemy against whom they were to hazard their lives.

This Remonstrance was sent to the Committee of Estates then at Sterling, the
25 of November 1650. where it bred great divisions and dissentings amongst
them. Much debate there was, what to do in it: to approve thereof, would add
many more fractions to their already-broken State, and make all desperate: to
show an utter dislike of it, would put the Remonstrators upon securing
themselves, lest if they should fall under the lash of their own Estates, they
might be worse handled then by being in the power of the English. But at last
they agreed upon a Declaration, which was drawn up, and voted to be sent to the
Commissioners of the Kirk; wherein they declared,

That the said Remonstrance, as it related to the Parliament and Civil
Judicatories, was scandalous and injurious to his Majesty's Person, and
injurious to his Authority: and that it held out seeds of division, and was of
a dangerous consequence, and withal dishonorable to the Kingdom, in so far as
it tended to a breach of the Treaty with the Kings Majesty at Breda, approved
by the Parliament and General Assembly: that it strengthened the hand of the
Enemy, giving him wherewithal to justify his unjust invasion; and weakened the
hands of many honest men. Lastly, that through the subtle contrivance thereof,
many religious Gentlemen, Officers and Ministers have been thereby ensnared.

This was backed by the Assembly of the Kirk, who signified their concurrence
with the Estates in dislike of the Remonstrance; but so nevertheless, as (if
possible) to bring Car and his party over by fair means: to which end, many
Papers passed betwixt them, and all means were used to compose differences.

The English Lord General observing these Western dissenters to agree with him
in many particulars, sent them several invitations to come in to him. Who
(being proud of so many courtings from all sides) grew so high thereupon, as to
think themselves strong enough to defend their own Cause against all opposers.
But as if Divisions had not already sufficiently torn that Nation, this Party,
who had lately made so great a rent therein, soon after subdivide themselves;
Straughan withdrawing himself, and in a small time closing with the English. So
that Car commands all now himself; and how he behaved himself in his command,
we shall presently see.

Upon this Party the English Lord General had a special eye, they quartering
near; who if they could not be made friends, might prove dangerous enemies, and
bad neighbors. At last, after many fruitless endeavors used to draw them over
to him, he resolves (notwithstanding the difficulty of marching at that time of
the year, it being December) to force them to it, or to do worse. Which was
strangely effected, in a short time after. For about the end of November,
Major-Gen. Lambert, and Commissary-Gen. Whalley, with five Regiments of Horse,
were ordered by the General to march from Peebles to Hamilton, on the
South Side of Cloid; himself in the mean time marching from Edinburgh on the
North-side, where he tarried the greatest part of a day: but having good
intelligence where Lambert and his party were, and the weather being very bad,
he returned back. Whereof when Colonel Car had notice, as also that Lambert had
taken up his quarters at Hamilton, he conceived that now a fit opportunity was
offered him of making sure work with him, he being disjoined from the Body of
the Army, and supinely sleeping (as he dreamed) without any thoughts of an
enemy. With this confident persuasion, Car sets upon a sudden March in the
night, with about 1500 Horse; and before day (making more haste then good
speed) he furiously breaks into Lambert's Quarters; and finding no opposition
at his first entry, he was emboldened to go up to the middle of the Town; where
a Captain with about 40 soldiers having taken the Alarm, had suddenly mounted:
these (being favored by a tree that lay cross the street) gave a check to
their carreer, till the whole Garrison was alarmed. The suddenness of the
business did somewhat amaze the English: but having soon recollected
themselves, they resume their wonted courage, being also very much animated by
the example of their Officers forwardness. And to make their work the more
perfect, part of their Forces being left in the Town, to engage the Enemy, and
to secure the Rere, the residue drew out, that if possible they might surround
the Enemies whole party; who making a timely discovery of this design, very
cunningly faced about and fled. Though this encounter lasted not long, yet of
the Scots were slain near upon 100, and as many taken prisoners; some few of
whom might well be accounted many, considering their quality: for among them
was Car himself, his Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain-Lieutenant.

This Victory was not so well won, but it was as well followed; for the chase
continued as far as Air; where also were routed a party of 150, which was the
chief remains of the Remonstrators. This Success came very seasonably; and the
more considerable it was, by how much the more difficult it would have been to
engage them against their will: for they knowing the Country well, and having
the people on their side, could march about at pleasure; when the English durst
not follow without a great part of their Army for fear of Lesley, who then lay
at Sterling with the Scotch Army, ready to make use of all advantages that
might serve for his purpose.

Immediately upon this, followed the Rendition of Edinburgh-Castle (the most
considerable strong hold in all Scotland:) It is seated upon a very high
Precipice, over-looking and commanding all places about it; insomuch that many
times the English Soldiers in their Quarters were galled with the Shot sent
from the great Guns into Edinburgh.

When the Lord General came first before it, which was immediately after the
Rout at Dunbar, he sent in a Summons to the Governor Colonel Will. Dundass;
which wrought no effect: presently after, several Papers were sent in to invite
the Ministers to come forth to their several charges; but they refusing so
civil an offer, the Lord General then seriously considered with his chief
Officers which way to reduce by force both them and it: knowing, that if it
should continue thus in the Scots hands, his own work would be very much
retarded thereby. Accordingly, the place being viewed, nothing could be seen to
encourage the attempting of it by storm. But as there is many more ways then
one to win; so every one of these ways that carried probability with it, was
debated. At last, a resolution was taken, That seeing this impregnable place
could not be beaten down, endeavors should be used to blow it up: to that end,
Miners both Scotch and English, were sent for, to carry on the work: In order
to this resolution, about the end of September, the Galleries were begun in the
night; which was no sooner perceived by those in the Castle, but they very
angerly fired upon it with five great Guns, and several vollies of small Shot;
which nothing hindered the English, whose indefatigable pains wrought through
the earth, until at last coming to the main rock, it put them to a stand,
finding it not to be of that mould they imagined. Yet could not this dismay
those, whose resolutions far surmounting the difficulty of their present
design; for finding the mattock did not perform its part, they, by other means,
made holes in the stones; and filling them full of Powder, made them fly by
firing.

But the Lord General taking notice how tedious the mining work went on, and
withal considering the uncertainty of the wished event when finished;
therefore, to make a quick dispatch, he gave order for raising a Mount not far
from the Castle upon a rising ground, whereon to plant a Battery, that so the
Enterprise might be carried on above ground as well as beneath. The sight of
this, very much amazed Dundass the Governor, who now perceived what a vanity
it was to withstand the English industry. Yet to quit himself of that great
trust reposed in him by his superiors, and withal to cherish the hopes of his
Countrymen, whose eyes were generally upon him, he did the utmost to answer
the expectations of those that thought this bone might go near to break
Cromwels teeth: who herein were much deceived; for it could do no more then
whet his appetite, and make him long for the possession of this strong Fort;
since the greater the opposition be, the more is a great spirit raised thereby.

The Battery being now raised to a convenient height (in spite of all
impediments) by the unwearied labors of the Soldiers, and all things
necessary prepared, four Mortar-Pieces and six battering Guns were drawn from
Leith, and quickly mounted against the Castle. Now the word of command was
only wanting, which the Lord General deferred to give, until he had sent to
the Governor once more, willing him to yield by fair means, and save the
labor of being enforced by foul. The Summons was sent the 11 of December, and
spoke thus;

That he being resolved by Gods assistance to use such means as were put into
his hands for to reduce the Castle, did, for the preventing of farther misery,
demand the rendering of the place to him upon fit conditions.

The Governor having received the same, made answer,

That he was entrusted by the Committee of the Estates of Scotland for the
keeping of the Castle: and that he could not deliver it up without leave from
them; and therefore desired ten days time to send to them, and receive their
answer: upon receipt whereof the General should receive his resolute answer.

But the Lord General knowing delays to be dangerous, and that time was
precious, and not to be lost in vain, he makes this sudden reply:

That it concerned not him to know the Obligations of them that trusted him;
but that he might have honorable terms for himself, and those that were with
him: but that he could not give liberty to him to consult with the Committee of
Estates, because he heard those among them that were honest enjoyed not
satisfaction, and the rest were now discovered to seek another interest then
they had formerly pretended to; in which if he desired to be satisfied, he
might have information at a nearer distance then St. Johnstons.

This Parley was intended to continue until 10 in the morning, December. 13. but
there flying from the Castle some great Shot on the overnight, the next
morning order was given to try the Mortar-Pieces: which was done; three with
shells, and the fourth with stones. This produced the Governors Answer to the
Lord Generals last Message; wherein he adjured him in the Fear and Name of the
living God, (which was called upon in the acceptance of his great trust) that
liberty might be granted for him to send to the Committee of Estates, and that
he should be very willing to receive information from those of his Countrymen
whom he could trust. The Lord Generals reply was, That whosoever he would
appoint to come to him, should have liberty for one hour; but to send to the
Committee of Estates, he could not grant. To this the Governor was silent,
until the Mortar-Pieces and great Guns began to play against the Castle; which
they did for some small time, with great violence. This made Dundass send forth
a Drum to desire a Conference with the Provest of Aberdeen, and one more then
in Edinburgh: which the Lord General willingly condescended unto. But they
seeing it to be a business of great concernment, utterly refused to have any
thing to do with it; leaving the Governor to take his own course in the
business. The Drummer being returned with this answer into the Castle, it much
perplexed the Governor, who reflecting on the sad condition he was in, saw
himself surrounded with many dangers both from abroad and within: for should he
yield, it would go near to cost him his life, if ever he went to give an
account to those that entrusted him with this charge: for the loss of so strong
a place would exasperate them beyond reason, and fill their minds so full of
anger and revenge, that in vain he might go about to make his own defense.
Should he stand it out, and defend the Castle, happily relief might come, and so
he might preserve his honor, and raise his reputation to a high pitch; which
are things a valiant Soldier ought to be as careful of, as life it self.

These Considerations at last made him wave all other thoughts, and wholly
resolve to acquit himself manfully, knowing his own strength, and that the
Nation could not afford a better Garrison to maintain then this, being naturally
strong and unaccessible. No sooner had he resolved thus with himself, but his
mind was accordingly signified to the English by a fair red Ensign hung out in
defiance on the top of the Castle, and the roaring of great Guns from the
Battlements of the wall. This Music was no ways unpleasant in the Lord
Generals ears; who answerable to the Scotch red Flag, produced Red-Coats (a
sight more formidable) and for their Guns, sent them in such Balls, that the
strongest Arm in the Castle could not beat back again. For now he thought it
concerned him to let them know his utmost force, seeing they were so hardy as
to withstand his power three months, when a potent Army at Dunbar could not do
it three hours. Therefore December 17 the great Guns play hard on the Castle,
and the Grenades flying in the Air, were as so many prodigious Comets
threatening misery to the Besieged, who in defense of themselves made the Castle
seem Aetna, perpetually vomiting out smoke and fire; but all to little purpose:
for the Lord General showred such continued storms of shot upon them, that even
made them despair of withstanding the same.

The Governor seeing this, and thinking that now he had done sufficient for
one man, beat a Parley, offering to surrender, if (still harping on this
string) leave might be granted to send to the Committee of Estates, and see if
their leisure would permit them to come with relief. But this being still
denied, Col. Dundass and his Soldiers thought it not good to abide any more of
these fiery trials, and therefore agreed to deliver all up, on these Articles:

That the Castle of Edinburgh, the Cannon, Arms, Ammunition, Magazines, and
Furniture of War, should be delivered up to the Lord General Cromwell.

That the Scots should have the liberty to carry away their public Registers,
public Movables, private Evidences and Writs, into Fife or Sterling.

That those Goods in the Castle belonging to any person whatsoever, the Owners
should have them restored again: this to be proclaimed, that all might take
notice of it.

That the Governor, and all Military Officers and Soldiers, might depart
without molestation, carrying their Arms and Baggage, with Drums beating, and
Colors flying, to Brunt-Island in Fife: moreover, the sick and wounded
Soldiers to stay in Edinburgh till cured, and then to receive the same benefit
of Articles with the rest of their Fellows.

According to these Articles this strong Castle being delivered up, December
24. was presently possessed by some Companies of the English, who found therein
(to their admiration) 53 Pieces of Ordnance, 15 of them Iron, the rest Brass;
8000 Arms, 80 Barrels of Powder, and all things else suitable. The Articles
were punctually performed, by the very great care of the Lord General, who sent
forth a Proclamation (according to the Tenor of the Agreement) for all persons
to come freely to Edinburgh, and fetch what Goods belonged to them; promising
that they should not receive the least wrong, nor be injured nor molested in
their Egress or Regress; the Soldiers on pain of death being commanded to obey
the Proclamation: and that none might plead ignorance, it was proclaimed by
beat of Drum, and sound of Trumpet in Edinburgh and Leith.

Of such importance was this place to the English, that it might compare with
any of their Successes ever since they first footed Scotch Ground:
Dunbar-Victory was a great advantage, and the routing of Car conduced much to
the weakening of the Enemy; but these things only pared the nails of Kirk and
States, which would after a while grow again; or else broke their shins, and
made them halt a little, which might be quickly cured by a Plaster brought out
of the Highlands: but this loss of Edinburgh Castle is irrecoverable; no more
such strong places will grow again; the loss of which almost broke the Scots
hearts, and made them cry out, That Cromwell fought with more then ordinary
Engines, and shot better Metal then Lead, or else it had been impossible to
reduce that which in imagination was accounted impregnable. But this was mere
fancy: for seldom it is, that any side loses, but some will maintain it was
by Treachery; when there was no such thing: so was it here: for Dundass the
Governor did what lay in his power, and bore up courageously, notwithstanding
he was bereft of half himself; for his wife was slain by a Granado that broak
into the Castle; and his Soldiers were so frighted, being frequently wounded
by them, that at last laying by the duty of Soldiers, they commanded their
Commander, and enforced him to do what he did. But these unruly fellows being
conveyed (according to Articles) into Fifth, found to their cost that they had
leaped out of the Drying Pan into the Fire: for about seventy of them were
clapped up to answer for their misdemeanors. Where they lay some time, until the
Kirk and States were at leisure to call them to an account.

The crowning of their King was now the main business in agitation amongst
them: this had been delayed long by the Kirk and States, who gave him some time
to repent of all his Fathers sins, and his own transgressions; which he at
first refusing, it had like to have set him besides the saddle: this
backwardness in him, made the Kirk afraid to trust in his hands the reins of
Government; wherefore they set themselves wholly to teach him mortification,
and rules of the new Creature; withal making him understand how impossible it
was to obtain a Crown, except he took up the Cross and followed them.

But the English vigorous prosecution of their designs, quickened them forward
to expedite this business, which they of themselves were backward enough in. A
head they saw was requisite to compose that enmity which was among them, and
bring in those families in the Highlands (that declared purely for Royalty) to
join with them in repelling the Prevalency of the Common Enemy, (which was the
term bestowed on the English Army:) for now it was declared lawful to make use
of all persons that became Soldiers, at this time of need; contrary to the
Remonstrators opinion, who would not admit of any to serve in the Army, but
such as could give sufficient testimony of their godly lives and conversations:
so that in their judgments none were to be made choice of, (let the case of
necessity be never so urgent) unless they could overcome by the Spirit: if a
house be on fire, nay more, a kingdom, no water must be made use of, but that
which is clean; rather should it burn down, then one drop of foul be cast into
it. These Conceits in Scotland made such a fracture amongst the Clergy of that
Nation, as to this day could never be cured again. But to return whence we
digressed.

The first of January was appointed to be the day whereon the King should be
crowned: great preparations were made to invest him in his Royal Power at
Scone: it was performed with the greatest Pomp and Magnificence that the
present condition of the Nation could afford: the Nobility attending in their
Robes; and the Marquess of Argile, as Speaker from the Parliament, made a
Speech: he having ended, the Ministers began with an Exhortation how to use
that which they were going to put in his power: then the Covenant being
tendered to him, was immediately subscribed. Argile setting the Crown upon his
head, (which was too heavy for one to bear) the people showed great
demonstrations of Joy, by their cheerful acclamations of God save King Charles
the second. This News was quickly spread through all the Garrisons in Fife,
where was seen the like content, signified by the thundering report of great
Guns, and lighting of Bon-fires.

This solemnity being over, the main design now was to raise such an Army as
might not only secure what they had still in possession, but drive the English
quite out of those places lately lost: to bring this to pass, Commissions were
granted for raising Horse and Foot, and new Commanders brought in. Middleton*
he was made Lieutenant General of the Horse, etc.

The Lord General all this while was no idle Spectator, but took such notice of
these passages, as might enable him to make his own use of them, and let them
know, that greater Forces then they were able to raise, could not make him lose
his hold, nor enforce one foot of ground from him. Therefore to make sure work,
and get into his hands all those Garrisons of the Scots which were on the
South Side the Frith, he commanded Colonel Fenwick with his own Regiment, and
Colonel Sylers to reduce Hume Castle, and bring it under obedience. The
Governors name thereof was Cockburn, a man much governed by fancy, as you
will see. Fenwick no sooner received this Order, but immediately he applied
himself to the work; and having drawn his men up before it, sent a Summons to
the Governor in these words:

His excellency the Lord General Cromwell has commanded me to reduce this
Castle you now possess, under his obedience; which if you now deliver into my
hands, for his service, you shall have terms for your self and those with you:
if you refuse, I doubt not but in a short time, by the Lords assistance, to
obtain what now I demand. I expect your answer by seven of the Clock tomorrow
morning, and rest,

Your Servant, GEORGE FENWICK.


The Governor to this returns a quibling Answer:

Right Honorable,
I Have received a Trumpeter of yours, as he tells me, without a Pass, to
render Hume Castle to the Lord General Cromwell: please you I never saw your
General. As for Hume Castle it stands upon a Rock:

Given at Hume Castle this day before seven a Clock.

So rests, without prejudice to my Native Country,

Your most Humble Servant, TH: COCKBURN.


Here may be perceived how ignorant the Governor was of Cromwels
Achievements. Which ignorance of his must needs be either pretended, or
wilful: for it could not be that he should know no more, when the whole world
had heard so much: but it is probable he thought a part of his Army which wanted
his presence, had not the same faculty in conquering, that he himself had when
in person; and therefore took the boldness after the return of his Answer, to
salute Colonel Fenwick with these Verses: I William of the Wastle
Am now in my Castle,
And awe the Dogs in the Town
Shall Not gar me gang down.


This is Mars mixed with a Tincture of Mercury. If the Superfluity of his Pen
had been able to rout two Regiments, what might his Sword have done? But
Colonel Fenwick having placed a Battery against the Castle, returns him Heroic
Verse for his resolute Rhymes: for the great Guns (being one Mortar-piece and a
Culvering) quickly made the feathers fly, especially a Granado that fell in the
middle of the Castle, which did them great mischief. But yet they held out,
until a small breach being opened, and the English ready to enter, the
Governor beat a Parley. But Fenwick now was resolved to hearken to no
Composition but only quarter for life: which was accepted of; so the
Governor, with his Garrison, (78 Commanders and private Soldiers) gang'd forth
of the Castle; which was presently possessed by Captain Collinson with his
Company.

It had been long now since the Lord General himself had been in the field; for
though Action was that which chiefly corresponded to his Nature, yet the
sharpness of the season made him continue in his Winter Quarters for some small
time longer: in which time, parties were, sent abroad to enlarge their
Quarters, and clear the passage between England and Edinburgh.
Timptallon-Castle was a place which many times had cut off passengers, and much
molested the Country by frequent excursions: for the reducing of which, Colonel
Monk (that gallant Commander) was sent with about three Regiments of Horse and
Foot. When first he came before it, finding the Scots very refractory, he
caused the Mortar-pieces to play for 48 hours: which did them little hurt;
until that six battering Guns being planted, they played their parts so well,
that the Governor was enforst to yield (seeing no other conditions would be
granted) to Mercy, and all those that were with him.

The Scots King having now got some power into his hands, used his utmost
endeavors to gain reputation amongst his Subjects, by visiting all the
Garrisons in Fife, and putting them in a posture to hinder the English from
landing on that side the Frith; But having experience of the Lord Generals
courage, and knowing that Forts would prove weak withstanders of his Forces,
should they make an attempt; therefore he drew from Sterling those Horse and
Foot which could be well spared, and joining with them the new-raised
soldiers, he quartered them all along the VVater-side, for better security.

After this business was ended, away rides he to the High-lands, to compose
differences, (for that place was not free from dissentions) and persuade those
rough-hewn Fellows to rise unanimously in defense of their craggy habitations.

This progress was no sooner ended, but the sitting of the Scotch Parliament
at St. Johnstons was begun, where the chief consideration was still to
recruit their Army with new supplies of men. This Meeting produced an Act,
Ordinance, or great Gun, to terrify those that should slip away from their
Colors without leave from their Captains, and was followed by the Clergy
(to show how ready they were to promote these designs) with an exhortatory
Declaration, stufft with raising rhetoric against the English, which was sent
into Fife and the High-lands, persuading all to rise at this time of need. This
produced little: for the common people must not stir, unless their Lords or
Leards beat the Drum. But these Grandees were now busily snarling one at
another about superiority in the Army; every one endeavoring to be in the
chiefest place of command: and if any one were advanced, he that came next
behind pulled him by the skirts, to hinder his preferment. By this means the
Scots great undertakings went on but slowly.

But to return, and make an inspection into the English Affairs: We find the
Army in and about Edinburgh, under a cloud of sorrow, mourning for the Eclipse
of that great Luminary which erst while had shined so bright in their
Hemisphere, whose influence had many times melted the waxen Whings of his
ambitious Enemies; but now (as all men are subject to be so) this great General
by sickness was confined to his Chamber, and utterly dis-abled for the present
to act in person with the Army, should any new occasion call them forth of
their Winter Quarters.

This did not so much depress the spirits of the English Soldiery, (who were
exceeding sensible of their unspeakable loss, should. Cromwell their fortunate
Leader be now snach't away from them in the midst of their hopes) as it
heightened the Scots, who were very much elevated with the fancy of his death;
believing the slightest report of it to be real truths, because it corresponded
with their desires; imagining to themselves assurance of Victory and sufficient
Revenge, when death had conquered him, who many times before had made them feel
the force of his Steel. This conceit was so deeply grounded in their
imaginations, that no report to the contrary could supplant it, but it must be
so, because so they would have it: so apt are men to believe any thing that
serves for their purpose, according to that saying, Quod volumus, facile
credimus.

But this Chimaera soon vanished into nothing: for a Scotch Trumpeter being
sent out of Fife to Edinburgh about the restoration of a Ship laden with Goods
which the English Frigates had taken sailing from Brunt-Island to Fife; after
his message was delivered, he very confidently aver'd to the Soldiers, That
their General was dead, and that they did well in hiding it; but all the world
should never make him believe otherwise. This report was much wondered at; and
the more, because the Reporter did it with abundance of confidence,
endeavoring to persuade all to chirp after his note. But he could not long
persist in his opinion; for this Novelty being handed about from one to
another, at last it came to the Lord Generals ear, who much admired such a
thing should be, and he not know it: therefore to dispossess the Trumpeter of
that conceit, he caused him to be brought into his presence; where coming, he
now saw, that although sickness had for some time sorely handled this noble
General, yet now his recovery was so far advanced, and that Nature had now
gotten so much mastery over his distemper, that in all probability he would
walk forth in a small time to take the air, and visit his neighbors at
Sterling, if not in Fife. At the return of the Trumpeter to those that sent
him, he quickly blew away this false report which went so currantly in the
Scotch Army, and assured the falsity of it.

The Parliament in England having ever a watchful eye on the Affairs in
Scotland, with singular providence provided sufficient supplies both of Men,
Money and Provisions of all sorts for Horse and Man, dispatching them away
continually to the Army; so that it might be said, That never was an Army
better provided for, then this; nor ever did Soldiers better deserve
encouragement then these.

About this time arrived at Leith Admiral Dean, one of the English Generals at
Sea, with large supplies from London: amongst other conveniences, he brought 27
great flat-bottom'd Boats, which were for transportation of the Army over into
Fife, that so thereby a quick dispatch might be made of this work, so far
advanced already. But the time of year would not admit of much action: for
although it was April here, yet the Rays of the Sun were not of force
sufficient to penetrate the congealed Clouds, and raise any verdure on the
ground; so that the Cavalry could not march, unless they carried their fields
behind them, or else in Carts. But this which hindered the English, furthered
the Scotch, and gave them leisure to scrape together as many men as possibly
could be got. Out of the High-lands marched Middleton, with a considerable Force
of Horse and Foot; and the Town of Dundee, out of a great respect to their
King, and to show their forwardness in prosecuting the cause, advanced for the
service a brave Regiment of Horse at their own charges, and sent them with a
stately Tent, and six fair Brass Ordnance, for a Present to the King then at
Sterling; where all being joined, their Army consisted of 20000 men, most raw,
or else but parboiled, having seen no Wars but what their own Country produced;
and being more acquainted with their fields then fights* knew better how to
handle a Spade, then a Spear. But though many of them were thus, especially
the new-raised Forces; yet all were not so: for Scotland being always numerous
in people, supplied the neighbour-Nations with auxiliarie Forces; so that many
Regiments of them were always in the service of the Swede, French, Dutch and
other Nations. But now upon report of Wars in Scotland, they repaired home to
serve in their own Nation at this time, against the English.

The Scotch Army being grown numerous, was still augmented by Forces newly
raised in all parts of the Nation where the King and States had any command;
yet more were desired: to that purpose, the Earl of Eglington (an eminent
person) was sent into the West (with some other Commanders) to raise Forces:
these coming to Dunbarton, began to put their Commissions in execution; but
Colonel Lilburn having notice of it, sent them a party of Horse, which
suddenly snapt the Earl himself, his Son Colonel James Mountgomery,
Lieutenant Colonel Colborn, etc. whom they carried away prisoners to Edinburgh.

The Lord General Cromwell had now got strength to walk abroad, notwithstanding
the relapse he fell into after his first sickness; and had it not been that he
was of an extraordinary strong constitution, the Ague, which last of all seized
upon him, might have shook him into the grave. But the Parliament in England
seeing how frequent these distempers were upon their General, and doubting the
air of Scotland might be the cause of it, the Council of State first of all
sent him two eminent Doctors, Dr. Wright, and Dr. Bates, to use their utmost
skill in his recovery; and presently after dispatched an Order into Scotland,
which gave him liberty to leave the business of the Army, and repair into
England, until his health and strength was recovered. Upon receipt of this, he
made a return of thanks by a Letter to the Lord President of the Council, which
ran thus:

My Lord,
I Having received yours of the 27 of May, with an Order of the Parliament for
my liberty to return into England, for change of air, that thereby I might the
better recover my health; all which came unto me whiles Dr. Wright and Dr.
Bates (whom your Lordship sent down) were with me: I shall not need to repeat
the extremity of my last sickness; it was so violent, that indeed my nature was
not able to bear the weight thereof; but the Lord was pleased to deliver me
beyond, expectations, and to give me cause to say once more, He has plucked me
out of the Grave. My Lord, the indulgence of the Parliament expressed by their
Order, is a very high and undeserved favor; which although it be fit I keep a
thankful remembrance, yet I judge it would be too much presumption in me not to
return a particular acknowledgement. I beseech you give me the boldness to
return my humble thankfulness to the Council for sending two such worthy
persons so great a journey to visit me, from whom I have received much
encouragement and good direction for recovery of health and strength; which I
find (by the goodness of God) growing toward such a state, as may yet (if it
be his good will) render me useful according to my poor ability, in the station
wherein he has set me. I wish more steadiness in your Affairs here, then to
depend (in the least) upon so frail a thing as I am: indeed they do not, nor
own any Instrument: this Cause is of God, and it must prosper. Oh that all that
have any hand therein, being so persuaded, would gird up the loins of their
minds, and endeavor in all things to walk worthy of the Lord: So prays,

My Lord, Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
Edinburgh, June 3.

Although sickness had a long time kept under the body of this noble General,
yet his courage was no way diminished by it: for no sooner was he able to stir
abroad, but with eager desire of action, he consults with the chief Officers of
the Army to carry on the War. The result of these Councils was to contract the
Army, by drawing in the out-guards or petty Garrisons which were of little
force, and only served for Perdues to give notice of the Enemies motions. To
Hamilton marched Commissary-General Whally with eight Regiments of Horse, and
brought off a Troop of Dragoons, and 60 Foot which were there placed; afterward
several other places were deserted by the Forces that kept them.

The Army being thus drawn into one body, were supplied with 33 Wagons and
Carriages for the Train from Barwick; and near upon the same time arrived by
Sea Captain Butler in the Success, a stout ship formerly taken from the French:
this was the Ship that wafted along the Golden Fleece, and safely swom into
Leith with a rich Cargazon of about 80000 l, for to pay the Soldiers. This
money was presently distributed out, to the Horse and Foot; which mightily
elevated their resolution to the present Expedition.

All things being now ready for this Champaigne, the Lord General Cromwell
ordered the Armies advance to Red-hall: which was cheerfully done, on June 24.
1651. At this place they only tarried until the Soldiers had wholly quitted
their Quarters, and then marched off to Pencland hills, a place which was well
known to the English, ever since the first entrance of the Army into Scotland,
when they took the confidence from thence to look big on the City of Edinburgh:
but now being in a braver condition then they were before, having cut through
the greatest difficulties of the War, and advanced their Blood-red Cross on
the top of the most impregnable places that durst withstand their invincible
Force; having made a breakfast of the South of Scotland, they intended the
North for a Dinner. Therefore to make have, now their stomachs were up, the
Lord General Cromwell caused the whole Army to pitch their Camp on Pencland
hills, in such a comely Order, and admirable Figure, so that Julius Caesar
himself, (could he have kept death off at the swords point, and thereby
survived to this Age) might have turned Scholar, and learnt the Rudiments of
Modern Discipline, by the Example of this excellent Commander. How amiable was
it to behold the towering Tents of the superior Officers, in various Figures,
and spreading Colors overlooking the Huts of the inferior Soldiers, like so
many Pinacles in a well built City, that aspire over the humble Cottages,
administering a pleasant object to the delighted Traveller! Here Military
Discipline resembled the Civil Power; all knowing their Duty, and performing
their Parts; whilst General Cromwell the Head, observed the Actions of every
Member in this great Body, with one hand stretched forth to reward the sober
and valiant; the other, to punish the cowardly and vicious. It was not here, as
usually it has been practiced in foreign Armies; as that of the Duke of
Lorain, where the first question to a new-listed Soldier was this, Can thou
plunder? or in some others, where the Van, by Rapine and destruction, make
Skeletons of the Rear.

While the Army lay thus encamped, the Lord General in his Tent feasted his
Officers, and several of their Ladies, as the Lady Lambert, and Major General
Deans Lady, with several other English Gentlewomen, who came from Leith to view
the Soldiers in their Tents, and afterward returned back to the places from
whence they came.

The Army continued not long in this posture: for General Cromwell seeing the
weather invited, and intelligence of the Scots being at Falkirk, requiring a
speedy advance, he therefore drew forth the Army to meet them, which we shall
muster in their March, and set down the names of the particular Colonels, with
their Regiments, both of Horse and Foot, which were actual in this Expedition,
that so the remembrance of these worthy Commanders may be preserved.

The Regiments were these:

HORSE.
1. The Lord General's. 2. Major General Lambert's. 3. Lieut. General
Fleetwood's. 4. Com. Genesis Whalie's. 5. Col. Tomlinson's. 6. Col. Twisleton's.
7. Col. Hacker's. 8. Col. Okey's. 9. Col. Lidcot's. 10. Col. Berry's. 11. Col.
Grosvenor's. 12. Col. Alured's. 13. Col. Lilburn's. 14. 6 Troops under Maj.
Husbands.
FOOT.
1. The Lord General's. 2. Major General Lambert's. 3. Major General Dean's. 4.
Leiut. General Monk's. 5. Colonel Fairfax's. 6. Colonel Pride's. 7. Colonel
Goff's. 8. Colonel West's. 9 Colonel Cooper's. 10. Colonel Ashfield's. 11.
Colonel Daniel's. 12. Colonel Read's.
Six Troops of Dragoons, and sixteen pieces of Ordinance.

This brave Cavalry and gallant Infantry, in prosecution of the present design,
first marched to New-bridge, from thence to Lithgow. Now the two Armies being
not far from one another, it was conceived a speedy engagement would follow,
seeing General Cromwell's courage prompted him to seek his Enemies; and the
numerousness of the Scots Army might be a persuasion to them not to fear a
Fight: But it seems, they intended nothing less; for the King having drawn his
Foot into Torwood, encamped there, and railed them in with regular
Fortifications, the Horse in great Bodies lying about them, for security; and
these again being fenced with the River and with Bogs, so that it was an
impossible thing for the English to drive them out of this fastness which they
had betaken themselves to. Yet however, the Lord General would try whether
provocations might draw the Scots to a fairer field, and therefore marched his
Army in Battalia so near their main Body, that their Tents might perfectly be
discerned; and so stood from twelve at noon, till eight at night, expecting the
Scots approach: but they having more mind to spin out time, then to put all to
the hazard of one Battle, refused an engagement. But because it should not be
said the English came there for nothing, therefore the Scots sent them some
thundering Messengers from the concavity of their great Guns, which wrought this
effect; that the Lord General Cromwell drew off his Army, with a resolution not
quite to desert the service, but rather to go back some few paces, that so he
might return again with the greater force; or else attempt the Scots Quarters
in some other places, and by that means, enforce his Enemies to seek to him for
relief of their Friends.

This resolution being taken up, the Lord General drew off his Army to Glasgow;
and after some small refreshment of his wearied Soldiers, he marched away
again, directly on the East side of the Town, and so continued in excellent
order marching on for five or, six miles toward Hamilton, (this was to amuse
the Scots, and bring them into security:) but upon the sudden, hoping to get
some advantage over the Scots, upon the remove of their Camp to Kelsith, he
wheeled about, and quickly after took up his Quarters at Monkes-Land, within
four miles of their Army. But though they still declined engagement, refusing
to meddle with the English, otherwise then by small parties, that sometimes
flew out, when they conceived any advantage might be gained; yet many of these
Land-Pickaroons were often met withal, and sent home again well Bastinado'd for
their boldness.

This spinning out of time in this manner so exasperated the Lord General
Cromwell, that he resolved to fall upon part of their Forces that were placed to
keep Kalendar-House. Accordingly, July 15. he caused two battering Guns to be
planted: they began to play about eleven of the clock that day; and about seven
at night they had acted their parts so well, that the wall no longer being able
to endure the force of these fiery Engines, fell down in many places; and yet
for all this, the Governor very stoutly made good his charge; believing that
the whole Scotch Army his friends, who were in sight, would never let him
perish for want of relief, and therefore resolved to stand it out to the
utmost. The Lord General seeing his Summons wrought little effect to the
obtaining of his ends, sent ten Files out of every Regiment, to pull them out
by force, seeing they would not yield for fear: these stout Lads being provided
with Faggots presently dis-burdened their backs in the Enemies Moat, and so
springing over into the breach, carried all before them, so that in half an
hour, the House was wholly possessed, and the Governor with sixty two Soldiers
hurried away into another world, having refused (when they might) to live in
this. The Scotch Army all this while moved not, but as passive Spectators
beheld this Tragedy, without offering to send one hand to help their friends in
distress, as if this business nothing concerned them. The Lord General seeing
how cowardly the Scots were, in that they suffered their Garrisons to be
snatched away from under their Noses, resolves to sit yet more close upon their
skirts, and bid fair for Fife, thereby to cut off those supplies of provisions
that enabled them to trifle out time, and protract the War. This design had
many times been discoursed of by the General and his Council of War, but never
before fell out so fit an opportunity as was now presented.

Wherefore Colonel Daniel's Regiment of Foot, having four Companies more
joined with them, and four Troops of Horse, all under the command of that
valiant Soldier, Col, Overton, were designed for this service: these lying at
Leith, it was given out, they were intended for England by Sea; but upon a
sudden, all provisions being in a readiness, the Boats and Pinaces also fitted
for Service, Colonel Overton marched with his Forces out of Leith, to Queens
Ferry; and there having imbarqued his men, Thursday July 17. in the evening,
this Brigade set forward, and the next morning very early, (being furthered by
the wings of Sails and Oars) this little Fleet flew over the Frith into Fife,
and landed at the North-Ferry, in spite of those showers of great and small
shot that were poured upon them at their approaching the shore: in exchange
whereof, Colonel Overton caused his men to pay them in their own coin, by
firing upon them out of the Boats: which being performed with admirable courage
and gallantry, made the Scots break off the dispute, and (notwithstanding their
advantage of firm footing, when the English stood on a very tottering
foundation) betake themselves to their heels, leaving behind them part of
their Arms and Artillery.

Overton being thus landed, made good his ground, by causing his soldiers to
become Pioneers, and to entrench themselves, for greater security, until more
Forces might come up to them; upon whose conjunction, they would be enabled to
march up into the Country, without fear of any opposition. To this purpose,
Messengers were with all speed posted away to the Lord General, to acquaint him
with their good success, and the present posture of their affairs; who
thereupon immediately ordered a supply of two Regiments of Horse and two of
Foot to be hasted away with all expedition, under the conduct of Major General
Lambert.

The news of these passages arriving at the Scottish Camp, gave them so hot an
Alarm, that in all haste Major General Brown is dispatched away with four
Regiments of Horse, and Major General Holborn with as many of Foot, to drive
the English out of Fyfe again. But they lost their aim: for Lambert getting the
start of them, came up to the relief of Overton, ere they could approach to
straiten him. The English being thus united, Lambert drew them up in Battalia
in a very formal manner, in this order: His own Regiment of Horse, with the
Dragoons of Col. Okey and Col. Morgan, made the Right Wing; Colonel Lidcot's
three Troops of Horse, with some Dragoons, made the Left: the Main Body
consisted of the Regiments of Major General Lambert, Colonel West, and Colonel
Daniel, of Foot; with some odd Companies more, which were edged in to the
greatest advantage.

The Scots finding the English in this posture, were not at all discouraged;
but expressing greater resolution then usually they had done, set their men in
Battle array, and stoutly confronted their adversaries. Both Parties having
faced each other for the space of an hour and an half, Lambert with the Right
Wing of his Battle fell on the Enemy with great fierceness, giving the first
Charge on the Scots Left wing; which they (not flinching a foot) manfully
sustained, returning like for like. Thus continuing for some time, the Scale of
success standing in equipondio, the Pistols having now done their part, the
fury of these Antagonists grew to such a hight, that flinging away those more
cowardly weapons, every man drew upon his opposite, and with swords point
charged through each other. But this was too hot to hold: for the English being
very dextrous in that kind of fighting, quickly routed the Enemies Left wing,
and made them flee, leaving a fair field. Neither were the rest of the Forces
on both sides idle spectators, but industriously acted their parts in their
several stations. The Foot that constituted the Main Body of the English,
traversing their ground, so reiterated their Vollies, that they seemed to cause
an earthquake. But the Scotch Horse being utterly dissipated, their Foot could
not stand long; who being left to the mercy of their Enemy, in this heat of
blood, found it cruel, being little other then what was dispensed at the
but-end of their Muskets, (especially to the High-landers.) In a word, and that
in plain English, so enraged were the English, that in a trice they bestrewed
the place with 2000 Scots, or thereabout, as so many objects of mortality.

Neither were the Captives inconsiderable, either for their quality or number,
they being as follows, viz. Major General Brown Commander in chief; one
Colonel, one Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, thirteen Captains, seventeen
Lieutenants, nine and twenty Ensigns, five Quartermasters, six and twenty
Sergeants, five and twenty Corporals, and One thousand two hundred twenty and
six common soldiers, with forty and two Colors of Horse and Foot. Brown
having received this Defeat, (which consisted not only in the loss of so many
considerable Forces, but the wounding of his Honor and Reputation, more valued
then life by a Generous mind) and being himself reduced to the condition of a
prisoner, survived not long; dying (as was conceived) of very grief for his
hard fate.

But the English triumph in their victory, still seeking to augment it, by
farther Exploits: now the Terror of this Blow had spread it self into all the
Scots Garrisons; and therefore Lambert first of all summons the impregnable Fort
of Innesgarvey, situate in an Isle lying in the Frith, betwixt Queens Ferry,
and the Pass into Fife. The Garrison here was possessed with such a pannick fear,
that upon summons, they were content to march away, with their swords only by
their sides, (to show what profession they were of) and leave the Fort, with
all the Arms, Ammunition and provision, with sixteen pieces of Ordnance,
behind them, for the use of the English.

The Scots King having the report of this great overthrow of his Forces brought
to Torwood, where he still lay strongly incampt, it wrought such a great
distraction in his Army, that he very hastily dislodged, and marched into
Sterling Park. But they could not be so quick in the retreat, but General
Cromwell (who still waited upon them) was as nimble in the Rear; who although he
had much diminished his Forces, by sending so many into Fife, yet still
endeavored to fight the whole Army of his Enemies, and marched after them
through the ground they lately possessed, and there found what pannick fear had
possessed them, who in have had left behind them all their sick soldiers, one
barrel of Powder, three of Ball, much Match, many Muskets, and three barrels
of Hand-Granadoes. Thus the Lord General followed them with provocations to
move them to fight, until he came within two miles of Sterling; but all to
little purpose: for they would neither bark nor bite, but hasted away to secure
themselves.

The Lord General seeing his stay here would be to little purpose, marched away
his Army the 22 of July to Lithgo, whence he sent over into Fife, the greatest
part of them, with the Train of Artillery, to prosecute the War on the other
side of the water. Now there remaining only four Regiments of Horse, and four
of Foot behind, those he made use of to secure what was already gained, and to
keep a watchful eye on the Scots future Motions. The Lord General himself
retired to Leith, there to take order for the supply of his soldiers. Whilst
he staid here, the happy news of the surrender of Brunt-Island arrived to his
Ears: for Major General Lambert prosecuting his good fortune, brought the Army
before that Island, in hope that the sight of his Red-Coats might daunt them
into a rendition. And herein he was not deceived: for no sooner was he come
before it, but without one shot made, the Scots desired Articles to depart in
peace: which Lambert (though a man of War) quickly condescended to; and so the
place was yielded upon these Conditions.

1. That the Soldiers in Garrison (who were about five hundred) should march
away with flying Colors.

2. That the Towns People should have what belonged to them.

3. That all provisions for War, together with all Guns and shipping of War,
should be delivered up for the use of the Commonwealth of England.

This place was of great concernment: for besides the strength of it, it was a
most commodious Harbor, and, in many respects, better then that at Leith; and
from thence the Army in the progress of their Conquests, might have constant
supplies of all necessaries.

The Lord General having dispatched his Affairs at Leith, made no stay, but
immediately crossed the Frith, to his Army then at Brunt Island, where he finds
all things governed by Lambert, with much Prudence and Policy; the Soldiers
courageous, and Commissary General Whalley with a strong Party of Horse abroad,
scouring the Seaside of Fife, having some Men of War by Sea attending his
Motion. The Activity of this excellent Commander was very eminent, who quickly
subjugated many small Forts, and possessed himself of all their Artillery, with
the Ships and Pinaces, that lay near them, for security.

Having now brought his Affairs to a very hopeful condition, the Lord General
placed Colonel Wests Regiment in Brunt Island, and with the rest of the Army
and Train of Artillery, July 30. 1651. he marched away to reduce St. Johnstons,
thereby to stop the High-landers from offering to send any Supplies to
Sterling, either of Men or Provisions. The swiftness of this March was such,
that in two days the English Army came within sight of the Town: and no sooner
had they faced the same, but intelligence informed the Lord General what small
resistance he was like to meet withal: which news was no way unwelcome, but
most acceptable: for now 'twas hoped to obtain possession by words, not by
swords; and therefore this Summons was sent in:

That being informed the Town was void of a Garrison, save the inhabitants, and
some few Country men, he thought fit to send to them, to deliver the same to
him immediately, and that he did thereby promise to secure their Persons from
violence, and their goods from plunder.

This Message was immediately sent away by a Trumpeter, who (as it was
conceived) would blow open the Gates, and make a free entrance for the whole
Army; but it fell out contrary to expectation: for this Messenger of Peace
approaching one of the Gates, he was denied admittance, and returned back again
by the Townsmen with a short Reply, That they were not in a capacity to
receive any Letters. This slighting of Peace, had like to have made them
incapable of Mercy, but that a speedy excuse from the Magistrates of the Town
was sent forth, to mend the matter, which declared, That the Kings Majesty had
sent a very strong Party, able to maintain the Town, and overpower them with a
Governor: But always to observe civility with his Lordship, they had obtained
leave from the Governor to excuse themselves, by showing how unable they were
to treat.

This was strange, but not so strange as true: For the day before, the Lord
Dafferes had entered the town with 1300 soldiers; and therefore General
Cromwell once more resolved to try the strength of his pen in a new Summons to
this new Governor, before they felt the fury of his sword. But this was to
little purpose: for Dafferes would not return the least line or word in answer.
This sullen silence caused the General to give a speedy Order for drawing away
the Water out of the Moats round about the Town, whilst three Regiments of
Foot, Col. Prides, Reads and Maliverers, boldly advanced, and planted four
great Guns, which played furiously into the Town: this continued for one night;
but the Governor next day finding himself in an Error, was unwilling to
persist any longer in it, for fear of being brought to the stool of Repentance;
and therefore sent out to desire a Treaty: which being concluded upon, it was
there agreed to deliver up the Town to the Lord General.

Thus the English Army run on in a continued Series of Successes, making all
places that offered to withstand their invincible force, bow in obedience, and
come under their command; and all this without the least opposition from the
Scots grand Army, commanded by the King himself, which had lain long in and
about Sterling strongly entrenched, as if their only design had been to defend
themselves, fearing (as 'twas thought) to offend their Enemies, and therefore
continued their station to no other purpose then to bring up the Rear in
Cromwell's Triumphs. But it fell out otherwise: for the English Army having
advanced as far Northwards as St. Johnstons, the King thought good to make use
of the present opportunity, seeing his Affairs in Scotland were reduced to a
desperate condition; and fearing the fate that hung over that Nation would
inevitably fall upon his own head, did not he prevent it by some extraordinary
means; therefore knowing a desperate Disease requires a desperate Cure, and
that being in a house ready to fall, it would be the safest course, by a sudden
departure, to save himself, by seeking a better Habitation; he presently took
that course. To which end, first of all, casting up his force, he found it
extended to about 16000 strong: with these, and hopes of farther help from
Friends, he resolves to venture for England it self, not doubting, if his
success answered his desires, to hook in both Scotland and Ireland into the
Bargain. This Resolution he resolves to put in execution, and therefore hastens
his soldiers to drive on the design.

Thursday, July 31. 1651. all things being in readiness, the Scotch Army began
their march from Sterling, and the sixth day after, entered England, by the way
of Carlisle. The noise of this Irruption made a terrible Echo through all the
Nation, especially in the ears of the Parliament at Westminster, who were much
startled with the suddenness of the Action. But they (like vigilant Statists)
doubting such a thing would happen, had beforehand provided to welcome these
new-come Guests: and first of all, Major General Harrison, attended by 3000
Horse and Dragoons, joining himself with Colonel Rich, and some other great
Commanders, marched away to salute them upon their entrance into England. Then
an Act was issued forth, and sent into all the Counties of the Nation, to raise
up the Militia into a present posture of Defense; and besides, to make all
sure, another Act was presently sent abroad, which prohibited correspondency
with Charles Stuart, or any of his Party; wherein it was enacted and declared,

That no person whatsoever should presume to hold any correspondencie with the
said Charles Stuart, or with his Party, or with any of them, nor give any
intelligence to them, nor countenance, encourage, abet, adhere to, or assist
any of them, nor voluntarily afford, or cause to be afforded or delivered to
any of them, any Victuals, Provisions, Ammunition, Arms, Horses, Plate, Money,
Men, or any other Relief whatsoever, under pain of High Treason. And that all
persons should use their utmost endeavors to hinder and stop their March.

Yet for all this, the Scots went on in prosecution of their present design,
bending their course, by a swift March, for the west of England, where we will
leave them, making more have then good speed; and return back again to the Lord
Genesis Cromwell.

He having notice at St. Johnstons, that the Scots Army were gone to take up
new Quarters in England, did immediately settle the Affairs of Scotland in a
posture sufficient to secure what was already won; and leaving six thousand
Horse and Foot more, with Lieutenant General Mork, to reduce the rest, he
causes Major General Lambert with five Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, to fly
away with all possible speed, to get into the Rear of the Scots Army, whilst
Harison was in their Front; so to impede their March, until himself could get
up unto them. This being done, with the remainder of the Army, consisting of
eight Regiments of Foot, two of Horse, and eight great Guns, this victorious
General marched away, leaving Scotland (but not the remembrance of his being
there) and on August 12. he with his Army crossed Tine. With this swift March
being quite tired out, he caused the Army to pitch their Tents on Ryson Haugh,
upon the brink of Tine; himself in the mean time quartering at Stelly House,
near unto his Soldiers.

The Mayor of New Castle, having notice of the Armies being thus near the Town,
immediately went forth with the rest of the Magistrates, to congratulate the
Generals arrival into England: And to make themselves welcome to the Soldiers,
they carried along with them, for supply of the Army, Bread, Cheese, Biscet and
Beer: these Provisions were a great refreshing, and enabled the Soldiers with
cheerfulness to undertake the future march.

In the mean time, the Scots with their King, marched on toward Warrington
Bridge, where Maj. Genesis Harison resolved to make opposition against them, and
if possible to hinder their passage over: but before they could break down the
Bridge, the Scots by a swift March from Charley came up; and being necessarily
engaged, they maintained a notable combat with those that offered to withstand
them: here they had a small brush, but could very well afford it, for the loss
was their gain (and so both sides were satisfied with the engagement) for
though some of their men fell in the fight, yet they had their desire, which
was to pass over the bridge. And now it was the great Question of all, whither
they intended to bend their course; most believed for London, being that was
the Metropolis of the English Nation, a populous City, well furnished with a
great Magazine of Men and Money; the first, being the Wheels of War; the last,
the Oil, which makes them turn nimbly about. But it seems the Scots looked upon
this as too hazardous, or else intended only to take the dimensions of the
Land, and when that was done, to return home again to their own Kingdom.
However, they marched on toward the West, showing all civility to the people
as they past along; and with such strict Discipline were they governed, that as
their Army marched through Shropshire, a private Soldier for offering to enter
an Orchard, was by his Officer immediately disbanded with a Bullet. By this
severity their rough-hewn natures were so polished, that if Necessity drove any
private Soldier to a door, he durst speak no other Language, then, A Drink of
Water. But now at last, their Peregrination ends at Worcester; for coming
thither, weak and weary with constant duty, and hard labor, having expected
much, out finding little, they here resolve to take up their Quarters, hoping
Massey's former services in Gloucestershire, and those parts, was not quite
buried in the Grave of Oblivion. But in this they found it otherwise: for
although they might love his person well, yet seeing his parts engaged against
the Grain of the Times, it quite alienated the affections of those that
otherwise might wish him well.

The Scotch King with his Army having thus entered Worcester, on Friday August
the 23. 1651. resolved (being he could go no further) to tarry there, and abide
the brunt: And therefore in the first place, because he would not be wanting in
any thing that might conduce to the preservation of himself and forces, he
caused works to be raised, for better security. Then he sent forth his Letters
Mandatory to Colonel Mackworth, Governout of Shrewsbury; and likewise to Sir
Thomas Middleton, to persuade them to raise Forces for him: but this proved
fruitless; so that being now got as it were in a pound, there was no way, but
to make the best of a bad bargain. And now the black and dismal clouds began to
gather about Worcester, which portended a dreadful storm would quickly follow,
as presently after it did: For victorious Cromwell (who by delays never
contributed to approaching dangers) having refreshed his men near New Castle,
marched away without the least delay or loss of time, until he came to join
with the rest of the Parliaments Forces, commanded by Lieutenant General
Fleetwood, Major General Desborough, the Lord Gray of Groby, Major General
Lambert, Major General Harison; and besides all these, the Militia Forces out
of every County were commanded to march away, and surround those wretched men
at Worcester, that so a quick dispatch might be put to the work.

Never was it known before in England, that such great Forces were gathered
together in so small a time; for the standing Army, with the rest of those
Forces newly raised by Act of Parliament, upon this occasion, could not amount
to less then eighty thousand. But now the Lord General Cromwell being come up,
and having observed the posture that the Scoth Army lay in, began his work with
an attempt upon Vpton Bridge; there intending, if it was possible, to pass over
his Army: this design was left to Major General Fleetwoods management, who
presently sent away a small party of Horse and Dragoons to discover how
feasible the attempt might be: this Party, though small, proved daring in a
desperate attempt: for finding the bridge broken down, and nothing remaining,
but only a Beam of Timber that reached from one Arch to another, (which
through negligence had been left by the Scots) these bold Fellows made no more
ado, but dismounting their Horses one after another, rid over on this Wooden
Pegasus, and presently after (having now recovered the other side) run
themselves into a Church near to the bridge for security. Major General Massey
being all this while in Vpton with about 60 Dragoons, and 200 Horse, lying
secure, without the least dread of an Enemy, imagining it impossible for any to
come at him at that time, was upon the sudden report of this Exploit, so
alarmed, that in great consusion, he with his men, gave a camisado on the
Church: but that valiant Commander Lambert, highly prizing the worth of his
men, immediately came in, with a new supply of Horse, to their rescue. Massey
now seeing that to fight would be mere folly, being much over-matched, thought
a timely retreat the only way to secure his men; which he performed with so
much bravery, that sometimes facing, then fighting, and so falling off, himself
brought up the Rear, and never left his station, until his men were got farther
off, into safety. This encounter at last fell heavy on himself; for he not
fearing his flesh, and despising the force of his Enemies, rencountered great
difficulty in getting away, having received a shot in his hand.

The Bridge being thus won, all imaginable industry was employed to make it up;
so that in a small time, Lieutenant General Fleetwoods Army marched over; which
still pressing forward, they laid a Bridge of Boats over the River Teame, (on
the west side of Severn, which gliding along, at last emptieth it self
thereinto, about a mile beneath Worcester.) General Cromwell, in the mean time,
caused another Bridge to be laid over the Severn on his side, that so the Enemy
might be the more straightened.

Upon this, the Scots having taken the alarm, rise from their Leaguer at St.
Jones, and with the greatest part of their Horse and Foot marched on to oppose
the Lieut. Generals passage. The Lord General seeing this, resolves to draw off
the Enemy, and so divert his design; or else enforce him to fight on great
disadvantage; therefore himself in person led over the River (on that side of
Worcester which he had undertook to attaque) two Regiments of Foot, Colonel
Hookers of Horse, and his own Lifeguard. In the mean time, Fleetwood, with the
assistance of Colonel Goff's and Major General Dean's Regiments of Foot,
marched on to a hedg-fight: for the Scots looking upon this as the safest way,
had lined the hedges thick with Musketeers; so that the Bushes must first be
beaten, before these Birds could be taken. This was not long in doing; for the
English falling on, performed a brave fight from hedge to hedge: the Scots on
the other side, not losing any thing that could be kept, but manfully
maintaining their ground, until Colonel Blake, Gibbons, and Marshes Regiments
came in to lay more load on their shoulders; then they retreated to Pawick
Bridge, where again they were engaged with Col. Hayns, Col. Cobbets, and Col.
Matthew's Regiments, in another hot dispute: but at length, seeing they could
not prevail, they provided for their own security by running into Worcester.

And now desperation animating their courage, knowing that to continue in this
pound, would make them in a pitiful pickle, therefore (having already tried
their fortune with Lieutenant General Fleetwood) they imagining him to have
commanded the greater force, they hoped to make a more fortunate sally against
General Cromwell; therefore upon the sudden, they sallied out against him, with
all the Horse and Foot they could; but (as it proved) with sad success, for
though at first they showed such activity in their Arms, that General Cromwels
men were forced alittle to retire, yet presently the multitudes of fresh men
coming in, so turned the scales, that the Scots were wholly routed, flying away
in great confusion, to save themselves: the Horse flew amain back again,
toward the North; but the Foot not able to keep company, ran into Worcester,
with some of the Victors at their heels. Whilst, in the mean time, General
Cromwell, to make sure work, with a few Regiments of Foot, ran up to the Royal
Fort; and being ready to storm, his clemency was seen, in venturing his person
through the showers of shot, and offering the Scots quarter if they would
presently yield. But they being infatuated, refused the profer, which caused
their too late repentance; for the Lord General falling on, quickly possessed the
Fort, and all the Artillery that was therein.

The City being now won, the soldiers suriously fly through all the streets,
doing such execution, that nothing could be seen for some time, but blood and
slaughter, until at last, the sack of the Town, and plunder of Prisoners having
satisfied their appetites, they fall to securing of Prisoners, which (both in
fight and flight) amounted to about 10000, the Ilain near 3000. so that near
all was lost, only some few Horse excepted, which escaped out of the Battle;
but these found their flight to stand them in little stead: for Major General
Harison with a fresh party, fiercely pursued in their Rear, whilst the Country
people fronted and flanked them like little Beagles, which when a Mastiff is
once beaten, will not let him pass without a snarle at his tail, and fiercely
pursue him, whom before they durst not look in the face.

This Battle put a period to the Good Fortune of the Stuarts Family; and on the
other side, crowned General Cromwels Achievements, with an absolute security
of all his former Conquests, the influence whereof (though acted in England)
was great in Scotland: their chief Nobility, Gentry, and private soldiers
being thus cut off, that Nation could no longer be able to hold up its head,
but quickly after must needs be brought under obedience to the Commonwealth of
England: as it fell out soon after.

The Parliament at London, having speedy notice of this prosperous success,
received it with grateful acceptance. But that which abated somewhat of their
Triumphs, was, That the King could not be numbered among the Captives, nor found
among the Slain, but was slipped away into some byplace: for he seeing that all
the Enemies aim was only to smite him, and that they did not fight so much
against small or great, as against the King of Scots; finding the battle to go
hard on his side, he left caring for others, to provide for himself: knowing
full well, that should he be taken, his Quarter would be Quartering; and that
without the help of an Astrologer, it might easily be prognosticated what Death
he should die. Therefore trusting more to horse then men, and fear adding wings
to his flight, he hastened with all speed toward Lancashire; but by the way
(doubting that much company would do him little good, but rather be a means to
cause his sooner discovery) leaving the Road, he wandered for some time about
England, till at last, finding a fit opportunity, he returned back again into
France.

Thus this object of worldly Mutability, having ventured at all, could enjoy no
more then the heavy Load of his own Misfortunes; having been only Tantalized
with the Golden Apples of sweet Sovereignty, but never suffered to satisfy his
appetite with their fruition: for coming into Scotland, his Government was cut
out to him by shreds, as pleased the Kirk and States of that Kingdom; and being
a stranger, he must be carved to, not suffered to serve himself, for fear of
surfeits, like Zancha Panza's Doctors, that slipped away the dishes out of
respect to his health, whilst in the mean time, they went about to starve him:
Even so these State-Doctors dieted this poor Prince for some time, feeding him
with hopes and expectations of his desire; and then at last, give him no more,
but only a Nut without the Kernel, a Crown without a Kingdom: so that his
Commands were presently countermanded by a stronger, and made invalid by
General Cromwels sword, who never left hunting him from place to place, till at
last he was forced to flee into Flanders for shelter, where he now remains.

The Lord General Cromwell having given this deadly blow at Worcester, September
3. 1651. which laid the Scots hopes low in the dust, and thereby raised to
himself a full assurance of the security of all his former Conquests, tarried
no longer in that City, then to see the Walls of it levelled to the ground, and
the Dikes filled with Earth, that so the disaffection of the inhabitants might
be bridled from attempting to secure any future Enemy. And now leaving this
Golgotha, he hastened away to offer his victorious Palms at the Parliaments
feet: Accordingly, September 12. approaching near to London, the Speaker, with
the Members of Parliament, and the Lord President of the Council of State, with
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and some hundreds more of Quality, met him with
demonstrations of extreme affection, to congratulate all his Noble
Achievements, and Worthy Exploits: here they comment on his Valor, making
large notes on his Victories: the more, because he had done much in a small
time, bringing that about in fifteen Months, which was rather judged to be the
work of so many years; having in this time quite dispelled those Vapors
(fearful to the Parliament) which were exhaled by the Rays of Regality, and
once more made the serenity of Peace to shine in our Hemisphere. Thus the Lord
General was received in Triumph, (having before sent his Trophies, the Scotch
Prisoners) with great acclamations, and conducted to his house near White Hall.
And after some small repose there, he and his valiant Lieutenant General went
to take up their places in the Parliament, where the Speaker in a
congratulatory Oration acknowledged the Obligation of the State to them for
their indefatigable industry.

The same day the Lord Mayor of London (to complete the rejoicing, and show his
gratitude in behalf of the City) feasted the General and his chief Officers.
This being ended, with mutual returns of thanks, the Lord General took his
leave, and returned back again, to consider what was farther to be done for the
settlement of the nation: This is his next Work; And what he did in order to
the accomplishing thereof, we now come to show.

The End of His Personal Wars.
HIS ACTIONS In the PROTECTORSHIP.
THE English Nation having by a Civil War banished Monarchy with an Exit
Tyrannus, presently institute an Oligarchy, which (to give them their due)
acted in their Infancy like Hercules in the Cradle, stifling all those Serpents
that offered to hiss against their Authority; and with such vigor prosecuted
they their designs, that both Ireland and Scotland were enforced to yield
obedience to their commands.

The Authority of this Power being thus miraculously extended, it grew at
length dreadful to the neighboring Nations, especially the Dutch, a people who
of all others, were most sensible of the growing greatness of the English
Commonwealth: they knowing full well, that two neighboring States of equal
greatness could never long agree, being still jealous of each others actions:
which jealousy causing misconstruction, would at last break forth into open
hostility.

Examples are frequent in this kind; Rome and Carthage so long contended, till
the one was ended. They first fell out about the Island of Sicily, and so by
degrees this fewd extended it self through all those Nations where either side
had any dominion. But at last a peace being patched up, it continued until the
second Punick War, wherein Carthage was made a Puny indeed, and brought under
subjection to Rome.

Another Example we have in that most noble Republic Venice, whose first
Founders being hunted by the barbarous Huns, out of Italy, were fain to shelter
themselves by flying unto some little barren Islands, which lay in the
Adriatic Gulf; where necessity putting an edge upon industry, caused these
people to begin an admirable Structure, which since has been increased to such
a magnitude and splendour, that it may well be termed, The Worlds Wonder, for
the excellent Architecture, multitude of Bridges, rare Arsenal or Magazine: but
above all, the Policy of this State far surpasses all others in Government,
and may well be a pattern for direction and imitation to any people in the
world.

Venice thus gradually ascending to eminency, grew so great as to challenge the
superiority over all the watery Element about it; as well it might, being
situate therein, and therefore Neptunes Minion. This City being on one side of
Italy, on the other side lay Genoa, situate near the feet of the Apennine
Hills; a Commonwealth too, and therefore aspiring high, grew emulous of the
Venetians greatness, which made those two Republikes grow at enmity. The first
occasion of their falling out, was about a Church allowed them both, for
exercise of Divine Service, in Ptolemais, commonly called Acoe in Syria: this
Church being too little to hold both people of such great spirits, there grew a
hot Dispute whose it should be; which came to this issue, That it must be
theirs that could get possession; which proved to be the Genoeses, who to
maintain their Mass, armed the Church with Fortifications (not for example to
after-Ages) and so kept it wholly to their own Use: Thus began the Quarrel,
which continued for many years, chiefly by Sea, till at last the Genoeses
received such dangerous shot betwixt wind and water, that they were fain to
cry Quarter, and ever since vail to Venice, acknowledging it their superior.

Even so was it between these two mighty Republikes, England and the United
Provinces. The Dutch fearing that current of Traffic would be stopped which
they had so long enjoyed, by reason of Englands. Domestic and Foreign Wars,
themselves, mean while, having Peace with all Nations (except Portugal) whereby
they increasing their Trade by an un-interrupted fishing in the British Seas,
and still greedy in their unsatiable appetite of engrossing all to themselves,
without either Right or Reason; grew at last highly conceited of their own
abilities, both as to Policy and Power. Their Policy was seen in giving
assistance to the Enemies of the English Parliament, whilst in the mean time,
their Ambassadors tickled the Council of State and Parliament into a belief of
their Masters real affections and hearty wishes for their prosperity. But these
unworthy actions being privately suspected, it was not long before they were
publicly detected: This put the Dutch to their Trumps, and made them arm out a
considerable Navy, to execute a design upon the Isle of Scilly, which then was
in possession of the Scotch Kings Forces. But the Council of State in England
having timely notice of this project, dispatched away Blake (their noble
General by sea) with a Fleet of Men of War, who being joined with Sir George
Ascue, immediately prevented the Dutch, by reducing that Island under obedience.

The Parliament of England having seriously considered the unhandsome actions
of these their near Neighbors, how refractory they were upon all Treaties of
Amity, which was seen by their refusing those Propositions which were sent to
them; and how those honorable Persons that carried them to Holland, were daily
so ill treated at the Hague by some insolent persons, that the Parliament, lest
their Ambassadors should again be Dorislaus'd, called them home Reinfecta:
Presently upon this, they were forced to take up a resolution to maintain the
Right of their Jurisdiction on the British Seas, and therefore sent abroad an
Act for encouraging Navigation, and increase of shipping. This very much
heightened the spirits of the English Seamen, and gave them hopes of being one
day even with the Dutch, for eating the bread out of their mouths, as they had
long before done, by bringing all Commodities into England, at cheaper rates
then they could be sent for, by reason they were in Amity with most Nations,
and could send out ships with no more men then what served to sail them; whilst
in the mean time, the English (having Wars with most of their Neighbors) were
enforced to be at great charges in double manning out their Merchant Men, for
security of the ships lading. But to proceed.

This noble Act being arrived at Holland, very strangely changed the
constitution of that People, from a Phlegmatic to a perfect Sanguine
Complexion: for now they saw it was time to look about them, being like to be
deprived of that sweet profit which before they did enjoy: This animated them
on to try conclusions, in denying the English their undoubted Right of Dominion
in the British seas. At first, it was put in practice by some particular men of
War, to see if the English would relinquish that old complement of striking the
Top-sail: but in this they met with sharp rebukes, far surpassing imagination,
so that many times present Ruin did befall them, that in wilful refusal durst
deny this ancient Custom.

Thus by degrees one Quarrel begetting another, the fire no longer smothered,
but broak forth into a dreadful combustion; all preceding ages since the
Creation, never having produced such terrible Sea Fights, which ever light
heavy on the Dutch shoulders, and made them know, That although Holland was the
elder State, yet was it impossible for them to make England a younger Brother.

But in the midst of all these high undertakings, the Lord General perceiving
the Parliaments intentions were to perpetuate their sitting, as appeared by
their delatory proceeding in the Bill for successive Representatives; therefore
knowing, that as standing water would breed corruption, and grow offensive, if
it were not sometimes changed: so Parliaments perpetual were offensive to the
Peoples Privileges; but when pro tempore, pleasant to their sight. He having
well weighed the matter, and deliberately debated the business with his Council
of Officers, it was at last agreed by them to serve the Parliament with a Writ
of Ease, and make them understand the meaning of Exit -- This resolution being
taken up, the Lord General Cromwell went into the House, attended by some of the
prime Officers of the Army, where he delivered certain Reasons for a present
Dissolution of the Parliament: which were no sooner heard, but all the Members
in obedience avoided the place, and every one betook himself to his particular
habitation.

Thus this mighty Parliament was dissolved, who first of all were called
through the importunity of the people, and afterward upheld by the zealous
devotion of the City of London, whose inhabitants, through their abundant
affections, made them a free will offering of all their Earrings, Bodkins,
Thimbles, and Jewels, to carry on the weighty great work of routing Popery,
beating down of Antichrist, suppressing Superstition; and out of all, to raise
up a Glorious Structure of Reformation.

To answer expectations, this Senate began the work with the Kings evil
Council, and having lopped them off, drove on to such great Actions, that the
faith of after-Ages will be much puzzled to believe, and rather look upon them
as Romances then Realities. But now their time being come, after twelve years
sitting, they were annihilated, and the power transferred into the hands of
others.

Presently upon this, the Lord General Cromwell and his Council of Officers
published a Declaration, showing the Reasons of the Parliaments Dissolution;
the substance whereof, was this:

THat after God was pleased marvellously to appear for his People, in reducing
Ireland and Scotland to so great a degree of Peace, and England to perfect
quiet; whereby the Parliament had opportunity to give the People the harvest of
all their Labor, Blood and Treasure; and to settle a due Liberty in reference
to Civil and Spiritual things: whereunto they were obliged by their duty,
engagements, and those great and wonderful things God has wrought for them.
But they made so little progress therein, that it was matter of much grief to
the good people of the Land; who there upon applied themselves to the Army,
expecting redress by their means, who (though unwilling to meddle with the
Civil Authority) agreed that such Officers as were Members of Parliament should
move them to proceed vigorously, in reforming what was amiss in the
Commonwealth, and in settling it upon a foundation of Justice and Righteousness:
which being done, it was hoped the Parliament would have answered their
expectations.

But finding the contrary, they renewed their desires by an humble Petition in
August, 1652. which produced no considerable effect, nor was any such progress
made therein, as might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was
petitioned for; but rather an aversness to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the People of God and his Spirit acting in them:
insomuch that the Godly Party in Parliament were rendered of no further use,
then to countenance the ends of a corrupt Party, for effecting their desires of
perpetuating themselves in the Supreme Government.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what Remedy might be applied to
prevent the same; but such endeavors proving ineffectual, it became evident,
that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousy of others,
the non-attendance of many, would never answer those ends which God, his
People, and the whole Nation expected from them; But that this Cause which God
had so greatly blessed, must needs languish under their hands, and by degrees
be lost; and the Lives, Liberties and Comforts of his people be delivered into
their enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of the
Nation, as well as by the Army, it seemed a Duty incumbent upon us, who had
seen so much of the power and presence of God, to consider of some effectual
means whereby to establish Righteousness and Peace in these Nations.

And after much debate, it was judged necessary, that the Supreme Government
should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons, fearing God, and of
approved integrity for a time, as the most hopeful way to countenance all Gods
people, reform the Law, and administer Justice impartially: hoping thereby the
people might forget Monarchy, and understand their true interest in the
Election of successive Parliaments; that so the Government might be settled
upon a right Basis, without hazard to this glorious Cause, or necessitating to
keep up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possibly to avoid extraordinary
courses we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament, to give us a
conference, with whom we plainly debated the necessity and justness of our
Proposals: The which found no acceptance, but instead thereof it was offered,
That the way was, to continue still this Parliament, as being that from which
we might probably expect all good things. This being vehemently insisted on,
did much confirm us in our apprehensions, That not any love to a
Representative, but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to perpetuate
themselves, was their aim, in the Act they had then under consideration.

For preventing the consummating whereof, and all the sad and evil
consequences, which upon the grounds aforesaid must have ensued, and whereby at
one blow the interest of all honest men, and of this glorious Cause had been
endangered to be laid in the dust, and these Nations embroyled in new troubles,
at a time when our Enemies abroad are watching all advantages against, and some
of them actually engaged in War with us; we have been necessitated (though with
much reluctance) to put an end to this Parliament.

This Declaration being sent abroad into all the Dominions of the
Commonwealth, was readily assented to by most of the chief Officers, both by
Land and Sea. But for farther satisfaction to the Civil Power in the Nation,
whereby a right understanding might be had, and that every one might still
(notwithstanding this sudden change) observe his Duty, the former Declaration
was seconded by this ensuing.

WHereas the Parliament being dissolved, persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, are (according to the late Declaration of the 22 of April last) to be
called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the supreme Authority;
and although effectual proceedings are and have been had, for perfecting those
resolutions, yet some convenient time being required for the assembling of
those persons, it has been found necessary for preventing the Mischiefs and
Inconveniences which may arise in the mean while to the public Affairs, that
a Council of State be constituted, to take care of, and intend the peace,
safety and present management of the Affairs of this Commonwealth: which being
settled accordingly, the same is hereby declared and published, to the end all
persons may take notice thereof, and in their several places and stations,
demean themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Nation as
heretofore: in the exercise and administration whereof, as endeavors shall be
used that no oppression or wrong be done to the people, so a strict account
will be required, of all such as shall do any thing to endanger the public
peace and quiet, upon any pretense whatsoever.

O. CROMWELL.
April 30, 1653.

These wonderful Revolutions mightily heightened the Resolutions of the Dutch,
who were wholly possessed with Chimaera's of their own inventions, imagining
their work would be very easy, if the English should happen to fall together
by the ears, amongst themselves. But GOD by his Providence had so ordered it,
that the Nation continued in a peaceable posture, not any offering in the least
to resist the Commands of their Superious.

The like was seen amongst the Naval Forces at Sea, whose vivacity was now as
great as ever, both Officers, Seamen, and Soldiers, minding nothing more then
how to gain honor to their Country, by repressing the insolences of their
Enemies, whose endeavors at this time were to rob England of her Right.

But now the Lord General having taken upon himself to weild both the Sword and
the Scepter, the first remarkable passage that befell him, was at Sea, between
the two mighty Antagonists. The Dutch having ready in their Harbors a very
great Fleet of Merchant men, outward bound, for France, Spain, and other Ports,
all things being fitted and prepared for the Sea, those High and Mighty States
added ninety men of War to secure them from those dangerous Fellows, the
English. This Fleet being all ready, they hoist up sail, bidding amain for the
North of Scotland; it seems rather choosing to make a long and sure Voyage that
way, then a short and dangerous one through St. George his chanel, which had
many times proved fatal to their Fleets, notwith standing the protection of
their best Commanders. Trump having according to his Commission, conducted his
charge so far, that they feared no other enemy then the winds and waves,
immediately tacked about for the Sound, from whence he brought away a great
Fleet of East-Land Merchantmen, from Russia, Denmark, Dantzicks and other
Parts; to which was joined a Fleet from France, laden with Wine, Salt, and
other Commodities of that Country: having in safety brought all these home, he
entered the Ports of Holland and Zealand with so much Bravery, and so great a
Flourish, that those persons that knew not the matter, might have thought him
dragging the English Generals at the Stern of his Ship, in Triumph.

This good Fortune being seconded with a report of the English Fleet being gone
Northward under the Command of General Monk and Dean, so highly animated
Minhere Martin Harper, that with all his Men of War he presently set sail for
the Downs, to act that in the absence of the English Fleet, which he durst not
do in their presence.

Being come into the Downs, May 25. the Dutch Fleet, consisting of 108 Ships,
ranged themselves before Dover, where they expressed a great deal of small
valor, in beating down with great shot the chimnies of that Town; and with so
much resolution and spirit did they perform this worthy exploit, that not any
of their ships offered to run away, all the while. This Action of Trump's was
looked upon by all, to savor more of Arrogance then Valor: for a gallant
soldier will scorn to meddle with him that is incapable of defense, but rather
measure weapons with his Enemy before the fight; neither should a General
content himself with making a few Tiles fly from the tops of Houses, in a poor
Town; which can be but small credit to himself, and not much damage to his
Enemy.

But we shall see that Van Trump will meet with such a match as will give him
opportunity enough to exercise his courage to the utmost: for the two Generals
Monk and Dean, upon the sudden returned from the North into Yarmouth-Road,
where they joined with that Fortress of his Country, General Blake, having 18
ships more: These on the 3 of June 1653. lying at Anchor three leagues off the
southhead of the Gober, early in the morning described two Dutch Galliots,
which presently were chased by some of the English Frigates so far, that they
came within ken of the whole Dutch Fleet. Upon this discovery, the Frigots made
the usual signs, which were presently apprehended by the whole Fleet, who
immediately weighing their Anchors, the English made up with all the sail they
could: but the wind being weak, 'twas 12 at noon before these mighty Armadoes
could engage.

The first days work proved hot on both sides, for three hours; in which
Dispute the English lost General Dean, who unfortunately fell by a great shot.
To balance this, the Dutch had three ships sunk, and one blown up.

The next day, both Fleets endeavored to try another bout, but there being
little wind nor wine stirring, but Brandy, which was very brisk in the Dutch
Fleet, it was late that day before the English could get up to give them
Gunpowder to it. This second days fight was managed with abundance of valor,
both Fleets charging lustily upon one another. Van Trump to show his skill in
Sea Fights, at first brought up his Navy in very good Order, having the
advantage of that little wind then stirring (for the Sea looked with a smooth
face upon these mighty Enemies) But the English Generals, Blake and Monk, who
were not behinde-hand in making use of any opportunity, finding the wind upon
the sudden to veer about westerly, drove in amongst the thickest of their
Enemies, with so much fury, that the Dutch fearing to feed those that had so
many times been food to them, tacked about, and with all the sail that possibly
could be made, steered their course for their own Coasts. The English seeing
their Enemies thus fly before them, thought it not safe to pursue, being near
the Flats, and having great ships that drew much water. Wherefore some small
Frigates being sent to discover the Enemies course, the rest cast Anchor in good
Order, to cast up accounts, and see what was got or lost by this Adventure;
which proved in full, to be thus: Of the Dutch slain, no certain ccount.
Dutch Prisoners in possession 1350 Captains captived 6 Men of War taken 11
Sunk 6 Of the English.
Slain 120 Captains 1 Wounded 236 Ships lost or dis-abled 0

This inconsiderable loss on the English side being well recompensed with so
considerable a Damage to the Dutch, caused the two English Generals (being no
ways dis-inabled by the fight) to keep the Sea, and resolve to follow the
present advantage to the full; therefore having new trimmed their torn sails,
and shattered Rigging, they immediately made all the haste that could be, to
block up the Dutch Harbors; letting Trump see that now his Bravadoes were
transferred from the Downs, to his own Doors, and that the Fleet which a little
before he thought good to send Hue and Cry after, were now come to dare him
upon his own Dunghill the English at Sea, lying thus before the Texel, Wielings,
and other Ports of Holland, taking Prizes at pleasure.

General Cromwell at Land (mean while) prepares for a new Parliament, in whose
hands the Legislative Power of the Nation was to be put: to that purpose,
persons being chosen by himself, to the number of one hundred forty four, out
of the three Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, they made their
appearance at Westminster, on July 4. 1653. (the day prefixed in their Summons)
in the Council Chamger at White Hall, where General Cromwell being present,
attended by many Officers of the Army, he made a short Speech; which being
ended, by a Writing under his own hand and seal, he empowered them to be the
Supreme Authority and Governors of England, Scotland and Ireland, with all the
Territories thereunto belonging: and that any forty of them should be a Quorum,
sufficient to dispatch business, make Laws, and order all things as they should
see good; only for their limitation, the Instrument ordered their sitting not
to exceed the third of November, 1654. and that three months before their
Dissolution, they were to make choice of other persons, to whom they were to
deliver up their Powers. Having delivered his Instrument to the Members, the
Lord General dismissed them with a Benediction (being very good at it) wishing
the Blessing of GOD might go along with them and their Counsels. Immediately
hereupon, the Members adjourned to the old Parliament House, where having first
appointed Mr. Rouse to be Speaker, a great debate arose among them what to call
themselves, whether a Parliament, or something else: at last it was carried in
the affirmative, That they were a Parliament; in which name, all Addresses to
them were to be made.

Being thus settled, they began (though scarce pen feathered) to soar high, and
at first dash to strike both at Law and Gospel.

But whilst these things were under debate. John Liburn, whose turbulent Spirit
in the time of the Long Parliament, had procured his Banishment, presuming at
this time to be again admitted into the Nation, very confidently addressed
himself to the Lord General, craving his Protection. But he knowing full well
of what spirit John was, would take no notice of him, but left him to the Law,
by which he underwent a strict Trial, and by the favor of his Jury was
acquitted.

This man was ever observed to be of an ambitious mind, always affecting
Popularity, and therefore ever barking against the Higher Powers; first against
the Bishops, then against the King: next, against the Parliament; and indeed,
against every one that stood in his way. Likewise so fickle in his own
Principles, that trundling from one Opinion to another, he at last fell down
into the sink of Quakerisme, in which he died, and was buried like himself,
being hurried along the streets, from the Mouth near Aldersgate, by a confused
medley of Levellers and Quakers. But to Sea again.

The English Fleet having out-Trumped the Dutch, and made their Neptune fly to
Land for shelter, they improved their advantage to the utmost, by blocking up
the Ports of Holland and Zealand, so that not a ship durst pass in or out, but
was immediately made Prize. Among those that were taken, were two laden with
great Guns, one carrying one hundred sixty two, the other, one hundred ninety
one.

These daily losses filled the people with rage and madness, seeing they were
deprived of Traffic, by which they chiefly subsisted; and if that was
obstructed, nothing but a deep consumption would quickly follow. The States
General sitting at the Helm, and foreseeing the sad consequence of the present
War, seriously debated which way to free themselves from that imminent danger
that now hung over their heads. To accomplish this, there was but two ways;
either by Force to repel Force, or by Treaty to procure Peace. To put both
these in execution, four Commissioners were dispatched away imediately for
London, to treat of a Reconciliation; and in the mean time, all imaginable
preparations were made to prosecute the War, that so peace might be obtained on
better Terms.

Whilst they are thus providing to run the hazard of one blow more, it will not
be much amiss to give a rough draught of Naval Combats. An ancient Philosopher
laughed heartily at the folly of those that durst be so bold to venture
themselves at Sea, within two inches of death, for profit. If to sail in a ship
so much deserves laughing at, what folly then (nay madness) is it to fight,
when all the Elements conspire to make an end of the Combatants? For, the
Timber, which is the material substance of a Ship, may be accounted Earth, out
of which it is produced, and easily gives way to penetration by the impartial
Bullet, which seldom hits the Hull without Execution, making those Planks fly
into splinters, and become the instruments of death, which before were looked
upon as a defense and safeguard from the Enemies shot. The infinite number of
great Guns belching forth fire and smoke, so that the superficies of the water
seems to concorporate with its contrary Element: whilst the serenity of the
Air is obfuscated by Clouds of Smoke; the Combatants, mean while, eagre to
grapple with each other, are lost in a fog: In one place is to be seen a ship
converted into a Bon-fire; and her men fearful to fry, fling themselves
voluntarily into a cooler kind of death: In another place is a Vessel
depopulated of all her Inhabitants, without Masts, Yards, Tackle, or any other
thing that is necessary for her guide; and thus she floats about in a desperate
condition. Here are men wanting ships, and there are ships wanting men: and
nothing is more studied, then how to alter the natural verdure of the Sea, with
the sanguine, Purple of humane slaughter. Thus Confusion rides in Triumph; and
death at one instant appears in various shapes: a neglected match, or
accidental spark, being got into the Powder, in a trice conquers the
Conquerors, and makes them fly, who before were pursuers. The water, as that
bears the Berthen, so it claims a great share in destroying: for at the
redoubling sound of the thundering shot, the Billows being backed with a puff of
wind, dance a Current to this doleful music, and readily attend the
destruction of those Vessels that are battered betwixt wind and water.

This being the Theotick of Sea-service, let us now see the Practick, as it was
acted by the two mighty Antagonists.

The two Generals; Blake and Monk, with the English Fleet, had now danced
attendance at the Dutch doors, for two months together, in all which time, Van
Trump was preparing the utmost strength that possibly could be made, by the
indefatigable industry of the States General. Their Navy being new rigged and
tallowed, was set afloat, consisting of 120 sail of Men of War. The most of
these lay at the Wielings, the rest in the Texel. And now to encourage and
raise up the resolution of the Seamen, that so they might atchieve mighty
matters, a Proclamation is made, that all the shipping they could take from the
English, being Men of War, should be their own; besides some thousands of
Gilders to those that durst take the English Admiral, and a proportionable sum
for him that could take the Vice Admiral or his Flag: these promises, with an
addition of Brandy-wine, tipped the Dutch men's tongues with valor. Van Trump
having now all things in readiness, set sail in hopes to return a complete
Victor, thereby to wipe off the stain which formerly had been flung upon his
reputation.

July 29. 1653. the English Scouts discovered 95 Men of War to come bravely
sailing from the Wielings: they soon knew them to be Enemies, and therefore
gave notice, that the whole Fleet (which then lay about three leagues off to
Sea) might make up: but the wind facing the English, kept them from the
Engagement, until six a clock in the evening; when about thirty nimble Frigates
(the rest being still at Stern) began the encounter, and so continued until
night parted them.

This first days fight did only whet their appetites to the ensuing
slaughter; for all this night the Durch bore away toward the Texel, where
joined with them, 25 sail of stout men of War: these were the prime ships of
their Navy, wherein they chiefly relied. Their Fleet being thus reinforced by
this conjunction, Van Trump immediately endeavored to put all in a fighting
posture, to engage: the next day: but the night proving foul, the wind in a
rough note threatened the poor English with destruction, either on the Flats, or
else on a Lee-shoar. To prevent these disasters, Monk, with the English Fleet,
set sail, and stood out to sea: this sight made the Dutch to suppose a flight,
insomuch that one of their Captains desired Van Van Trump to pursue: For (said
he) these Schellums dare not stand one Broad Side from your Excellency; you may
see them plainly running home, and therefore my Lord miss not the opportunity.
This was not the first time that Trump had seen the English at Sea, and
therefore returned the Captain this short Answer: Sir, look to your Charge, for
were the Enemy but twenty Sail, they would never refuse to fight us. So it fell
out: for the weather proving fair and calm, the English contracted their Fleet
together, and in a Body tacked about to meet the Enemy. Neither was Trump
behindhand to meet his resolute Adversary; but with as much speed as care he
brought his Navy into such a form, as sufficiently manifested the excellent
skill he had in managing Maritime Affairs. The Morning to this fatal day proved
somewhat gloomy, so that it seemed the Sun was ashamed to behold the ensuing
slaughters. About five a Clock in the morning, the Dutch having the
Weathergage, began the sight somewhat at a distance; but it was not long*
before both Fleets were desperately engaged board and board. Now, (as a modern
Poet expresses it) The Slaughter-breathing- Brass grew hot, and spoke
In Flames of Lightning, and in Clouds of Smoke,
Till the discolored Billows did in Grain,
Blushed to behold such Shambles of the Slain.


Never was fight upon the Sea better managed and maintained, then this. The
Andrew (which deserved Saintship for the service) luft aboard Trumps own Ship,
but was quickly haled off by a Fire-ship which stuck like a Plaster to her
side, so that in a trice the Tackle blazed like a Torch; and had it not been
for the wonderful courage of some few Seamen, she had then undoubtedly
perished. The like disaster fell upon the Triumph a second-rate Ship, which
sometimes encountered many at once, but still triumphed over all, till at last a
great Flemish Ship set her on fire; which began to rage in such a terrible
manner, that it wrought the greatest confusion imaginable in the distracted
Company; some of them choosing the Flood before the Flame, leaped overboard and
were drowned. The example of those few that ended their lives in this desperate
condition, made the rest double their diligence, to save themselves and Ship:
which was at last performed; so that the medley growing great, and the fury of
the Sailers and Soldiers having banished all fear, they boldly board one
another. The Rainbow, an English Ship, having a long time striven to make prise
of others, was at last like to be surprised her self, had not the Oak seeing
the danger of her fellow, bore in to the Rescue: but this charitable deed
reduced the Oak to Ashes, she being destroyed by a Fire-ship. Yet for all this,
the English (no whit daunted) maintained the Fight with such an obstinate
Gallantry, that the Dutch, though high in resolution, were low in hopes of the
Victory. And well they might: for what can be expected, when men fight for fear
of punishment, as here many did, not so much regarding the honor of Conquest,
as the Eyes of the two Lords sent on purpose in a nimble Frigate to observe
every Captains Actions?

This bloody Battle now continued with eagerness (but more uncertainty) from
five in the morning till ten; about which time, Van Trump, fighting in the
midst of the English Fleet, had a Passport sent him for another world, being
shot with a Musquet-Bullet into the left Breast near the Heart. What can live,
when the Heart is dead? Trump was the Life of the Action; by whose example all
was guided and directed: no sooner was his Life spent, but the Hearts of his
men were broken: a general Consternation suddenly possessed the whole Fleet, so
that the Seamen had more mind to carry home the news of their renowned
Generals death, then to take vengeance on the English for killing him.

This unfortunate shot made the Dutch (now the Head was lost) for preservation
of the remaining part of the body, at first to disengage themselves, still
fighting in a defensive posture; and then about three a Clock in the evening,
to clap on all the Canvas possible, and haste to their own Ports. It had been
happy if all could have made the like speed; but that was forbidden by the
English, who had sunk and fired 27 of their Men of War, and killed them upwards
of 2000 men, besides six Captains and 1000 Prisoners taken: but the loss of
losses was the General Van Trump; to conquer whom alone, had been a Victory
sufficient to deserve a Triumph: hereby the States of Holland were deprived of
as able a Seaman as ever sailed the Ocean: he was a man serious in
deliberation; but when resolved, truly valiant in Action; which was
sufficiently manifest in that eminent service he performed for the safety and
honor of his Country against Don Antonio d'Oquendo, in the year 1639, when
with a small Fleet he fought the Spaniards in the Downs, and without any great
trouble brought that great Armada to nothing, wherein was imbarqued 23000*
Soldiers, besides Mariners. This he did with so much generosity, that when the
Spanish General durst not set to Sea from under the protection of Dover-castle,
for want of Powder, Trump offered to supply him therewith, and afterward to
fight him. He was ever observed to be a zealous Assertor of the Orange
Interest, both at home and abroad; this made him so eager to foment and drive
on the War between England and Holland, because the posterity of King Charles
(Father-in-law to the Prince of Orange) were excluded from Government. Some
Obligations he had received from the said King; as Knighthood at Dover, anno
1641. and gifts at the same time, which sufficiently manifested the Bounty of
the Donor. This is certain, that the fall of this great man did very much
conduce to the future Peace between the two Republics, which quickly after
followed.

Trump's death was not without loss on the English side: for no less then six
Captains, with 400 Soldiers and Seamen took leave of this, to bear him
company into the other World: besides these, there was wounded six Captains,
and 700 of the inferior sort: but for shipping, the loss was so small, that it
may cause wonder; for no more miscarried then the Oak, a Ship of about 30 Guns,
and a small Fire-ship besides: but yet the rest of the Navy were so much
wounded, that they made home to repair Breaches, and recruit for another
Expedition. Thus the English Mastiff baited the Belgic Lion, till she made him
run roaring home for shelter.

Whilst these Successes were given abroad, discontent rages at home among the
most sober sort of people, caused by the strange Actings of the Parliament, who
had now sat six months, and hatched little more then the Act for Marriages;
which was made, more to vex the Clergy, then please the Laity. This was but a
branch of the Ministers maintenance, the body being Tithes, was with might and
main endeavored to be hewn down to the ground: but the event answered not the
intent; for a Committee being purposely appointed to consider of this weighty
business, and make report to the House; the Legality of it both by the Laws of
God and man, was so largely and clearly proved before them, that after a full
hearing, and serious consideration of the whole matter, the Committee returned
an Affirmative report for Tithes: but yet for all this, many of the Members
being desirous to lay open a gap for confusion, did very stiffly argue against
the Ministerial Function, making it little better then Antichristian, and
Burdensome to the people. Of this humor there were no fewer then 60 of the
Members, and for the Ministry 84. these last were the Major part, which very
wisely (fearing the Minor would undermine them, by watching all opportunities
to accomplish their designs) did resolve to break-up housekeeping: which
motion being made by a Member, Monday December 12. it was readily assented
unto; so that the Speaker adjourned to White Hall, and delivered up the Powers
they had received, to General Cromwell again.

As the Magnitude of Hercules body was once drawn by the dimension of his foot;
so the policy of Cromwell may be seen in the Actions of this packed Parliament;
as may be perceived by a rational Answer to these following Queries:

1. Whether the Parliament did not make way for Cromwel' s future greatness, in
taking away the Engagement, under pretense of liberty for tender consciences
that scrupled the taking of it.

2. When Cromwell earnestly desired the several Members of this Parliament to
remember Tithes and the Universities, whether he meant the extirpation or
confirmation of them.

3. Whether some of this Parliament-Members violent endeavors to level the Law
in its practice, and the Gospel* in the preaching thereof, was not a design of
Cromwels, to render the Members odious to the vulgar, that so his own
Government might be the more acceptable to the people.

4. Whether it was an Act of Grace or Gratitude in the Parliament, to make
Cromwell a Member of that which he had made a Body.

5. Whether the picking of this Parliament was intended more for public good,
or private designs.

The Lord General having now got the Civil and Military Powers into his Hands
by this Resignation, made use of them to his best advantage. First of all, he
called a Council of Officers; and joining with them certain other persons to
advise, it was by them (not without abundant seeking of God, and speaking from
several places of Scripture which lay much upon the spirits of many in this
Assembly) resolved to have a Commonwealth in a Single Person; which person
should be the Lord General Cromwell, under the Title and Dignity of Lord
Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging. To him was assigned a Council consisting of One and
twenty, to be assistants in the Government. But because there can be no
Superstructure without a Basis, an Instrument was framed, to be the Foundation
of this present Government: which chiefly was made up of these following Heads.

1. The Protector should call a Parliament every three years.

2. That the first should assemble on the third of September 1654.

3. That he should not dissolve the Parliament till it had sat five months.

4. That such Bills as they offered to him, he not passing them in twenty days,
should pass without him.

5. That he should have a select Council, not exceeding one and twenty, nor
under thirteen.

6. That immediately after his death, the Council should choose another
Protector before they rose.

7. That no Protector after him should be General of the Army.

8. That the Protector should have power to make Peace or War.

9. That in the Intervals of Parliament, he and his Council might make Laws
that should be binding to the Subject, etc.

But now to make these things binding to the Conscience of this Grand
Magistrate, December 16. 1653. he in great state went from White Hall to
Westminster, where in the Chancery Court, before the Judges, Mayor and Aldermen
of London, with the chiefest Officers of the Nation, he did solemnly swear, To
accept of the Government; and promised in the presence of God, not to violate
or infringe the matters and things contained in the Instrument, but to observe,
and cause the same to be observed; and in all things to the best of his
understanding, govern the Nations according to the Laws, Statutes and Customs;
seek their peace, causing Justice and Law to be equally administered.

This Oath being publicly known, the Ceremony concluded with great.
Acclamations of certain Soldiers. Presently after, this following Proclamation
by the Council was published through England, Scotland and Ireland.

WHereas the late Parliament dissolved themselves, and resigning their Powers
and Authorities, the Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, by a Lord Protector, and successive triennial Parliaments is now
established: And whereas Oliver Cromwell Captain General of all the Forces of
this Commonwealth is declared Lord Protector of the said Nations, and has
accepted thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as we hereby do) to
make Publication of the Premises, and strictly to charge and command all and
every Person and Persons, of what quality and condition soever in any of the
said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and submit themselves
to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, etc. are
required to publish this Proclamation, to the end none may have cause to
pretend ignorance in this behalf.

Nothing could satisfy Caesar's Ambition, but a perpetual Dictatorship; nor
Alexander's, but to have more worlds to conquer; and why then should our
Cromwell, having the same aspiration, (and inspiration above them) be satisfied
with less then a perpetual Protectorship? Ambition is of such a Nature, that to
be first in a Village, pleases better then the second place in a City; but to
satisfy an ambitious Appetite sufficiently with honor, is impossible; unless
he can clime so high, that none dares ask how he came to that height.

To this Elevation is the Subject of our Discourse come, that his thoughts can
rise no higher, then how to keep in Peace what he has got by Policy. The City
of London (as there can be no great change without its Concurrence) presently
invites the Protector to a great Feast at Grocers-Hall, where his Entertainment
was more suitable to the former Splendour, then present Exigence of that
once-flourishing City. Immediately after, some Paperkites flew out of the
Country to Court from particular persons, making Demonstration of
Congratulation and real Obedience: These bore in the Front the Title of
Addresses from all the good people in the Nation; when it was well known, that
those whose Blood had purchased them Liberty from under one Person, would never
subscribe themselves Slaves to another.

The Protector began his Reign with seeming Serenity, insomuch that many
expected Halcyon days; such Sanctity appeared in the Countenance of this
Governor: his Tongue on all occasions was tipped with Lamentations at the
Effusion of Christian Blood, and customarily would bemoan the Animosities
amongst the people, caused by diversity in Religion: Yet for all that, when any
Overtures were made to him tending to a Settlement and Conformity in Religion,
then, his power was no greater in the Nation then a Constable's, who is to keep
peace and quietness amongst all parties. Thus he behaved himself toward the
Ecclesiastics.

But now we come to his first grand Action of State, the Negotiation of the
Dutch Peace. This War had been gallantly maintained by the long Parliament, who
in many Fights filled our Harbors with Prizes, which weakened much the united
Provinces; but every bout augmented the Valor and Resolution of the English
Seamen: so that in a little while, the dread of this Adversary was turned into
contempt.

I will not yet in the least derogate from the worth of this brave Enemy: for
in all Encounters, their endeavors were good; and might have been better, if
Sobriety among the Seamen had been well observed; but it is sad fighting, when
the Can charged with Brandy, must be a Gun to conquer an Enemy: these weapons
usually conquered themselves, and made way to their own destruction. But now to
show in part the Dutch Ingratitude, it will not be much amiss to remember what
England has done for them.

Time was, when the (High and Mighty) States of Holland, not able to help
themselves, implored (as poor and distressed) Queen Elizabeth's assistance: she
readily condescending, sent them over a wellfurnished Army commanded by the
Earl of Leicester. These were but the forlorn to greater Bodies, which after
were transsported under the Conduct of those brave Commanders, Norris, Vere,
Sidney, and many more, whose blood laid the Foundation of that Commonwealth:
These were the Men that cut the Spanish Yoke from off their Necks, and never
offered to sheath their Swords, until the Dutch were fully possessed of their
Liberties. But O Ingratitude* this was no sooner done, but the Deed forgotten:
For in King James his time, many Depredations were secretly committed on the
English by them: It may suffiice if we mention no more but only the business
of Amboyna, which sufficiently witnesses how far their Will would have
extended, had they had power sufficient to execute it. Afterward, King Charles
perceiving their enchroaching, set forth a brave Fleet, (which hurt himself
more then any body else; for it raised so hideous a storm amongst his Subjects
upon the payment of Ship Money, that never after could be appeased, till his
Head was blown off his Shoulders) these lying in the Downs under command of
Dover-castle, to protect a Spanish Armado intending for Flanders, the Spaniards
were boldly set upon by the Dutch, and utterly destroyed. Had this presumptuous
attempt of the Hollander met with a vindictive King, it would not have been so
silently connived at. These Affronts being thus slightly passed by, imboldened
them to attempt higher matters: for the English Nation on a sudden involved in
a Domestic War, they made use of this opportunity to fish freely on the
English Coast; which they continued so long, that from custom, they would
argue a right; because they had done it, therefore they ought to do it still:
presuming withal, to make Englands Harbors the bounds to their Sovereignty. A
rich Bank of Treasure, and great strength in shipping, prompted them to this
project; and the rather, because England was wasted by War, and disunited
amongst themselves: Now they thought it their time to attempt the design,
wherein they fancied an assured and absolute Conquest; not at all considering
what advantages in Navigation England has over them; as first, not a ship can
well pass the Narrow Seas between Dover and Calice, but must run the hazard to
be snapt in their passage, unless they sailed under protection of a strong
Fleet of War. Secondly, in stormy Weather the Winds would enforce ships at Sea
to put into the English Harbors for shelter. In both which respects, it must
needs be very prejudicial to the Dutch, if they fell out with England: their
Traffic this way being stopped up, no other means remained to continue a Trade
to France, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, East and West Indies, but by the North of
Scotland, with a Circumference about Ireland, whereby the Merchant must
necessarily be exposed to a double danger in respect of Enemies: And that which
is more unavoydable, the tempestuousness of the Sea in this Northerly Latitude,
would have rendered their passage that way both unfafe and uncomfortable. But it
seems these Considerations never entered into the thoughts of that State; their
minds were only troubled with dividing Spoils, and how to give Laws by Sea to
the whole world. This high conceit of Fortitude, many times bars up the doors
against prudential Counsels. Well, blinded as the Dutch were, Van Trump, that
leading Card against the English Commonwealth, must begin the Game, and that
when their Ambassadors were in Treaty at London.

The Parliament of England remembering their late saucy Action in the Downs,
resolved to make it redound to the honor of England: to that end, they fell
into a close debate of the Nations right in those Seas: now Mare Olausum speaks
English, to let every one see the Dominion of the Narrow Sea is Englands safety
and Protector, under Divine Providence, from the fury of foreign Foes, which
if it were lost, a Confluence of all Nations would quickly subjugate the Land
to their will. How sensible the Senate and People of England were of this, is
easily seen by the industrious Counsels of the one, and incomparable Valor of
the other; so that in a few months the Dutch sustained more loss by this their
wilful undertaking, then before they had done in several years War with the
Spaniard. The English Parliament being thus engaged in a defensive War, quickly
changed the Scoene to offensive, maintaining it with wonderful Policy and
Prudence: but on a sudden, in stepped General Cromwell, and justled them out of
Power, taking upon himself to end this War. He fought the Hollander twice
prosperously, which brought over into England four Ambassadors extraordinary
to solicit a Peace: these using pecuniary Persuasions, so far prevailed with
the Protector, as made him balance the public Concernments with his private
Interest; and so granted their desires.

The Peace being thus concluded, and published, the people of England were then
persuaded to a general Thanksgiving, by a Declaration, partly made up of nine
Verses out of the 107 Psalm. To make observation on Englands Profit by this
Peace, is needless; that I will leave for the Merchant to rejoice in.

Actions of State are like the Billows of the Sea, one design drives forward
another, as they are agitated by the Princes breath. No sooner was peace
proclaimed abroad, but Plots commenced at home: the chief Designers were two
Gerrards, Brothers, one Jones an Apothecary, Teuder, Fow, and Vowel: some of
these (through mercy) were saved, but Vowel and Gerrard must suffer for example.

In the same Juncture of time fell out an arrogant exploit of Don Pantaleon Sa,
brother to the Portugal Ambassador: this man being followed by a fanatique
Crew, came one evening to the New Exhange armed with Swords, Pistols, and
Hand-granadoes: what the original provocative to this design was, is
uncertain: however, one wrapped in Buff, (a bold Blade no doubt) being followed
by Knights of Malta, Foot-boys, and the like, ascended the Staiers into the
upper Exchange, where firing a Pistol, a Gentleman there walking, was slain.
There happened to be walking the same time this Gerrard abovementioned: he
seeing their Countenances not so swarthy as this deed was sable, draws his
Rapier, and with a magnanimous spirit drove them all before him down staiers.
The Lord Protector having notice of these Portugals frollique, upon examination
resolved to proceed thereupon without respect of persons, and to make the
chiefest Actor an example of Justice; which being found to be the Ambassadors
Brother, he was condemned for this ridiculous riot, and executed at Tower Hill
on the same Scaffold (though for different causes) with generous Gerrard. The
eyes of the Spectators never beheld such different tempers in two men: Gerrard
no way appald in countenance or behavior, like a true English man, out-braved
Death on the very Block. His body being removed out of sight, up came Don
Pontaleon Sa the Portugal, with a body too heavy for its supporters, and a
countenance which sufficiently demonstrated, that the terror of his heart had
in a manner made him insensible of the smart of the Executioners Ax; so that
many present believed his head served only to satisfy the Law, his life being
already fled through fear.

But now on a sudden there breaks forth an Insurrection in the Highlands of
Scotland: these mountanous people having little to loose but their lives, would
ever be trying to shake the English yoke from off their necks. The chief
bellows to blow these miserable men to destruction, was the Earl of Glencarne,
a man whose industry was ever pregnant in contriving new designs against the
English: he having now drawn together a considerable strength, proclaimed to
his fellows what great assistance would be wafted over to them from the Low
Countries, by which means it might be easy (if unanimous) to obtain their
Liberty, and get immortal Fame by freeing their Country from the present
subjection it lay under. This was heard with general applause, and sprightly
prosecuted, especially now Middleton was come from the Netherlands with the
promised provisions for War. This Middleton, amongst other things, brought a
special Commission to be Commander in chief over all those then in Arms; and
under him in the next degree was Monro Lieutenant General. This spoiled all;
for Glencarne scorned to raise an Army for others to command; he loved the
Cause well, but would not be disparaged by it: must he foment and stir up
others, to be brought down himself? or take pains for others gains? No, he
would not endure this, seeing it was a diminution to his honor, which as a
Soldier he equally prized with life. On the other side, Middleton was too
stiff to stoop; he stoutly stood to have Monro in the second place of
Superiority. The consideration of the dangerous consequence of this falling
out, made all the Gentlemen endeavor a Unity: which endeavors prevailed so
far, as to procure a reconciliation between Middleton and Glencarne, provided
Glencarne might be made Lieutenant General. But the pride of Monro could by no
means condescend to this motion.

When thus they had bandied together for some time, at last Glencarne
challenges Monro to a single Combat; which being accepted of, on a certain
morning they fought, with fortunate success to Glencarne, who wounded and
disarmed his Adversary, and then immediately after left the Army with about 500
Gentlemen, who made their composition with the Governor of Dunbarton to live
peaceably at home, and leave Middleton to shift for himself.

Thus dissension among the Grandees leading the Van, destruction quickly after
brought up the Rear. For General Monk with the English being not ignorant of
these transactions among the Highlanders, and delaying for some time to march
against them, till he had seen the event of their divisions, and observed his
opportunity to suppress them; upon certain intelligence of their motion, he
advanced to meet them; and engaging Middleton at Loughgerry, after some small
bickering the Scots were wholly routed, and Middleton enforced to flee back
again into Holland.

The Lord Protector in England seeing on what a ticklish Foundation his
greatness stood (for though he had obtained a Government, yet was it not
confirmed to him by the People) therefore according to the tenure of the
Instrument of Government, he summoned a Parliament to assemble at Westminster,
September. 3. 1659, when there appeared a great number of grave judicious
persons, men that sufficiently understood the peoples privileges, having many
times before been Champions to defend them from the enchroachments of Usurpers.
The day before their sitting, the Protector went by water from White Hall to
the Painted Chamber, whither he sent for the Members; where they being come, he
desired their company to hear a Sermon at the Abby-Church the next day, and
afterward he would impart his mind to them. About nine in the morning, his
Highness (not much affecting pomp and bravery) rode in his Coach to the Church:
with him there sat his Son Henry and the Lord Lambert: his Gentlemen very
richly clad, marched first, bare-headed; next before the Coach, went the Pages;
and on one side of the Coach walked on foot Mr. Strickland one of the Council,
and Captain of the Guard, together with the Master of the Ceremonies; on the
other side, in like manner, was Captain Howard Captain of the Lifeguard. After
these, followed in Coaches, the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, of the
Treasury, and the Council; at last, the ordinary Guard of the Protector put an
end to the train. In this manner he went to the Abbey. As he entered the Church,
there was born before him four Maces, the Purse and a Sword, which the Lord
Lambert carried, bare-headed.

When Dr. Goodwin had ended his Sermon, the Protector and Parliament went to
the Painted Chamber, where he declared to the Members in a set Speech, (briefly
thus:)

THat the Parliament then met, were such a Congregation as England never saw
before; and that it might be a matter worthy such a meeting, to give a Series
of Gods Providence all along to these times; but that being well known to most
of them, he should proceed to let them know in what condition these Nations
were when this Government was erected. Every man's heart was then against
another: that we had then our humors and interests, and every thing almost was
grown Arbitrary. Next of all, what a prodigious contempt there was of God and
Christ; the Grace of God was turned into wantonness, and his Spirit made a
Cloak for vile practices: yet many would say, Matters of Religion belonged not
to the Magistrate, he was only to look to the outer man, not to meddle with
the inner. Nay, the abomination was swelled to that height, that the Ax was
laid to the root of the Ministry, as Babylonish and Antichristian. While these
things were in the midst of us, and the Nation rent and torn, one Family
against another, and nothing in the hearts and minds of men but over-turn,
overturn, overturn; at the some time swarms of Jesuits coming over, having
their Consistories abroad to rule all the Affairs of England, and the
dependencies thereof. Withal, the Nation was deeply engaged in a War with
PORTUGAL, HOLLAND and FRANCE. In such a heap of Confusion was this Nation, that
a speedy remedy must be applied, and has been applied. This Government (let
men say what they will) is calculated for the peoples interest. That for his
own part, he could with humbleness toward God, and modesty before them,
recount something in the behalf of it. First, it had endeavored to reform the
Law: it has put into seats of Justice men of known integrity and ability: it
has settled a way for probation of Ministers to preach the Gospel. And
besides, it has called a free Parliament (blessed be God) we see this day a
free Parliament. As for the Wars; a peace is made with Sweden, Denmark, the
Dutch and Portugal: moreover, at this time a treaty is depending with France.
These things are but Entrances and Doors of hope: but now he made no question
to enable them to lay the top-stone of this work. This Maxim he recommended to
their observation, that Peace, though it be made, is not to be trusted farther
then it consists with Interest. The great work that now lay upon this
Parliament, was, that the Government of Ireland might be settled in terms of
honor, and that themselves would manage Affairs with Prudence, lest foreign
States retain hopes of advantage by their confusions. For himself, he did not
speak like one that would be a Lord over them, but as one that was resolved to
be a fellow servants with them in this great Affair. To conclude, he wished them
to repair to their own house, and there use their Liberty in the choice of a
Speaker.

The Protector having ended his Speech, the Members immediately repaired to the
Parliament House, and chose William Lenthal Master of the Rolls to be their
Speaker; then they resolved to tune the Instrument of Government. The first
debate was, Whether the Legislative Power should be in a single Person and a
Parliament. This Ball was bandied about for some time. The Protectoreans with
might and main endeavored to have the Question resolved to be no question, but
rather to be passed immediately in the Affirmative. This was strenuously
opposed by the major part of the House: amongst the rest, a noble Gentleman
stood up and made an excellent Speech, wherein he showed the Snares that then
were laid to entrap the Peoples Privileges: for his own part, he declared that
God had made him Instrumental in cutting down Tyranny in one person, and now he
could not endure to see the Nations Liberties ready to be shakled by another,
whose right to the Government could be measured out no otherways then by the
length of his Sword; 'twas this imboldned him to command his Commanders. To the
same effect many more Speeches were made, in direct opposition to a single
Person.

Thus the Parliament for eight days together run divisions upon the Protectors
Instrument, till it jarred so much, that it was impossible to play one pleasant
Tune for the Court to dance after. This highly offended his Highness, and made
him resolve to put the Parliament into a better mode, if possible: to which
end, away he goes by water to the painted Chamber, and there sent for all the
Members of Parliament then sitting, to appear presently before him: there he
declared,

That his sorrow was very great, to find them falling into heats and divisions;
he would have them take notice of this, that the same Government that made them
a Parliament, made him a Protector; and as they were entrusted with some
things, so he with other things. In the Government there was Fundamentals that
could not be altered: as,

1. That the Government should be in one Person and a Parliament.

2. That Parliaments should not be made perpetual, nor always sitting.

3. The Militia was not to be trusted in any one hand or power, but so, that
the Parliament ought to have a check upon the Protector, and the Protector upon
the Parliament.

4. That in matters of Religion, there ought to be Liberty of Conscience, and
means used to prevent Persecution.

For the rest of the things in the Government, they were examinable and
alterable as the State of Affairs did require. For his own part (he told them)
his heart was even overwhelmed with grief to see that any of them should go
about to overthrow what was settled, contrary to their trust received from the
people; which could not but bring on very great inconveniences.

In this manner he persuaded them to Conformity in his designs: but fearing
words might be little regarded, he therefore prepared a Laxative Composition
wrapped up in a Recognition, which was to be taken as follows:

I do hereby promise and engage to be true and faithful to the Lord Protector,
and the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland; and shall not (according
to the tenor of the Indenture whereby I am returned to serve in Parliament)
propose, or give my consent to alter the Government, as it is settled in one
Person and a Parliament.

This dose purged some Members out of the House; and others again swallowed it
without any reluctancie; so that for all this, the Parliament (though they
looked somewhat thin) continued sitting five Months after, in which time they
did much, in doing nothing. The Protector seeing how opposite they were to his
hopes, could not brook these their dilatory proceedings; and seeing they would
not settle him, he resolves to unhouse them; and accordingly takes the first
opportunity his Instrument would give him (not slipping one day) and dissolved
them.

Upon the very nick of this Catastrophe, the Court was Alarmed with news of a
great rising in Shropshire, Montgomeryshire, Wiltshire, Nottinghamshire,
Northumberland and Yorkshire; it is needless to tell the rise and growth of
these malcontents: their folly and fall may sufficiently manifest, there were
secret invisible springs that turned the maine wheels of this Design. However,
the Protector continued still Victorious, and triumphed over his Enemies.

Long had the World stood in amazement at the Protectors mighty preparations,
wondering what the intent should be, or event would prove: The Design was too
deep to be easily fathomed, being managed with such secrecy, that the chief
Commanders both by Land and Sea, who were to put it in practice, knew not at
first what they went about; only this they were assured of, that it was for
the honor of God, the good of their Country, and would be to themselves a
profitable glory. Time, with great industry and vast sums of money, having at
last produced two mighty Fleets, one of them was commanded by General Blake,
who (being fitted only for the Sea) sailed away to the Straights: about two
Months after, the other Fleet put out to Sea, commanded by General Pen, who
took aboard him a Land-Army, under Conduct of General Venables. These
Landforces being in all three thousand, were divided into five Regiments,
under their respective Commanders, and distributed through the Navy,
consisting of about thirty Sail of good Ships, but provided with necessaries
(neither suitable nor sufficient) for so long a Voyage.

December. the 19th 1654. this Eleet set sail from Portsmouth for the Barbados,
the appointed place of Randezvous: it pleased God to give them a speedy
passage, insomuch that the 29 of January, they were all at Anchor in Carlisle
Bay, and presently landed their men upon the Island.

The King of Spain all this while, not being assured that these Forces were
designed against him, yet by many circumstances believing no less, he sent a
speedy Mandate to the Marquess de Leda Governor of Dunkirk, to pass into
England in the quality of an extraordinary Ambassador, that so he might know
the certainty thereof. This gallant Commander (for so indeed he was) presently
after arived at London accordingly: but after some stay, finding little
satisfaction in his Audiences, he returned back again to give an account to his
Master.

But to return: during the abode of the Fleet at the Barbados, the Generals,
Colonels, and inferior Officers were not negligent in their several stations.
General Pen caused the Carpenters of each Ship to set up those Shallops which
were brought over in Quarters out of England: And ordered the Coopers to trim
and fit water-Casks: Besides, he sent two Frigates to S. Christophers and Mevis,
for raising of Volunteers there. In the mean time, General Venables formed a
new Regiment of Seamen to serve upon occasion at Land; these were put under
the Conduct of Vice Admiral Goodson; the rest of the Regiments brought out of
England, were easily completed to a full number: Likewise, a Troop of gallant
Horse were raised by the Islanders, at their own cost and charges (the Carcases
of which were afterward buried in the Soldiers bellies, for want of better
food.) But these were not all the strength: for the Planters Servants
understanding that if they would serve the State, their time should still go
on, and that at last (in spite of their Masters) they should enjoy their
Freedoms in as ample a manner as if they had served them; this spurred them on
to become Souloiers of Fortune; and many were presently listed into several
Regiments accordingly. The Fleet was also augmented by twenty Sail of Duch
Vessels, which were made prize for presuming to traffic with prohibited goods
contrary to the Articles of Peace betwixt the two Nations. The Land-Army being
now in a readiness, their number was found to be so great, that every Ships
share was as many as it could well carry. March 31. they set sail, from the
Barbados, and in six days after came by the Lee under S. Christophers. Here
joined with them about 1300 more, which came off from several Islands, in hopes
to be made for ever. From hence they shaped their course directly for
Hispaniola. On the 13 of April the whole Navy came fair by the Island, and
plainly discovered the Town of Sancta Domingo: immediately hereupon, a Council
was* called, and the Guides consulted withal: here it was concluded that
General Venables should to Land. According to which resolution, the next day he
landed about ten Leagues to the Westward of the Town, with 7000 Foot, a Troop
of Horse, and three days Provision of Victuals. No sooner were they landed, but
every man's tongue was tipped with gold; nothign could be thought on, but the
plunder of Plate and Jewels; small things could not enter their minds: as for
Hangings, Household Stuff, etc. they would be cumbersome to carry, and therefore
they resolved to leave such things behind them. In this extacy of joy was the
Soldiery; when behold, upon a sudden, there appeared a Proclamation from the
General, commanding, that when they entered the Town of Sancta Domingo, no man
should presume to plunder either money, Plate, or Jewels, neither kill any tame
Cattle, on pain of death. This made the Army look sour on their imaginary
sweetmeats; their golden hearts were now turned to leaden heels; so that it
was indifferent to them, whether they went farther, or tarried there: Yet for
all this, on they marched through Woods of incredible thickness, receiving no
opposition, except the excessive heat of the Sun, which caused an intolerable
drought, that oppressed them sorely, having not had one drop of water in many
miles march, but what they carried in their own bladders; so that Urine was as
white wind to them that could swallow it.

General Pen, after the landing of these men, set ashore three Regiments more
under the command of Colonel Bullard, in a Bay where a fair fresh water River
disburdened it self; this was within two Leagues of the Town, and appointed to
be the place for conjuncton of the whole Army. It was not long before the
General (according to appointment) having peaceably past the Woods, came to the
River, and joined himself with Bullards Brigade. Here, upon view, the Army was
found to be 9700 (but few fighting) men. From this river the Army hasted-away
to take possession of the Town, which in imagination was already won: there
marched on before the rest, a forlorn Hope consisting of 500 men; afterward
followed the main body of the Army: in this order they marched within four
miles of the Town, when upon the sudden a small party of Spaniards encountered
the forlorn Hope, and in an instant forced them in confusion through the next
Regiment, which was also routed: the Body of the Army coming up to their
rescue, made the Enemy retire to a Fort hard by in the Woods, without any
considerable loss at all to the Spaniards: on the English side was slain
Captain Cox, the chief Guide for the place, and many others.

The General having now seen the imbecility of his men, through want of water
and many other necessaries, he caused them to march back again to the River
from whence they came, to refresh themselves in order to a full prosecution of
the Design in hand. To which end, scaling ladders were made, and two small
Drakes mounted, with a Mortar-piece and Granado-shels which were landed from
the Fleet: these were conveyed by water to be set on shore at a convenient
place near the Town. All things being now in readiness, to try conclusions, the
Army once again dislodged, and were by the Guides promised to be brought upon
the Town of S. Domingo by a private way, where they might pass through the Woods
free from danger of any Fort. Such a way there certainly was; but these blind
Guides taking another to be it, the whole Army were brought near to the place
where before they had been shamefully repulsed. The Spaniards mean time having
certain intelligence by Negroes and Molattoes of the English march, prepared to
entertain them in their passage. April 25. 1655. the whole Army approached near
to a Fort which the Spaniards had in the Wood built of Brick, in a triangular
form without Flankers: in it were nine Pieces of good Ordinance, and 300
resolute fellows to manage them. The English Army a little before noon
approaching near this Fort, were upon the sudden charged by a Party of the
Enemy that lay undiscovered among the Trees: these resolute Spaniards, being
about seventy in number, at first fired a round Volley of small shot upon the
forlorn Hope, and then flew in like madmen with their sharp Steel Lances
upon the English (who were already even suffocated with thirst, and hardly able
to stand, much less to fight) so that in a moment the Generals running
Regiment, with near half the Army, flew back to the Rear, and possessed their
fellows there with such a pannick fear, that every one began to shift for
himself. Mean while the Spaniards pursued their Victory with the greatest
slaughter they were able to make: for meeting with no resistance (but what that
ever-renowned Gentleman Major General Haines was able to make alone of himself,
who never stirred one step, but dyed not unrevenged in the midst of his
Enemies,) they wreaked their fury at pleasure on these dastardly dunces; till
at last, being overcome with killing, they retreated back in Triumph with seven
English Colors, the evident Trophies of their Victory. The Retreat of the
Enemy, gave opportunity for the living to number the dead: upon view, it was
found that 600 were slain outright, 300 wounded, (most in their backs) and
besides, 200 more crept into bushes, and ran away to save themselves; which
afterward were knocked on the head by Negro's and Mollatto's.

Upon this sad disaster, the Army that night drew up nearer the Spanish Fort,
as if they intended some mighty matters; and having planted a Morter-Peice in a
convenient plot of ground, and all things being ready to do execution on the
Fort, upon a sudd^n the soldiers were ordered to draw off: so the Army without
doing any thing, marched away to their old watering place in the Bay. To what
intent and purpose this was, I shall be silent, and leave it for others to
judge.

The Army being come into the Bay, had not that supply of Victuals from the
ships as formerly, but were necessitated by parties to go in the Woods to catch
Cattle; which many times cost them dear: for the Negro's instead of hunting
Cows, would oftentimes change their game, and breath them back again to their
Quarters. These things brought the Army to such distress, that (fearing to
fight for Food abroad) they exercised their Valor at home upon the
Troop-horses belonging to their own Army: thus did they continue for some days,
till a resolution was taken to imbark them, and with all speed to make for
Jamaica. May the third day, (all the remaining part of the Army being shipped)
without the least disturbance from the Spaniard, the Fleet set sail for the
aforesaid Island. On the tenth of the same month, the whole Fleet cast Anchor
in Jamaica Harbor, and quickly after possessed themselves of Oristano the chief
Town in the Island: here the Army having taken up their standing, began to
plant (which since has been and is like to prove a bad Neighbor to the
adjacent Spanish Islands.) General Pen presently after returned for England,
and was quickly followed by General Venables, to give an account to the Court
of the brave service they had performed for the honor of their Country; which
pleased the Protector so well, that he sent them both to the Tower of London.

This unfortunate Voyage to Hispaniola, cannot well be let pass without some
small inspection into the miscarriage of the Action. Where there is want of
Food, and Arms fitting for an Army, they must of necessity become a prey to
their Enemies: neither of which were sufficiently provided for in the
beginning, as they ought to have been. It has been always the policy of
Conquerous, first to possess, and then to plant: but the Wives and Children in
this expedition, showed a confidence in the fruition, before they gained
possession. Alexander at his entrance into the Wars of Persia, had but 35000
men; which proved sufficient to carry on his enterprise. By this we see, two
thousand Cocks are better to fight then ten thousand Capons. But above all, if
the spring be corrupted, the stream cannot run clear: Where covetousness is at
the root, the branches of a design are always blasted: This made Achan prosper
no better with his ill gotten gold. A General that will prohibit plundering in
an Enemies Country, must resolve to do all the service himself: for Soldiers
will suffer him to win all, that must wear all.

To dwell longer on this lamentable lame Story, can be no way useful, unless it
be to call to mind that excellent saying, Man proposes, but God disposes.
Therefore to sweeten the bitterness of the blow received in America, it will
not be much amiss to recount brave Blakes successes in Africa. Not long before
Pen set sail for the unfortunate Islands, Blake set forth with a considerable
Navy to scowre the Straights from Pirates which had much damnified the English
Merchants in their passage out of the Levant Sea. At first he beat about on the
Spainsh Coast, in hopes to find them roving abroad; but missing of his
expectation, a sudden resolution was taken up to fire their nests, and consume
their shipping in the very Harbors: to effect this, April 18. 1655. the Fleet
approaching near Tunis, General Blake sent to the Dye, demanding satisfaction
for ships taken, and a speedy release of the poor English taken in them, from
their present Captivity. To this Message such an arrogant Answer was returned
by the imperious Turk, as very much enraged the English Seamen; insomuch that
after a small debate, it was concluded to revenge themselves on nine ships that
lay in Porta Ferino: the wind at present sitting fair, encouraged a present
prosecution of the designed project, which was effected in this manner: At
first, there entered the Harbor the Boats of every Ship manned with resolute
Seamen; and then followed Blake himself in the Admiral, with the Vice Admiral,
and Rear-Admiral: These lying within Musket Shot of the Enemies Castle and
Forts, plagued them perpetually with whole broad sides, until the Boats had
utterly consumed the Turkish men of War, which were reduced to ashes in four
hours time, with no more loss to the English, then 25 men slain, and 48
wounded. This may in part wipe off the blemish which stained Englands
reputation in the former disastrous Expedition.

At this time, the Lord Protector endeavoring to strengthen himself abroad,
made an alliance with the Swede; the effects of which Peace have since been
felt to purpose, in some parts of Europe. Then presently after, he constituted
Major-Generals, and divided England into eleven parcels amongst them. The names
of these Viceroys, and the Counties allotted to every one's share, were as
follows:

Colonel Kelsey
For Kent and Surry.
Col. Goff
For Sussex, Hampshire and Berkshire.
Genesis Desbrow
For Glocestershire, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon and Cornwall.
Lieutenant Genesis Fleetwood
For Oxfordshire, Bucks, Hartford, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Essex, Norfolk and
Suffolk.
Major Genesis Skippon
For the City of London.
Com. Genesis Whaley
For Lincolnshire, Nottingham, Derby, Warwick and Leicestershire.
Major Butler
For Northamptonshire, Bedford, Rutland, and Huntington.
Col. Berry
For Worcester, Hereford, Salop, and North Wales.
Col. Wortley
For Cheshire, Lancashire and Staffordshirre.
Lord Lambert
For Yorkshire, Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland and Northumberland.
Col. Barkstead.
For Westminster and Middlesex.
These Major-Generals in their respective Provinces, did the Protector no small
service, in forcing Delinquents to pay the Decimation of their Estates, which
was imposed upon them by the Court (for the sins of their youth;) he very well
knowing: It Is good for Princes to have all things fat,
Except their subjects; but beware of that.


Yet this new device after a while grew troublesome to the grand Projector
himself, who fearing they might in time eclipse his own greatness, (if
continued) brought them down again to move in an inferior Orb.

Another design (of a far different nature, but for like ends with the former)
was about this time set on foot by the Protector, to wit, the readmission of
the Jews into this Nation. This people indeed were sometime Gods peculiar
people, to whom pertained the adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenant, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises: insomuch that
Moses thus expostulates with them; What Nation is there so great, who has God
so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him
for? But as if all this had not been sufficient, it pleased God so far further
to honor them, that of them, according to the flesh, Christ came; who although
he were approved of God among them, by miracles, wonders and signs, for their
conviction; Yet they entertained him with crucifixion, uttering this direful
imprecation thereupon, His blood be upon us and our children. God took them at
their word. For (not to mention what some affirm, that a bloody issue has ever
since hereditarily descended upon them) not long after (according to Christ's
prophecy) their City was destroyed, their Temple not on stone left upon
another; and themselves ceasing to be a Nation, became (with Cain) Fugitives,
and Vagabonds upon the Earth; having now, according to that prophecy of Hosea)
been many days (yea many years) without a King, and without a Prince, and
without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an Ephod, and without a
teraphim; being dispersed amongst all Nations, and hated by all people:
remaining nevertheless in such a degree of contumacious obduration, that here
in England (whither some of them wandered) they crucified children in despite
to (and derision of) the name of Christ. For which, and other execrable
practices, they were justly expelled this Nation by King Edward the first, in
the year of Christ's incarnation, 1291. And so willing were the people then to
be rid of them, that for this Act of that King, the Commons in Parliament
freely granted him a whole Fifteenth. Thus they were expulsed; and ever since
(for the space of 364 years) they have been excluded, without the public
permission of so much as one Synagogue in England.

But this our Protector having a large (I say not conscience, but) heart, and
being of tender bowels, his charity extended so far, as to plead for the
re-entertainment of these guests: to which purpose, he propounded it to several
eminent Ministers for their approbation; alleging, that since there is a
promise of their Conversion, means must be used to that end, which is the
preaching of the Gospel; and that cannot be had, except they be permitted to
reside where the Gospel is preached. But (by his leave) when Gods good time is
come, there shall not be means wanting to accomplish that work; which being of
an extraordinary nature, is not like to be done by ordinary means. Besides,
such was (then, and yet is) the temper of the people of England, so full of
diversities in opinions, and reduced to such an indifferency in matters of
Religion, that it is more then probable, the number of their Proselytes would
have exceeded that of our Converts.

But this is not all: for it seems our Protectors charity that we mentioned
before, (according to the Proverb) began at home: he had a promise of 200000 l.
from the Jews, in case he procured their Toleration here, as says Mr. Prynne
in his Narrative, p. 56. which sweet morsel he had swallowed by thus gratifying
them, had not the design been opposed by Arguments as sharp as weapons of STEEL.

The War with Spain beginning now to wax warm, not only under the Torrid Zone,
but likewise Northwards of the Tropic; the Protector thought it best to annoy
this Enemy in as many places as possible; which could not well be brought about
without a Peace with France, which being effected, room might be made for
English Feet to tread Flemish ground. The French at this time earnestly desired
the same: for their chief minister of State Cardinal Mazarine saw every
Champaign, how prejudicious it was to his Masters Affairs in Flanders
(especially in besieging a Seaport Town) to be without correspondencie with
England. This gave the Protector not only opportunity of making up the long
continued feud that had been betwixt the two Nations, but to do it on very
advantageous terms, wherein the French King was content to deny himself, in
sending out of his Dominions his near relations the Stuarts; which kindness the
Protector requited, with sending him 6000 Foot-Souldiers. Thus the alliance was
contracted.

The impediments that hindered Peace with France being past over, to the
Protectors great content, he set himself wholly to a through prosecution of his
Wars with Spain. For this purpose, the two Generals Blake and Montague, had
with a strong Navy long beleaguered the Port of Cadiz by Sea, and with many
provocations endeavored to dare out an Enemy: but the grave-pac'd Spaniard
durst not step one stride to drive the English from his coasts; but rather
waited the lucky hour, when scarcity of provisions, or distress by weather
would do the work to his hand, and save the Limbs and Lives of many good
Catholics which might miscarry in forcing the English farther off. But this
piece of Policy little prevailed: for when the Fleet wanted water and other
necessaries, the Generals found out a way to supply it, by sailing to the Bay
of Wyers in Portugal, whence they were recruted; in the mean time, leaving
behind Captain Stayner with a Squadron of seven Ships to have an eye on Cadiz.

Now it happened that in the absence of the Generals, a stiff gale of wind forced
Stainer to ply it off to Sea, which brought him upon the discovery of an
excellent object; it was the King of Spaines Plate-Fleet, richly laden with
Gold, Silver, Pearl, and other good commodities newly brought from the Indies.
The Spaniards at the first sight of the English Frigates, took them for
Fisher-boats; which indeed they were, in a sense; for Captain Stainers work was
to fish for gold; and now seeing so fair a shole swimming, he thought he would
be sure to catch some considerable quantity, or lose his life in the attempt:
wherefore with these three, the Speaker, Bridgwater, and Plymouth Frigates, (the
remaining part of the Squadron being driven to Leeward) he gallantly fell upon
the Spanish great Galleons, which were seven in number; and plied them so sore
with great shot, that in few hours the whole Fleet was quite spoiled; one
whereof was sunk, another burnt, two forced on ground, one run away, and two
remained in the Conquerours hands, which were safely conveyed to England, and
very joyfully received by the Protector, who set apart a particular day* to
give God thanks for this good success.

The Protector being much necessitated for money, and withal impatient to tarry
longer for a Confirmation of his Dignity by the People, which although he could
not obtain of the preceding Parliament, he hoped he might gain of another; this
persuaded him to attempt once more a new Representative: Which being resolved
upon, he issued out Writs for Election throughout the three Nations.

But remembering the Speeches and carriage of some in the late Parliament;
private intimation was given to certain persons in several Counties, to
obstruct (if possible) their Election again in this ensuing Session: yet for
all this, the generality of people being swayed by respect, made choice of them
they thought sit, and such as were most able to carry on the weighty affairs of
the Commonwealth.

September. 17. 1656, being appointed for the general meeting at Westminster, the
Members accordingly made their appearance at the Parliament House, where they
found (quite contrary to the ancient Privilege of Parliament) that no Members
could* enter into the House, except they were first tied up in a promise, Not
to act any thing prejudicial to the present Government. Many of the Members
would not bite at this Bait, but rather chose to return home again, seeing they
could not sit with a safe conscience. Those that entered the House, having made
choice of Sir Thomas Widdrington to be their Speaker, began to act answerable
to the Protectors own desire: which we shall see in its due place; mean time,
take this ensuing Relation of General Blakes worthy exploit against the
Spaniard.

Of all the desperate Attemps that ever were made in the World against an Enemy
by Sea, this of noble Blakes is not inferior to any: He lying upon the Spanish
Coast, had intelligence given him, that the West India Fleet were arrived at
the Canary Islands, and put into the Bay of Sancta Cruz, on the Island of
Tenariff. Upon this, the Fleet weighs Anchor on the 13 of April 1657. and by
the 20th of the same Month, were fair in the Offing of Sancta Cruz, where they
discovered how bravely the Spanish Ships, (sixteen in number) were barricado'd
in this Bay, where they lay in a manner Semi-circular. Near to the mouth of
this Haven, stands a Castle sufficiently furnished with great Ordinance, which
threatened destruction to any that durst enter without its leave into the
Harbor: besides this, there stood seven Forts more, round about the Bay, with
six, four, and three great Guns apiece, and united together by a Line of
Communication from one Fort to another, which was manned with Musketeers. To
make all safe, Don Diego Diagues, General of the Spanish Fleet, was not idle,
in making provision for the best defense of his Armado: he caused all the
smaller ships to be mored close along the shore, and the six great Galleons
stood farther out at anchor, with their broad sides toward the Sea: It happened
at this time, there was a Dutch Merchants ship in the Bay; the Master whereof
seeing the English ready to enter, and that a combat would presently be
commenced, it made him fear that among all the blows that would be given, he
could not avoid some knocks; therefore to save himself, he went to Don Diego,
and desired his leave to depart the Harbor: For (said he) I am very sure,
Blake will presently be amongst you. To this, the resolute Don made no other
Reply, but, Get you gone if you will, and let Blake come if he dares.

They that knew Blakes courage, could not but know it needless to dare him to
an engagement; for himself was ever forward enough to fight, especially when
the honor of his Nation lay at stake: like himself were his Seamen, who never
questioned Commands, but readily ran upon the most desperate attemps: which
shows, that courage in a Commander, infuseth activity in the Soldiers; as
here it did in an eminent manner: for Genesis Blake having seen his Enemy,
presently called a Council of Officers to contrive the best way for carrying on
the present exploit. In this Council of War, Glory quite eclipsed hazard; so
that little else was discoursed upon, but a quick Execution, which quite buried
difficulty in Oblivion. All things being ordered for fight, a Squadron of Ships
was drawn out of the whole Fleet to make the first Onset: these were commanded
by Captain Stainer, in the Speaker Frigate; who no sooner had received Orders,
but immediately he flew into the Bay with his canvas wings, and by eight in the
morning fell pell-mell upon the Spainsh Fleet, without the least regard to the
Forts, that spent their shot prodigally upon him. No sooner were these entered
into the Bay, but Blake following after, placed certain Ships to pour broad
sides into the Castle and Forts; these played their parts so well, that after
some time the Spaniards found their Forts too hot to be held. In the mean time,
Blake strikes in with Stainer, and bravely fought the Spanish Ships, which were
not much inferior in number to the English, but in men they were far the
superior. Here we see, a resolute bravery many times may carry the day, and
make number lie by the Lee: this was manifest; for by two of the Clock in the
afternoon, the English had beaten their Enemies out of their Ships.

Now Blake seeing an impossibility of carrying them away, he ordered his men to
fire their prizes: which was done so effectually, that all the Spanish Fleet
were reduced to ashes, except two Ships that sunk downright, nothing remaining
of them above water, but some part of their masts.

The English having now got a complete victory, were put to another difficulty
by the wind, which blew so strong into the Bay, that many despaired of getting
out again. But Gods providence was miraculously seen, in causing the wind upon
the sudden to vere about to the Southwest (a thing not known in many years
before) which brought Blake and his Fleet safe to Sea again, notwithstanding
the Spaniards from the Castle played their great Guns perpetually upon them as
they passed by. The wind, as it proved a friend to bring the English forth, so
it continued to carry them back again to their former station near to Cadiz.

Should we compare the vastness of this attempt with the diminutive loss the
English received, it may go near to raise incredulity in the Reader. However,
it must not be past over in silence. All the men that Blake had slain in this
fight, which lasted from eight in the morning to seven at night, were but 48^
and one hundred and twenty wounded. On the Spanish side, all was lost that
could be lost, their whole Fleet being quite destroyed; so that the English
gain was nothing but Honor, which ever attended Blakes attempts.

For this good service, the Protector at the Parliaments desire sent this
worthy Commander a Ring worth five hundred pounds, and presently after Capt.
Stainer came to England that his Ship might be new fitted for the Sea, which
gave the Protector a fair opportunity to clap on his shoulders a whole
Knighthood, which served to satisfy for all his brave services.

The Protector, according to a private agreement with France, prapared a
Brigade of Foot to join with the French Army under Command of Marshal Turin,
that so both together might fall into Flanders against the Spaniards. The
English Forces designed for this service, were 6000. many of them old
Soldiers, but most new raised men; over whom Sir John Reynolds was made
Commander in Chief, and Col. Morgan Major General (who afterward was Knighted
by the Lord Richard Cromwell for his eminent service) these being provided with
all necessaries for a march, were rendezvoused on Black Heath; from whence they
marched away to the Seaside, and were immediately transported over to Bulloin
in Picardy. At their landing, the Soldiers had all new Red-Coats, distributed
amongst them, which made such a glistering show, that the French King said he
never before saw the like sight. About the later end of October 1657. the
English were advanced into the Spanish Territories; and being joined with
Turin, the whole Army sat down before Mardike-Fort lying about two miles from
Dunkirk. This place was looked upon to be of great importance, and might much
conduce to the taking in of Dunkirk it self, (as afterward it proved.) The
French and English having beleaguered this strong place, did not lie long
before they reduced it to a surrender upon Composition; so that it was
delivered up wholly into the possession of the English. But presently after
(the French being withdrawn into Winter Quarters) came a strong body of
Spaniards, and made a fierce Camisado upon the Fort, hoping to give the English
little joy in their new Conquest; but it fell out quite otherwise: for the
assailants were stoutly repulsed, and enforced to flee, having lost in the
attempt several brave Commanders.

The Protectors foreign affairs standing in a posture answerable to his
desires, his domestic designs at the same time did likewise very well
correspond thereunto: for the Parliament having sat near nine Months, had in
this time past many Acts which crowned the Protectors*hopes so fully, that more
could not have been desired by him, nor well granted by them. For first, out of
a deep sense of his loss (should such a design as bold Syndercomb's take
effect) they made provisions for the security of his Highness Person, wherein
it was Enacted High Treason, for any to attempt, compass, or imagine the
Protectors death.

This Act having pared the claws of choleric humors at home, in three whoops
more, the Title of Charles Stuart, etc. was utterly defunct. And besides this,
(to answer the end for which they were called) round sums of money were granted
to carry on the Spanish War (notwithstanding his Highness late Conquests in the
Indies) that so the Protector might with more facility bang the legs of that
long-limb'd Enemy. The Acts made for this purpose, were these that follow: Per
Men's. An Act for an Assesment upon England, for three Months, at the rate of
60000 l. On Scotland, for three Months, at 05000 l. On Ireland, for three
Months; at 05000 l. On England, Scotland and Ireland for three years: England
to pay 35000 l. Scotland, 06000 l. Ireland, 09000 l. An Act for continuing of
Tunnage and Poundage. An Act for preventing the multiplicity of buildings in
and about the Suburbs of London, and within ten miles thereof: a whole years
Revenue to be presently paid, for dwelling or Outhouses that had been reared
upon new Foundations since the year 1620. An Act for Excise of merchandise
imported; Hobby-Horses, Childrens Rattles, and old shirts not exempted.

These, with many more, being: at once presented to the Protector for his
consent, were by him passed; at which time he made this short Speech to the
Parliaments Speaker.

I perceive, that among these many Acts of Parliament, there has been a very
great care had by the Parliament to provide for the just and necessary support
of the Commonwealth, by these Bills for levying of money now brought to me,
which I have given my consent unto: and understanding it has been the practice
of those who have been chief Governors, to acknowledge with thanks to the
Commons, their care and regard of the Public, I do very heartily and
thankefully acknowledge their kindness herein.

The Protectors thanks for this, could do no less then animate the Parliament
to complete the great work they were about for settlement of the Nation. This
business had been daily debated, and was almost brought to perfection, when on
a sudden, a Petition was ushered into the House by a worthy Citizen of London,
to have his Highness one Tittle higher in his Title. Hereupon, the great
Machine of Englands Government, called the Petition and Advice, was hastened
away to the Protectors view, with a desire that his Highness would be pleased
to magnify himself with the Title of KING. Alas! what thing more averse to his
nature could be presented to him, then this? It was not to sit in high places,
that made him undertake the Government, but rather to be a Servant to his
Country: Monarchy he knew was as odious to the Army, as (according to the
proverb) comparisons among the people; and therefore he could not look upon
this otherways then as a Temptation to try the strength of his resolution
against that which before had like to have wrackt the peoples Liberties; which
(said he) undoubtedly had fallen out, had not he stepped into the sea of blood,
and with invincible Arms preserved the Ship of State from those Piratical
inchroachers that were ready to board her. Yet to do nothing unadvisedly, nor
without mature deliberation, his Highness took time to return the Parliament
this positive answer (to their liquorish desire) which he with much meekness
gave them in the Painted Chamber, in these words: That he could not undertake
the Government with the Title of King. Upon this, the Parliament voted that
Protector should be the style of the chief Magistrate.

All things being now brought to maturity in the Petition and Advice, and
nothing wanting to make it a Law, but only the Protectors condescension; a
Committee was sent to desire a Conference with his Highness: which he granted,
and appointed the place of meeting to be in the Painted Chamber. May 25. 1657.
his Highness (attended by his chief Officers) came accordingly; and there the
Speaker Sir Thomas Widdrington, presented him with the Parliaments Petition and
Advice; the substance whereof was as follows:

1. That his Highness under the Title of Lord Protector, would be pleased to
exercise the office of chief Magistrate over England, etc. and to govern
according to all things in this Petition and Advice: also, that in his lifetime
he would appoint the Person that should succeed in the Government after his
death.

2. That he would call Parliaments consisting of two Houses, once in three
years at farthest.

3. That those Persons who are legally chosen by a free election of the people
to serve in Parliament, may not be excluded from doing their duties, but by
consent of that House whereof they are Members.

4. In the fourth, was shown the qualifications of Parliament-Members.

5. In the fifth, the Power of the other House.

6. That the Laws and Statutes of the Land be observed and kept; and no Laws
altered, suspended, abrogated, repealed, or new Law made, but by Act of
Parliament,

7. For a constant yearly revenue, ten hundred thousand pounds to be settled
for maintenance of the Navy and Army, and three hundred thousand pounds for
support of the Government, besides other temporary supplies, as the Commons in
Parliament shall see the necessities of the Nations to require.

8. That the number of the Protectors Council shall not be above one and
twenty; whereof the Quorum to be seven, and not under.

9. The chief Officers of State, as Chancellors, Keepers of the great Seal,
etc. to be approved of by Parliament.

10. That his Highness would encourage a Godly Minstery in these Nations; and
that such as do revile or disturb them in the Worship of God, may be punished
according to Law; and where the Laws are defective, new ones to be made in
that behalf.

11. That the Protestant Christian Religion, as it is contained in the Old and
New Testaments, be asserted and held forth for the public profession of these
Nations, and no other; and that a Confession of Faith be agreed upon and
recommended to the people of these Nations; and none be permitted by words or
writings to revile or reproach the said Confession of Faith, etc.

This is the sum of the most material matters contained in the Parliaments
Advice; which the Protector liked very well, and was resolved to follow; yet
with much reluctance in himself, considering the great burden that was to be
borne upon his shoulders, which he had rather any man should bear then himself:
but being it was the pleasure of Parliament that none but he must be the
buckler to defend Englands Privileges, he past their Petition, and declared
unto the whole Assembly, as follows:

That he came thither that day, not as to a Triumph, but with the most serious
thoughts that ever he had in all his Life, being to undertake one of the
greatest burdens that ever was laid upon the back of any humane creature; so
that without the support of the Almighty, he must sink under the weight of it,
to the damage and prejudice of these Nations. This being so, he must ask help
of the Parliament, and of those that fear God, that by their prayers he might
receive assistance from God: for nothing else could enable him to the discharge
of so great a duty and trust.

That seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on of the Government
of these Nations, and there being many things which cannot be supplied without
the assistance of Parliament, it was his duty to ask their help in them; not
that he doubted: for the same Spirit that had led the Parliament to this, would
easily suggest the same to them. For his part, nothing would have induced him
to take this unsupportable burden to flesh and blood, but that he had seen in
the Parliament a great care in doing those things, which might really answer
the ends that we have engaged for, and make clearly for the liberty of the
Nations, and of the Interest and preservation of all such as fear God under
various Forms. And if these Nations be not thankful to them for their care
therein, it will fall as a sin on their heads.

Yet there are some things wanting that tend to reformation, to the
discountenancing vice, and the encouragement of virtue: but he spoke not this
as in the least doubting their progress, but as one that does heartily desire,
to the end God may Crown their work, that in their own time, and with what
speed they judge fit, these things may be provided for.

This Speech being ended, the Members returned again to the House: and in few
days after, the Speaker received a Letter from the Protector, desiring the
Parliament to adjourn their sitting till further time. Hereupon, the speedy
Inauguration of his Highness was concluded upon. Accordingly, June 26. 1657.
all things being prepared in Westminster. Hall for this great solemnity, the
Protector (about two of the clock in the afternoon) went by water to the Lords
House; and after some short retirement into a room near the Painted Chamber, he
came forth, attended by the chief Grandees of his Court: all these being
marshalled into Ranks and Files, marched away with his Highness to the place
appointed in Westminster Hall; where the Protector having taken his standing,
under a cloth of Estate, the Speaker (Sir Thomas Widdrington) in the name of
the Parliament presented to him a Robe of Purple-Velvet lined with Ermines, a
Bible, a Sword, and a Scepter, (all which were precious tokens of the
Parliaments favor) at the delivery of these things, the Speaker made a short
Comment upon them to the Protector, which he divided into four parts, as
folfolloweth.

1. The Robe of Purple, this is an emblem of Magistracy, and imports
Righteousness and Justice: When you have put on this Vestment, I may say you
are a Gown-man. This Robe is of a mixed color, to show the mixture of Justice
and Mercy. Indeed, a Magistrate must have two hands: Plectentem, and
amplectentem.

2. The Bible is a Book that contains the Holy Scriptures, in which you have
the happiness to be well versed. This Book of Life consists of two Testaments,
the Old and New: the first is Christum Velatum; in the second, is Christum
Revelatum: it is a Book of Books, and does contain both Precepts and Examples
for good Government.

3. Here is a Scepter, not unlike a staff: for you are to be a staff to the
weak and poor: it is of ancient use in this kind. It Is said in Scripture, that
the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of like use in other Kingdoms:
Homer the Greek Poet calls Kings and Princes, Scepter-Bearers.

4. The last thing is a Sword, not a Military, but Civil Sword; it is a Sword
rather of defense then offense; not to defend yourself only, but others also.
If I might presume to fix a Motto upon this Sword, it should be this: Ego sum
domini Protectoris, ad protegendum populum meum.

This Speech being ended, the Speaker took the Bible, and gave the Protector
his Oath: afterward, Mr. Manton made a prayer, wherein he recommended the
Protector, Parliament, Council, the Forces by Land and Sea, Government, and
people of the three Nations, to the Protection of God. Which being ended, the
Heralds by sound of Trumpet proclaimed his Highness Protector of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging: requiring all
persons to yield him due obedience. At the end of all, the Protector with his
Train returned (a joyful man, no doubt) to White Hall, and the Members to the
Parliament House, where they prorogued their sitting to the next January.

There is no humane joy free from the mixture of some sorrow; yea, many times
it falls out to be equivalent to (if not superabounding) the joy it self. So
it fell out here: for though the Protector might rejoice at this acquisition of
a Scepter, yet the death of General Blake (like a dish of cold water cast into
the boiling Pot of his rising fortunes) could do no less then mitigate the heat
of it, and cover the Courts countenance* with a Cypress Vail.

This noble Blake in the beginning of Englands distractions, sufficiently
testified a high resolution, in his almost miraculous defending of Lime and
Taunton against the fury of Prince Maurice and the Lord Gorings Armies.
Afterward, the worth of this inestimable great Commander being taken notice of
in Parliament, they resolved, it should not long lie hid at home, but show it
self abroad; and therefore he was advanced to be one of their Generals at Sea.
At his entrance into this Office, he pent up Prince Rupert in the chief Port
of Portugal, and hunted him from Sea to Sea, till he had reduced those ships
with him, which before had revolted from the Parliament.

This was but petty Play, to after-Labours: For no sooner did the quarrel begin
between the two Re-publikes, England, and the United Provinces, but Blake was
the first that resisted their arrogancy in the Downs; and ever after continued
a fortunate Vindicator of his Countries Privileges, from the encroachments of
insulting Neighbors. The last part he ever acted in a Sea of blood, was
against the Spaniards at Sancta Cruz; here with 25 Sail, he fought (as it were
in a ring) with seven Forts, a Castle, and 16 ships, many of them being of
greater force then most of those ships Blake carried in against them: yet in
spite of opposition, he soon calcined the Enemy, and brought his Fleet back
again to the Coast of Spain full fraught with honor. But what Commander is
able to repel the strokes of Death? This is he that does conquer the
Conquerours, and level the Honors of the mightiest Monarchs with the meanest
Captains: there is no withstanding his force; for all must fall; Blake himself
is compelled to strike the top-sail and yield, now death has got the
weathergage of his crasie body; so that being no longer able to hold out, he
expired at the entrance into Plymouth.

He was a man wholly devoted to his Countries Service; resolute in his
undertakings, and most faithful in the performance: with him, valor seldom
mist its reward, nor cowardice its punishment. When news was brought him of a
metamorphosis in the State at home, he would then encourage the Seamen to be
most vigilant abroad: for (said he,) It Is not our duty to mind State Affairs,
but to keep Foreigners from fooling us. In all his Expeditions, the wind
seldom deceived him, but most an end stood his friend; especially in his last
undertaking at the Canary Islands. To his last, he lived a single life, never
being espoused to any but his Countries quarrels. As he lived bravely, he dyed
gloriously, and was buried in Henry the Seventh's Chapel; yet enjoying at this
time no other Monument, but what is reared by his Valor; which Time it self
can hardly deface.

The Lord Protector having now ensured his own Greatness, he thought it good to
confer Titles of Honor upon his Children; and to that purpose sent his Son
Henry into Ireland with the Title of Lord Deputy. This young Gentleman in his
Government ruled with so much discretion, that in small time he had brought
that disordered Nation into the most hopeful condition of a flourishing State.
But a grand Catastrophe afterward falling upon the Cromwels Government, his
Authority reverted into the hands of a subsequent Parliament.

The time of the prorogation of the present Parliament being expired, the
Members appeared again at Westminster the 20th of January 1657. and did
presently receive into the House their Fellow Members which the Protector had
before secluded from sitting in the first Session of this Parliament. This they
did, upon the fourth Article of the Petition and Advice, by which, no Members
legally chosen, should be excluded from performance of their duty, but by
consent of Parliament.

In this interval of the Parliaments sitting, the Protector had provided his
Peers which were to make up the other House, who accordingly took Seats in the
Lords House: but with so much regret to the House of Commons, whose complexion
was quite changed from what it had been formerly, that now they would not own
the work of their creation, but looked upon it as a by-blow, a thing by chance,
or a Pageant Parliament set up on purpose to mock them. In this surly humor
the Protector let them run on for near a fortnight together; till at last they
made his Highness wince with handling his Prerogative-Royal; which he being not
able to endure, in a fume flew from White Hall to the House of Lords; and
having sent for the Commons before him, he told them, That it concerned his
interest, as much as the Public Peace and Tranquillity, to terminate this
Parliament; and therefore he did now put an end to their sitting. Thus he blew
them away with a sudden puff of wind from his mouth.

But now comes into play a terrible Plot; no less place then London was to be
fired, and in the hurly-burly of confusion that it would make, must the Tower
be taken, the Mews seized, and all the Soldiers about the City be sacrificed
to the fury of -- The Protector being well acquainted with these kind of
machinations, knew very well how to stifle them in the birth; and therefore he
sent presently for the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Counsel of the City of
London, to forewarne them of the approaching danger, and to Commissionate their
Militia to raise Forces for security of the City, and by their vigilance to
counter-plot these Plotters. Upon this, many persons were apprehended, a High
Court of Justice erected, and Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewyt, Mr. Mordant, and
many inferior fellows who were to have been Commanders in the execution of
this design, were brought to Trial. Sir Henry Slingsby and the Doctor were both
condemned to loose their Heads upon Tower Hill; and six others (of the meaner
sort) were adjudged to be hanged, drawn and quartered: but of these, only
three suffered: one in Tower-Street, another in Cheapside, and the third before
the Exchange in London. For the procuring of Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewyts
Pardon, great endeavors were used: the Ministers of London petitioned the
Protector for the Doctors life, and many great persons for the Knights: But the
Protectors ears were deaf to all entreaties made in their behalf; so that
nothing could satisfy his anger, but the lives of those two considerable
persons.

Prodigies in nature, as they are seldom seen, so when they happen, are sure
presages and fore-tokens of alterations that shall fall out in the place where
they do appear. At this time, June 2. 1658. arrived an ominous Whale in the
River of Thames, (not to do Homage to his Highness (this was a fond conceit) as
one would have it) but rather to forewarn him of his end (which not long after
happened.) This fish, contrary to its nature, which is to return to Sea when it
sents the fresh water, came swimming up the River against the tide as far as
Greenwich, where it was taken, and found to be fifty eight foot in length, and
every way proportionable.

Flanders being the Scoene of War, wherein the united Forces of England and
France did intend this Champaign to act mighty matters; in the beginning of
May, D'Aumont a French Marshal, hoping to get a good bargain, turns Merchant,
and trucks for Ostend. Money, as it over-turns all things, was at this time made
use of to corrupt the Noble blood of the Soldiers of that Garrison, and make
them turn Traitors to this their trust: but the sequel will show how far
honesty is above treachery. The Chief Factor that drove on this bargain, was
one Colonel Spindeler: he having acquainted the Governor of Calice that Ostend
was to be sold, this Monsieurs mouth presently watered at the motion, and
therefore acquaints the Court how a rich commodity was how offered to sale at a
cheap rate. The French Grandees presently bite at the bait, little doubting the
hook was daubed over with this pretty pretense, that the Governor, Magistrates
and Citizens of Ostend, being grieved at the English keeping their Coast blockt
up with Ships, to rid themselves of this continual trouble, they would rather
be under France, then remain any longer in their present condition. This motion
being made, they came to a price, and agreed upon a good round sum of money,
which Marshal D'Aumont was appointed to pay, and take possession of the place
at a time agreed on. He being well apaid in the employment, slily slipped from
Calice with three Ships fraught with Soldiers, and soon after fell in amongst
a Squadron of English Ships commanded by Vice Admiral Goodson, then lying near
Ostend. The English Commander seeing how confident these the Protectors
Confederates were in the design they went about, was willing to assist them
with Seamen, the better to facilitate their landing. Whilst D'Aumont was
preparing to enter the Town according to agreement, the Spaniards within (being
a courteous Nation where they take affection) were very active in making
preparations for the entertainment of their French Guests: to this end, the
Governor of Ostend caused the Inhabitants to keep their Houses, and not to
stir from thence till they heard the Bells Ring in the City Steeple: then the
great Church, and Capuchin Friars Church, with many more secret places, were
crowded with clusters of Soldiers; these were to give the French a Spanish Fig
at their landing. All things being in readiness on both sides, May the 4th in
the morning, some of the Frenchmen (that were before received into the Town)
went out and invited their Contrymen to come in. D'Aumont upon this, and the
sight of white Colors placed upon the Walls, (for Decoys,) did not in the
least distrust, but took all to be gold that glister'd. Hereupon, the tide
beginning to serve, about ten in the morning, four French Vessels, a ship of
Dover, and six or seven Boats from the English ships, sailed into the Haven;
and presently the French: landing upon the Keys, were in a trise drawn up in
Battalia. Upon this, certain Spanish Officers went to enquire for the money
that was promised them: to which the French returned answer, That it was ready
in one of their ships. This being* as much as could be expected, the Officers
returned into the Town again, and immediately showed the French an a la mode
trapanning trick; for the great Guns from two Batteries (one of which was
mounted with twelve, the other with eight,) let sly their murdering shot upon
the poor French Foot; and to complete their misery, the Bells rung (as before
appointed) which brought the Soldiers and Townsmen about their ears. The
French now (when it was too late) seeing how hard a bargain they were like to
have, made some small ^^ir at the beginning: but finding it fruitless to
resist, they laid down their Arms, and submitted on quarter. Thus much for the
taking of Ostend.

The sly Spaniard having thus slurred their Enemy, it raised in the French an
unquenchable thirst of revenge; and therefore to quit scores, the whole French
and English Armies joined together, resolving to wreak their wrath upon the
Town of Dunkirk. This place may be called, The Key of Flanders, it being a
Sea-Port-Town, and (of all men) best known to English Merchants, whose ships
were frequently carried prize into it. But now to put a finit to their infinite
Losses, a formidable Siege was framed before it, which hotly alarmed the
Spaniards in all their Quarters.

Hereupon, Don John of Austria takes these two things into serious
consideration: first, the importance of the place: for its Situation, it was a
Key to Flanders, a frontier to France (next after Graveling) and a certain:
supply of moneys, by continual booties brought in thither by his men of War. On
the other side, should he lose Dunkirk, the English (in whose possession it
would be put) had a door opened, and fit opportunity to bid fair for all
Flanders; here might an Army be landed from England, and from hence incursions
made to the Walls of Bruxels, Mean time, the Spanish Ports, Newport and Ostend,
could expect no less then to be perpetually infested by men of war; which would
utterly spoil their Trade, and ruin the Inhabitants: these and such like
considerations mounted Don John upon fixed resolutions to undertake the relief
of Dunkirk, though it were to the hazard of his whole Army.

Mean while, the Confederate Forces beleaguering this strong place, did in a
small time (working like Moles) run their Trenches to the Spanish
Counterscarpe; and still encroaching upon the Wall, they promised fair to a
speedy accomplishment of their Design. These things were well known to the
Spanish Army, who now saw the relief of Dunkirk would admit of no delay; for
were it not speedily accomplished, the Town of necessity must lie prostrate to
the Enemies mercy. The bettter to effect which therefore, Don John the Spanish
General having drained his Garrisons to fill up his Army, suddenly advanced with
15000 men to the relief of his distressed friends; these by a swift march
through Fuernes, quickly seated themselves upon some sandy Hills within an
English mile and a half of Turine the French Generals Camp. The report of the
Enemies near advance, made both the French and English Officers consult upon
the best course that could be taken to repel the Force that now sat upon their
Skirts, endeavor to frustrate their labors in the present Siege, and render it
fruitless. Time for consultation being short, (for it was on the overnight)
they agreed unanimously to give the Spaniards the next morning a warm
breakfast. All this night, the Officers of both Nations were very active to
provide for the ensuing action; the Army being found sufficient to fight a
Field Battle, and at the same time to keep the besieged from ranging abroad.
For this service most of the English were drawn from their entrenchment; and
being joined to the French Horse, they marched against the Enemy. In the
morning both Armies being come near together, it was perceived, the Spaniards
posture was rather Defensive then Offensive: but the English Commanders knowing
it was no time to dally, and being desirous withal to show the discipline of
their own Country, (which is to make seeing and fighting all one) did presently
mount the Sand-Hills with a forsorn of three hundred Musketeers commanded by
Captain Devaux: after these followed that courageous Commander Lieutenant-Col.
Fenwick, with the Lord General Lockharts Regiment. The Spaniards perceiving
that the resolution of these men was by degrees to creep within them, did as
highly resolve to keep them off at the Arms end, by pouring down perpetual
vollies of great and small shot.

General Lockhart knowing what: duty belonged to his Office, did here show the
part of a noble Commander: for finding the French unwilling to enter, now the
English had opened the gap; and on the other side, seeing the gallantry of his
own Regiment, who although they could no longer gain ground, yet still kept
their station, notwithstanding they were exposed to the enemies assaults, he
caused a considerable Brigade of fresh men to reinforce those that had first
born the brunt of the Battle. This Reserve (through Genesis Lockhart's care)
coming in time to the relief of their tired fellows, made no long delay, but
fell into the Spanish foot with the butt-end of their Muskets; who not being
able to withstand their courage, left the Field, and fled toward Fuernes. The
French Horse seeing the good success of the English Foot, did likewise make a
charge upon the Spanish Cavalry, who being disheartened with the routing of
their Infantry, thought it their safest course to run after them. But the
French showed excellent valor in pursuit: for the day being won, none durst
stand in their way: the poor Spaniards were sadly handled by them, and hewed
down on all sides. Being extremely scattered in their flight, both the English
and French were put to the trouble of gleaning for Prisoners, which at last
were found to be 800 Officers, and about 2000 private Soldiers. How many were
slain, is uncertain: for the Conquerours not being willing to loose time in
numbering them, made have hack again in triumph to their former siege.

To particularize in setting forth the gallantry thus expressed on the English
side in this encounter, would cause me to exceed my wonted brevity: let it
therefore suffice to give an instance thereof in the personal valor of two
only; viz. Col. sons, and Major General Drummond a Scotch-man, who were most
eminent therein: these two Gentlemen came at first to Dunkirk only to satisfy
their curiosity; but this fight happening in the time of their stay, it raised in
them a noble resolution to be no longer idle Spectators, but brave partakers in
their Country-mens labors. For Col. Jones his part, he at the first onset
charged on foot with Lieutenant Colonel Fenwick; and after mounting a Horse,
fell so desperately on the Spaniards, that being too far engaged amongst them,
he was made their Prisoner; but afterward being exchanged, the Protector made
him Knight and Baronet in recompense of his valor. Major General Drummond's
spirit being little inferior to the best in the Field, behaved himself with
much bravery; which was so much the more, by how much the less he was concerned
in the Quarrel; no obligation inducing him to venture his life, except it were
the present engagement of some friends that bound him (through respect to them)
to partake of their dangers; which afterward proved his own death: for in the
beginning of the fight, his Horse was shot under him; and presently after,
having mounted a second, he was by an unhappy push of a Pike dismounted again;
yet still prosecuting the service more then minding his own safety, he received
a desperate wound that brought him to the grave.

But now to return: The Army having vanquished the Relievers, did renew their
attempts with extraordinary vigor upon the Town of Dunkirk. The Marquess de
Leda (Governor thereof) seeing how hardly he was beset, could not contain
himself within the narrow compass of his own Walls, but having a desire to beat
up the French men's Quarters, he suddenly sallied out of the Town with a strong
Party; but alas, all proved to no purpose; the Fates cannot be withstood:
neither was he free from error in the attempt. For as if in a natural body
(upon apprehension of danger) the vital spirits retire to the heart, life is
preserved; but if they forsake that, and depart to the extremities, death
ensues: so this Don (being the life of the rest, as indeed all Generals and
Governors are to their Armies or Garrisons) sallying out in person (that should
have been encouraging those in the Town) procured his own death; and the
miscarriage of his design; therein showing more valor then discretion. For
upon his death, a cold damp seized upon the Dunkirkers, who seeing what
prodigious Balls of fire were flung out of the English Mortar Pieces into the
Town, were sorely terrified thereby; and so much the more, in regard of their
not being accustomed to such stratagems; his Holiness the Pope having
prohibited the use of Granado's amongst his Catholics, to prevent burning of
Churches. Considering therefore that the longer they stood out, the harder
would be their terms; And seeing all hope of relief by Land was lost, the Sea
secured against them, and daily discouragements arising every way; therefore,
to prevent further inconveniences, the Spaniards desired a present
Capitulation; which being easily granted, it was agreed that the Town should be
surrendered upon these following Articles:

1. That the Town should be yielded up, with all the great Guns, their stores
of Victuals, Magazine of Arms and Ammunition, without any imbezelment.

2. The Officers and Soldiers to march out with Drums beating, Colors flying,
two Pieces of Ordnance, and their Baggage.

3. That they should have the liberty to march with a Convoy to conduct them to
S. Omers.

4. The Inhabitants to remain indemnified in their Persons and Goods, and to
enjoy their former Customs and Privileges for two years, and not to be
molested touching the exercise of their Religion.

These Articles being ratified by the King of France; this strong Town of
Dunkirk was delivered up into the hands of the English, by the King of France
and Cardinal in Person, upon Tuesday, June 25. 1658. The Spaniards at the same
time quitting it, there marched out one thousand horse and foot; and seven
hundred more, that had been wounded in the siege, followed after, as their
strength gave them leave: The English having possession of the Town, found in
it 140 great Guns, all Brass except eight, with Ammunition and Provision
sufficient to maintain it for a great while longer then it was kept.

The Naisby Frigate riding Admiral of the English Fleet in Dunkirk road, at that
time when the Town was delivered up, Cardinal Mazarin's curiosity was whetted
with reports of this stately Ship, insomuch that he desired to give her a
visit: which General Mountague undestanding, he invited the Cardinal and other
French Lords aboard: they all most readily accepted of it, and returned many
complements (which the French are never unprovided of) for the singular favor
offered them. The time appointed being come, the Cardinal in his
Pontificalibus, with a great Train of Noblemen, went in Boats, to see the
Ship: at his lanching forth, the English Frigates, in the bravest equipage they
possibly could be put, saluted him with the roaring noise of great Guns, so
continuing firing as he past by them. Approaching near the Naisby, the English
General with many Officers and Gentlemen met him in their Boats, and conducted
him aboard. His Eminency and the rest being landed in this floating Island, the
General treated them with a noble Banquet, at which the Cardinal showed so much
abstemiousness, that of all the varieties provided for his entertainment, he
tasted little, and only drank of Rhenish Wine: afterward General Montague
showed him all the parts and places of this excellent ship; which so highly
pleased the Cardinal, that he protested, Of all the sights he ever saw, none in
his life pleased him like this. With this great satisfaction he returned again
to the Shore; and as at his coming, (for a welcome) so again at his departure,
all the Men of War gave him their broad sides for a farewell.

The year gliding thus away in Victories and Triumphs, Dunkirk enforced to grow
under the shade of the English Oak, and all prospering so well in Flanders, as
if Mars himself had born the English Banners, caused endearing congratulations
mutually to pass between the Protector and his Cozens of France. The Lord
Fawconbridge being made one of the blood by Matrimony, carried the first
complement to Calice, and there presented it to the King; which was quickly
after returned back again by Monsieur Mancini nephew to Cardinal Mazarine, and
the Duke de Crequi: these arrived at London to present their respects; which
having done, they returned with high satisfaction. These being departed,
another far-less-welcom Messenger arrived at the English Court, even Death it
self, who came to require of our great Cromwell what was his due by Nature. Him
no Arguments can persuade, nor Policies evade: here Prayers and Tears prevail
not, neither can money bribe him: Promises of Preferment signify nothing, with
him; for he lays all earthly Honor in the dust. His fatal Sickle cuts down all.

The first Symptoms of this great man's last sickness, appeared presently upon
the death of his Daughter Cleypole; whose end is thought by many to have
hastened his dissolution. About the beginning of October, his distemper
discovered it self to be an Ague; which conspiring with a combination of other
malignant distempers, so depressed his vitals, that he fell into many Trances,
before his final exit; the intervals of which (wherein he gained some repose)
he spent in conferences with Dr. Owen, Dr. Goodwin, and several other Divines,
and with his Privy Counselors; with these, about the Succession here; with
the other, about his own possession hereafter. To succeed him in the
Protectorship he appointed his eldest Son Richard.

In the evening before his departure, he was heard to pray thus.

Lord, I am a miserable Creature, yet I am in Covenant with thee through grace;
and I may, I will come unto thee for thy people. Lord, thou have made me
(though very unworthy) a mean Instrument to do them some good, and thee
service; and many of them had too high value of me, though others would be glad
of my fall: but Lord, howsoever thou disposest of me, do good for them. Give
consistencie of Judgment, one heart, and mutual love unto them. Let the name of
Christ be glorious throughout the world. Teach those who look with much
affection to thy Instrument, to depend more upon thee. Pardon such as delight
to trample upon the ashes of a worm: for they are thy people too: And Pardon
the folly of this short Prayer, even for Jesus Christ his sake.

Afterward his sickness violently increasing upon him, it separated his soul
from his body on Friday the third of September 1658. near three of the clock in
the afternoon: death then became a Conqueror, and overcame him, that before
had vanquished the Scotch Armies twice on the same day of the year.

The Corpse, presently after his expiration, being embalmed, and wrapped up in
a Sheet of Lead, was on the twenty sixth of September, about ten at night,
privately removed from White Hall in a mourning Hearse, attended by his
domestic Servants to Somerset House, where it remained in private for some
days, till all things were in readiness for public view; which being
accomplished, his Effigies was with great state and magnificence exposed
openly; multitudes daily flocking to see the sight, which appeared in this
order. The first room where the Spectators entered, was wholly hung with black;
at the upper end whereof, was placed a Cloth and Chair of State: In like
manner, was the second and third rooms, all having Scutcheons very thick upon
the Walls, and Guards of Partisans placed in each room for people to pass
through. The fourth room was completely hung with black Velvet, the Ceiling
being of the same: here lay the Effigies, with a large Canopy of black Velvet
fringed, which hung over it. The Waxen Picture lying upon it is back, was
apparel'd in a rich Suit of Velvet, robed in a little Robe of Purple-Velvet,
laced with a rich gold Lace, and furred with Ermins: upon the Kirtle was a
large Robe of Purple-Velvet, laced and furred as the former, with rich strings
and tassels of gold. The Kirtle was girt with a rich embroydered Belt, wherein
was a Sword bravely guilt and hatched with gold, which hung by the side of this
fine thing. In the right hand was a Scepter, in the left a Globe; upon his head
was placed a Purple-Velvet Cap furred with Ermines, suitable to the Robes:
behind the head, was placed a rich Chair of Tissued Gold, whereon was placed an
Imperial Crown, which lay high, that the people might behold it. The Bed of
State whereon he lay, was covered with a large Pall of black Velvet, under
which was a Holland sheet, borne up by six stools covered with Cloth of gold.
About the Bed was placed a complete suit of Arms, and at the feet of the
Effigies stood his Crest. This bed had fixed about it an Ascent of two steps; a
little from thence stood eight silver Candlesticks about five foot high; with
white wax Tapers standing in them, of three foot long. All these things were
environed with Rails and Ballasters foursquare, covered with Velvet; at each
corner whereof there was erected an upright Pillar, which bore on their tops
Lions and Dragons, who held in their Paws Streamers crowned. On both sides of
the Bed were set up in sockets, four great Standards of the Protectors Arms,
with Banners and Banrols of War, painted upon Taffaty. About the Bed stood men
in Mourning bare-headed; and without the Rails, others to receive people in,
and turn them out again.

When this Show had been seen for many weeks together, the Scoene was then
altered; the Efsigies being removed into another room, it was there set up,
standing upon an Ascent under a Cloth of State; being vested as it was before,
lying: only now his Purple-Velvet Cap was changed for a Crown. In the same
manner as formerly, were men waiting upon him bare-headed. In this posture he
continued until the 23 of November, which day was appointed to carry him with
all solemnity to Westminster Abbey.

This great Funeral was performed with very great Majesty, in this manner
following. All things being in readiness, the Waxen Picture of the Protector
(with a Crown on his head, a Sword by his side, a Globe and Scepter in his
Hands) was taken down from his standing, and laid in an open Chariot, covered
all over with black Velvet, adorned with Plumes and Scurcheons, and drawn by
six Horses in black Velvet. The Streets from Somerset House to
Westminster-Abby, were guarded by Soldiers in new Red Coats and black Buttons,
with their Ensigns wrapped in Cypres: which made a Lane to keep off Spectators
from crouding the Actors.

For the Procession.
In the first place went a Marshal attended by his deputy, and thirteen more on
horseback, to clear the way: after him followed the poor men of Westminster by
two and two, in Mourning Gowns and Hoods: next to them, the servants of those
Persons of quality that attended the Funeral. These were followed by the
Protectors late domestic servants, with his Barge-men and Watermen. Then came
the servants of the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London. Following them, were
Gentlemen Attendants on Foreign Ambassadors and public Ministers. After
marched the poor Knights of Windsor in Gowns and Hoods: then the Clerks,
Secretaries, and Officers of the Army, Admiralty, Treasury, Navy, and
Exchequer: next, the Commissioners of the Excise, of the Army, and Committee of
the Navy. Then the Commissioners for approbation of Preachers: behind these
followed all the Officers, Messengers, and Clerks belonging to the
Privie-Council, and both Houses of Parliament. Next in order followed

The Protectors Physicians.

The Head-Officers of the Army.

The Officers and Aldermen of London.

The Masters of Chancery, and his Highness Council at Law.

The Judges of Admiralty, Judges in Wales, and Master of Requests.

The Barons of the Exchequer, Judges of both Benches, and Lord Mayor of London.

The Persons Allied in Blood to the Protector, and the Members of the other
House.

The public Ministers of Foreign Princes.

The Holland Ambassador alone, having his Train held up by four Gentlemen.

Then the Portugal Ambassador, and the French Ambassador, in like manner.

The Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal.

The Commissioners of the Treasury.

The Lords of his Highness Privie-Council.

All the Grandees were in close Mourning, the rest but in ordinary.

The whole Assembly passing along in divisions, were distinguished by Drums,
Trumpets, Banners and Horses, whereof there were eleven in all, four being
coverd with black Cloth, and seven in Velvet. These passing in comely order,
at length came the Chariot with the Effigies, on each side of which were six
Banner. Rols (twelve in all) born by several Persons; And likewise several
Pieces of the Protectors Armor carried by eight Officers of the Army, attended
by the Heralds. Next went Garter Principal King of Arms, attended by a
Gentleman on each hand bare-headed. Now came the chief Mourner. And to conclude
all, came the Horse of Honor, in very rich Trappings imbroydered on
Crimson-Velvet, and adorned with white, red; and yellow Plumes of Feathers,
being led by the Master of the Horse. The Rear of this brave Show was brought
up by the Protectors Guard of Halberdiers, the Warders of the Tower, and a
Troop of Horse.

The Essigies in this manner being brought to the West-Gate of the Abby-Church
of Westminster, it was taken from the Chariot by ten Gentlemen, who carried it
to the East End of the Church, and there placed the Picture in a most
Magnificent Structure built in the same Form as one before had been (on the
like occasion) for King James, but much more Stately.

Thus much for the History of O. Cromwell: Now follows.

His Character.
WE find him in the beginning of England's Distractions, a most active
Instrument to carry on the Cause for King and Parliament; this pretense holding
water, and proving prosperous, he then became the main stickler for Liberty of
Conscience without any limitation. This toleration became his masterpiece in
Politics; for it procured him a party that stuck close in all Cases of
necessity. These Libertines in general, being divided into several particular
Fractions (as Independents, Anabaptists, Socinians, Millenaries,
Antisabbatarians, Ranters, Quakers, Seekers, and God knows how many more) did
all of them serve as steps to mount our Protector to the highest pitch of
Preferment. After he had made use of all that could augment his Interest, then
Humility condescended to look through his fingers at a Crown: but still waving
the ayrie Title of King, he rather chose to accept the substantial Power of
Protector. The Primum mobile of his desires herein being somewhat satisfied,
then Parliaments were rallied, and by him as familiarly routed; wherein he
showed himself to be in Policy as far above the Peoples Capacities, as Saul in
Stature was above the Israelites. In his governing of England, Scotland and
Ireland, it is obvious to all, he studied Men more then Books; so that his turn
was served in all Offices: parts advanced few; but he that would never question
Commands, but act freely his Interests, was sufficiently qualified for
preferment: Yet this he would do, when Ambassadors were to be made, or Forces
sent into Foreign parts, then suitable spirits fitting the Employments, were
always called out to serve; as the Lord Lockhart for France, and Reynolds for
Flanders: the first going in quality of Ambassador, the other as General.

In the choice of his Privy. Council, much cunning might be seen; yet he never
relied so much on their Counsels, as to have it said, England was governed by a
Council and Protector: for he made the world know, it was by Protector and
Council.

In his rise, he never cut down one step before another was built to support
him: this was seen in his levelling the Long Parliament, and present spring of
the next Little One: then, they being dissolved, in comes an Instrument for his
own Government. In all these changes, he took time by the foretop, not
suffering such an Interregnum as might encourage the Peoples minds to work him
any mischief.

His Speeches were for the most part ambiguous, especially in public meetings;
wherein he rather left others to pick out the meaning, then did it himself. But
when Offenders came under his own examination, then would he speak plain
English, and declare his power unto them in a ranting style.

Secrecy in carrying on Designs, is the principal part of a Prince: at this he
was excellent, both in Military and Civil Affairs; insomuch that few actions
ever miscarried under his hands, except that grand one of Sancta Domingo.

They that go about to diminish his Valor, do little less then rob him of his
right: for in the Camp his Armor deprest fear, and made him stand in defiance
of all Guns under the Demie-Cannon; but at Court, his courage was somewhat
quailed with a new light sprung up, called, Killing no Murder.

The Pride and Ambition which some say he was guilty of, may be easily excused
as an original sin inherent in nature: and we all know, That which is born in
the bone, will never out of the flesh.

To conclude, he carried his Design clear, and hit the mark he aimed at,
notwithstanding the Parliament, Triplo-Heath and Dunbars Engagements: which
shows, that Policy and Piety may both lie in a bed, and yet not touch one
another. But now we mention Piety,

His Religion must not pass my Pen; in this he was zealous, not altogether like
the Pharisee, that prayed in the Temple; but really often would he mourn in
secret, and many times did his eyes in public distill tears at the Nations
stubbornness.

To take him in the whole, he was a Man better fitted to make a Prince of, then
the People was to receive him: this we see sufficiently in the management of
the Government to his Death. But afterward, the sudden disaster which befell
his Posterity was so admirable, that it cannot be imputed to any thing else but

Digitus Dei.
A Catalogue of Honors conferred on several Persons, by Oliver Cromwell, Lord
Protector, in the time of his Government.
His Privy Council.
HEnry Lawrence Lord President. Lieut. Genesis Fleetwood. Major Genesis Lambert.
Philip Lord Lisle. Nathaniel Fiennes Commissioner of the Great Seal. John
Desbrow. Edward Mountague. Generals at Sea. Sir Gilbert Pickering. Sir Charles
Woolsley. Col. William Sydenham. Edmund Earl of Mulgrave. Walter Strickland,
Esquire. Philip Skippon, Major Genesis Col. Philip Jones. Richard Major, Esquire.
Francis Rouse, Esquire. John Thurloe, Secretary of State.
The Members of the other House, alias House of Lords.
1. LOrd Richard Cromwell. 2. Lord Henry Cromwell Deputy of Ireland. 3. Nathaniel
Fiennes 4. John Lisle. Commissioners of the Great Seal. 5. Henry Lawrence,
President of the Privy Council. 6. Charles Fleetwood, Lieut. Genesis of the Army.
7. Robert Earl of Warwick. 8. Edmund Earl of Mulgrave. 9. Edward Earl of
Manchester. 10. William Lord Viscount Say and Seal. 11. Philip Lord Viscount
Lisle. 12. Charles Lord Viscount Howard. 13. Philip Lord Wharton. 14. Thomas
Lord Faulconbridge. 15. George Lord Euers. 16. John Cleypole, Esquire. 17. John
Desbrow 18. Edward Montague. Generals at Sea. 19. Bulstrode Whitlock 20.
William Sydenham. Commissioners of the Treasury. 21. Sir Charles Wolsley. 22.
Sir Gilbert Pickering. 23. Walter Strickland, Esquire. 24. Philip Skippon, Esquire. 25.
Francis Rous, Esquire. 26. John Jones, Esquire. 27. Sir William Strickland. 28.
John Fiennes, Esquire. 29. Sir Francis Russel. 30. Sir Thomas Honywood. 31. Sir
Arthur Haslerigge. 32. Sir John Hobart. 33. Sir Richard Onslow. 34. Sir Gilbert
Gerrard. 35. Sir William Roberts. 36. John Glyn. 37. Oliver St-John. Chief
Justices of both Benches. 38. William Pierrepoint, Esquire. 39. John Crew,
Esquire. 40. Alexander Popham, Esquire. 41. Philip Jones, Esquire. 42. Sir Christopher
Pack. 43. Sir Robert Tichborn. 44. Edward Whalley, Com. Genesis 45. Sir John
Barkstead, Lieut. of the Tower. 46. Sir Tho. Pride. 47. Sir George Fleetwood.
48. Sir John Huson. 49. Richard Ingoldsby, Esquire. 50. James Berry, Esquire. 51.
William Goff, Esquire. 52. Thomas Cooper, Esquire. 53. Edmund Thomas, Esquire. 54. George
Monk, Genesis in Scotland. 55. David Earl of Cassils. 56. Sir William Lockhart.
57. Archibald Johnson of Wareston. 58. William Steel Chancellor of Ireland. 59.
Roger. Lord Broghil. 60. Sir Matthew Tomlinson. 61. William Lenthal Master of
the Rolls. 62. Richard Hampden, Esquire.
Commissioners of the Great Seal, and their Officers.
NAthaniel Fiennes. John Lisle. William Lenthal Master of the Rolls.
Officers attending.
HEnry Middleton Sergeant at Arms. Mr. Brown. Mr. Dove.
Judges of both Benches.
John Glyn, Lord Chief Justice. Peter Warburton Richard Nudigate. Justices of
the upper Bench. Oliver St-John Lord Chief Justice, and Edward Atkins Matthew
Hale Hugh Windham. Justices of the Common Bench.
His Barons of the Exchequer.
RObert Nicholas. John Parker, and Roger Hill. Sergeant at Law. Erasmus Earl,
Attorney General. Edmund Prideaux, Solicitor. William Ellis.
Sergeants at Law called by him to the Bar.
RIchard Pepes, 25 January 1653. Thomas Fletcher, 25 January 1653. Matthew
Hale, 25 January 1653. William Steel, 9 February 1653. John Maynard, 9 February
1653. Richard Nudigate, 9 February 1653. Thomas Twisdon, 9 February 1653. Hugh
Windham, 9 February 1653. Unton Crook, 21 of June 1654. John Parker, 21 of June
1654. Roger Hill, 28 of June 1655. William Shepard, 25 October 1656. John
Fountain, 27 November 1656. Evan Scithe.
Viscounts.
Charles Howard of Glisland in Cumberland, created Baron Glisland, and Lord
Viscount Howard of Morpeth, the 20th of July 1657.
Baronets.
JOhn Read Esquire, of Bocket- Hall in Hertfordshire, created Baronet the 25 of
June 1656. John Cleypole Esquire, created Baronet the 16th of July 1657. Thomas
Chamberlayn of Wickham Esquire, made a Baronet the 6th of October 1657. Thomas
Beaumont of Staughton-Grange in Leicestershire, Esquire created March 5. 1657. John
Twisleton Esquire of Horsemans-Place in Datford in the County of Kent, created
Baronet of the same, March 24. 1657. Henry Ingolds by Esquire created 31 of March
1658. Henry Wright of Dagenhams in Essex, Esquire created Baronet, March 31. 1658.
Edmund Dunch Esquire of East-Wittenham in Berkshire, created Baron of the same
place, April 26. 1658. Griffith Williams Esquire of Carnarvon, made a Baronet the
28 of May 1658.
Knights, when and where made.
SIr Thomas Viner, Lord Mayor of London, at Grocers-Hall, Feb. 8. 1653. Sir
John Copleston, at White Hall, June 1. 1655. Sir John Reynolds, at White Hall,
June 11. 1655. Sir Christopher Pack, Lord Mayor of London, at White Hall,
September. 20. 1655. Sir Thomas Pride, at White Hall, Jan. 17. 1655. Sir John
Barkstead, at White Hall, Jan. 19. 1655. Sir Richard Comb, at White Hall, Aug.
1656. Sir John Dethick, Lord Mayor of London, at White Hall, Sept. 15. 1656.
Sir George Fleetwood of Bucks. Sir William Lockhart, at White Hall, December
10. Sir James Calthrop of Suffolk. Sir Robert Tichborn, Lord Mayor of London,
and Sir Lislebone Long, Recorder, December 15. Sir James Whitlock at
White Hall, January 6. Sir Thomas Dickeson of York, March 3. 1656. Sir Richard
Stainer, at White Hall, June 11. 1657. Sir John Cleypole Baronet, at
White Hall, July 16. 1657. Sir William Wheeler, at Hampton Court, Aug. 26.
1657. Sir Edward Ward of Norfolk, at White Hall, November. 2. Sir Thomas Andrews,
Alderman of London, at White Hall, November. 14. Sir Thomas Foot, Alderman, Sir
Thomas Atkin, Alderman, Sir John Huson, Colonel. December. 5. Sir Ja^ Drax, at
White Hall, Jan. 6. Sir Henry Pickering, Sir Philip Twisleton. White Hall, Feb.
1. Sir John Lenthal, at White Hall, March 9. Sir John Ireton, Alderman of
London. Sir Henry Jones, at Hampton Court, July 17. 1658.
Sic transit Gloria mundi.
FINIS.

