THE Confirming Work OF RELIGION: OR, Its Great Things made plain, By their
Primary Evidences and Demonstrations.

Whereby the meanest in the Church, may soon be made able to render a Solid and
Rational Account of their Faith.

Written by R. Fleming, Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures.

Now Published by Daniel Burgess.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
end of Cheapside. 1693.

THE Publisher to the Reader.
THE highest Angels are most humble Creatures; the Church of God is full of
their Services, but knows next to nothing of their Names. Their Works praise
their Lord and ours, but not Themselves. And if the Evangelical Author of this
Book could have had his Will, the Churches of Christ should not have had his
Name. He would have kept himself together a Benefactor, and a sort of stranger
unto them.

Against his will it came to be known, that his book of the Fulfilling of the
Scriptures was his And by the Divine Providence it was made necessary that his
latter Works should bear his Name. Obscurity was his Ambition; though his Gifts
and Graces prove too big and too bright to be covered. And, in short, it has
pleased the Supreme Ruler (and Fountain of Honor) to honor him whether he
would or no.

The Book first named, is followed with the Eulogies of greatest Divines; and
is a Manna sweet to the Taste of all serious Christians. His Epistolary
Discourse, dedicated to the Queen's Majesty, as most graciously accepted by
Her; and highly valued by those that I must think of the best of her Subjects.
Being, as is his Discourse of Earthquakes, a Treasure of things Old and New;
Michtam's golden Jewels. Arguments, several, not so much as touched by any Pen
within her Dominions, or beyond them, save Mr. Flemming's.

Nevertheless it is of this his Treatise, that I would say, with submission to
better Judgments, There is none like it. Herein it is, that I think he has
singularly honored his God, and I believe his God will very singularly honor
him. For, is any Disease more Morial, or more Epidemical, than Popish Implicit
Faith? And is there any to be named, against which we are so destitute of
Medicines? Is there extant in English, or any European Language, any one
Rationale of Christianity, in Method suited to them who do most need it? Has
any one Writer, beside our Author, set himself to teach Minors the primary
Evidences, and reasonable Demonstrations of Christian Faith? I will con him my
best thanks who shall name me so much as one.

How sound and how ^enerous a Medicine this Treatise is, let the Wi^e judge. I
declare it to be the only one, that on no slight ^nquiry, I have heard of.
Being so, I no sooner read it, but I blessed it, and its unknown Author.
Privately and publicly I praised it, and finding it not to be had in our
Shops, nor but from Holland, (if from thence) to be gotten, I presently
resolved to Reprint it. Soon after, hearing who was the Author, and where he
was, I sent him notice of that my fixed Resolution, whether he consented to it
or no. For thus I argued; that if he were of the heavenly spirit breathing in
his Book, he could not gainsay it; and if he were of another spirit, for the
Churches service, it would be innocent and praiseworthy to cross it. But
blessed be God, and blessed be he from his Lord and mine, he readily forgave me
this wrong, and cheerfully I proceeded.

No Lion found I in my way; but a sorry Worm I counted the Exclamations of some
nice Folk, against the Phrase and Style of this confessedly excellent Work.
Dutifully I compassionated the weak; and no less the many sick, of curiosity.
Who have such Ulcers in their Palats, that they cannot, without cruel pain,
swallow the most desirable Dainties, unless they may take them in Oil and
Sugar. Cannot prevail with themselves to read Periods that require an attentive
mind, and the least strain of their Understanding. Wherefore I used my Sponge,
and took out as many expressions of my Author's Native Language, as I thought
would disturb an English Reader. Substituting ^^^h as appeared sufficiently
intelligible. Which being done, the Bookseller was wise enough to set the Press
going.

I signified my purpose to Catechize Youth publicly in the Positions and
Characters of this Book, one Lords day; as in W. Assembly's Catechism, on the
other, by course. Which practice other Ministers, soon told me, that they would
take up. As, I trust, many more will do; forasmuch, as none can be unsensible
what multitudes of men do go to Grass, on this side the Alps, as well as on the
other; and what a fantastic Faith common Protestants do rest in, as well as
Romanists. Making show of a Faith, (as the Moon of a Light,) whereof not any is
in themselves rooted. Brit, is painted; Tain, is a Nation.
Sadly it is seen of all, how too too properly we are still named Britains;
the Faith of most being such a Paint, as cannot but melt and vanish in any
Trial that is fiery.

Memorable are the words of the Learned unhappy Spalato; to this effect as I
remember. To say that I do not my self know why I do believe a Religious
Article, but yet I do believe it, because the Church in which I am does believe
it; it is the self same as to say, I do not my self open one of my Eyes, but
yet I do see the thing spoken of, because the Company in which I am does see
it. The good Lord lessen among us the number of Men so Absurd, (...).
and so plainly void of Faith! He has already made the Leaves of this Book so
healing unto some, that in great hopes I commend them unto all. And especially
to the Societies of Young Men, that hold weekly stated Meetings for Edifying
Conference. In which, as I tell those of my own Charge, they shall not find
more Eligible Arguments than this Book stores them with. Happy they, if, in the
best sense, they do make them their own! Lord increase holy Faith, and quench
fiery Faction; so prays

Bridges-street near Covent Garden, Feb. 28. Daniel Burgess.
POSTSCRIPT.
UNderstanding the Foreign Churches want of this Work, as well as our own, I
purpose ere long to Translate, and send it forth in the Latin Tongue. Unless
some good hand, of more leisure, do prevent me.



THE JUDGMENT OF SOME London Ministers CONCERNING THIS TREATISE.
THings of unquestionable Excellence in themselves, and of greatest Importance
unto our welfare, have not always the Deepest and most Constant Thoughts
bestown upon them. Witness the Satisfaction of our Minds about the Matter, and
about the Foundations of our Holy Christian Faith.

It seems too little observed, but it can never be sufficiently Lamented, what
we do observe of Protestants neglect of the Matter of their Faith. And yet our
sad Experience certifies us, that they are incomparably more heedless of
acquainting themselves with the Reasons thereof. We have very many that do
competently know, what it is to be a Christian, for every single man that can
render a Reason, why he ought to be so.

Storms do make men look to their Anchors; and we do not know, but aweful
Judgments are hastening on us, (being Remote ones do not awaken us,) to beat us
out of our inconsiderately chosen Refuges. Our Precarious and Unexamined
Confidences, which in very Propriety are but Fancy, and not Faith built upon
any solid Grounds. However, we must all, needs Die; and it is more than
probable, that a near Prospect of the Future State, may convincingly show the
most obstinate, that the King of Terrors is not to be conquered, and no
Miracles are to be wrought, by an Implicit Faith. Pecudum ritu euntes non qa
eundum est, sed qa itur. Sen.
Or by a way of Religion, that is taken up and walked in, merely for Company.

Wherefore we give our great Thanks to the Author of every good Gift; who has
drawn this his richly furnished Scribe, to supply us with so very needful a
Treatise as is here offered. Some of us do Profess that in reading it, we were
surprised with Joy and with Wonder, that a Topic so little Written,
Discoursed, or Thought of, should be treated on with such depth of Judgment,
and with such Experience as is rarely found in the most laudable Writers.

Through the Divine Blessing which we implore, we hope that we, and our Brethren
throughout these Nations. shall find good success of our Peoples use of this
most instructive Work. For which, with the excellent Author, (who did but
Consent to this Edition of it;) we are indebted unto the Reverend and Worthy
Publisher, by whose means we receive it. We join with both of them, in Prayer
to the most High, that this Rich Seed of the Sower may be made Bread of Life to
the Eater.

William Bates. Matthew Mead. Thomas Cole. John How. Matthew Sylvester. Daniel
Williams. John Showers


The Author's PREFACE.
THis small Treatise here offered, is on the greatest Subjects that can fall
under the Consideration of Mankind; and is a Study, which was never more
pressingly called for, than in these days, for making Peace with God, and
gaining such an Assurance of his Truth, as may fully quiet and support the
Soul, though all sensible Props should be broken, and fail, Great changes do
surely hasten on this Generation, and the Life of Faith is in another manner
like to be put to Trial, than since the Churches Rise and Recovery from
Antichristian Bondage. The storm now visibly grows upon the Churches of Christ,
though nothing ought to Faint or Shake the Spirits of any, who know their
Anchor is sure and cast within the Vail; but the strongest Difficulties, in
following the Lord, (when overcome,) yield the greatest Victory, and will be
not only matter of Joy here, but to all Eternity, in having with Patience and
Hope endured, and got well through a Throng of Temptations and Assaults in a
resolute adherence to the Truth. If men think it their Wisdom to secure their
Private Interest, by dividing it in such a time from the Public Cause of the
Reformed Church, and make Light of the greatest Truths of God now assaulted, of
the Blood of the Martyrs, yea of their own Eternal State, by any coolness or
shrinking from the same; they will find no Temporal Motives, can ever
compensate that loss and ruin which inevitably will meet such in the Issue.
Yea that these Words of Mordecai to Esther, (Esth. 4.13, 14.) Have the same
Voice, and weight in this day. What is held forth in the following work, I may
with humble Confidence say, was under some pressure to have such clear Evidence
and Quieting Persuasion of Divine Truth, as made it less easy to have my own
Spirit satisfied herein, than possibly it may be to others; for if it were not
from that blessed Assurance of the Lords being God, of the Revelation of
Christ, and of the Glory to come, I should not know what could be comforting,
or make a rational Being desirable. Some singular Engagements I judge my self
also to stand under, for putting to my Seal to the Truth and Faithfulness of
God in his Word, from many signal Confirmations hereof in the course of my
Pilgrimage, if such a poor Testimony might be of any weight. Let the Blessed
Lord, graciously accept this small offering to him, for the Interest of his
Truth, by so mean an Instrument, and give some Fruit hereof, that may abide,
and be found in the day of Christ.

I hope the Reader may find by a Perusal of the I. Chapter of what Serious Use
and Intent the II. is, yea that in this day it was not Unseasonable or
Incongruous to the foregoing Subject what is held forth in the III. Chapter.
But Oh! it is sad and amazing to think how few are under that weight of
Religion, as once to have a Serious Inquiry on the Grounds and Reasons thereof,
and to account the most special Assistances to their Faith to be the greatest
Helpers of their Joy within time.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAPTER. I. The Primitive Confirmation, held forth and cleared in seven
Positions.
POSIT. I. Sad is the aspect, which the implicit and traditional profession of
this day has upon the present state of Religion. page 1. POSIT. II. It is a
great service for the Church to have a clear founding of the faith of assent,
upon known and solid grounds herein, more universally promoted. page 3 POSIT.
III. The true primitive confirmation as it was in the times of the Apostles, is
held forth and cleared from the Scripture. page 5- POSIT. IV. The continued
necessity thereof, is no less convincing now, for the Churches use, than in
those Primitive times. page 7 POSIT. V. Such a confirmatory work respects not
only the more knowing and inquisitive part of Men, but the meanest within the
Church. page 9 POSIT. VI. What is specially called for in the practical use of
this primitive confirmation, is held forth in some serious proposals for this
end. page 11 POSIT. VII. Special excitement we are under, for promoting the
same in so remarkable a period of time as this, and from the hope of a greater
reviving yet of such a Catholic Spirit, to advance the highest ends of
Religion amongst men. page 15
CHAPTER. II. For giving some clear view, of these primary evidences and
demonstrations of our Faith, that the meanest Christian should know, and with
the least expense of time may improve for their daily use, on these greatest
Principles.
SECTION. I.
I. OF the glorious Being of God, which is the first Foundation of all
Religion. page 17 II. Of the original of the world, and its not being eternal.
page 19 III. Of a supreme Providence in the conservation and government of the
world. page 20 IV. Of that special providence, which in its continued
administration of human affairs, does unchangeably difference betwixt the
righteous and the wicked. page 22 V. How such a wonderful record as that of an
immediate revelation of God unto men, is so demonstrably extant in the world.
page 24 VI. Of the special evidences of the Scriptures Divinity, which men must
needs see to be infallible. page 25 VII. Of the secure conveyance of the
Scripture though all the changes of times past. page 27 VIII. Of the fall of
man and entry of sin into the World, as it is fully demonstrable to reason, as
well as by the certainty of Faith. page 28
SECTION II.
I. HOlding forth those great assistances to the Christian faith, and of the
Messiah being surely promised to the Church before his coming. page 29 II. Of
the truth and accomplishment of this great promise of the Messiah, and how it
is now as sure in the event as it is clear he was promised. page 30 III. Of the
special advantage for confirmation of our faith herein, that for 4000 years the
promised coming of the Messiah was deferred. page 32 IV. Of the nature and
internal excellency of Christianity, to bear furthest evidence to the truth
thereof. page 33 V. That this is the same Gospel we now receive and enjoy,
which from the first promulgation thereof has had so great effects on the
world. page 34 VI. That the sufferings of the Saints in times past was so
demonstrably above the assistance of Nature, page 36
SECTION III.
I. FOR holding forth on what grounds the faith of a Deity must determine men
to be Christians. page 37 II. What confirmation the Christian Religion has
from that visible State of the Jews. page 38 III. The way and manner of its
prevailing on the world, which no profession else could ever pretend to. page
39 IV. The nature of that great evidence, which Christ has himself given to
the world of his divine mission in the love and unity of his people, Joh 17.21.
page 40 V. How the strength of such a demonstration stands still clear and
evident in these dividing times of the Church. page 42 VI. What in these last
times is under our hand to compensate such a confirmation by miracles, which
was in the first times of the Gospel. page 43
SECTION IV.
I. FOR holding forth with the furthest rational certainty, and evidence the
truth and doctrine of Christ, to be a soul-quickning and experimental Religion.
page 44 II. The truth also of conversion of men from a state of nature to a new
state of grace. page 46 III. Of so great an experiment of Religion as Communion
betwixt God and men here on Earth. page 48 IV. Of so great a demonstration of
Religion in the power and workings of the Conscience. page 49 V. Of that
special confirmation to our faith, which does result from such a demonstration
of this power of the Conscience over men. page 50
SECTION V.
I. FOR holding forth the Truth of a Kingdom of Darkness in the World, in
opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. page 51 II. What confirmation to our
Faith, the certainty hereof, and of these Powers of Darkness, does clearly
afford. page 52 III. That great truth of the immortality of the Soul, with the
clearest evidence to reason; as well as by the certainty of Faith. page 54 IV.
How confirming a Seal to the Scripture that great change which passes on all
men by death is, and how it is no natural accident. page 55 V. Some special
assistances to the Christians Faith of an eternal Glory in Heaven, and to serve
an unavoidable conviction on the greatest Atheists. page 57 VI. Something of a
visible Hell, in some near approach hereof even to men's senses, held forth to
awake and convince the World of such a state of horror and torment in another
World. page 59 VII. Some assistances to our Faith of that great truth of the
Resurrection of the Body. page 61
CHAPTER III. The Confirming work of Religion further improved with respect to
this dismal and amazing time we are now fallen in.
SECTION I.
TO hold forth what may be both for light and confirmation upon this great
distress the Churches of Christ are now under. page 63
SECTION II.
HOW great a talent we stand accountable for in this day of such immediate and
extraordinary appearances of the Lord for confirming the same public cause of
the Reformed Church since the Reformation, which we are now called to adhere
to. page 65
SECTION III.
WHat manner of time is the present lot of the Church now fallen in, and what
judgment we ought to have hereof from the Scripture, for our furthest
confirming in such a day. page 73
SECTION IV.
SOme special service that we are now called to, and accountable for; in behalf
of the truth, and for sanctifying the Lord in the eyes of others, who are under
so great a talent of Light and confirmation in the same. page 77
The True and Infallible WAY For attaining a confirmed State in Religion, etc.
CHAP. I. The Primitive Confirmation in the truth of Christianity, held forth
and cleared, in its continued necessity and use to this day, in seven Positions.
Posit. I. THAT nothing can be of a more sad and threatening aspect on the
present state of Religion in all the Churches of Christ, than that utter
estrangement, most are under, to the true grounds of Faith, and to those
fundamental differences betwixt Christianity, and every false way, which no
pretended Religion can lay claim to. The reasons of the Position, are these. I.
That it is too visibly manifest, how no men in the world know so little of
their own profession, of any human art or science, as such who bear the Name of
Christians. Or are so generally strangers to the Truth and firmness of the
Principles thereof, for maintaining either a due Valuation, or powerful sense
of the same on their Soul; so that an implicit and Traditional Profession is
the only part and propriety which most can claim in the Truth, and Doctrine
they profess. II. That very rarely also is any Serious Personal Inquiry and
Trial, if there be indeed such a thing as an Experimental and Soul-quickning
Religion in the Earth. That can bear the expense of the most dismal and
afflicting times, and has so great a temporal Revenue, as Peace with God, an
Immediate Communion with him, the Joy and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, when we
are under such pressures of trouble as are above the support of Nature. III.
That the furthest account, why most go under the name of Christians, rather
than of any other form, can rise no higher than Custom and Education, that it
did bespeak them from their Birth, and was the Religion of their Ancestors; yea
become in that manner natural to them as the Customs and Language of their
Country. Which are grounds that would determine to the very opposite
Profession, if they were stated under the same circumstances, and had the same
motives to be Mahumetans; since it is sure these can found no other Assent,
than is suitable to the Nature and Strength thereof. IV. That thus it is plain
the most numerous part of Visible Professors; are destitute of any defense
from internal motives, and solid conviction of the truth they profess, upon its
own evidence; and there was never more cause to fear, some unusual apostasy
from the very visible profession of Christ, upon any violent trial and assault
this way. When such find it more easy to render up their Religion, than to
adhere to the same, under strong temptations, who yet never knew that
substance, advantage, or certainty herein, as could preponderate with the want
of all external motives for such a profession.

Posit. II. That thus one of the highest services of these times, for the
public good of the Church, does convincingly lie here; to have the faith of
assent to the truth and doctrine of Christ, in a clear and firm certainty of
the judgment, on its own evidence, more vigorously promoted and the proper
means and assistances, which the Lord has given for this end, in some other
manner yet improved, than seems to be at this day, for a more universal use.
The grounds to enforce the necessity hereof are these; I. That it is sure
wherever the Gospel is revealed to men, it comes with so full an assurance of
understanding, and sufficiency of objective evidence, as can admit of no
possible doubtfulness herein. Which is the credit and glory of our religion,
that in no other way it does require acceptance, but with the furthest
conviction of evidence. II. Because the express design and tendency of this
blessed revelation, is no less to found such a rational assurance in the
judgment, of its truth, than to engage the will and consent, for embracing
thereof; and though such great demonstrations for this end can only, in suo
genere, have a convincing influence to persuade the understanding, yet are they
of such weight here, as next to the demonstration of the Spirit of God, they
are the greatest means to bring up men's assent to a full and quieting rest on
that security to which they must trust themselves for ever, and to let them
see, that this even here by the way, is assuredly full, though not yet their
enjoyment. III. Because this faith of assent, should be first followed in the
order of nature, as being the very first principle of conversion, to know and
be sure, that God has sent his son into the world to save sinners; wherein as
the Holy Ghost is not the Obj^ctive, but the Efficient Cause of our Faith, so
is not the internal work and Testimony, he gives on the Soul the first
Testimony, but must still have respect to the revelation of the Word without,
and such demonstrative evidences thereof, wherewith it is revealed to the
world. Nor may any ever separate, that which God has himself so indissolubly
joined. IV. That there is so convincing a necessity and use hereof to the
Church, and in a special way with respect to the youth, for a more firm laying
of the groundwork of their Christian profession, and for the seed-plot of a
blessed and desirable growth amongst such in this day; that they might thus
know early, something of these primary grounds and demonstrations of their
faith; so also is it a study of that high importance, as I humbly judge should
be of notable use for a Manuduction in the first place to Students of Divinity,
before they launch forth in that vast and immense Ocean of the speculative part
thereof; and for being at some greater advantage thus for carrying on such a
confirming work in the Church in their future service. V. Yea of what use might
this be with respect to many, who may be sore haunted, with hidden and dreadful
temptations to infidelity, and to weaken them in the very foundations of their
faith; who are wholly unfurnished of any such grounds and arguments in their
judgment to repel the same: and it is certain that to believe firmly the
History of the Gospel, that God was manifested in our nature, to save man, is
with respect to the object a much higher act of faith, than to believe, that he
will save us; since as the one does unspeakably more transcend all human reason
than the other, so does the Apostle thus argue from the greater to the less,
Romans 8.32. that he who gave his own son to the death; will he not also with him
give us all things?

Posit. III. That such a Confirming Work, was most specially followed in the
Practice of the Primitive Times, and one of the great Ends of the Ministry of
the Apostles and Evangelists, to have this Faith of Assent and Doctrinal
Certainty thereof, on its proper Grounds and Evidences, deeply founded in Men's
Judgment; is so clear as cannot come under Debate. I. That this way did the
great Author of our Profession himself take, not only by the Authority of his
Word, and the Power and Energy of Grace, but with that Convincing Evidence and
Demonstration of his Truth to Men's Understanding, as might found also a firm
and rational Assurance hereof. II. That for this End, he did pray the Father,
Joh. 17.21. and was so much pressed herein, that so great an external
Demonstration of the Truth of the Gospel, in the Concord and Unity of his
People, might be kept clear, that the World might thus believe that he was sent
of God, and have a deeper Conviction hereof wrought in them, by such an
Evidence. III. That one special Intent of the Gospel of Luke, was for this end,
Luke 1.4. That men might know not only the things themselves by a naked
Relation, but the Certainty of these things, wherein they had been formerly
Instructed. IV. That herein did the Ministry of Apollos so brightly shine
forth, Act. 18.28. And was then of most singular use to the Church, by that
clearness of rational Conviction and demonstrative Arguments for the Truth of
Christ, as the greatest gainsayers could not withstand. V. That it is sure it
was then without Exception expressly required of the meanest within the Church,
to be always ready to render the Reasons of their Hope to all who asked: and
not only to know what they did Believe, but why they did so, as is clear, 1
Pet. 3.15. This could not be by bringing forth of internal Evidences, for
Conviction of others, but by giving them an account of the most cogent grounds
and demonstrations of the Gospel, as might be most prevalent, and confirming to
the weak, and leave others inexcusable; and seems to have been then specially
pressed in these Primitive Times, as a proper Test of their Christian
Profession. VI. And we see herein also, how much these excellent Bereans were
taken up, and were so highly commended of the Holy Ghost, Act. 17.11. To know
the demonstrative part of Christianity, and by its own evidence, with that
entire harmony and consent of the Scripture therein, and their being thus
diligently intent in that comparing-work of Religion, to see the truth thereof
not singly and apart by themselves alone, but in that joynt-union and coherence
wherein they stand, each in their own room, for confirming and giving light to
other. VII. That this was the way also, wherein the Gospel did come to the
Gentile Church is clearly showed 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Not in Word only, but as in
Power, and in the Holy Ghost, so also in much Assurance of Understanding, upon
its own Evidence, which was that way, it did so wonderfully prevail over the
world against nature, and the stream of flesh and blood, that stood in the
furthest opposition thereto. VIII. That one of the greatest services of the
Apostles in their visiting the Churches, did expressly lie here, Acts 14.22. To
confirm the souls of the Disciples in the first place in the certainty of their
faith, and then in exhorting them to continue in the same, so as they might
follow the Lord, with the furthest light and assurance of Mind, amidst the
great Trials of such a time. IX. That it is this way also the World is rendered
inexcusable for their misbelief of the Gospel, when under such sufficiency of
means given for this end, by so great a discovery of the confirming evidences
of its rruth, so as they can have no pretense herein, but an obstinacy and
resolution not to be convinced; on which ground does our Blessed Lord testify,
that it was no want of light, upon the certainty of his truth, why men did not
receive it, but that they loved darkness better than light, because their deeds
were evil; and when such clear, rational, and convincing evidences are laid
open to their view, how most men possibly can get these put by or rejected, is
not easy to comprehend, but that a real Irritation and torment of Spirit, from
such clearness of evidence, does thus more tend to harden than convince.

Posit. IV. That there is a continued necessity of such a Confirmation in the
Faith to this day, what ever can be objected of so long a consent and
prescription of time in the profession thereof, is fully demonstrable on these
grounds. I. Because it is sure, the Christian faith does still need these
assistances and it is a strange mistake, that only for Heathens and Atheists,
such confirming evidences of the same should be proposed, but not for any under
a visible profession, when the whole of Divinity, and Doctrine of our Faith, is
so full of demonstrative arguments, for the daily use of the most established
Christians in their passage through time. II. That as the highest motives to
all serious godliness and the moral duties of Christianity must needs be from
its known certainty to us, so is the continued use thereof to be still the
same. III. That these numerous trials and conflicts of Christians now, do no
less call for some higher establishment in the truth on which they must alone
rest when all visible props fail in their judgments, than of supporting grace;
nor is it conceivable how men can this day walk in the light of any true joy
and comfort, without a more solid assurance of their being on safe grounds
herein than most seem to reckon. IV. Because the revelation of the Gospel, and
of an eternal state in another world, is so great and wonderful, as it is
strange how this is not the highest interest of men's life, to have their faith
more deeply confirmed on the furthest trial of their security now by the way
herein, who must shortly make so great a trial thereof at death; for if we were
but once come thus far as to ask our own Soul what the Christian Faith indeed
is, that we are thus called to believe, it could not possibly but beget some
ecstasy of wondering at the greatness thereof, and to reckon any light and
implicit assent to the same as a degree both of Atheism and Indifferency in
this matter. V. Though there be no conflict with Heathens, as in the first
times, yet was such a spirit never at a higher pitch than it is now to take off
all firm assent to the greatest principles of truth, when Atheism seems to be
at its last attempt in the world, and we are fallen in so amazing an hour of
the power of darkness as makes these latter times more remarkably perilous and
trying than the first. VI. Yea if such a confirming work, be one of the
greatest means to advance the repute and honor of Religion, when its wonted
awe and veneration is so far lost, and to awake men to deeper impressions of
its truth, when so few seem now under any such weight; then it is certain there
was never more need of the same than in this day.

Posit. V. That such a Service to the Church, does not only respect the more
knowing, inquisitive, and judicious part thereof, but the meanest Professors
of Religion also, of whom this is necessarily required, is Evident on these
grounds. I. Because each Christian should have undoubtedly such a ballast on
their own Soul, of the solid and rational Grounds of their Faith, as well as
those of greater parts and Endowments: the promoting of which were it more
deeply considered, I dare humbly adventure to say would be found one of the
choicest means to promote Christianity this day. II. Because this is not to
drive any to doubt or question the least sincere degree of assent, though it be
not with such strength of evidence as in others, nor can by that formal
argumentation give the same account thereof; since a few grounds this way may
specially help to some solid conviction and confirming of their mind, when they
may be ignorant of many other cogent arguments for this end; but it is certain
also the greater clearness of evidence does still in the appointed way of means
lead in to a more firm and strong assent of the judgment, to the truth of our
Religion. III. Because the strength of the foundation in it self cannot be
enough if it be not with such a known evidence, as men may build firmly and
with assurance thereon: Nor has the Lord thus only designed to give his people
an infallible and sure testimony to adventure on, but that it should be made
sure also to them. IV. Because none can in truth say that Jesus is the Lord but
by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 22.3. by which is not to be understood so much the
necessity of supernatural grace, for a saving faith, but that none can give a
true assent and confession of the same, but from these grounds and arguments
which are revealed by the Holy Ghost unto men for this end; and as it is certain
that these Characters and evidence of Divinity, which are imprinted on the
whole revelation of the Gospel, may be clear and demonstrative to our judgment,
so are they as truly divine, as the doctrine which is confirmed thereby. V.
Because there can be no possible cause for Unbelief of the truth from any
intricate obscureness of the same, when the Lord has given such great
assistances to our faith to be as milk for babes as well as meat to strong men.
And though it be objected that the furthest objective evidence of the Gospel,
with so clear and strong a conveyance thereof, is yet so little operative on
most; the same might be said also of the whole letter of the Scripture; but tho
this tends not in the least to resolve our Religion into any mere exercise of
reason, and leaves the whole work of the Spirit, in its energy and operation
therewith on men's souls, entire; yet does it fully evince such a sufficiency of
evidence with the Christian faith, as makes any doubtfulness herein simply
impossible, through want of the greatest advantage of means; yea such as are of
another kind than to induce only a probable persuasion of the same. VI. Because
it is one of the saddest Symptoms of the present State of Religion, that so few
almost in whole Congregations can give any clear Assent to the Truth and
Certainty thereof, but to Amazement both live and die Strangers to the same,
yea how many of these who are otherwise Serious in Religion, yet have their
Faith starved this way, and are destitute of any such support; but as it is not
the numerousness of Professors, but the Strength and solidity of their Faith,
wherein the Churches Strength most lies, and has more flourished in a few such
to beget a greater Awe and Veneration of Religion amongst Men, than at other
times in the greatest Multitude; so is it the Glory of Divine Truth, that it
can subsist by its own proper Evidence, and preserve its Station in the worst
of times, when all External Arguments do most visibly cease.

Posit. VI. That it is fully demonstrable and clear, how no simple instructing
of men in the general Principles of Religion, can be the proper and adequate
means for such a Faith of Assent to the Truth thereof, on its own Evidence, or
answer that Apostolic Pattern of laying the Foundation, Heb. 6.2. But that
some special Duties else are called for to so high an end; such wherein not
only that true Primitive Confirmation in the Christian Faith might have some
Practical use, but we might also Hope therewith, for a more remarkable
out-letting of Confirming Influences of the Spirit of God. What is to be
understood herein I shall humbly offer in a few particulars.

I. That it is one of the greatest concerns of the Ministerial Work, and of the
Key of Doctrine, to have all who hear the Gospel, in the first place pressed to
take Religion so far to Heart, as to make a serious inquiry into the Grounds
and Reasons hereof, and thus to know their being on sure ground herein, not
because they know not another way, but because they know this is the alone way
of Truth, to which they dare trust their Immortal Souls. II. That for this End
the Supreme Truths of Relion be represented with that certainty of Evidence,
and Demonstration, as both such great and mavelous things do require, and the
temper of such a gainsaying Age now calls for; and to have this pressed more
on men's Judgment and Conscience, that the things of God, which are of the
highest Consequence, Reality and Substance, can have no possible Reception by
any implicit or probable belief thereof, nor can admit any pretense for the
same, when the Lord has given such kind of Proofs and Evidence, as leaves men's
darkness herein without any shadow of excuse.

II. That it peculiarly belongs to the Catechetical Work of Religion, to take
some account of the meanest Professors thereof, and with a special respect to
the Youth; of their Faith of Assent to the Doctrine of Christ, on what grounds
and certainty of evidence this is founded, and for their instructing therein,
as well as in the general Principles of Religion; when one of the most ruining
things to the Church lies here, that the Profession of most is laid in so deep
an Ignorance, as they have almost nothing to say for the same, but a naked
Affirmation. I know the difficulty hereof for the weak may be objected, but
without just cause; since as the Prime Truths of Religion are few, easy and
plain for the meanest Capacity, so also are the Primary Evidences and
Demonstrations of our Faith, if such once with that desire did search after the
same, as for a hidden and invaluable Treasure; wherein this respect should be
still had, to difference betwixt what is Initial and of a more fundamental
concern for the weak, and what may tend to an higher growth and increase of
others.

III. It should be of greatest use and advantage also for the same end, that
the young growth now coming up in the Church, were put to give some explicit
Evidence of their Consent and Choice of the Profession of Christ, so far as may
witness a Ratification of the Baptismal Covenant, now as their own proper Deed,
wherein they were implicitly engaged in their Infancy. Some special Grounds
and Reasons for this, are; I. Because God will have his Service freely entered
in and upon choice, as that way which is most agreeable to his Honor; for as
the Covenant binds mutually, so do the Seals thereof also, and therefore upon
our part is Baptism a Sacramental Oath of Allegiance to God. II. Because it
tends to a more resolute and firm adherence to the Service of God, that this
business should be personally brought home to Men's Conscience, especially
before their first admittance to the Sacrament of the Lord's supper, and thus
to engage them as Joshua did, Chap. 24.22. Ye are witnesses against your selves
herein, and they said, We are witnesses. III. Because this is expressly held
forth 1 Pet. 3.21. where Baptism is called the answer of a good conscience
toward God, upon this ground, that such then who were come to years of
knowledge, were personally brought to confirm by their own consent that solemn
Engagement and Dedication by Baptism to be the Lords, and therefore it is
called (...), which is vox juris, and signifies, sponsio, and stipulatio
publica inter Christianum, and Dominum Christum, as the most Judicious
Commentators on that Scripture do clearly render it; and so this was a special
part of the Primitive Practice, not only with respect to such, who were
Converted from Heathenism, but were born within the Church, and Partakers of
that Seal of Baptism in their Infancy, to bring them to answer to that great
Demand of the Covenant, Do you now Consent upon Evidence and Choice, to be the
Lords, and to be a Subject of his Kingdom, and embrace the Laws thereof, and do
you thus in Sincerity and Truth declare the same wherein you have a good
Conscience before God? And of what blessed Fruit and Advantage should this be
both for the Increase and Honor of the Gospel, if this were more deeply taken
to Heart for some Practical use, according to the Rule, and Primitive Pattern
in the Churches of Christ?

IV. It were specially desirable also, that there be some clear view and
summary by it self, of the most cogent Grounds and Demonstrations of the
Christian Faith, with respect both to the Doctrinal, Historical, and
Prophetical part thereof, and in that manner accommodated, as the meanest
within the Church might have such a help still at their hand, and thus with the
least expense of time, be provided of such Arguments and Reasons, as should
tend (through the Blessing of God) not only to the furthest rational Assent,
and Certainty of the Truth of their Profession, but to give a most special
support of Mind against that inward Trial of Satan's Temptations and Fiery Darts
this way; yea is such a mean, that in the serious Improvement hereof by having
such Evidences once brought in on Men's Judgment and Conscience, so as to see
with their own Eyes the Truth of the same, I must humbly judge, there is
nothing, next to the internal work of the Spirit, of this kind, might tend more
to promote the Kingdom of Christ in this day.

Posit. VII. That as there are some more signal Periods of time, to which a
greater brightness and increase of Light has respect under the New Testament;
so does there now seem to be some remarkable Call and Excitement, to such a
Confirming Work, in this day about the Christian Faith; when we may hope that a
more solemn and restoring time of Religion in the World, is on a near approach,
(though all sensible evidence would seem to control this) and may be now more
looked after, and prepared for, under a suitable Impression of these Grounds
for the same. I. That the promised time of the Conversion of the Jews does
assuredly draw near; and whatever be judged by some of the Lords immediate
Appearance herein by a Miracle, yet is it unquestionable that nothing in the
way of means could be more promising and hopeful to promote this great end,
than by promoting so great a Service as this for the Christian Church. II. That
a greater extent also of the Profession of Christ amongst the Gentiles, and
rending of the Vail that is now over many dark Nations, seems clearly insured
therewith; and what a hopeful Evidence should this be if such a Public and
Catholic Spirit were more seen, how to advance the highest Ends of Religion on
such an account without respect to any partial or divided Interest? Yea that
this blessed Zeal of God might in that manner appear to have the dark World get a
more clear and convincing prospect of the highest rational Demonstrations of
Christianity, as might through the Lords Gracious Concurrence bring men once to
an Inquisitive and Serious Spirit about the same. Oh that such may be raised up
in this dismal hour with something of that ancient Spirit, to travel with
desire for the Salvation of Mankind, and of whom it may be said, as of blessed
Nehemiah, these are indeed come to seek the welfare of their People, in their
greatest Interest. III. And this farther excitement we are now under for this
end, in a time when Popery seems to be upon one of its last and greatest
Assaults against the Church; since it is so clear that what ever tends to
Confirm Men in Christianity from their own Trial and Inquiry upon the
Confirming Evidences thereof, must have the same Native result, to make such
Confirmed Protestants; yea nothing is more demonstrable than that the Method
and Grounds that are taken both to engage and fix men in the Popish Profession,
have the same rational Tendency to promote Atheism, and to give Infidels the
greatest Advantage to reject the Profession of Christ. He that has Ears to
hear, let him hear, Amen.

CHAP. II. The Confirming Work of Religion, reduced to Practical Use; in some
clear view of those Primary Grounds, and Demonstrations of our Faith, which
none should pretend Ignorance of, who enter the Profession of Christ upon
choice, and Certainty of Evidence.
SECTION I.
Qu. I. What Reasons, and Demonstrations, can you give for so great a Faith as
that of the Glorious Being of God, who is invisible to humane Sense; since this
is the Foundation of all Religion?

Ans. Though this is Principally founded on the Sacred Truth and Authority of
his own Word, yet I am with the furthest Infallible Evidence confirmed herein;
I. That it can be no more sure, that this mavelous frame of the Heavens and
Earth has a being, and is the Object of our Sense, than that a Supreme
Infinite Wisdom and Power must be the first cause hereof, and it were simply
impossible it could ever otherwise have been. II. That he has thus made
himself Visible to our Eyes, by such a visible World, and in so exquisite an
Order and Correspondence to support the same, as nothing stands alone by it
self, but in a line of mutual respect, which runs through the whole Creation.
We may as clearly thus see, that God is, as that there is an invisible Soul in
a living Body. III. That this Harmony is amongst things, in their own Nature so
Contrary and Destructive to other, for to hold this wonderful frame, as all
must abandon Reason, or see an infinitely wise Conduct herein; and no need of
Extraordinary Miracles, to Confirm what the whole Constitutions of Nature do
Witness. IV. That this rare frame of man could never have come in being, but by
him who could Unite such different Substances as a Material Body, and an
Immaterial Soul, in so near and mavelous an Union. V. That there is such an
universal Consent of Mankind in all Ages thereto, as shows Religion to be
founded in the very Nature of Man, and as Essential to his Being, as his Reason
is, yea that the ultimate difference of Man from the Beast, and most essential
Property of humane Nature lies here. VI. That though every one be an Enemy to
what torments him; yet it was never possible for an Atheist to free himself
from that unavoidable Sense and F^ar of a Deity; nor, in a World so much lost
in Wickedness, could he ever extinguish the awe of Religion, or make any
rational Opposition to this greatest Article of the common Faith of Mankind.
VII. That the Reason of the whole Constitution of Nature, and vicissitude of
things here, is so great, as, without shutting out the use of Reason, we cannot
but see, how nothing possibly could have been better; and that any want hereof
in the whole frame of the Universe, would be as the Dislocation of a joint of
the Body, and were not conceivable to be otherwise than it is by Infinite
Wisdom appointed. VIII. That it is simply impossible that God Blessed for ever
should not exist, or that this Universe, (which is a work so highly becoming
the greatness of its Maker) could possibly subsist for one hour or minute of
time, without a Supreme Independent Power and Being, on which all Visible
Beings have their Dependence, since they cannot depend upon nothing. IX. That
such is the absolute necessity of the Faith also of a Godhead, as without this
the state of Mankind could not morally subsist, or any possible Order,
Subjection, Piety, and Justice, be to support Human Society, but as Bradwardine
says, O quam necesse est hunc esse, quem impossible est non esse. X. How
plain is it, that men cannot but see these effects of his Power on the
Conscience, in the Certainty of a Prophetic Light and Discovery as has been
often given of Future things, and in the undeniable Truth of Miracles, so as such
a Prodigy as a professed Atheist, can have no claim to humane Race, as a rational
Being, more than the greatest monster in Nature to be a true man.

Qu. II. Wh^t does witness the Worlds not being Eternal, and its first Original
and Beginning from God, to Confirm your Faith herein, by rational Demonstration?

Ans. I. That Eternity is an Incommunicable Perfection of the first Cause, and
that which is made up of corruptible and perishing things, as this Visible
World cannot possibly be in it self Eternal; nor could ever produce it self,
since thus it must both be and not be at the same time, which is the greatest
Contradiction. II. That if there be such a thing now as time, there can be no
judging of Days, Years and Ages to be Infinite, or how one thing in a continued
order, should thus go before another, without coming to some first beginning.
III. If there be a gradual Increase of human Learning on the Earth, and a
further discovery of Arts and Sciences; and the greatest Experiments and
Inventions have been but of a late Rise and Date; then can there not possibly
be an Eternal Succession of Mankind, with a continued Progress and Experience
this way; nor can it be that but of late one part of the World is known and
discovered to another. IV. That so short an History as we have in the most
Ancient Records of time, were wholly Inconsistent with such an Eternal
Duration, or that Infinite Ages preceding should leave no remembrance to
Posterity, when so small a measure of time, as a few thousand years, have left
so much. V. Nor could men beget men Eternally without going back to some first
man, who could not beget himself. VI. That if Eternity be preferable to time,
then should not the excellentest being in the Earth, Man, be thus corruptible,
and only this inanimate Mass of the Earth Eternal. VII. That infinite Ages
past, though they should have but multiplied the race of man in an Age, to two
or three more, should have come to that at last, that the whole Precinct of the
Earth could not possibly bear the product of such an infinite Increase; and no
Wars or extraordinary Judgments were ever yet known to be such, as to restrain
such an unavoidable growth.

Qu. III. What infallible Evidence to Reason is there of a Supreme Providence,
both in the Conservation, and Government of the World; for Confirming your
Faith of the Scripture herein?

Ans. I. That it is clear the support of this great frame of the Universe, with
that continued and regular course of nature herein, is as simply impossible
without an infinite Divine Power, as its first Being and Creation. II. That
such an extent of Providence as respects so innumerable Objects, with such a
Contrariety both of Qualities and Passions in the same, must needs be from an
Infinite and Intelligent Cause. III. That all things to this day, continue in
that established Order of second Causes, wherein God has placed them by a Law
so Visibly Imprinted on the Nature of things without Reason, that they do as
exactly answer the same in their proper Course and Station, as if they had a
rational Knowledge of their Duty. IV. That Universal respect, the Sun in the
Firmament has to things here below, though at so great a distance, which does
neither cease, or grow weary to send forth its beams and hidden influences to
the meanest Creatures, may let us clearly see, how it has the same Visible Use
and End to Confirm an Incomprehensible and Infinite Providence about the
meanest things, as well as the greatest. V. That immediate Precedence of the
Soul in that lesser World of Man, bears the same Evidence therewith; which
though we never saw with our eyes, yet does undeniably actuate the whole body
in its Functions, as the proper Spring of every act and Motion there. VI. It is
thus further confirmed, by these continued vicissitudes and turns of Summer and
Winter, and of day and night, that man might have, both Light for his Labor,
and Darkness as a covering for his Rest. VII. By such Visible Discoveries of
Divine Judgment, and Execution of his Laws on men here, as all may see his Hand
therein, who yet will not hear his Voice in the Word. VIII. By these
extraordinary and wonderful Works of Providence, which have been in all Ages.
IX. By so evident a restraint both over Devils, and wicked Men without which
they would quickly disturb the whole frame of this Earth, and make it
uninhabitable for Human Society; if their being thus Bounded and Chained, were
not as Visible, as the Certainty of their Being. X. By such a Natural
Obligation to Moral Duties, with the Sense of a difference betwixt good and
evil, as is founded in the very rational Nature of Man, that none can possibly
root out, even where the Scripture is not known. XI. By that Natural Confidence
also in God, which all Men have, and recourse to him on any present extreme
hazard, to Witness not only that the most High bears Rule in the Kingdoms of
men, but that the Sense and Evidence hereof is unavoidable.

Qu. IV. But does this great Administration of Providence, about human Affairs
as unchangeably appear, in a diff^rencing betwixt the Righteous and the Wicked,
by some Recompense to the One, and Punishment to the Other, as in the
established course of Nature?

Ans. It is certain that such as desire a Confirming of their Faith herein,
want it not, with the furthest Evidence, but may ever see that exact Conformity
in the whole Dispensation of Providence, to the Rectitude and Perfection of the
Divine Nature, and how a firm belief that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that Diligently seek him, is one and the same Faith; when we cannot but
see, I. That natural sense of good and evil, and essential difference betwixt
the same, which is so firmly founded in the Reason of all Mankind, as no human
Laws or Custom could ever take this off their Conscience, or make an
indifference herein, without extinguishing the very Nature of Man; to show that
Eternal and Unchangeable difference, which the Holy Nature of God has put
betwixt them. II. That we see the worst of Men so constrained to an awful Sense
and Regard of Truth and weldoing, and to acknowledge the Loveliness and
Excellency hereof, as does make them seek their own repute by a false show and
counterfeit of the same; and gives such a Being and Rise to that dreadful
Imposture of Hypocrisy. III. That it is the Truths Privilege ever to outlive
Falsehood, and prevail over the same, yea to have the greater Triumph after its
sorest Conflicts; and how this is of as fundamental a Constitution in the
course of Providence, as the most firm Establishment of Nature. IV. That in no
time since man was formed in the Earth, does true Joy and Serenity of Mind,
cease to be the Native result of welldoing, or the Fruit of Righteousness to be
Peace and Assurance of Mind, nor has it ever wanted a Witness, even before any
Word given of the Lords taking Pleasure herein. V. That it is so evident, in the
most dismal times, what a public Blessing such are, who by more extraordinary
Trials have been put to the highest Exercise of their Grace and Patience; yea
how Visibly such have been promoted to the most honorable Service for God, and
to advance the Credit of Religion before Men, who on the first sight and view
have been accounted the most miserable of any. VI. Whilst, on the other hand,
it may be ever seen, how with the greatest Prosperity of the wicked here, there
are Punishments of another kind Dispensed, and more dreadful than any outward
Affliction, such as judicial Obstinacy, and Blindness of Mind in Opposition to
God, even when their own ruin is made Visible to them herein. VII. How often men
are thus evidently condemned to be happy in this World by some strange measure
of Temporal Success and Prosperity, before some great Fall and Ruin, as the
Issue hereof in the last scene of Providence, does fully attest. VIII. That
it is seen also, how Sin does ever bring its own Punishment with it, in some
begun Degree both of Shame and Torment; and, as Seneca, an Heathen, could say,
That Wickedness was the most exquisite Contriver of human Misery, so the World
likewise may see how a present immunity from Judgment is no release, but when
its Sentence is not speedily Executed, yet is it at last surely executed. IX.
And how evident is it, that the greatest haters of Godliness are yet enforced
to justify the same and the Christians choice herein, as the greatest Wisdom,
upon any surprising State and Extremity; yea how such would be glad to join
Interests then with such in their Death, whom they most contemned in their Life.

Qu. V. How is it Convincing and Demonstrable, that God has given any clear
and express Revelation of his Will and Counsel unto Men, and that such a
wonderful Record is undoubtedly extant in the World.

Ans. That, I. It is not possible to believe the Being of God, and not also the
Truth of an established Law, and Rule of Commerce betwixt him and man here, so
as to know both what we should do, and what we should Expect and Hope from him.
II. That this also must be known and display its Power and Efficacy to the
World, in that manner, and by such infallible Evidence of its Truth, as may
render all inexcusable, who give not entire Credit thereto. III. I can be no
more clear and assured that there is but one Sun in the Firmament, than that
there is but one Fountain, and Repository of Sacred Light about Religion, which
is the Scripture, and its being the alone public Standard of truth to the
whole World. IV. That no way was ever made known to recover mankind from a
state of Bondage, Darkness, and Misery, consistent with the very use of reason,
but by this blessed light which shines there. V. Yea that there is as visible
a difference, betwixt the same and any pretended Religion which ever was
besides in the World, as there is betwixt day and night, which is founded in
the immutable nature of these things in themselves. VI. That there is one
proper Sphere, where this glorious Light of Divine Truth is fixed, and wherein
it shines forth from one Age to another; which is the Christian Church.

Qu. VI. But what more peculiar evidences can you show of the Divinity of the
Scriptures, that all may see them to be of infallible truth?

Ans. I. That it is sure such a book is this day in the Earth, which no created
wisdom could ever have made, and contains such things of highest concern to
mankind, as does infinitely exceed the bounds of human ability and invention,
and could never have been discovered but by God himself. II. That it gives
forth such exquisite laws and constitutions of our religion, as men must needs
see the holy nature, purity, and perfection of God, most brightly shining forth
therein. III. Which does discover so great and proper a relief for all those
evils and miseries that do attend this fallen estate of man, as none but an
all-sufficient God could work. IV. That he alone must be the author of this
blessed record, who rules the World, and has determined the changes and
revolutions thereof, when it is not more evident that these visible Heavens are
stretched forth over the Earth, than that this Line of the Scripture is
stretched over the whole Work and Frame of Providence, and does most clearly
and brightly illuminate the same. V. That surely this was the product of
Infinite Wisdom, that so great a variety of matter should meet with so visible
a concent and harmony in one perfect and entire frame; yea knit in so close a
bond of union together, as makes the whole Bible to be entirely one piece;
though in the writing of each distinct part thereof it could never have
possibly been contrived or foreseen by human wisdom, as we see here, of so
admirable an agreement and correspondence, as is in all the parts thereof. VI.
That none else could have spoke to the World, in so Majestic a way, and so
becoming the greatness and sovereignty of God, to assume such a supremacy, and
give forth Laws for absolute obedience from all Mankind thereto, and on such a
penalty of eternal destruction; or that any impostors, either possibly could,
or durst have, in such a manner, personated the same. VII. That it must needs
be his word who perfectly knows what is in man, and has an absolute authority
over the Soul, and is a discerner of the thoughts thereof, who thus not only
gives law to the Conscience, and our inward parts, but does establish an
internal Religion there, no less absolutely, than what respects our external
work and actions. VIII. Yea where all may see the Penmen thereof under so
entire a subjection to the doctrine which they taught, and that it is no
contrivance of their own, as they did record their own failings, and
imperfections, in behalf of the truth; and did thus also require all just
respect and obedience to Magistrates, when through the whole Earth they were
then greatest Enemies to the Truth of the Gospel. IX. That this must be his
Word, who alone can derive principles of life to his own institutions, and
animate the same with a quickening Spirit; and is a work above the contrivance
of Angels or Men, when directed to each new trial of the Church, and personal
case of Christians, as though it had been alone written for that time; so that
I can be no more persuaded in reason that there is such a Book as the Bible in
the Earth, than that it came from Heaven, and is the alone rule of Religion,
and of Divine Revelation, for the governing of Mankind.

Qu. VII. How is the secure conveyance of the Scripture demonstrable amidst all
the changes of times past, and that there could be no possible tendency to its
corruption?

Answ. I. That it is so undeniably the first rule which ever was given to
mankind about Religion, and the alone public standard of Truth, that has
endured the trial and inquiry of all times past, so as no pretenses in the
matter of Antiquity could yet ever be to the contrary. II. That there is so
exact an Harmony betwixt the Old and New Testament, as the one is a visible
transcript of the other, in its accomplishment; that I can be no more sure of
such a venerable record as the Old Testament, and its unalterable conveyance to
the Church, to which the whole race of the Jews is yet a standing witness, than
how it is continued and perfected in the revelation of the Gospel, and but one
entire frame. III. That its deliverance was by no private deed, but by a
public trust to the whole Universal Church; so as it were more easy in the
way of reason to question the most fundamental statutes and laws of any Nation,
by which men's private right and property is secured, than the truth hereof. IV.
That under the Gospel it has been so fully dispersed over the World, and in
such various languages; that an innumerable company of Christians these 1600
years past, have been as common living Books of the same. V. That those
numerous Versions and Commentaries written thereon in diverse Languages, do
fully evidence they had the same Scripture, and no other than what we have this
day. VI. That this was delivered to the Church not only in writing, but in that
form of sound words, for keeping close thereto, as could admit of no possible
tendency to corrupt or alter the same; besides the continued and public
reference that has been since the first Ages of the Gospel to its decision,
which all these sharp controversies, that have been in the Church on all sides,
do inevitably require.

Qu. VIII. What does confirm the fall of man, and entry of sin into the World,
this way, from clear and unavoidable evidences of reason?

Answ. I. That there is such a thing as sin and evil in the World, with the
sense and conscience of guilt arising hereon, amongst all mankind, can need no
proof nor evidence. II. That it is simply impossible this should have been
originally created with man, or essentially belonging to his first frame and
constitution, since then there could be no conscience of guilt or remorse, for
what was given to be a part of himself, in his first frame; nor could it be any
sin, to act thus suitably to their own original state. III. That it were not
conceiveable also how one part of man should be in such opposition to another.
IV. Nor that such a thing as inherent shame could be in the nature of man, upon
the sense of guilt, and by so natural a result follow the same, or that such
should be ashamed of any part of his own being, if this were not upon an
undoubted apostasy from what once he was, and that inevitable conviction of
Conscience that he now is what he ought not to be, so as the certainty of Man's
Fall though alone revealed in the Scripture, as to the true cause thereof, yet
may be as evident to reason, as the truth of his being now is.

SECTION II.
Qu. I. ARE there such assistances to the Christian Faith upon that great and
astonishing mystery of the Revelation of Christ to the World as can fully
answer the greatness thereof from clear and infallible evidence to Men's
Judgments?

Answ. It is sure there could nothing possibly be desired more to satisfy the
most doubtful and suspicious mind than is given for the furthest certainty
hereof. I. That such a glorious person as the Messiah was to come, and be
anointed to that great work of redeeming mankind from sin and misery, and bring
man back again unto God; and that this promise is the alone foundation, whereon
the church was founded since man fell. II. That all the numerous types and
sacrifices under the Law, did so expressly tend to confirm their Faith of that
one blessed Propitiatory Sacrifice which was to be offered up. III. That long
ere the New Testament was written, there was so clear and exact a protraicture
of the Messiah drawn forth in the Old, with such peculiar marks whereby he
should be known to the church, and infallibly take place in the event, as men
could not upon any Scripture evidence expect his coming in another way. IV.
That his humiliation and sufferings were so expressly held forth and foretold,
with the peculiar circumstances thereof, in the 53. chap. of Isaiah, and 9. of
Daniel, as if they had been Eye witnesses of the accomplishment thereof. V.
That even the special season and period of time for accomplishing this great
promise was so far made known, as upon diligent search and inquiry, its near
approach might be discernable and clear to what, or what manner of time this
did specially relate; for which both the Fall of the Monarchies, and Daniels
seventy weeks were set up as Highway marks to guide men's Faith herein. VI.
That it is simply impossible according to the Scripture, how the promised
Messiah could be yet to come, except the Jews were put in the same state they
were in at his coming, when now for these 1600. Years there has been no
Scepter, not Lawgiver, no Temple, or daily Sacrifice. VII: That this great
mystery could never possibly have entered in our thoughts, or be devised by any
created understanding.

Qu. II. But are there as clear and infallible evidences of the truth of this
great promise in the event, that surely the blessed Messiah of the World is now
come, as that it is sure he was promised?

Answ. It Is beyond all possible debate, I. That so Divine and Wonderful a
Person was in the days of Tiberius Caesar manifested to Israel, with no outward
show or observation; who did so great and mavelous things, before all the
people, as were above all created power, yea, that he was Crucified at
Jerusalem, under Pontius Pilate, is a truth in the matter of fact, that both
Jews and Heathens have been enforced to confess it. II. That this special
season of his coming into the World is the great Epoch and period of time from
which the Christian Church, has ever since to this day reckoned her state and
succession, is undoubted and clear also. III. That the time of his appearance
unto the World, did so exactly suit that which was foretold by the Prophets,
that the Jewish Church was at that time with greatest intentness looking after
the Messiah; so as some remarkable Impostors took occasion from hence to
deceive the People herein. IV. That in him who was then revealed, and whom the
Christian Church worships, it is sure, was most exactly fulfilled, what ever was
foretold, concerning the Messiah in the Old Testament; and we do appeal herein
to these Records which all the Jews even to this day do acknowledge to be
Divine. V. That this was not done in a corner, but in the public view of men
in those days, most known to all and famous; yea by the special appointment of
God at so solemn a time of the Passover in Jerusalem, where Christ our Passover
was then Sacrificed. VI. That no humane interest or policy could pos^ibly be in
this discovery of the Gospel; when nothing could have been more visibly cross
thereto or obstructive of its success, than such a publishing of the death and
sufferings of our Lord, with all the ignominy and abasement which attended the
same, had there been any way here to consult Carnal Reason, or any other ground
to bear it out than the evidence and certainty of its truth. VII. That herein
have all divided parties and sects in the Christian World been enforced still
to meet and consent, in an acknowledgement of the substance thereof. VIII. That
in the same light which was held forth in the Old Testament about the Messiah,
did the whole Gentile Church enter; and made claim to their right for being
adopted the Seed and Children of Abraham, on these clear and express Promises
given for the same; which the Jews could not but confess to be of Divine
Authority.

Qu. III. What confirmation is it to the Christian Faith, that the coming of
the Messiah should be deferred for 4000. Years after the Promise?

Answ. Though the sovereign pleasure of God should silence and satisfy our
mind herein; yet is there such a sight to be had hereof, and of infinite Divine
Wisdom shining forth in the same as should be most confirming for these ends.
I. That there might be a more distinct representing of the glory of this
Mystery to Angels and Men, in such a gradual opening up of the same. II. To put
that weight and high value on his own Promise and Testimony herein, when on the
alone credit thereof, he would thus both try, and bear out the Faith of his
Church, for so many Ages, and draw forth their desires and longings in all that
long space of time after the same. III. To testify the greatness ^f his wrath
against Sin and the Apostasy of mankind, by suffering the generality thereof to
lie so long under its fatal effects. IV. To prepare the Church for so great a
reception, by all that long preparatory service of legal institutions, it
highly becoming the greatness of this mystery, to have so solemn and wondrous
an introduction thereto. V. That thus the World might have its full trial of
the insufficiency of natural abilities, and of any improvements of humane
Wisdom and Learning, for help; after this had first been at the furthest height
both in Greece and Rome, before the alone Redeemer of the Church came.

Qu. IV. What can offer furthest conviction to the World, of the Truth of
Christianity from its nature and internal excellencies; and that it is no less
essentially good in its self, than evidently true?

Answ. I. It is undeniable even to those that live at a distance, that such is
the truth of Christ, that though all visible and humane props should fail, it
can subsist by its own evidence, and authority over Men's Consciences; and has
thus ever preserved its station in the worst of times. II. That as it holds
forth the most exquisite rule of perfection to follow, so does it bring the
greatest relief to the distempers of the mind, and those miseries which attend
the humane state here; so that a higher glory does thus result to the Holy God,
by this dispensation of Grace to fallen Man than if he had stood in his
Primitive state. III. That it is sure the Truth and Doctrine of Christ does
natively tend to fix men in a state of light and Communion with God, and in a
State of Separation in their Principles, Affection, and Conversation from the
World. IV. That it does more brightly shine forth in simplicity, and truth and
in its internal and vital acts, than in any outward form or show: Yea in the
way of self-denial, meekness, and poverty of spirit, does such an excellency
appear, as in its own nature, has as visible a difference from the proud and
vindictive spirit of this World, as the day has from the night. V. That such
Christianity, can be known, by no naked doctrinal discovery of the same to men's
judgment, or such rules as any humane science is acquired by, without an inward
power, and principles of a new life; nor can there ever be a right knowledge of
Divinity, until it be first ingrafted in a Divine Heart. So far is this mystery
above all humane rule, and contrivance. VI. That it is stated in the greatest
opposition to any false show or hypocrisy; yea, brings such inforcements
therewith of candor, and truth, and of love, tenderness and sympathy toward
others, as all must see is not only the highest ornament and perfection of our
nature, but the greatest blessing to the World that ever was known. VII. That
such a native luster and fragrancy does attend the truth, and simplicity of the
Gospel, as makes it no more possible for humane art or cunning to represent
this, than to make the dead image of a man to live, or to paint on a board the
vital scent of a Violet or Rose, to our Senses. VIII. That in this way of the
Gospels subduing Men to the Obedience thereof, by the power of inward Grace,
the Glory of Christ does more eminently shine forth, than if he had appeared
for this end with the greatest outward majesty and attendance of Angels to our
Bodily Eyes. IX. That it is visible that the whole World besides, that is
without the revelation of Christ, is a place where horror, falsehood, and
impiety do manifestly reign.

Qu. V. But how do you receive so wonderful a truth, as that of the Gospel is,
when it is now so great a distance of time from its first promulgation.

Ans. I. That we can be no more sure and persuaded of the most visible and
present objects of sense, than, that this is the same Gospel which is still
shining forth to the world, whereby an innumerable company of all nations,
tongues and languages, have received the spirit, and been sealed; yea, it has
made that change upon men, in turning them from ungodliness and idols to serve
the living God, as has been no less mavelous than the turning of so many
wolves into lambs. II. That it is the same gospel which not only through a
series of 1600 years has been attested, but by such innumerable witnesses who
counted not their life dear unto the death for sealing thereof, and found it
sweet to be offered up in the Flames for Christ. III. Which in all Ages past
has stood out the greatest opposition that ever the World made to any
interest, while the weapons of its Warfare were Spiritual, and not Carnal; and
with that success that made the time of the Churches hottest Persecution from
Heathens the time also of its most remarkable spreading in the World. IV. That
the same Gospel is revealed this day, which has had such discernible triumphs
and success when no external assistance could be had for it; and there was no
visible power by which it gained the most savage and dark parts of the Earth to
take on the Yoke of Christ, and prefer the objects of Faith to the most
desirable objects of Sense. V. Yea, the Gospel has not only had such vital
influence on Men's Heart and practice, to change it into the same Image; but
that herein the doctrine of the Cross of Christ in the greatest simplicity has
still been the most effectual way of its conquest, and the greatest attractive
on Men's Souls to receive the same.

Qu. VI. How is it demonstrable that such remarkable sufferings of times past
for the truth of Christ, were both founded on the alone certainty thereof, and
carried out by a Divine Spirit above any assistance of Nature?

Answ. That it is sure, I. Here was no Comedy, Play, or Personated sufferings
which the Primitive Christians, then and in after times, did endure for Christ;
or that these unexpressible torments and pains were any Dream, and Delusion
either to themselves or the World, and that their adversaries did thus conflict
and wrestle with their own shadow in so continued and cruel an opposition. II.
That the Joy and Exultation of Spirit these Witnesses had amidst their
Torments, (who otherwise wanted no sense or feeling of their Pains and
Sufferings,) could have no rise but what was supernatural. III. That this could
be no possible dissimulation or counterfeit when they were stepping into
Eternity, nor the product of a distempered judgment; whilst all might see what
seriousness of Spirit, Tenderness, and Bowels of Compassion to their
Adversaries they did then evidence. IV. That those greatest sufferings were
upon choice, and Christians hastened to endure them rather than to be safe at
the rate of receding and departing in any thing from the Truth. V. Yea no
natural Reason can comprehend how such mean and feeble persons as many of these
were, should endure, what would have made the greatest natural Courage to
faint, as if they had foregone all Humane Passions which Flesh and Blood must
needs have herein; so that I am constrained to see something no less mavelous
and supernatural in the Faith of Martyrs, than in the Faith of Miracles.

SECTION III.
Qu. I. IS it fully demonstrable, that the Faith of a Deity, and of such an
establishment as a religious worship, must necessarily determine Men, and
constrain them to be Christians, on this ground that they cannot but see how
Religion has not another Being in the Earth, but in the Truth of Christianity?

Answ. It is simply impossible to make a rational trial herein, and not see the
certainty of this demonstration, to be thus clear. I. That there needs no more
for any of a serious spirit, but to come and see, what the whole frame of
Heathenism was, and if it be possible to deny, (even under any sense of the law
and dictates of Nature,) its being the highest reproach of Mankind; and that
the very mysteries of that Heathenish worship, were so horrid and impure, as
they needed a Vail from the common view of the World. II. Nor can there be a
rational reflection this day, on that strange Monster of Mahumetanism, but as
of a visible Prodigy of the Judgment of God, on these parts of the Earth; upon
their Apostasy from the Christian Faith, by giving men up to such an Imposture,
as exposes the very name and form of Religion to derision; and can never claim
a reception either from the purity of its rule or internal evidence of the
truth thereof, or of its having any possible consistence with it self. III.
That it is sure also that the Jewish Religion had never another Being but in the
Truth and Faith of Christianity, and where this Foundation is divided from, it
has none at all; yea that that People unto this day are such a Confirming
Witness to the Christian Religion, as it is strange this does not beget deeper
Impressions on Men's Spirits. So that there is an absolute necessity, we must
either forego the use of Reason, or see, if there be not such a Rule given and
Revealed for Commerce betwixt God and Man, as the Scripture, (where the Laws
and Constitutions of the Christian Faith, are for this end held forth,) that
it is then sure there is no such thing, as any Religion in the Earth, but what
were so highly irrational and absurd, as should rather justify Atheism.

Q. II. What special Confirmation to Christianity, can this Visible State of
the Jews bear, who are in so express an Opposition to the Gospel of Christ?

Ans. If this were brought near our thoughts we should find it one of the great
Assistances to our Faith. I. That it is sure there is such a People and Race, as
a Living and Visible Evidence to our Sense, of the Truth of that renowned
Nation, and Church of Israel, to which the Oracles of God were committed; and
thus is still, as some part of the evident ruins of that once flourishing
State. II. That the World may see, such a People kept by themselves and not
mixed with the Nations, whose Fathers from one Generation to another did still
own the D^vinity of the Old Testament; and does attest that Doctrine, in which
the Truth and Substance of Christianity lies, even whilst with greatest malice
they oppose the Christian Faith, to witness that there can be no possible
Collusion and Deceit here. III. Their being under a stroke of that Judicial
Induration and Blindness of Mind, as no Reason could possibly comprehend such a
thing, how they should not see the Light in the very Noonday of the Gospel, if
we were not expressly foretold that they should be concluded under such an
Arrest of Judgment, until the Fullness of the Gentiles be brought in. IV. That
so immediate an appearance of God, is in the Judgment of that People, both in
the manner and continuance thereof, as no instance could ever be found to
resemble the same, since man was formed in the Earth; and is as a Conspicuous
Monument of Divine Wrath, set up for every Age and Time of the Church, to turn
aside and consider this great sight, and inquire what means so strange and
amazing a thing, as the State of the scattered Jews is, now under the Times of
the Gospel. V. That this Desolation on them and stroke, had such special
concurring circumstances for giving Light thereto; as being not above forty
eight years, after the Death of Christ, with their hands, as it were, hot and
reaking with that Blood which they had wished on them and their Children; that
it should be at that time of the Passover, which was the very same of the
Sufferings of our blessed Lord there, and pointing as with the finger at the
same; as also by the Romans, whose Interest in their Opposition to Christ they
pretended to own.

Qu. III. Is the way and manner of the Gospels Promulgation such, as no other
Profession could ever pretend to, and where all may see there can be no human
Interest or Contrivance in the same?

Ans. It is undeniable, that no Interest else was ever in such a way promoted,
and it does exceed all natural understanding, how the Truth of Christianity
could in this manner prevail, I. To persuade men without any Motives, or
Inducements from this present World, to embrace a Doctrine so wholly repugnant
to Nature; yea to prefer an Interest of things not seen, and which none ever in
the Earth saw, to the most desirable Objects of Sense. II. To admit no
implicit Reception from any, but on their exactest Inquiry and Trial herein;
or in another way claim an Interest in Men's Affections, but by a full Assent of
their Light and Judgment to the same. III. To admit no Gratification to the
most Predominant Desires and Inclinations of Men toward any Darling Sin; which
according to human Wisdom would be judged of an absolute necessity for gaining
any Acceptance with such; yea to give no partial respect to the greatest
Princes more than to the meanest. IV. To pursue its Interest, by so plain a
Discovery of the Death, and Sufferings of our Blessed Lord, with the whole
Ignominy thereof, when nothing could more evidently control such an end by any
Rules of human Wisdom and Policy, if there had been consulting with Flesh and
Blood herein. V. And it is sure there could be no design, without an immediate
Divine Power, in such a manner to plead the Interest of Christianity with men,
by inserting Affl^ction, and the Cross in the first entry, as Essential to the
Profession thereof, and holding forth the Necessity of taking on the Yoke of
Christ, without which none can be his Disciples.

Qu. IV. But wherein does the Evidence of that great Demonstration of the
Gospel most clearly appear, in the Love and Unity of Christians amongst
themselves, which we find Christ does so specially press, for this end, that
the World might know, and have such a Visible Seal of his Divine Mission? Joh.
17.21.

Ans. The greatness of this Demonstration may be thus evident to all. I. That
it is so clearly demonstrative of the Purity of our Religion, which can admit of
no Bitterness, Strife, Recrimination, or such Indecencies of Heat and Passion,
which are the fatal Effects of Discord in the Church; and thus lets us see the
Excellency of the Spirit and Rule of the Gospel. II. That thus also we may know
the Power and Efficacy of the Truth thereof, which is according to Godliness,
upon Men's Hearts, in subduing these Distempers of the Mind and Judgment. III.
That this does so specially tend to make Religion Lovely, and to draw forth
matter of Praise and Blessing to God from the World, when they see such a
Native Effect of Christianity as this, to make those who profess the same in
that manner shine forth in Tenderness, Humility, and Brotherly Love, so that
they become as a Public Good and Blessing to Mankind in the places they are
in. IV. This appears also from the Nature of that Union in the Church of
Christ, and amongst his Followers, which only a Divine Power could both Frame
and make Effectual; and it is sure that no Humane Society or Constitution could
ever claim such an Unity therein as this is; where not only Persons of all
Nations and Languages, and of all Conditions, both high and low, but of the
most different Interests, Humors, and dividing Circumstances in other things,
do yet in so mavelous an Harmony meet in the Body of Christ which is his
Church here in the Earth. V. Because herein also does the Glory and Honor of
our Blessed Head, more eminently appear in securing this Unity of his Church,
under a Diversity of Light and Judgment otherways, by a Spirit of Love,
Meekness and Condescendence amongst his People; than by imposing the most
severe and absolute Uniformity in all things, to be the alone Condition of
Christian Communion.

Qu. V. But what strength and evidence does this Demonstration of the Gospel,
now bear in so divided a State of Religion, and when the wounds and breaches of
the Church this day are like to bleed unto Death?

Ans. Whatever just cause be of grief, yet is there none for darkning the Truth
of this Demonstration, on these grounds. I. That none can deny the Perfection
of the Rule of the Gospel, for there is a most firm and entire Unity amongst
all the Followers of Christ on the Earth II. That no Opposition is made
thereto, but what has been foretold as one of the greatest Trials of the
Church under the New Testament, and the Spirit of God does most expressly point
at in these latter times. III. Because the furthest Opposition thereto can be
no more cause for any to stumble, or question the Truth of this Demonstration,
than whether there is a Devil, whose greatest design has ever been to divide
and break Christians amongst themselves. IV. Because this Union, which is
chiefly Mystical and Invisible, is much greater often, than what this way may
appear to the World, and of that kind as is not interrupted by distance of
place, or any want of Local Communion. V. That such a guard is set by the Lord
unto this piece of his Glory, to oppose any Invasion thereon, that there stands
an Angel with a flaming Sword, upon every hand in the Commands and Threatenings
of the Gospel, to secure this Blessed Unity of the Saints amongst themselves,
so as none can invade the same but on their highest Peril, of opposing that
which is as the Apple of Christ's eye. VI. That it is ever found that this
Demonstration has some clear Evidence amongst such who are indeed the
Disciples of Christ, and according to their advance in the Life and Power of
Christianity does the more brightly shine forth; so that the nearer the Lines
are to the Center, the nearer also are they amongst themselves. VII. That in
all times there has been some tremendous mark of the Judgment of God made
visible on such who are Contentious, and have made it their work to Cause
Division in the Church and sow discord among Brethren.

Qu. VI. But what has the Church now in these latter days to Compensate, and
make up the want of that great Demonstration by Miracles, and such
extraordinary Confirmations of the Christian Faith, as were in the first times?

Ans. I. We may hereby see that the Seal of Martyrdom, which came in the room
of Miracles to the Church, has exceeded that which was in the first times of
the Gospel. II. That there have been since such innumerable shining Examples of
Holiness, yea these continued to this day, whom the World might see did walk in
the Light and Power of Christianity, as sure as men walk, under the Power and
Virtue of a living Soul. III. That we now see what a length the Course of the
Gospel and of the Church Militant is come, and how far thus the Times of the
Gentiles are fulfilled, which once was so contrary to all human Appearance. IV.
That so sure and exact a Performance of the Scripture, is now undeniable in the
event, and of such great and mavelous things which were foretold under the
New Testament, that in an ordinary way none could have believed, what we see
with our Eyes; and now have these things, which were in former Ages the Object
of the Churches Faith, been made the Object of our Sense; and it is sure this is
such a Seal and Confirmation to our Faith in these last times as does much
exceed the greatest Miracles which were in the first Planting of the Gospel. V.
Though we may not resolve our Faith on any Extraordinary Providence, or lay
the least weight hereon to support the Authority of the Doctrine we profess,
(since this only is founded on that Sacred Revelation of Divine Truth in the
Scripture, which is the infallible Rule to discern true Miracles, and what is
Gods Seal herein under the undoubted Signature and Stamp of his own Power and
working in the same;) yet has there been such incontroulable evidence of
extraordinary Signs and Confirmations to confirm the Truth of the Reformed
Religion, since the Reformation, as in no Ages past was ever known, but with
the first planting of the Gospel among the Gentiles.

SECTION IV.
Qu. I. IS it clear and demonstrable that the Doctrine of Christ, is a
Soul-Quickning and Experimental Religion, and the Trial thereof, in its most
Supernatural Truths, of such rational Certainty and Evidence, that the World
can no more deny or question the same than those Experiments of Nature, that
are of most universal Use?

Ans. Though men looked but at a distance here or were come from Heathenism, so
far as to make a Serious Trial of Christianity, it is sure they could not but
see, and be fully persuaded in their Judgment hereof on these grounds. I. That
a discovery is undoubted and clear in the Scripture of so great things, as,
that there is a Holy Ghost, and there be his workings on Men's Souls, of Peace
with God, and the Joy of his Presence, which all who receive the Gospel are
called to know and prove on their own Trial. II. That this witness of Christian
Experience, has as discernable a Consent and Harmony therewith as Face
answers to Face in the Glass, and is clear to be no Casual Thing, but every
step in this way of Trial, is by Scripture Light, and what Christians did
before read there, they know it now by Feelings on their own Souls. III. That
this in all Ages of the Church and wherever such as served God in the Spirit
were found in the most remote parts from others, has still been the same; and
like a great Roll is sent down from one Generation to another, with their
Confirmatory Seal, that God is faithful and true, in those Truths of his Word
which seem most incredible to the World, and now come to our hand to require
the same Attestation and Witness. IV. That they who know and testify these
things, sometimes found it not easy to believe the same, and did no less judge
of such great Experiments of Religion as a Dream or imaginary thing than most
now do, until they knew them by Experience on their Soul. V. That such also
have been the most Burning and Shining Lights that ever were in the Church, and
these innumerable in all Ages declare the same; and that in the Mouth of the
Grave and entrance to an Eternal State when no outward Interest could sway them
hereto. VI. That it must be a matter of greatest Assurance which has then
pressed the most tender Parents with their last and dying Breath to commend the
same Trial to their Children, and to charge their being earnest herein as the
greatest Interest they could leave them. VII. That whatever Differences be often
among these in some matters of Truth: Yet, in the Certainty of this great Trial
of the Life, Power and Comforts of Religion, there is an Harmonious Oneness in
the same Testimony in all Times of the Church. VIII. That if any question this,
because so remote from Men's Senses, and the Judgment of Carnal Reason; the
reality of its Effects, does unanswerably prove both the Reality and Excellency
of the Cause.

Qu. II. What clear and Rational Conviction can you offer, of so great a thing
as Conversion of men from a State of Nature, to a new state by Grace, which
does raise them as far above the residue of Mankind, as Reason does above the
state of the Beasts?

Ans. Though I should strive against the Conviction of such a Miracle, and
Demonstration of the Gospel, as Conversion is, yet were it not possible to deny
such demonstrative Evidences as the World has hereof. I. That it is sure such
a Change is made essentially requisite to the Being, and Constitution of a
Christian, by the whole Consent of the Scripture. II. That there was never yet
an Argument in Nature, for ones being a Christian in the Life and Power
thereof: what ever may be for a naked form or show. III. That they are not a
few, but innumerable Instances in all times and of all Ranks and Conditions of
Men on whom so great a Change and difference has been made thus evident, both
from themselves what once they were, and from the residue of the World. IV.
That this has been not only upon such as have been signally Impious in their
Practice, but who in their Judgment were wont to deride Holiness as a Fancy; so
as Atheists must grant that there have been as professed Atheists sometimes as
themselves, who have been made such Conspicuous Monuments of the Power of the
Gospel. V. That none can Object here, as once the Jews did, Do any of the
Rulers, or such as the World counts most wise, and knowing stand witnesses to
the same; when it is so known that there have not been more Wise, Learned, and
Judicious in the Things of Reason upon the Earth, than such as have been
eminent Examples of the Power of Conversion? VI. That its mavelous Effects in
subduing men, from what once was their Predominant Interest and Idol, and to
part from what had been as their right Eye, or Hand could only be from an
Immediate Divine Power. VII. That such as were greatest Adversaries to the
Truth, have been made no less eminent Instruments in the Service of Christ, and
choice Vessels of Honor, than once they were in their Enmity and Opposition.
VIII. That this Change has been discernable in times of most Visible
Persecutions and Hazard, when no outward Advantage or Gain could have the least
influence thereon. Now as these are demonstrably clear, so can there be no
possible ground to question this. I. That the Scripture is faithful and true in
so great a discovery. II. That there is a Divine Spirit and a Power above
nature, which accompanies the same in such a change. III. That there are
surely, contrary states in another World, when they are so undeniably manifest
here.

Qu. III. But can so great an experiment of Religion as that of Communion
betwixt God and Men, here upon Earth be made rationally convincing to such as
are themselves strangers thereto; and for a further confirming of the Christian
Faith?

Answ. Though this be an experiment of Divine Truth of a more transcendent
interest and value than all that ever were in Nature, yet it is no less
evident, and there can be no possible delusion herein; if I. It Is that to which
so innumerable a Company bears Testimony and has sent down the same, as that
which not once or twice they have approved but in the continued trial of their
Life. II. That it is known to the World, that such as testify what they do, and
have so often found in the retirement of their Souls with God, are of as
discerning Spirits to know the true value of things, as any else; yea such
whose testimony in other things the worst of men could not refuse nor deny.
III. That it is undeniably evident, such must have another acquaintance and
society than that of men; which not only makes these hidden exercises of
godliness so desirable, (where all may see they more flee than follow any
humane Witness,) but also makes so visible a change both in their case and
countenance after most sad anguish and down-castings of Spirit. IV. That it is
so evident also how such as are most serious this way, have been visibly often
raised above their ordinary case, and frame in Prayer, and other duties of
Religion; yea, in that manner, as they who never knew there is a Holy Ghost but
by report, could not withstand so clear conviction of the reality hereof, that
can beget such liberty, humble tenderness and melting of Heart, yea such
discernable joy and confidence. V. That no delusion or false show can be here,
when it is ever seen, that such as are most serious and frequent in Prayer and
these hid retirements with God, are the most flourishing also in the vitals of
Christianity, and have the most honorable luster, and appearance of any in
their profession. VI. That it is such only whose joy and comfort is most
specially discernable beyond others, when these lower springs of outward help
and encouragement are most visibly shut up.

Qu. IV. Is that great, and experimental part of Religion in the Power of the
Conscience over man, such as may be as demonstrable to the World, as the truth
of a rational Being?

Answ. It may be matter of wonder that men are not struck with deeper
convictions hereon, when they cannot but see. I. That though this be the
greatest tormentor, and troubler of the World, yet is there no possible retreat
from its power, though men should flee to the uttermost parts of the Earth, but
does it enforce the Soul to a reflection on its self, even when it trembles at
that sight. II. That it causes great fear and horror upon the commitment of
secret sins, when no dread of Humane Witness, or of visible hazard this way
could occasion it. III. That it admits no violence in any to out-dare the same,
but is a power that the greatest Monarchs find to be stronger than they; and is
such, that these often are enforced for present ease, and relief either to
divert, or bribe the same by some false grounds of peace. IV. That it
constrains men to Justify God, and Judge themselves, (when his hand does
pursue them,) and to find out their sin, and guilt, which was before hid. V.
That it makes men also afraid to be alone with themselves; and to tremble at
the Word of Truth, because its light does torment them, by that unavoidable
application which Conscience makes hereof. VI. Yea it makes men's guilt so
legible often in their countenance, (even when they study most to conceal it,)
that all may see there is an accuser within, whose Authority and Power cannot
possibly be declined. VII. That with so remarkable a confidence and security,
it does support Men's Spirit, and makes it easy to sustain its greatest
infirmities from without, when it is a Friend; yea, and upholds the oppressed
with unspeakable Peace and Comfort, when it does often cause the oppressor to
tremble.

Qu. V. But what does most necessarily result from so clear a demonstration as
the Conscience is, for confirming of our Faith?

Answ. I. That it is infallibly thus clear, that there is a Higher Power and
Judgment, to which all mankind is subjected, and gives the World an unavoidable
demonstration, both of the being of God, and of the Truth of his Word, in the
great and supernatural discovery which it makes hereof. II. That there is a
Supreme and Infallible Law also and Invisible Judge above us, under whose power
and authority this Court of Justice does (without respect of Persons) both
Summon, Arrest, bring in Witness and Sentence great and small. III. That the
Internal Government of our Blessed Lord, this way (both in the severity of his
rebukes and most sensible enlargements of Peace and Comfort) is unavoidably
demonstrated. IV. That it bears so clear evidence to unknown and undoubted
relief, and none else could be ever found, for these Wounds and Stings of the
Conscience, but in the Light and Power of Christianity. V. That it is simply
impossible for men to delight freely in a course of sin, when no Humane Power
can disarm the Conscience of that so intolerable a sting, by which it begins so
early a Hell within the Soul. VI. That such is the Power and Peace of a good
Conscience, as can make it stand unbroken amidst the greatest ruins and
terrors of the World, when under such a guard as that of its own innocence.

SECTION V.
Qu. I. IS the evidence of a Kingdom of Darkness, in a direct opposition and
contrariety to that Kingdom of Light, which Christ has set up by the Gospel,
such as the certainty thereof may be a matter of Sense, as well as of Faith?

Answ. This is of such special use, both to confirm the Christian Faith, and
awake such to deeper reflection on the same, with whom there seems no hope to
prevail, but by proofs from palpable experience; and it is not possible to
deny. I. That there is such a power, as the Devil and those wicked Spirits
incompassing the Earth, yea that they have an ordinary and familiar converse
with many therein. II. That these Spirits (though once originally excellent,)
have fallen into such an Apostasy, as all may see their aim and only pleasure,
is to dishonor God, and destroy his Image in Man. III. That it is impossible
to deny the marks of that Power and Conquest, which the Prince of this World
has every where amongst men; yea how visibly many are transformed into his
Image by such prodigious and desperate acts of wickedness, as we should think
humane nature could not but tremble at. IV. That none can question the
certainty both of Sense and Reason which is in the truth of Apparitions and
Bodily Possessions of Men in all Ages, and in all places of the Earth; and can
need no demonstration for this, that in many places of the Earth, the Devil is
both visibly and audibly known. V. That he is so manifest in his appearance as
a Spirit of Blasphemy, which impetuously acts Men to War against Heaven with
their Tongue in such Oaths and Cursing as have no sensual pleasure, or gain
herein; yea, as a Spirit of Delusion in so visible an excitement of others to
such extravagancies (under a show of Religion,) as are inconsistent with any
use of Judgment or Reason. VI. That so innumerable a company of humane Race,
has in all Ages been in a formal, and express Covenant with these powers of
darkness is undeniable, upon the most severe and impartial inquiry herein.

Qu. II. What special assistance to your Faith does the certainty of these
Powers of Darkness bring therewith?

Answ. I. It is plain that such a Party both in their Nature and continued
Actings, are in a stared opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. II. It is
visible, that the Prey which these Mighty Hunters do follow after, is not our
Body, or the things of this Life, but it is the Immortal Soul, and Future
State, that Man might be made sharer of the same Misery under which they are
concluded. III. All may see their being under restraint of a Supreme Power
above them, and under such Chains as do irresistibly bound their rage and
enmity against Man, by an invisible Guard and Hedge which they cannot break
over. IV. Their greatest rage, and struggling is against the Conversion of
sinners to God, and to hold fast his possession in such, as the Spirit of God
does not more clearly move for their rescue, than these do to cross that
blessed design of the Gospel. V. There are none that are serious in the Truth
and Life of Religion but find themselves pursued by such an Adversary; and have
as discernably another Party than themselves, or the World to conflict with, as
if they saw them in a visible shape. VI. That by the Gospel and within the
Precinct of the Church, there is discernably a much greater restraint of Satan's
Dominion and Power than in all the Earth besides; yea that the advantage of
being within the external covenant of Baptism, is so demonstrable that the
least yielding or tendency to a renouncing of the same, (or any Acts of
Homage,) for making use of his help, has ever made way for some more
extraordinary Power of the Devil over such than others. VII. Thus is a most
undeniable Confirmation given of an Invisible World, and of such intellectual
Beings there, as are far above man; yea and it is plain that there is an
intercourse betwixt Men and Spirits, such may clearly show the interest that
Man's Soul has in another State and World than this.

Qu. III. Is that great truth of the Immortality of the Soul, and its never
dying state after Death, as fully demonstrable to Reason, as it is by the
furthest certainty of Faith?

Answ. Though it be so amazing a thing to believe an Immortal Soul, and Eternal
State, wherein it must shortly enter, as by few seems to be apprehended, yet
are its demonstrative evidences such, that except men lose all sense and use of
reason, it is not possible to deny. I. That there is such an Immaterial and
Active Substance as the Soul, which can admit of no cause, either of its decay
or dissolution, from the Body; yea that the greatest excellency of this visible
Creation, is here, that such a vital Beam of Life, Light, and Immortality, as
the Soul of Man is therein. II. Though we cannot see this rare and wonderful
Being, yet we fully perceive it to be something distinct from the Body, and to
have a distinct interest, both in its griefs and comforts. III. That it can
have no dependence on the Body in its Being, which does no way depend thereon
in its Actings and Exercise; but is often most vigorous and clear, in its
exercise, not only when most separate and abstract from sensible things, but
when the flesh is under the greatest decay, and near its dissolution; to show
the Soul lies not a dying with the Body, but has its distinct subsistence, to
live in a separate state, when it dies. IV. Its being peculiarly framed for
converse, and intercourse with spiritual Beings, yea its being the only part of
the visible Creation admitted to fellowship with the invisible God, and to have
reflex acts upon it self. V. It is a Being of a higher nature and value than
the Sun Moon and Stars; which not only can know, and conceive of things above
the evidence and impressions of sense, but make a rational choice of good,
(though cross to any sensual pleasure;) yea to rejoice, and have its proper
delights, when the body is afflicted and in pain; nor can it be defiled from
the most loathsome sores and defilements of the Flesh, so as we must needs see
both its Dominion and Pre-eminence over the Body, and have assuredly a
subsistence without the same. VI. It is such a Being, as is capable of a
happiness beyond the whole extent of the World, and has these intellectual
Faculties, which cannot possibly want, both objects suitable thereto, and
enjoyments above the Senses. VII. The most choice and excellent, are usually
most afflicted, and crushed under the feet of their oppressors, whilst the
vilest flourish in the Earth and have no bands in their death, so that such
were of all men the most miserable, if in this life both their being and
blessedness were terminated. VIII. That there is so universal a sense of
Immortality, that they who both fear and hate the evidences hereof, yet under
some constraint of Reason, have the same for a continued terror. IX. That it
is sure the certainty of death, makes it simply impossible, for things only
suited to this Life of Sense, to be the ultimate good, or fruition of Man;
since else the Beasts should have a greater happiness than such, if it were not
for respect to an after and Immortal State.

Qu. IV. What confirmation to your Faith does that great and amazing change by
Death offer, when it would seem to be something merely natural?

Answ. Though the only wise God moves herein according to the nature of second
causes, and it has various ways of approach unto men, yet may all see with the
furthest conviction of rational evidence, as well as certainty of Faith, I.
That Death in its first constitution is Penal; and comes by a Divine
appointment unto all, not merely as men, but as sinners; and to be no natural
accident and result of our Primitive and Original Frame. II. That it is Death as
a Penalty which keeps the fear and dread thereof so much on all living, it
being in that last period, that the eternal state of Men is decided. III. That
the sting and bitterness of sin, is so manifest in innumerable diseases and
strokes of Death, which many feel an 100. times ere they dye once, beyond any
other of the Creatures. IV. Though the Sentence of dying is on all, yet so
great a difference is betwixt the Saints and residue of Men here, that its
penal execution on the ungodly, is such as nature can give no support under it.
V. That supernatural presages and warnings hereof ere it come, are in all times
known and sure; yea such extraordinary evidences are sometimes of the precise
time, as could have no possible rise from any natural cause. VI. That its
immediate commission from a supreme and Invisible Power, is so evident in such
executions often, of this Sentence, by Sword, Famine and Pestilence, as the
visible Finger of God, in a just retribution unto men for sin, may be no less
seen, (and a supernatural causality,) than the effects have been undoubted and
clear; to show that such is the state of Man, that this great revolution by
Death, does each moment depend on a call from Heaven. VII. That the certainty
of something supernatural in this King of Terrors, is so known that as no
relief can possibly be found, but in the truth and power of Christianity, to
set men both above the fear of Death and an after State, when once it comes
near. VIII. Yea that it is surely above the possibility of Nature, which can
bear out in this great adventure and trial of Men's Faith, both in the truth and
strength thereof, at Death; for which end the Lord has thus chosen that by so
strange an entry, and at so dark a Port they should first pass to the full
enjoyment of that glorious state above.

Qu. V. What evidence and demonstration can you show, to confirm so great a
Faith of an Eternal Glory prepared for the Saints in Heaven, and of its earnest
and first fruits here, as may strike an undeniable conviction hereof on the
World?

Answ. I. The visible ripening and resemblance to such a state in all the
degrees of a Christians growth, to a more full stature of the man in Christ,
may be no less evident than the natural growth of our Body. II. Though the
opening of these Gates of the Second World be hid, (so as no humane sense can
discern the Spirit in its ascent through those higher Regions, to that
unconceivable Paradise and Glory in the Third Heaven,) yet is the triumphant
entry and passage of innumerable Christians at death, such as has often been a
matter of sense and clearest evidence to the World. III. Such also were both
humble, tender, and sincere in their Life, and then in so great a composure of
judgment, that all might see they knew what made them glad, and could swallow
up both the fears and bitterness of Death; yea and this was not given for their
own support only, but for a more public use, for the Conviction and
Confirmation of others. IV. The state of glory is demonstrable and has been
often brought down to Men's sense, by these ravishing joys of the Martyrs of
Christ, and exultation of Spirit even in the Flames. V. Supernatural comforts
attend the Life of Christianity, and can have no possible rise from the flesh
and outward causes, with that Joy and Peace, which by so natural a result
follows well-doing, and any service of love for Christ; which all may see to be
the first fruits of that harvest which is above. VI. Rare and mavelous a
frame of the new man, set up in this lower Region of Grace, in so discernable a
conformity to the blessed God, and resemblance to another state than here, to
which the World is but as a place of Pilgrimage, trial and a preparatory state
only. VII. Visible returns of joy and comfort Christians have after saddest
conflicts and down-castings, and such daybreak of vital quickening beams of
Divine Light, that have often been no less evident, than that of the Martyrs at
the Stake, who cried out, Now he is come, he is come. VIII. Their breathings of
Love after an unseen Christ and visible effects of its power on men, might show
some begun translation of the Soul so far herein, as to be more where it loves
than where it lives. IX. Though we cannot see here, that ineffable glory, which
is above, but should have our Faith instead of Eyes; yet such is the truth of
holiness, as does not only evidence, but in its own nature partake of a future
glory; so as every degree and act thereof does enter in a begun state of
fruition and blessedness, and makes it simply impossible for a good man in any
true exercise of Godliness, not to be happy also, and thus in a more near
capacity to know that joy unspeakable, and full of glory, which is above. X. By
so sure, known, and tried a passage betwixt Heaven and Men's Souls in Prayer,
with so settled a Trade of commerce this way, and certain returns, as with
assurance such can say, though they must change their place, yet not their
company. XI. The whole dispensations of Providence in Isreal's passage through
the Wilderness, and to so excellent a Country as Canaan, is no less sure in its
self, than that it was given for an Emblem and Type of the journying and
militant state of the Saints here, and to be a solemn pledge of that Canaan
above. XII. Such is the Magnificence, Harmony and Order of these visible
Heavens, and Celestial Bodies there, with their different degrees of glory,
(though all illuminated from the same Fountain of Light the Sun) as we may
judge by a Divine Ordination to have some peculiar respect to that end, to
awake and raise our thoughts to these higher Regions of Glory, which are above
all these, by what is thus visible to our Eyes; where the redeemed of the Lord
shall be ever fixed, and shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

Qu. VI. What visible and awakening evidences are there of the truth of an
Hell, and that state of horror and torment in another World, which even to
men's senses here, might present the certainty thereof?

Answ. I. That it can be no more sure, that there is such a power and party as
that of the Devils, than the reality of some such a horrid Region and place
also, to which they belong, and are adjudged to. II. From so innumerable a
company of human race, as are not in the visible service of these Infernal
Spirits, but partakers of the same nature and enmity against the Holy God and
his Image, which does clearly witness their respect and tendency to the same
state and place, and Confederacy in their judgment, as here in their sin. III.
Such visible impressions of vindictive justice are on men's Souls, with such
horror of Conscience and unsufferable torments this way, as in all Ages have
been known by most remarkable instances, (when not in the least distemper of
their natural reason,) that may present to men's Senses something of a visible
Hell, as convincingly, as if one had risen from the Dead, for the same. IV. A
trembling sense, and terror of Divine Vengeance, often follows upon horrid acts
of wickedness, and so eminently breaks forth upon a surprising sight of Death,
that all may see something more dreadful herein than in the dissolution of
Nature; and the Power and present Arrest of a future judgment is made visible
in the same. V. There are begun degrees, of blaspheming and rage against God,
because of his plagues, and such prodigies of cruelty exercised by Men here in
the Earth, as may be evident to all to be more than humane, and rather the
effects of infernal spirits acting in a humane shape. VI. So clear a prelude
and beginning of Hell, is in that judicial obduration, and blindness, which
many are given up to, (under the greatest discoveries of light,) that all may
see their being thus bound over in Chains, and shut up in Prison, until Death
bring them forth to the Execution; and that no relief or application of the
means of Grace has then any success. VII. Such a Map and Shadow of Eternal
Vengeance, is in these terrible acts of Divine Judgment inflicted here on
Apostates, and Persecutors of the Truth, and other flagitious persons, which
with the very first view might present an awful and immediate appearance of God
in the same, some strange and supernatural punishment is often so visible on the
workers of Iniquity. VIII. And (whatever be of natural causes in such visible
representations here in the Earth, as that sulphurous Lake where once Sodom
was, and those burning Mountains of Haecla, Aetna, and Vesuvius,) yet we may
truly judge that they are thus set before the World as visible memorials of the
Infernal Flames; and as it were so many Chimny's or Vent-holes thereof, for
such who will not believe the same, because they do not yet see or feel such a
thing.

Qu. VII. What assistances has our Faith, of that great and wonderful truth of
the Resurrection of the Body, after its dissolution in the Grave unto Dust?

Answ. I. It has great assistance from that visible and stupendous frame of
the Heavens and the Earth, when it is sure that the same Infinite Power, that
has not only made Man, but the whole Creation, can as easily collect and
reunite the dispersed ashes of the Body, as form the same. II. From that
greatest pledge hereof, in the Resurrection of the Body of Christ. III. From
that tribulation and sore pain, that the Saints here in their outward man are
exposed to, since it is sure that in the holy justice of God, he did not give
such Bodies for labor, and for toil, and to his Martyrs, to endure
unexpressible torments for Christ, at last to perish for ever. IV. From these
visible resemblances and p^efigurations of the Resurrection which the Lord has
given to confirm our Faith herein, in the ordinary course and productions of
nature; so as all may see how every night is as the Grave of the day light, and
each morning a new resurrection of the same; and how visible an image of Death
is in each season of the Winter, with so mavelous and beautiful a
Resurrection of the Earth, on every return of the Spring, in the Herbs, Flowers
and Plants, taking life and rising again, in the leaves, blossoms and fruits;
yea this in such a variety, as may no less convincingly evidence an Infinite
Divine Power herein, than that the same body of man should be raised at the
last day. V. From that continued miracle of the Harvest, after the Seedtime,
with so amazing a production of the Grain sown in the Earth, and its first
dying there before it be quickened, so as to be at last brought to 30, 60, yea
sometimes an hundred fold, out of the very same grain; which to these who had
never before known the same would seem incredible, and above all reason to
conceive, or give credit thereto.

CHAP. III. The Confirming Work of Religion, improved with respect to the
Times, to clear the way of the Lord herein, before this Generation, and let us
see how nothing is so strange in the Events of this day, which should not more
strengthen, then shake, and that the God of the Reformed Church, does still own
the same Interest, according to his Faithfulness: Which is here briefly Pointed
at, upon some special inquiry, proposed about the same.
SECTION I.
Qu. I. What can afford both Light, and Confirmation to our Faith, in such a
time, when we see the Work of the Lord, about his Church, to be most remarkably
now a work of Judgment, with such dark and searching Trials therewith, as
former times have not known.

Ans. It is sure, we have seen nothing, but what might have been too evidently
looked for, and that we can pretend no want of Light herein, upon these
Grounds. I. That the Trials of a Church, should be suited to the measure of
their Talent of Light, and when this has been in some more than ordinary way
dispensed, that some remarkably searching Times might be expected to follow;
nor can it be now strange to us, that such things fall in with this day, which
did not meet the Churches of Christ at the first entry of the Reformation, who
then had not so clear Discoveries of the Truth, and that measure of
Confirmation therein, which has been since. II. That some unusual Trials, and
Conflicts, in the Lords Method of Providence, should be suited also, to the
greatness of that Work, which he is bringing forth, may be no strange thing;
and to see a time of such sore wrestlings as this, when all things seem to cry,
and be in Pain, as Micah 4.20. Yea when some great event of the Scripture is to
be revealed to the World, and near to its full height, and Period of
Accomplishment, (as we have safe ground for Assurance of this day.) III. Nor
has this sad and dismal hour on the Church, been more obvious than the
provoking Cause hereof, in which the Holy Righteousness of God, may be no less
clear, than the Cloud now is dark; when there has been such a Visible falling
off from that Love, Tenderness, and Power of Religion, that did formerly attend
its Profession; for these many years past we might have seen that some sore and
remarkable Judgment was coming, and that if we had not been in such a manner
undone, we were, under some sadder stroke of Spiritual Judgment, ready to be
utterly undone. IV. Yea it has been too Visible, that such Evils followed the
Reformed Churches, as in no time it was ever known, that the Holy God, did pass
by, without some signal Evidence of his Wrath against the same before the
World. V. We know that Carnal Confidence has a Curse ever waiting upon it in
the Scripture, and none can take it off, or make that thrive which God has
himself cursed; and it is too visible, how far we have gone thus out of the way
of our Strength, by such eager seeking Humane Props, and support, that we have
forgot the Guide of our Youth, and Covenant of our God, and what great things
he has formerly done in the greatest straits of his Church, when there was
much humble trusting, that the Spirit of the Lord, would do more to recover his
Truth than all Humane Might or Power, could do.

SECTION II.
Qu. What Talent, are we still accountable for to support our Faith against
the greatest Fears of this time, from these immediate Appearances of God, and
of the Glory of his Power, for the same Truth and Cause of the Reformed Church,
we are now called to contend for, which has been since the Reformation when so
strong and unusual a Tide, now is against the same?

Ans. If men shut not their eyes, and hide this great Talent of the Works of
God, under the Ground, it is sure none can Question such a Seal, which before
the Sun, (to the Amazement and Conviction of the World,) has been put to the
Truth of the Reformed Religion; that we are now brought under such a Call, as
the Church of Israel was, Deuteronomy. 4.34. To ask of the Times, that are past, since
Isreal's coming out of Egypt, and since the first planting of the Gentile
Church, by the Gospel, whether there has been so great a thing as this in the
Earth, that God has essayed to take to himself a People from the midst of
other Nations, by Temptations, by Signs, and by Wonders, and by War, and by a
Mighty Hand, and by an outstretched Arm, and by great Terrors, according to
all that the Lord our God has done for the rescue of his People, in these last
Times, from Antichristian Bondage and Darkness; and settling them in a
Church State; but unto us was this showed, that we might know, that the Lord he
is God, and there is none else beside him: Ye are still called to see, and be
as Eye Witnesses to these things; I. How Bright a Day of the Gospel of Christ,
did go before this great Darkness on the Church, and what a solemn Triumph in
these late Ages the Truth has had over Antichrist, so as the full stroke and
ruin of his Kingdom, (which is sure and established in the Promise of God,)
seems not now more mavelous and above humane appearance, than what we have
seen, in the begun degrees of its accomplishment. II. In how few years also,
there was, as a new Christian World brought forth, in that swift Course and
Progress which the ingathering of the Reformed Churches had, so as between the
Year 1560, and 1621. such famous Plantations of the Gospel were settled in a
Church State; which all may see was the immediate Work and Power of God; to
show that none should fear, or stagger at his Promise; though the waters yet
swell, and come to the flowings of Jordan, and difficulties appear unsuperable
to humane Sense, after these great things which the Lord has done, III. How
extraordinary a Calling, and excitement of Instruments, was then evident, for
the Service of that time, and Reapers thus eminently prepared for so great an
Harvest of the Gospel, as might put the World to inquire whence these were, in
so numerous a Concurrence, when a few of such a Spirit, were so rarely to be
found in many Ages before. IV. Yea such an Accession also, of Spiritual Gifts,
and Endowments was then for. Building of the Church, ^s had not been formerly
known, since the first coming of the Gospel to the Gentiles; wherein it may be
said, the Glory of these last Times has even in some degree exceeded that of
the first. V. And can the most dismal things of this time, countervail the
Confirmations of our Faith, who have so clearly seen, with the first breaking
up of the Purer Doctrine of Christ, the Power and Life of Christianity came
therewith to the World, as a Seal, and Attestation thereto, beyond any
Miracles; yea how innumerable a Company, in these last Ages of different
Tongues and Languages, and these so remote from one another, did not only
receive the same Truth, but with such Resolution Adventure their Souls thereon,
as might fully witness, they had another prospect of Christianity, and to be in
some other manner ravished with the Glory and Beauty of the same, than is now
in these times: VI. Such high Spring tides of the Power, and Efficacy of the
Gospel, might be evident to all, after so sad a restraint had been for so many
Ages before, under Antichristian darkness; for whatever was then as a Private
Seal, on the Spirit of Christians whilst the Witnesses did Prophecy in
Sackcloth, yet was there no such Evidence and Demonstration of the Holy Ghost,
or a Public Confirmatory Seal to the Truth, as was after the Reformation. VII.
Yea was it not the most Sober, Serious, and Inquisitive Part of Men, upon a
sure Trial of the Grounds of their Faith, who did most firmly embrace the same;
and how many of these also were of the greatest Parts and Abilities, whom none
could Judge to Adventure so far herein, without the highest Assurances, that
this was their undoubted interest and Salvation. VIII. We have seen not only
men of mean and low Estate, but such of the Highest Place and Quality, most
cheerfully adventuring whatever Interest could be dearest to them in the Earth,
for the Truths sake; yea it was ever found, that such as were most acquainted
with the Reformed Religion in its Power, and lived up in their Practice to what
they professed thereof, were those who with the greatest Assurance, most
resolutely still adhered thereto. IX. We have seen also, its most remarkable
spreading in the World, when there could be no possible pretense of a Worldly
Interest, or External Motives for the same. X, We have seen something not only
extraordinary, but even Miraculous in the Joy, and Resolution of innumerable
Martyrs since the Reformation, who did bear out with a more than humane
strength, against a cruelty so visibly Inhumane, and Savage; yea which did in
some degrees exceed that measure of the Heathens, in the Primitive Times, as
being against a greater Light than theirs. XI. And have we not seen of what
Spirit, such still have been since the Reformation, who were the most notorious
Instruments in the Churches Persecution, and how visibly such did act herein,
under so impetuous an incitement of the Devil, that as Tertullian, in his
Apology speaks of Nero, the Truth might boast in having such Adversaries. XII.
It is sure we have seen, that no humane Power, could yet ever undo this blessed
Inteterest of the Reformed Religion, though no way, or change of Weapons, has
been left untried; but we have thus seen, whither so strong, and united a
Confederacy, as the Catholic League in France did at last resolve, and not
only in the ruin of the greatest Actors and Contrivers therein, but to a
further establishing of the Reformed Churches there, as though such had
Intentionally acted for the same; when if second Causes had brought forth their
Ordinary effects, it might have been judged impossible to fail. XIII. We have
seen that issue of all the Councels, Expense and Cruelty of Philip the II. of
Spain, to bear down the Truth of the Gospel in the Netherlands, which was to
the furthest settling of this Illustrious State and the Church of Christ there;
yea how their Conspicuous Rise and Flourishing even in the Externals, and their
resolute adherence to the Truth of Christ did most visibly keep together. XIV.
We know that deluge of Blood, which so quickly followed the French Massacre;
and the most dismal time which ever that Nation knew, did then visibly
Contemporate, with such a time of their greatest Rage and Persecution against
the Truth, and that Event of the Third Vial most clearly fulfilled herein, Rev.
16.5, 6. Thou art Righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because
thou have judged thus, for they have shed the Blood of thy Saints and Prophets,
and thou have given them Blood to drink in great measure. XV. Yea have we not
seen how four Kings of France Successively, were in less than thirty years,
taken away, in the same continued pursuit, how to destroy the Church there, in
whom that whole race of the Valois was thus extinct; yea in the manner of their
Death, were most remarkable Monuments of Divine Judgment, as the most famous
Writers of that time do attest. XVI. We have seen what mavelous effects did
follow those Bloody Years of Queen Mary's Reign in England, to promote and
commend the Protestant Doctrine to Men's Consciences there, with so great a
Triumph as it had in the Sufferings of such choice and excellent witnesses for
Christ, and has brought in more Rent to the Praise and Glory of their Blessed
Head, than may to the furthest compense all that Blood of the Saints there,
though highly Precious in the Eyes of the Lord. XVII. We have seen likewise the
Blood and Cruelty of late, against the Protestants in Bohemia, in a short time
most Visibly returned on the Authors thereof, and how the immediate Finger of
God might be seen in calling forth the Swedes to avenge the same, and in that
desolating stroke which followed in Germany. XVIII. We have seen in these late
Times the Issue of that horrid Massacre on the Protestants in Ireland, to the
utter ruin (in a very few years after,) of that Barbarous Party, who had thus
acted herein. XIX. We have seen what wonderful Providence did attend the
actings of that poor handful of Protestants in the Valleys of Piedmont since
the Reformation, upon the account of that Bloody Massacre which was set on foot
there against them, which was so astonishing as all might see an extraordinary
Appearance of the Lord herein, as is clearly attested by the most Faithful
Histories of that time. XX. And can it be forgot unto this day, how visibly a
Divine Hand did appear in breaking that great Spanish Armado, in the Year 1588.
which had been for some years in Contriving against England. XXI. Astonishing,
and specially Demonstrative of the immediate Power and Presence of God, and
matter of Wonder and Praise also for after Ages, was that solemn time of the
Reformation of the Church in Scotland, for planting the Reformed Religion
there; with that zeal and oneness of Spirit, as did then appear in all ranks to
embrace and adhere to the Profession thereof, amidst the greatest threatenings
of their Adversaries; so as a few Years did bring forth that, which would have
seemed strange for an Age to accomplish; yea that we find betwixt the last
Martyr for the Truth there, who was burnt at St. Andrews, 1558. and the
establishment of the Protestant Religion, and full abolishment of Popery, with
the full Concurrence of Civil Authority herein, in July 1560. was but little
above two Years, to show what great things the Lord can do, above all Humane
Council or Confidence. XXII. It Is sure we have seen in what remarkable degrees
these last Vials of the Holy Judgment of God, have taken place on the Kingdom
of Antichrist, and how Conspicuous the Event has been of that Prophecy, 2
These. 2.8. in these great Effects and Consumption thereof by the Ministry of
the Gospel, as an assured Pledge of the full Accomplishment of what remains
herein. XXIII. And as every step of the Churches Rise, has been still advanced
in a continued, Conflict betwixt the Truth and Antichrist, so have we still
seen, when the Assault and Opposition has been greatest, its most remarkable
tendency to a greater Victory; which were it rightly considered upon clear and
solid grounds from the Scripture, the most formidable appearances of Trouble
from this Adversary would with more Comfort than Fear this day be looked on; so
that whatever be the nearest and most immediate events, yet is it sure, as the
Lord is true, (whose Word is passed hereon,) that whosoever gives their Power
and Strength to support that Interest of Antichrist shall lose the day, and
find their Cause desperate, for the party with whom they contend herein is the
Son of God, against whom no humane Power shall ever be able to stand. These are
but a few, which are here mentioned, of the great Acts of our God, in behalf of
his Truth, to be still as present in our sight, in a time when the Spirits of
many are ready to Stagger and Faint; and here mentioned, to lay no stress or
weight of the Authority of the Truth and Doctrine of our Profession thereon,
but on the alone Revelation of the Scripture; but they are such an undeniable
Seal for Confirming our Faith, and of so known, Public and famous Evidence, as
should be no less considered and taken to Heart now, than in the time when the
Lord thus appeared herein.

SECTION III.
Qu. What present Judgment are we called to have of this Time, upon clear and
assured grounds from the Scripture; that we may know under what aspect thereof,
the present State of Religion, and of the Reformed Churches is under, when so
great a Crisis is this day, as would seem to be in the very Height of its
Conflict, whether as to Life or Death?

Ans. It is no present Appearance of the time that must Direct our Faith, nor
should we either stretch our Fears or Expectations of Things and Events, beyond
what the God of Truth does warrant in his Word, but it is clear, if we credit
the same, and admit the Divinity of the New Testament, there is no just Cause
of Hesitation or Darkness as to what the Lord is bringing forth for his Church
now in these latter days; nor can there be any pretense, to seek another Light,
(either from the Stars above, or the Diviners of this Time,) when so woeful a
Trade has got up in the World, that men wtll thus go to the God of Ekron, as
though there were not a God in Israel, or such a thing, as his written Oracles
to inquire at, when it is sure these lie open, and with a clear and distinct
sound speak to all who have a Serious and Unprejudged Spirit. I. That the
Church under the New Testament has now passed and gone through that most
dismal and continued Trial herein, which was to go over her Head under
Antichrists Reign and Height, and whatever appearance he now has in great
Wrath, yet is it sure and evident that the Winter is past and the Churches
Spring begun; and a few steps further off, that Judgment which is now hastening
on, will at length end the quarrel; so that by a near converse with the Word,
we may clearly see from what point the Churches course and motion this day
lies, and how exactly it keeps, in the Certainty thereof, by the clear Conduct
of the Scriptures of Truth, where a full Map of her whole Course and Passage
through Time is clearly showed. II. That we may now with some clear Evidence
Judge, and have our Faith persuaded hereof, that the Churches Interest is upon
the rising Hand, and on a present Advance, though nothing would seem more
Contradictory than all visible grounds now are; since this cannot fail, John
3.30. That Jesus Christ in his Kingdom in the Earth must Increase; yea that the
Scripture so clearly Points forth Antichrists Ruin and Progress of his fall
and downcasting, with resemblance to that great Judgment on Pharaoh as an
evident Type hereof; in the same judicial stroak^ of Induration, on both, and
gradual Progress herein by one Plague after another, until the last and
greatest Assault, as was then at the Red Sea, has the same effect for a more
glorious appearance of God, in the greatest step of Judgment, and Victory over
this Adversary, when not only the Song of Moses, but of the Lamb also, shall be
then sung, Rev. 15.3. as importing something more glorious and a greater
brightness to be put on this Illustrious Act of Divine Judgment, reserved to
these last times, when a more immediate Appearance of the Lord will be seen,
than in any former deliverances of his Church. III. It is no Conj^ctural thing,
but what by a clear Scripture Conduct we may see, that this time of the Church
now under so notable a Crisis in her Case, is evidently falling under that
Remarkable Assault and Conflict, with that Adversary, before the accomplishing
of that Vial on his Seat and Throne, as we may see Rev. 17.13, 14. That when so
Conspicuous a step of the Churches Victory is near; the Opposition thereto also
will be in some higher degree proportionable to the same, when the great men of
the Earth, and such who shall receive Power as Kings, one hour with the Beast,
shall have one Mind, and give their Power and Strength thereto, and shall make
War with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, etc. Nor is it found through the Scripture where the Lord
has done any great thing for his Church, but some unusual darkness, and
sore-wrestlings have still gone before, and should be no matter of staggering
to our Faith, (whatever it be of present Fears,) to see so dismal a Time of
Trial as now is, and amazing height of trouble beyond what former times have
known, when one of the greatest events of Providence in behalf of the Church,
since the revealing of Christ to the World, until his second coming, is
assuredly near in the fall and overthrow of the man of Sin. IV. We have clear
ground also to judge, that so great an Eclipse as seems almost Universally over
the State of the Reformed Churches, is no going down of the Sun thereon,
(whatever did befall the most famous Eastern Churches to an utter dissipation
thereof;) if these different Periods of time be justly considered, how their
Sunset did then fall in with the Entry of that great Apostasy of the Christian
Church and with that long and dismal Night of Antichrists Reign; whilst now
this hour of Trial on the Churches, does meet in that blessed Period of
Antichrists begun fall, and of a growing Light of the Gospel, and when the
Scripture so clearly warrants our Faith herein, that the Work of Providence is
to Plant, and not cut off, but to bring forward that Interest of the Reformed
Churches, in the founding of which the Mediator has so eminently appeared in
the Glory of his Power in these last times. V. It is sure we now live in the
Evening, and Extremity of time, when the motions of Providence may be expected
to be more quick and speedy, as being so near the Center, and to the last
Epoch, and Period of all Prophetic Chronology; wherein the Glory of God in
his Truth and Faithfulness shall most eminently shine forth, and these
Scripture Truths which were formerly dark and abstruse, with that Evidence
shine forth in the event, as shall cause men to wonder at their former thoughts
and stumblings thereat. And here I must say, that there is such a sight now in
the Earth, as the Romish Church, in its Complex frame and state, in so
different a mold cast from any Power or Jurisdiction else, and such a Compound
of a Civil, and Spiritual Monarchy in one and the same Person, is so solemn and
undeniable a Seal to the Christian Faith, and Divinity of the New Testament;
that it is strange why this is not improved more, against the Atheism of this
time, that such a visible event of the Scripture is now in being, which was so
clearly foretold by the Holy Ghost 1500. years ago, with its proper
Circumstances, as to the manner of that Antichristian state, with its Rise,
Growth, and Duration, as is to Admiration still evident to the World, when not
the least shadow or appearance of so strange Future Emergencies was to be seen
or could have entered men's Thoughts; to show it only could be revealed to the
Church by him, to whom all his Works are known from the Beginning. This I have
looked on, as such a Confirmation to the Truth of Christianity, that no
Miracles in the first times of the Church could have more evidence for the
same; yea if such a party were not in being, both what it now is and in former
Ages has been, it might in another manner stagger the Faith of the Saints, to
a questioning the Truth of the Scripture, than its most formidable appearance
this day can do. VI. I shall but add here, that we know and are sure the Lord
has reserved his greatest works to these latter days, wherein his Judgments
shall be manifest; and that one of the most eminent Manifestations of his Glory
before the close of time shall be Conspicuous in the fall of Antichrist, on
whose ruins that Glorious House which Christ is yet to have for himself both
of Jews and Gentiles, shall be prepared and built up; and though this great
Eclipse of Antichristian Darkness, should yet more prevail, even over the
visible Profession of the Truth in the Churches of Britain, and Ireland, there
is no cause to be staggered in the Faith of Romes fatal Period, being near, but
to look hereon according to the Scripture, as the last attempt of that wounded
Adversary, which will be found in the issue to have the most immediate
Connection with his greatest downfall, and the Reviving Glory of the Church; for
strong is the Lord God who judges her.

SECTION IV.
Qu. What is specially called for, in this day, of such as are accountable for
so great a Talent of Light, and Confirmations to our Faith?

Ans. If this were suitably taken to Heart, we could not but reckon our selves
under the greatest excitement and call, to such an improvement hereof.

I. That we account it not enough to have a Faith, for quieting our own
Spirits, but also to confirm others, by putting to our Seal that God is true,
in the great Assurances of his Word, and to Sanctify him before the World;
which is so important a Duty, as the Lord was wroth even with a Moses, and
Aaron for one short-coming, when he called for the same, Numb. 20.12. and it is
sure in no time was such a special trust more reposed thereon, than in this
Age, both as a public Debt on the Church, and Personal on each Christian, how
to witness for the Lord, upon that great Interest of his Faithfulness and for
Transmitting the same, to the Ages to come, by a Confirmatory Seal, and
Testimony thereto.

II. To reckon our selves also under some more than ordinary call this day,
(each in their present Capacity and Station,) to appear for the Credit of the
Truth, and stemm so visible and impetuous a Tide, as is now running of
distrust, and of a discreditable faintness; for it may be said, never was the
Church under the New Testament so remarkably held under such a Trial, as that
wherein the Lord did prove the Church of Israel, Numb. 14. Or had a more
evident resemblance thereto, in the same Circumstances as in this day, if they
were seriously pondered; As I. How in the same manner, such a false and evil
report is too visibly raised upon the blessed ways of the Lord, to discourage and
faint the Spirits of his People, as was then by the Spies, that there were
insuperable difficulties in the way of the Promise, by Reason of the Anakims,
and of their walled Cities, and did thus oppose the Credit of Sense, to all
these Assurances which God had given to their Faith. II. That this highly
dishonorable Cowardice and Distrust did so seize on that People, as was like
to resolve in a visible revolt, and to cry for a Leader to go back to Egypt
again; which amongst too many in this time may be justly feared. III. That this
was after such extraordinary Confirmations which the Lord had given to the
Faith of his Church then, who had by his own immediate and outstretched hand,
so lately brought them out of the House of Bondage, and from the Iron Furnace
in Egypt, as rendered their misbelief to be a guilt under such Aggravations, as
the Holy God did in that manner plead, Verse. 22. These ten times have they
tempted me, who have seen my Glory, and my Miracles, which I did in the
Wilderness, etc. IV. But herein we hope, and are Confidently sure of a blessed
Disparity in this resemblance, as to the numerousness of such, who shall be
found of the Reformed Churches, to Act something of that part, which these
Heroic Witnesses, Caleb and Joshua did; and were then put to stand alone
therein; who through Grace shall yet appear with some measure of that Spirit,
and withstand so high a Tide of fears, discouragement and unbelief as is at
this day; and thus to plead against the same as these did, Number. 14.9. If the
Lord delight in us, then let us not rebel against him, neither fear the
greatest difficulties that can be in the way, etc. V. And is not the same
Precedent of Providence, of so singular a respect as the Lord did then testify
to his Caleb and Joshua (who were of another Spirit in following him fully, in
that day) a continued Assurance, for all who shall be helped to any honorable
appearance of this kind, by making them see, and inherit the Truth of his
Promise; yea that such a residue as out-lives this great and amazing storm
shall have something of that Testimony to bear also, which Caleb gave, Josh.
14.8, 10. My Brethren which went up with me made the Heart of the People faint,
but I fully followed the Lord my God, and now behold the Lord has kept me
alive, etc. O blessed they, whose Souls are raised with that Holy Zeal for the
Truth, to stand up in this great breach, by a resolute Profession of their
Faith, and Witness to the Faithfulness of God, as such great and extraordinary
Confirmations, given thereto, now call for.

III. It is one of the special Duties of this day we stand also accountable
for, how to stemm this high and growing Tide of Prejudice, and Reproach against
the Reformed Religion which in some unusual way is now aloft, and raging; and
by Manifestation of the Truth to gain some more awful regard hereof on men's
Conscience, that they may see something of the Glory of our Profession, and in
what manner it maintains its Conquest as no way else can possibly claim; I.
Which reckons none to be the true and genuine Professors hereof who embrace
not the same upon Evidence, and with respect to its Intrinsic Excellency and
worth; nor does Judge the Interest of Religion to go by number, and poll, where
this is wanting; but pursues that end to have men engaged first to be
Christians, that they may be true and sincere Protestants; and therefore can
admit no such Methods of any base Compliance with the Humor and Interests of
Men, which its Principles will not bear. II. Which in its course is ever
regular and Certain, according to the Rule of an Unchangeable and Eternal
Truth, without dependence on the will of man herein, or any mutable Revolutions
of the Time. III. Which does with the greatest luster shine forth in the
Brightest Light, and is maintained by the clearest Knowledge; yea by the
furthest plainness, and openness of Heart, toward all, commends it self; so
that the World may see, it espouseth not men's Affection, before it gains on
their Conscience; and it has their Judgment fixed on a judicious Trial,
before their Resolution; nor accounts the Truth of Religion, can ever subsist
by an external show and Profession, without its known Evidence and the Efficacy
thereof on men's Souls. IV. Which sincerely follows the Catholic Interest of
Christianity and public good of Mankind, in promoting the great Ends of the
Gospel, so as the World may see its highest Intent is to exalt all Divine
Institutions, and advance the Simplicity, and Spirituality of Gospel
Administrations, (according to the revealed Rule) amongst Men, as that which
does most nearly concern the Vitals of Religion and an Inward Life of Communion
with God. V. Which Pleads an Impartial Trial of all its Adversaries, whether
the Principles of our Profession or of Popery, give the greatest Security to
Civil Government, and founds the strongest Obligations to Magistracy and to all
Civil, and Moral Duties, by which the awe and venerable esteem of Religion is
kept up in a Nation. It is high time that men should cease to be implicit, and
become express upon this greatest Interest they have within time, which is the
Truth of their Profession in the matter of Religion; when a Deceit or Mistake
here is of an Eternal Concern: Upon which account, without respect to Interest,
Party, or Education, I have this day sought to know the Truth, and what
Adversaries could possibly pretend, to Reproach, or Prejudge any for the
Reformed Religion; All they can do, is but to charge men's Corruption and
Offenses in their Practice, upon the Rule and Principles of their Profession,
that can never give the least Latitude, or Connivance thereto, but is clear as
the Sun; when on the other hand I could know no other way, to embrace such a
Profession, as Popery, but by turning Atheist, in the first Place, and then
quitting both Religion and Reason at once: But I can say, in a resolute
Adherence to the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, I fear not to adventure my
Soul, and enter into an Eternal State.

FINIS.
AN IDEA, Of the Confirmed State of a Christian in Dismal and Shaking Times.
Though the Measure of all Christians Establishment in the Truth be not alike,
but must have respect to their different Trials, Talents, and Improvements for
this end; yet may it cause Astonishment to see, how rare any Study of this kind
is now to be found. When it is not only one of the highest concerns of
Christianity, but in a more than ordinary way called for, as the Work of this
day; yea, being this is a part of Religion, which seems least improved of any,
for the more general State of Professors within the Church; under some
Conviction hereof, was this Essay designed; wherein with humble Confidence (I
may say) the Truth has been sought with that Serious Enquiry into the Nature
of these things held forth, as I judged needful for such, who have so great an
Interest, and Adventure not only through Time, but for all Eternity, to support
themselves upon the alone Certainty hereof; and ere these days of Trial, which
we now see, pass over this Generation, it may be found this was not
unseasonable, or without cause directed to such a time, if the Lord graciously
bless the same; nor will it (I hope) be found unnecessary to present yet
further, some clear prospect of a Confirmed State in Religion, and what those
ought to be, who with Light, and Assurance of Mind are like to follow the Lord
fully, in such a day; which is here offered in a seven fold Character, under
which a truly Confirmed Christian in the Truth of his Profession may be Stated.

CHARACTER I. He is one who has another Sense, and Impression of this great
Study for attaining to a Confirmed State in Religion, and is on higher grounds
pressed to follow the same, than most of the Visible Church do apprehend; and
should be thus Considered.

1. As one to whom the Glory of the Christian Profession is in the highest
Degree dear, and who would have the World see, that such as embrace the same,
and do most fully Adventure on the Testimony of God in his Word, are those who
walk on the highest Principles of true, and enlightened Reason; yea, who take
deeply to Heart that Obligation which is on all* who desire to advance the
Repute, and Honor of the Truth, to be in such Terms therewith upon its own
Evidence, that they may know how to Confute and Shame Atheists, and Infidels,
if called thereunto.

2. Who see also, that such is the State of fallen Man, as stands in need of
all the Contributions that can be, not only to strengthen the Christians Faith,
to bear our against the strong Assaults of Infidelity, but to gain also more
Credit and Veneration to the Truth, with those who are not easily dealt with,
but by such means as bear some Congruity to their Natural Light, and Reason;
for which end the Lord has afforded his Ministerial helps, to render the
Unbelief of the World, and all pretense of Hesitation about his Truth more
inexcusable.

3. He also sees, that the most important, and Fundamental Truths of
Christianity, need the greatest Confirmation in his Faith; and those who enter
into so high and discriminating a Profession from the residue of the World,
need to know in what manner they embrace the same. He sees that the natural
Order of things does absolutely require to have the Foundation sure laid, on
which so great a superstructure must rest, so as he judges it a Work by it
self, and to need some peculiar retiring his Soul in the most serious recess,
and Composure thereof, to attain a stedfastness in the Truth, and to know the
strong and firm Conveyances of that greatest Mystery of the Gospel, in such a
manner, as needs not a new Miracle to Confirm the same. But he knows that no
sharpness of men's Natural Understanding about the Truth can ever attain a true
Rest, and Settlement of Mind therein, without an humble, and serious Spirit
stooping down before the Wisdom of God, and entering as a little Child into his
School; and by that humble Practice, and Obedience of the Gospel, there is an
undoubted coming up to the greatest Assurance and clearest Demonstrations of
the same, as Joh. 7.17.

4 He knows that as nothing tends more to shake Men's Spirits, and stagger them
about the Truth, than a Light and Transient View hereof, so does the greatest
Establishment follow, on the nearest approach by a deep and serious Enquiry
about the same; and he clearly sees that if such who look but at a distance on
the way of Religion, did but once come to have their Spirits exceed in a more
serious Reflection thereon, the first view they should have, could not but be
matter of Wonder, and Amazement; to think what can support a Soul in so
mavelous a way as the Life and Practice of Christianity; Which is so visibly
above Nature, and that wherein they must do violence to the same; wherein they
must part with the Multitude, and oppose themselves to the strong^st Tide of
Example, and must endure also in Hope, and believe for things not seen, (which
were never the Object of Humane Sense,) to any in this Earth; and are often
called to part with the most desirable things of Sense, upon the alone Credit
of their Faith; yea, wherein they must enter that Profession, on no other
Terms, than to be Martyrs for the same, and Seal it with their Blood; so that
he must needs see a Christian according to the Rule and Institution of the
Gospel, to be the greatest Riddle, and Wonder of any sight within time; but
when such come more close and near upon this Trial, and have once understood
the Nature and greatness of that Security which these have to adventure on, and
what is the Glory of their Hope, and the sure Spring of their Supplies, for
their Work and Trials within time; then will this second wonder unspeakably
exceed the first; how it is possible that such are not of a more raised, and
enlarged Spirit, in the service of the Gospel, in that short season they have
here for it on the Earth, and how their difficulty should not be more, to bear
the Joy of so great a Prospect, and Expectation, than to bear any present
Griefs and Troubles, Yea how a man's Life, who indeed sincerely makes the
Christian Profession, is not in some more continued transport of ravishment and
wondering, to know that they are surely made for their Eternal State in another
World, and are among those, on whom the glorious God has chosen to have the
exceeding Riches of his Grace showed forth, in the Regions of Blessedness above
for ever.

5. He has another sight and prospect of the Christian Creed, than most who
give an easy Assent thereunto; and has his Reason so dazzled with the
Revelation of the Gospel, and of the Wonders thereof as has put him to such an
Exercise as that 2 Chronicles. 6.18. How to Credit his Eyes therewith, the more deep
Reflection he has upon the same; But will God in very deed dwell with men on
the Earth? He judges that they, who after some fluctuating suspense, are
admitted to see the Truth of Christianity, with that Certainty of its Evidence,
as the greatness of such a discovery does require; may have some resemblance to
that transport which the Angels had at the first Creation; when the Morning
Stars Sung together, and the Sons of God shouted for Joy; to see themselves
thus, who were brought out of pure nothing, entered into that ineffable Light of
seeing God, and also their own blessedness in him, in so high a degree. So that
he accounts it one of the highest Seize of Religion, for a Christian
indeed to believe the Articles of his own Faith, and have his Soul as fully
persuaded hereof, as of his being; that such a time assuredly was, (and is now
many Ages since past,) when the glorious Redeemer of the Church, the second
Person of the Godhead came down from Heaven, and was revealed in our Nature;
that on him, as Surety to Divine Justice in the room of the Elect Church, was
the whole Guilt, and Sin thereof transferred; and in this mavelous way did
the Holy God take Satisfaction to Himself, by Himself; that thus our Nature is
exalted, by the Incarnation of Christ above the Nature of Angels; that the time
is near when the meanest afflicted Christian, shall take in no other Air, than
the Breathings of the higher Paradise above, and now has an Eternity of Joy,
and Blessedness before him; that within a very little time he shall know this
welcome of our blessed Redeemer to his Followers here on the Earth, Come ye
blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom, etc. When he shall take off the
Cross, and put on the Crown, when it shall be then no more a matter of Faith,
but of Sense, to be Partaker of that Inheritance with the Saints in Light; and
know those Proper Mansions in that State of Glory, and peculiar Assignment
thereunto, which all the Redeemed shall then have; and be put in the same rank
with the Elect Angels; to be as those pure flames of Love, and Joy; yea know
what it is to walk in the Streets of the New Jerusalem which are as Gold,
Transparent as Crystal; and what that meeting-will be of his Soul Perfected,
and in a Triumphant State, with his Glorified Body, raised incorruptible, and
never to part any more; and to have his proper share of that blessed and
greatest Solemnity, that shall be celebrated in Heaven; the Marriage Supper of
the Lamb, with the whole Triumphant Church; and hear that honorable account
which the great Judge will then make of these Trials of his Faith, and sharp
conflicts which he had gone through within time; with that solemn Testimony of
Approbation, which will be given hereof! And since it is sure these great things
must be a part of the Christian Faith; can it be strange, that such, as would
in that manner converse therewith (tho they be not yet seen) as no less
undoubted Realities than any present Objects of Sense, cannot be easily
satisfied with a low degree of Evidence and Confirmation of their Judgment; but
would have their Joy perfected so far as this State of Mortality can bear; and
so find it easy to Rejoice, and Glory in Tribulation, and to weep now for a
Season, who are to rejoice for ever; yea to say in the Words of Mephibosheth,
Let them take it all, and enjoy the same, since he who is their Life, and
Exceeding Joy, Lives and Reigns, who is Infinitely better to them than all
these things.

6. He accounts the Strengthening of his Faith, to be such a concern, not only
as it is his Souls Adventure for all Eternity, but as the highest way of
Glorifying God here: That whatever tends to a more full Confirmation of the
same, he reckons also one of the greatest Additions to his Joy and Comfort
within time; and that these manifold Assistances (with such Reduplication
thereof) which the Lord has himself given for this end, are such that no
Fragments of so rich a Talent should be lost; and tho he knows the greatest
Demonstrations of our Faith can add nothing to the Certainty of Divine Truth in
it self; yet are they thus given in regard of the strong Trials of a Christians
Life, and of what their weaknesses stand in need of for support.

7. It Is in this Study, he sees and takes to Heart, how not only the Condition
of Man in the Earth, but the Profession of Christ also calls for such a
reckoning, that he may have Trials in that manner dispensed, that no visible
refuge will be found in the least to stand by him, but all humane Comfort and
Assistance will fail him, so that he must needs lay in Ballast now in its
Season, and be founded thereon with that Assurance of Judgment, as is needful
for that Day, when he must either get through in the alone way of Believing,
against Sense, or Perish. And tho no such Seize of Light can bear out
then, without present, and immediate Influences from above, and that it is sure
according to the Day, so must the Christians Strength be, yet does he see also,
the want of an established Judgment, and of some proper stock laid up of Aids,
and Assistances this way against a sharp Storm, is like to make sad work among
the Professors of this Age, ere the Trials of such a time have done their work.

8. He sees also how the greatest Contest, which in this day in the World, is
betwixt God, and Man, upon the Truth and Assurance of his Word; and that the
highest Trial, and Probation of a Christian, in which all the Trials of his
Life do still meet, may be resolved here; if they receive the Testimony of God
in his Word as an absolute Security to rely on, yea or not. And tho this is
the peculiar Glory of the only true God, to have an absolute Dependence of his
whole Work on himself, and to be the alone Center of his Peoples rest; yet may
nothing be more evident, than that with most he bears that Name, of being their
trust; when the whole burden and weight thereof lies alone upon visible
grounds; so that those Bonds, and Promises which he has himself given unto
men, do b^ar no more Credit, than they have some External Surety of in the
Earth, which they still look after, to stand as it were good and responsible
for the same, which is the highest Indignity can be offered to the glorious
Majesty of God.

9. He does much take to Heart this present Period of time, wherein the
fluctuating suspense, and halting of so many under a visible Profession of the
Truth, is now one of the most dismal Signs hereof; and that it seems to be the
time, wherein the Lord will in an unusual way take this Generation off from any
implicit Profession of the same; and when that great Roll of Visible
Professors in all the Reformed Churches, may be ere long in that manner called,
as each must answer to his own Name; and be put to stand to the Proof before
the World; when no Temporal Interest, but Internal Motives and Certainty of the
Truth upon its own Evidence, must bear one out; yea that the most established
may ere long find it not easy to be kept from Staggering; and a few days come
in the Churches way, more remarkable for Trial, than have been in some Ages
before.

CHARACT. II. A truly confirmed Christian, may be thus also stated, as one who
is in the first place most deeply taken up about that rare Plot of Man's
Redemption; and to see these great, and wonderful Truths there, not singly, and
apart, but in that Harmony, Order, and Consent of all the parts thereof, as
they are linkt together in this mavelous frame; so as to make the whole one
entire piece. And whereof no part does in the least interfere with another.
Which he finds to be one of the most Principal Demonstrations of this great
Mystery of the Gospel, which the Lord has given for Confirming his Peoples
Faith. And thus in another manner than formerly, can he now entertain his Soul
herewith; and have his Joy unspeakably heightened. 1. To see at once the ruined
State of fallen Man, and what a Flood-gate of all Evil is let loose on Adams
Race, not only Morally in Sin, but what is Penal in the Woe, and Miseries
thereof; yea such a State, where all Hope of relief is for ever cut off in the
way of Nature, or by any created help; and where the Execution of a Righteous
Sentence on men for the voluntary Violation of a Law, Just, Holy and Good, can
be no Impeachment (in the least) of the Righteousness of God; But then
therewith he does see such a relief brought to Light, as can not only answer
the whole extent of this ruin, but the Glory of God more eminently displayed
therein, than if the Law had been obeyed, or absolutely executed in its Penalty
on the whole race of man. Yea, (which makes this more wonderful,) to see a
higher Dispensation of Grace unto man, now under the Gospel, than was to Adam
in his Primitive State; whereby innumerable Christians are made to endure and
prevail over stronger Assaults, than broke him even in his Integrity; which is
a thing so mavelous, that the great and Infinite God only could find out and
effect it. 2. He does now see how clear a Consistence and Harmony is here, that
he who had no Sin by Inhesion, but was Holy, harmless, and Undefiled, should be
under the greatest weight of Sin by Imputation; and by the exactest Rule of
Divine Justic^, be made liable to answer both the whole Duty, and full Penalty
of the Law; having, as Surety betwixt the Creditor and Debtor, put himself in
his Peoples room, to answer the full demands thereof both for Debt, and Duty.
3. It is here he does see that blessed Consent and Harmony betwixt the spotless
Justice of God, and his mavelous Grace; so as his Love is to the highest
glorified, in that mavelous way, which secures the full and complete
Satisfaction of his Law, and all the rights of Inviolable Justice. 4. Whilst he
is thus dazzled with the greatness of such a Light, and put to enquire what such
a mystery can mean, he is then further led on to see that rare Plot and
Contrivance of the Covenant of Reconciliation between God, and Man, here within
time; to be the very Duplicate, and Counterpart of that Eternal Transaction,
and Stipulation between the Father and the Son; and thus sees whatever God has
declared, and promised in the former to his Church, was first promised, and
secured to our Blessed Head in the Covenant of Redemption; wherein as with a
Reverend and Awful Distance, so with the greatest Evidence of Light he is made
to see here these reciprocal Obligations betwixt them, and mutual Trust for
making good the whole Terms thereof in the appointed time. 5. He does also
clearly see that rare Order, and Harmony of time in these signal Periods of the
Revelation of this great Mystery of Christ, which from its more dark Discovery,
and Dawning, did still more gloriously open its self to the Church; by a
gradual Light, and unvailing of the same, as the Sun in its Course unto the
perfect day; yea he has his Faith thus unspeakably confirmed, to see herewith
the Gospel Church being still the same, whither of Jews or Gentiles; and how
that Series, and Consent has yet never been broken off since the beginning of
a Church called forth from the Residue of Mankind, set apart as a peculiar
People for the Lord; where none ever had Right and Privilege to be Members of
the same, but by Faith in the Messiah, and Profession of their Obedience to his
Laws. 6. It is in this Union and Harmony, he sees all the Branches, and Parts
of Gospel Obedience most exactly mere, and terminate, to advance both the
greatest Excellency and Blessedness of Man, and Assimilate him to the Blessed
Image of God. Yea, how all the Rules, and Precepts thereof do so entirely
Conspire for this end, as may constrain the Wo^ld to see, and admire the
Glorious Nature, and Perfections of him, whose Laws these are, wherein he does
so brightly shine forth. 7. Nor can he look seriously herein, and not see that
sweet concord as a part of this Harmony, which is betwixt the Promissory, and
Mandatory part of the Gospel; so as the Christians Comfort is most fully
established, and no Duty abolished; but the very Path-road to the most full
Enjoyments of the Promise, and proper way to attain rest, and tranquillity of
Spirit, must be ever by taking on the yoke of Christ. 8. Yea (to Confirm this
entire Union, and Harmony more fully,) he now sees that exact and mavelous
Correspondence which is betwixt that first Fundamental Promise of the Messiah,
and the Event; betwixt all the Ancient Figures and Types of the Levitical
Service, and the Revelation of Christ himself, in which all these did meet as
in their proper Center, and now have their full End and Accomplishment. 9. His
Confirmation thus grows to see that wonderful Consent of Christianity, and
Native result hereof, to put fallen man in a due posture toward God, toward
his Neighbors, and toward himself; so as he may know by Faith and Adoration
how to enjoy God, and his Brother, by Love; and thus by Patience, Meekness, and
Humility, to possess his own Soul, and enjoy himself. 10. Yea it is in this
rare and wonderful frame, he is made to see (and no sight can be like this)
that exact correspondence which is betwixt the Foundation and Superstructure,
how the whole Tract of the Gospel is but one Entire and Complete means to
Glorify God, and restore fallen Man to the highest Blessedness? How that
excellent Stream of Sanctification, does flow from that Fountain Head of an
Eternal Decree; which does still run under the Ground, until it break up at
last in the Heart of each Christian, by the Effectual Call of the Gospel; and
thus runs down through time until it lose its self in that unconceivable deep
of Perfection and Glory. Thus is it that each Christian might attain some
higher Degrees of Confirmation in his Faith, than most seem either to know, or
look after, if he understood more how to improve this rare comparing work of
Religion by setting the great Truths and Principles thereof in their Order, and
Dependence, so as each may be seen, in its necess^ry Coherence with other, and
under its proper aspect.

But the more deep Reflection and Enquiry he has herein, he is the more made
to wonder, and finds this one of the great Assaults to his Faith? that the
Revelation of Christ, and Redemption by his Blood should have no greater
effects this day amongst men, and that the Christian World is not in some other
manner awakned with the Glory of this Light, and pressed after a larger spreading
and Diffusion of this highest and universal good to poor mankind; Yea the more
he considers this, it does heigthen his Amazement to think how men's designs in
the matter of Duty and Service for the Kingdom of Christ, can be so low within
time, whose Designs and Hopes in the close thereof are so high in the matter of
Enjoyment; or take so little to heart, that the whole Day of the dispensation
of the Gospel, (amidst the most dismal Trials that may fall in therewith,) is a
continued time wherein we are called to keep the Feast, and from one Age to
another celebrate the same, as a perpetual Jubilee of Joy, and Exultation,
since Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us; but oh how rare a thing seems
this to be, and how little of that flame and fervency of Love to our Blessed
Redeemer is now kindled on his Altar? Such as might be expected on such
wonderful incitements thereto, and which once were in the Church.

CHARACT. III. Though a Confirmed Christian must be specially stated as such,
one who knows the Internal part of Religion, and Sealing work of the Holy Ghost
on his own Soul, which is not by words, but things of the highest Truth,
Substance, and Reality; yet is he not satisfied to know this by Spiritual
Sense, until he can see the same with the furthest Evidence of Light also to
his mind; and have no less a clear and judicious Trial of this great Mystery of
Experimental Religion, for confirmation of his Faith, than to be sensibly
affected with the felt power thereof. And in the first place why this is
necessarily requisite and called for, with respect to the Confirmed State of a
Christian, may be thus considered, on some few grounds.

1. That the things of Religion, which must be experienced within time, are
such sublime, and wonderful Mysteries, as may be just matter of astonishment,
and make men a wonder ^o themselves, to think that these present Pledges of so
great a hope which is to come, are no shadows, no appearances of things, but
most sure, and undoubted realities; and that such there are this day in the
Earth, who know so near a converse with an Invisible God, and the supernatural
Truths of his Word, with the sensible feeling of the inestimable Love of
Christ, by this demonstration of Experience; yea, who in such dismal Times do
assuredly know what the Joy of his Presence* and an immediate Fellowship with
their blessed ^^ead is, upon the greatest certainty of Trial; since these are
so high, and marvelous things, which exceed all Natural Understanding, as the
felt Sweetness of their enjoyment should not more deeply take men up, than to
see the Truth, and Sureness of these Principles, whereon they build.

2. Because this Testimony of the Truth of Experimental Religion, should be
understood not only as it is of highest use for Christians Personal Comfort, and
Establishment; but with respect to the Public Int^rest of the Church; a
special duty it is to have the Credit of this greatest Testimony, and Seal,
demonstrably cleared, with the furthest strength of harmonious, and
argumentative Reason, for such who look but at a distance yet thereon; which
may not only awaken them to some deeper sense, and impression hereof, but
constrain them to see, how no Natural Science has more clear, and firm
demonstrations, than the Experimental part of Christianity, (which is the very
Life and Soul thereof,) may have to men's Reason, and Judgment, though they never
knew it within themselves. Yea for this end should such, as have experienced
the Truth, and Virtue of the Gospel, reckon themselves as Witnesses; who are
judicially obliged to put their Seal thereunto; and is now more called for, in
an Age when no particular Truth seems more strongly impugned, than the Reality
of Experimental Godliness is; and become as a Public Theme of Derision; though
men must either quit the whole Revelation of the Scripture, or see this to be
as Essential to the Constitution of a Christian, as Vital Principles are to a
Living Man.

3. Yea it is sure herein, that such as take Religion to heart, must needs look
to be put to the greatest Trial of its Certainty, and should ^ost nearly
concern themselves, to know if they can abide as firmly by their Spiritual
Sense, as by that which is Natural; and do know as surely in themselves the
Operations, and Motions of a Spiritual Life, as that they have being by Nature;
and that here be no doubtful or abstract Notions but which have had deep Trial,
and Reflection on them; that they who dare to venture their Eternal State on the
known certainty thereof, do Reason their Souls to a steadfast adherence to the
Truth, when they are called to sacrifice their Lives thereto; to wit, from the
Rare Experiments, and Proofs, they have often had of the same in their own Trial.

4. It does more specially call for a demonstrative clearing of the Credit of
this Testimony, as one of the Services of Religion, to promote the Kingdom of
Christ amongst men, which seems least improved of any with respect to the
general State of such who are within the Church, who are so great strangers to
the same; yea should be judged one of the great wants of this day, when Atheism
is now at so astonishing a height, that it is not more studied to have the
Experimental part of Religion, (which in it self lies deep and hid, and is a
secret betwixt God and the Christians Soul,) with such clearness, and by that
manner of Evidence demonstrated to the World, as might tend to beget some more
Awful Sense and Conviction hereof, (when such clear and unanswerable grounds
might be improved for this end) on those who look thereon as some strange and
dark Riddle, so as they could no more deny, or withstand the Evidences hereof,
than that they have a Living Soul which yet they never saw; or could ever be
the Object of Human Sense. And how sad a prospect should this give of the
greatest part of the Christian World? who not only know nothing of the True
Glory, and Spiritual Powers of Christianity, but have not the very Notion, or
any Sense of the reality of such a thing.

But in the 2d place it is thus that each Christian, for being solidly
confirmed in the Way of Religion, may as clearly see, as he does sensibly feel,
the Truth of his own Experience, and have his Faith as fully established by
this inward, and great demonstration of the things of God, as his Affections
are quickened, upon such strong, and demonstrative grounds of the certainty
hereof, as these are.

1. By considering his present, and former State; that not in a dream, but in
the most deep and serious composure of spirit, he knows that once he was blind,
and wholly estranged from this Mystery of Christian Experience, which now he
does see; and once had the same sentiment hereof with such who do never at all
reflect on the same; but no sooner did the Truth, and Power of Religion seize
on his Soul, than he found himself entered into a new World, to know the
dawnings of this marvelous Light, and what belongs to these Enjoyments, and
Vital Acts of Christianity, that have not the least dependence on any Natural
Cause.

2. By considering the marvelous Superstructure of Experimental Religion, which
from the inward observation of Christians in all Ages, is such as the World
could not almost contain the Books, that might be written hereof; which yet is
so entirely founded on one, and the same Foundation, and does in all the Lines
of this great Circumference, still meet in the same Center; yea thus how
entire, and harmonious a thing Religion in all the parts thereof is within upon
the Soul, as well as without; so as every step in this way of the Experience of
the Saints is no groping in the dark, but what is by Line and by Rule, with as
sure, and demonstrable a connection with the External Testimony of the Word, as
there is in Nature betwixt the Cause, and the Effect; which affords a more
wonderful assistance to his Faith, than the greatest External Miracles could
ever do; and though the Spirit of God does sometimes in an extraordinary manner
reveal himself to men, ( as acts of his Sovereign Prerogative which make no
Rule) yet with the Established Constitutions of his Word does the continued
Experience of the Saints most harmoniously ever correspond.

3. By considering thus also the Being, and Reality of Grace, not in its
Effects only, but in its proper Cause and Original, and how the Truth of
Holiness in the Life of a Christian is so express a Transcript of the Gospel,
in its External Revelation; that the Impress does not more clearly answer the
Seal on the Wax, than it does beget the same Form and Image of it self in such
as believe; yea also that conformity it bears to the ever blessed Archetype, as
well as to the Revealed Rule; and how bright a discovery is this of so glorious
a Being, and Nature, to which it is conformed? Who is the alone Pattern, and
Example of all Truth and Holiness; which is so great a discovery, as he is made
to wonder, that men in this Age are so much awakened to find out the true
Phoenomena of Nature, (though in its own room a most choice study, and specially
desirable,) and will be as in a Transport, upon some rare Natural Experiment,
as made one in that manner cry out, (...), I have found, I have found; whilst
here is another kind of demonstration, and of more transcendent interest than
all these could ever amount to, on which the Eyes of most are this day shut.

4. By considering that Unchangeable Congruity, which is betwixt the nature of
these things, enjoined in the whole Institutions of the Gospel, and men's being
made happy thereby, now in their present state; and how great a Temporal
Revenue of the Fruits of Religion, as inward Confidence, Peace, and Serenity of
Mind, does as natively follow the life, and practice hereof, as the Fruit of a
Tree answers to its kind; and is ever found the alone true relief of Mankind,
against all the griefs and bitterness of time; yea that it is no distance of
place, but of men's spirit by impurity, and corruption, that makes so sad a
distance betwixt God and Man here in the Earth.

5. He is thus further confirmed upon this great Testimony of Experimental
Religion, by considering that it is sure such as do bear this witness are known;
1. To be such who are of the most discerning, and judicious in the things of
Reason, as well as any else. 2. Whose walk and practice use to have the
greatest Authority over men's Consciences with whom they converse. 3. Who are
found most intensly taken up in the retired work, and duties of Religion; that
can have no respect to the witness, and observation of others. 4. Who seek no
Implicit Credit from any herein; but do pray men to come, and see, and prove
the same in their own Experience; with an appeal to the most exact Inquiry, and
rational Trial of all Mankind, if here be any casual thing; and if that
Testimony of the Doctrinal, and Experimental part of Religion be not still one,
and the same. 5. Who also out of the most remote places of the Earth, and
otherwise strangers amongst themselves, do yet most harmoniously meet in the
same Witness, and are thus mutually disclosed to each other, by a near, and
feeling intercourse of their Souls, from such an Oneness in a Spiritual State,
and those Specific Properties of a Spiritual, and New Nature, with as
discernible evidence, as if one man should meet with another of the same kind,
in such a place of the Earth, which were only inhabited with Beasts.

6. By considering also, (with a deep and serious reflection hereon,) that
sure, and known Conjunction, which is betwixt the most rare Experiences of a
Christians Life, and the most searching Trials thereof, with that uniform
Consent that has in all Ages of the Church been, in such marvelous things, as
these. 1. What solemn Tokens and Testimonies of the Love of God, and his
Acceptance, are found usually to meet his People in the entry of some great
Trial, or Service for him; even in some unusual manner then, in the sense
whereof, as it was with Elijah, they have been made to go many days after in a
Wilderness-state; yea how this does not respect Persons only, but Churches;
that the Word still uses to go before with some remarkable confirming work, to
secure the heart before the Cross, and some special Trial of Persecution comes.
2. That as each day has its proper burden, and work, so has it its proper
allowance provided for the same; which should be no less sought after by a
Christian, than his daily Bread, and when the pressure of such a day grows to
some more singular height; so also should the expense hereof be in Faith sought
for, and expected. 3. How the choicest Mercies are reserved to the saddest
Times of a Christians Lot; and most usually cross to their own choice, and they
have had the greatest struglings with those Methods of Providence, which in the
issue tended most to their Advancements. 4. Yea how the returns of a long
deferred hope after much humble waiting have been to them, as a Pisgah, whence
they have not only had a clear, and comforting prospect of their bypast
Trials, but have been more fully confirmed for the time to come; and can bear
now that Testimony, that the Lord has cleared all past things to them, and
has taken the Vail off his work, which for long had been as a dark and strange
Riddle.

7. This likewise gives a most clear, and confirming prospect of that great
Seal of Experience, when he can now see, both in his own case, and of others,
what the issue of believing in a singular Exigency, and Trial, and upon some
special act of trust, and adventure herein, does at last come to; which, the
more deeply it is considered, he finds one of the most peculiar assistances to
his Faith, and one of the greatest seize of Experimental Religion within
time; when he can thus see the same way of believing, (in some strong and
extraordinary assaults,) which he has found to crush and break him herein;
which has carried so many through in their saddest Trials; bring him also in
his turn, to be an instance in the same kind, to bear an honorable Testimony
to this sure, and excellent way of believing before the World, that none may
fear, after him, to hold by the promise of God, and venture on that security,
(though it then seem against hope,) whose Dispensations, did yet never, never
give his Word the lie.

CHARACT. IV. He is a truly confirmed Christian, who in a dismal time, is not
staggered in his Faith from the present signs, and appearances thereof, but
has his Soul ballasted with such solid grounds of confirmation against the
same, that those Providence, whereat others do most stumble, tend to his
further strengthening in the way of the Lord, when he does now clearly see;

1. How Tribulation, and the Cross make one of the most illustrious, and
beautiful parts of the whole frame of Providence about the Church, and in the
Lot of each Christian; so as there can be no poss^ble stumbling to any for want
of Light here, that sore Trials, and Distress should most remarkably follow
those in their Journey, who have an Eternal Blessedness before them in the
close hereof; when so great a part of the Scripture is directed not only for
comfort, but for clear conduct of the Christians Faith, through all the
intricacies and labyrinths of such a dispensation. He s^^s how highly congruous
it is to the Infinite Wisdom of God, that so strait and narrow a way, in such a
s^ate of Trial as is here, should go before the st^te of everlasting enjoyment;
that there should be s^^h a Stage, and Theater also, whereon the passive Graces
of the Spirit, may not only be exercised, but displayed in their true luster,
and glory before Angels, and men. Yea, that thus the Redeemed of the Lord
should be first trained in so sharp a Warfare, as may not only put a due value,
and respect on the greatness of that Triumph, and Reward which is to come* but
be matter of ineffable Joy, and Exultation, that ever they were admitted thus
to evidence their Love and Adherence to their blessed Head, and his Truth here
on the Earth; and accounted worthy to be put on some hotter service, and to
peculiar Trials, and Conflicts this way beyond others, for some example, and
encouragement to the Church in their day; and here also he can now see how the
greatest enjoyments of Comfort, are more owing to the most sharp, and
afflicting Trials of their Life, than to the greatest external Calm; and that
to endure patiently, and suffer for the name Christ, is such a Privilege as
the Elect Angels have not been admitted to. Yea, that the Lords chastning work,
and sorest smiting of his own, is an Act also of saving; so that thus, the more
deeply he searches here, the more does he see, admire, and consent to that
glorious piece of the administration of Providence about the Church; and finds
it to be one of the greatest Confirmations of his Faith within time.

1. He does now clearly see how the Truth, and Faithfulness of God is
commensurate to his whole work of Providence; and that all the Lines hereof, as
they do lead from his Revealed Counsel in the Scripture, (which is the adequate
sign of his Eternal Counsel, and Decrees,) so do they return thither again, to
make this great demonstration clear; that if a full History were written of
this World, and what has been conspicuous through the whole series of times
past in all these Conjunctions of Inferior Causes, (whether necessary, free,
or contingent, and of such Events that seem most casual,) it should be nothing
else but an ex^ct Transcript, and History of the Bible, to bear this witness,
That the World is nothing but God set forth in his own Scripture Light. But
though a full discovery hereof be not attainable within time, yet is it a sad,
and deplorable want, that the great Acts of the Lord, in each Age of the
Church, are not more searched, and sought out of all them that take pleasure
therein, that they may be seen, observed, and admired, by that part of the
Creation, Angels, and Men, who are only in a capacity to know the same. Which
is a Service for the Lord, wherein his Praise, and Declarative Glory is so
highly concerned, that a Christian should account the meanest Room herein, one
of the most desirable Seize within time. Yea it seems just matter of
regret also that this comes not under a more public Care, and notice of
Particular Churches, and of the Christian Magistrate, (where Religion has any
true regard,) to have such solemn Providence as occur in that time, and place,
which may be called most Instructive Providence to the Church, (and of a
further reach, and extent than any Private use*) both Searched after, and
Recorded; as becomes so high a Service to the Christian Cause, and one of the
highest concerns of Posterity, in Order to have them not only possessed of a
pure Religion, but of that Seal also, which the Lord has in the great Acts of
Providence appended thereto. And thus to have that Increase, which each
Successive Age brings therewith to the public Stock of the Church, looked
after, as a piece of the greatest trust reposed thereon; so that the Children
rise not up and say, we have not heard, nor have our Fathers faithfully
communicated to us the wondrous Works which the Lord has wrought in their time.

3. He is thus also taught to see the Demonstrative Causes of the most strange
Judgments on the Church, to be as clear in the Scripture as they are in the
event. And though the Holy God, in the day of his Patience, and Long-suffering,
is not alike quick in the Execution of the Sentences of his Word; yet does he
ever establish the Authority of his Laws by the works of his Providence in the
most opportune season, and as Judgment deferred is no acquittance, so does it
more threaten its being the greater, when it comes, than a quick and present
dispatch; yea though this tempest which now blows on the Churches of Christ,
come to a greater height, and the darkness be such, as no Moon, or Stars may
for many days yet appear of any Visible signs of Hope; yet is his Soul thus at
rest, whilst he can see the Credit of the Truth cleared, on which he has more
in trust than any Adventure within time; and does rejoice, whatever miscarrying
there may be of Inferior Ends, that this great, and ultimate End of the works
of God is secured herein; and the Glory of his Truth does shine forth in the
most strange and amazing Acts of his Providence, whereat many are ready to
stagger, when they do not wisely consider the same.

4. He sees now likewise, so high a value which the Lord puts on the Trial of
his Peoples Faith, and that the great dispensation whereby he deals with men,
is by trust, and on the credit of his Word, as it adds further to his
Confirmation, to see all humane, and Visible Refuges often taken out of his
Churches sight. Yea his greatest works in the Earth make the greatest delay ere
they be brought forth, and his Churches Case is put so far beyond help before a
cure, as the first quickening of her crushed, and almost dead hope, must be at
the mouth of the Grave; and he is thus herein more singularly strengthened, that
when the Lord speaks the same in the way of Providence, which he has spoke in
his Word, [not by Might nor by Power,] that he does with unspeakable Advantage
supply, and fill the room thereof by the next Word, [but by my Spirit says the
Lord.] Which in this day should with a full Assurance of Faith be both sought
and looked after.

5. It is in this rare Study he attains also the greatest Confirmation to his
Faith, that could possibly be desired within time; to see now when it is so near
the close thereof, and after all the Revolutions of times past, how the Truth
and Faithfulness of God, has (as the Sun in its Strength,) still kept its way
straight and fixed amidst all those dark Clouds, which have been to darken the
same, and is now gone its course, until it draws near to the full, and perfect
day; yea thus to see how signally this present Age is held upon that same
appeal, andd solemn Testimony which Joshua gave, Josh. 23.14. That not one
thing has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke
concerning you, all are come to pass to you, and not one thing has failed
thereof; and Solomon did bear also at the Dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings
8.56. Blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his People Israel,
according to all that he promised, there has not failed one Word of all his
good Promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his Servant; so is this
now that great Testimony of the latter days, and the highest Tribute of Praise
to the Glory of God in his Truth, which can be given by men, that this present
Generation stands accountable to make the same, yea much greater appeal to the
World, if they can instance one Promise or Prediction of that sacred record of
the Scripture which has ever failed or fallen to the ground, but may be this
day read in the Event, and under those proper circumstances wherein it was to
take place in its proper Season, as evidently as it was foretold. And must
still bear the same witness, Psalm. 18.30. That the way of the Lord is perfect,
and his Word tried on all the Adventures of Faith, and Trials which to this
moment of time have been made hereof, and of his being still a Buckler to such
as trust in him, and are called to send this glorious Testimony to the
succeeding Ages, that it may never cease to shine or want a public witness
thereto before Angels and Men, until the whole mystery of God in his Word be
finished, in that magnificent close which shall be thereof at the second Coming
of the Lord.

CHARACT. V. A Confirmed Christian in this day should be thus also stated, as
one who has not only attained a solid rest and settlement of Mind, upon the
Certainty of the Christian Faith but does know the pure genuine Truth of
Christianity, amidst such high Oppositions betwixt the Romish, and Reformed
Church herein.

And in the first place has in this manner held himself upon such a trial; 1.
As one who knows there is but one true, and saving Religion in the Earth, to
which God has annexed the Promise of Eternal Life, which can never be divided
against it self. 2. Who knows that within a little while his Religion will be
tried in the Truth thereof, at the Tribunal of Christ; where every man must
give account of himself unto God. 3. Who sees there can be no possible
indifference in the Exterior Profession of either way, but that so high a
contrariety of Principles is in this Opposition, that if the Doctrine of Christ
be on the one hand, it is sure Antichristianism must be on the other hand. 4.
Yea who has in that abstract manner sought to state the Case herein with his
own Soul, as if he were just come out of Paganism, to give a serious assent to
the Divinity of the Scripture, and were now press^d to join in with that
Profession of the Christian Faith, which is most exactly conform to the same,
in the genuine, and perspicuous sense thereof.

In the second place he has sought to know, how he could embrace the Popish
Creed, and adventure his Eternal state thereon; or how he could extinguish his
Reason, and Conscience, so far as to believe that the Holy God would ever
impose such a Faith upon men, as this is; 1. Where he must abandon these
Principles of natural Reason, in the most necessary use thereof, which God has
himself planted in man's Soul; so as not to trust his own Eyes, but others in
that great Interest of his Eternal State; and with his own consent be shut out
from all proper knowledge of the rule of his Religion; yea account a blind, and
unlimited Obedience to men, amongst the highest Excellencies of Faith. 2. Where
he must at once believe the Fullness, and Perfection of the Scripture; (which is
not only fitted for that great end of bringing Mankind to God, but for such an
universal use herein, as to make the Simple wise, and cause the Poor to receive
the Gospel;) and yet believe also, that it is a Mass of dead, and unsensed
Characters, until the Romish Clergy put a just Sense thereon, tho its Sense and
meaning is the very Soul thereof. Yea thus pass from the Letter of the same,
and all Certainty of its Truth, (from Intrinsic Evidences, and these Marks,
and Characters of its Divinity,) whereby the Christian Cause could be
maintained against Pagans. 3. Where he must believe also that these are the
Words of Christ, Joh. 7.17. If any man do my will he shall know my Doctrine,
whether it be of God or not, and that men err through not knowing the
Scripture, Mat. 22. And yet believe all the while, that these sacred Fountains
of Light should be shut up, to keep men from Errors; and that the sole right of
understanding the same, belongs to a few, not to the Multitude; who yet can
pretend no extraordinary Assistance, or Revelation herein, nor will themselves
come to these waters of Jealousy to be tried. 4. Where he must needs believe
that the Scriptures are the Oracles of God committed to the Church, to give
answer in every dark Case, Romans 3.2. The Type and Form of sound Doctrine, Romans
6.17. Unto whose Sentence in all matters both of Faith and Practice, we are
expressly referred, Isa. 8.20. And yet believe also, that it has no Authority,
or Decisive Voice; but what is Precarious, and dependant on the Romish Church.
And thus Consent to have the whole Christian Faith Visibly unhinged of the
Foundation of the Scripture; and subjected to a Supreme, Visible, and pretended
Infallible Judge here in the Earth, with such a claim of Dominion over the
Faith of the Saints, as the Apostles of Christ durst never own, but did fully
disclaim, 2 Cor. 1.24. 5. Where he must believe that Jesus Christ came for this
end, to save lost man, and by one Offering has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified, Heb. 10.18. And yet join with the same, a Faith of a human
Satisfaction for Sin, so as men may both Merit, Mediate, and Supertrogate, go
above what is needful for themselves; And so be saved in the same way of Life,
which was by the Covenant of Works; ascribing no more to Christ than the giving
Salvation to men's own Merits; which their own Intrinsic Value, and Condignity,
does require as a Debt. 6. He finds not how in the same Creed he could possibly
hold by one Mediator betwixt God and Man, where a Plurality for this end is
admitted; and by the reality of Christ's human Nature, and his having a true and
finite Body, which is subjected to have a new created Being, each time in the
Consecrated Host; or beli^ve the Truth of his Sufferings as now fully
accomplished, and to be repeated no more, when it is in that daily Sacrifice of
the Mass still offered, as a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the
Dead. So on the most severe, and impartial inquiry, he cannot find how one
holding these Principles should go a further length than Morality; or claim
another standing than by a Covenant of Works. 7. Nor knows he how to believe at
once the Truth of the Gospel, to be a Doctrine of Holiness, and Infinite
Purity, and yet join in the same Faith such an Indulgence for men to Sin, that
Money may stand for Merit, and the Rich may have the most easy and large Entry
into Heaven. Conceit that it is a Privilege for men to destroy themselves; and
by External Severities and Penance to the Flesh, (like to the Lancing and
Gashing of Baals Priests,) supply the room of Christian Mortification. 8. Yea
he finds it not possible to believe, that Sin can only be expiated by the Blood
of Christ; and is his alone Work, who has purged our Sin himself, Heb. 1.3. Or
that there are more than two ways that lead to a twofold State of men; (a
Strait way which leads to a Life, and a Broad unto Destruction, Mat. 7.14.) and
yet believe that there is a Purgatory after this life, wherein men must be
tormented and suffer extreme Pains, to expiate such Venial Sins, as their
Prayers, and Penances here could not do; yea he is made to wonder how any who
believes such a thing, can ever have true Peace, or Comfort in the World;
concluding that Papists do either take it as a Fiction, or forget themselves,
when they are cheerful. For the fear of such a place, the Uncertainty of
Release, and how long a term it may be ere this Purging Work be complete, (when
their own Writers Assign no less time, than 10000 Years as needful to satisfy
for some Sins,) and fear lest it prove a real Hell, must still be a piercing
terror; nor can he believe that such should Credit themselves herein, who
assume this Power to Change the Condition of the Dead. Since were it really
believed, that the Keys of such a Prison were here in men's hands, and Folk
could, by the largest Bribes to the Romish Church, get a safe Deliverance
thence; it were not strange to see the Temporal State of Christendom in a short
time made over to these. We should Judge they were in a strange manner indeed
privileged above the whole residue of men, who by such a Power over the World
to come could make so easy a Purchase of this also which is present. 9. He
finds, and is sure he could never get his Reason and Conscience brought to such
a Faith, even tho he made a feigned Profession herein, of that pretended
Supremacy of Peter as Bishop of Rome, on which the whole frame and structure of
the Papacy leans, and the Virtue of all the Pardons, and Absolutions founded
thereon; on which so many have adventured into an other World; except he would
build on the Sand only, and not on the Rock. 10. He finds also how such an
Erection of the Gospel Church in her Militant State here, as the Papacy in its
complex frame is, united in such an Head, as the Pope, (who as the sole
Vicegerent of Christ in the Earth, is at once invested with a Civil Monarchy,
and Universal Empire over the Church, to impose, and judge in the highest
Transactions which relate to the Eternal State, and Immortal Souls of Men,) is
a thing that as to Matter of Right, is as Foreign to the Scripture, and
inconsistent therewith, as Mahumetanism can be. And as to Matter of Fact, is a
Trust that no created Being could ever Exercise. 11. He sees, and is sure that
he must either lose sight both of the Rule, and Spirit of the Gospel, or have a
just abhorrence of that way, wherein he should be inevitably Involved in a
Virtual Consent, and Accessoriness to all that Cruelty, and Blood which for so
many Ages has been shed therein; when it is so clear that this was no
Exorbitance only of Practice; but a Native result of their Tenets, and
Principles, and not only dispensed with, but counted an highly Meritorious
Service; yea when it is sure that under no Secular Government of the most
Tyrannical State that ever was in the World, has such Arbitrary Violence, and
Oppression been exercised. Or so much Innocent Blood been shed, as by this
party. 12. And tho his Judgment stood indetermined, and in an equal Balance
upon this great Controversy, he could not exercise Reason, and not see upon
what Hand such a Decision is, as was in Solomon's time of the true Mother of the
Child; and who do most ruefully seek to interest themselves in the imminent
Hazard of the Christian Faith, and who under the least influence of any
Temporal Motives do this day stand for the Truth and Substance of Christianity,
and plead that i^ be not destroyed in envy and hatred to them; or on what side
it is likely that this manner of Conquest is most followed to gain men to the
Profession of the Truth by a prevailing Evidence of their own Light, and
Judgment herein, and to require their exactest personal Trial, and enquiry
about the same.

In the third place, tho he sees there can be no pretense of Doctrinal Wavering
about the Reformed Religion, and finds it not easy to comprehend how in one
and the same Age, wherein the Truth has so brightly shined, this way of
Popery, should have Prevalence, or gain ground any more, by Seduction with
Arguments to the Reason, or Conscience of any; yet since it is an hour of
Temptation, and of Fainting, above all that have been hitherto known, and men's
eyes are Arrested with such a Prospect of the times, as is like to Stagger the
Faith of the most established; he is pressed, (as counting it one of the
highest Duties of this day,) to know and search out what may afford greatest
Assistance to his Faith, from the Dispensations of Providence therein, and to
know the Evidence, and Strength of such Reflections as these are for this End.

1. That it is sure, as the smallest things which the Lord does afford, to
strengthen and support against such a Storm, should be seriously improved, and
taken to Heart; so does it lay us in the way of that Promise for having greater
things given to our Observation; yea that now is the time when such as have
been most comforted by the Word of Promise, may be put to the sorest Trial in
their Faith of any, to keep off stumbling at the Work of Providence: and be
thus tried according to the measure of these Confirmations.

2. Tho the Churches Declinings under greatest measures of Light may be too
visible, and that Religion gains not by Persecution as formerly, with such an
amazing change as is now in her External Condition, yet he sees it to be no
strange thing, when most signal warnings have gone before of such a Trial with
too evident Dispositions toward the same, and discovery of its approach in all
the Causes thereof; yea might be forseen by all that the Holy God would not
still bear with an Impure, and unenlivened Profession of the Pure and Glorious
Truth of Christianity, which has now long been one of the most sad, and mortal
signs in the public state of Religion; nor can it be found that ever any
Church did decline and fall from the Purity of the Truth, and lose ground
herein by External Persecution, where a judicial departure of its Life and
Power did not remarkably go before; so as it is not of late, this has been
clearly presaged, that some dark and unusual measure of trial from Antchrist,
and the last Havoc of the Reformed Churches, was drawing near, which would be
sore ere it had done its work.

3. He sees also, how this present hour is not more searching and dark, than it
may be clear herewith, 1. That now after the issue of that Opposition, which
was betwixt the Christian Faith in the first Entry of the Gospel, and that
dying Apostate Church of the Jews; and next, with the Pagan Empire, after that
new Erection of the Gospel Church among the Gentiles, which is now over; so is
the greatest Trial of the latter days fixed on the Decision of that long
depending Controversy betwixt Christ, and Antichrist, 2. That according to the
Scripture we must believe that as after the manner of Egypt, that glorious
Triumph and Delivery of the Church from Antichrist will be surely carried on;
so the more near it comes to the last assault; (and when this falls in to have
its proper room in the Frame and Administration of Providence;) the greater
Extremity, Terror, and Darkness may be expected also, such as has not been in
any former time. Yea with that united and formidable Conjunction of Strength
and growing Success of this Adversary for a time, that the most established
Christians may be in hazard to stagger. 3. That now is the day wherein the Lord
will have men know what it is to have the Bible as the alone Security of the
Protestant Religion, on which they must entirely rest no less than as it is the
sole Rule and Standard thereof; which is a Trial worthy of all that expense of
the Pain, Anguish, and Wrestlings, that can now possibly attend the same.

4. Whilst the great Standard of Antichrists Kingdom is visibly set up, and
brought to the open field, as it is this day in the Church of France, and all
humane help taken out of sight; yet does he see herewith, 1. How this now is
concluded, as the most infallible Remedy to recover Popery. And that Argument,
to which they trust more than to Peter's Keys, to wit, these Sanguinary Laws by
the Sword, and Rack, which they have again betaken themselves to, tho such an
Argument the Scripture never knew, and sober Heathens would abhor, and which
gives up the Credit of all Religion to Atheism. 2. That there can be no more
evidence of a desperate and sinking Cause than is here, and nothing else can
support it, but these weapons which are not against the Conscience; or by any
terror of the second Death, but of the first. 3. That this is such an
Argument, (if they have not in a strange manner forgot,) which has within
these 100 Years been so fully Answered, and by such an immediate Appearance of
God in the Kingdom of France, that according to these measures of Cruelty
against the Protestants there, so was it returned in a deluge of their own
Blood, yea so both the public state of the Church and Faith of the Saints in
the Truth was more deeply rooted; and tho we yet see not the end of these
wonders, but the Dark-side only of the Dispensations of such a day, yet do we
know this sore Rod on the Church, is but as the Saw and Ax in the Carpenters
hand, who shall never undo that glorious Work which Christ has done, and is
still further perfecting on the ruins of Antichrists Kingdom.

5. Tho some unusual deeps, and Methods of Subtilty be now on foot also against
the Truth; yet he cannot but see how nothing could more effectually tend to
confirm the Protestant Cause, and take the Credit of Popery off the Consciences
of those in their own Profession who are considerate and in the least serious
herein; when the World must thus see, 1. How easy it is for such to take any
Measure, and Latitude in the Doctrinals of their Profession, when this can most
serve the juncture of such a time, and heighten or narrow the Controversy
betwixt them, and the Reformed Church at their Pleasure; so as to Sacrifice the
Church of Rome unto the Court of Rome, if no less can secure that end. 2. That
the most horrid Turkish Slavery over men's Bodies comes no such length, as that
strange claim that these now make of an absolute Empire over men's Consciences
by the Sword; and to put them to such a Tribute of their Obedience, that they
shall then be secure, if they but come the length to Sin against their Light,
and adventure on so small a thing as to go to Hell, and perish Eternally; since
it is an external and feigned Profession of such away that they do thus force
from those, who (they see) cannot in Faith be persuaded hereof. 3. Yea it has
been too visible how much that Master-plot, and Engine, has in these times
been working, to take men first off from all Sense of Religion, and destroy
them in the Morals of Christianity, to make this Conquest more easy, that such
may have no Inward Defense, and support against the terror of humane Violence.
Yea in this way, when they have sought how to divide Protestants among
themselves, and betwixt Rulers, and them, this seems the last and greatest
Engine of all, how to divide betwixt them, and their God, Acting the same Plot,
which was laid betwixt Balak and Balaam, as knowing that it is no naked show or
Profession of the Reformed Religion they need fear, so much as that Old
Protestant Spirit in the Power and Life thereof, before which their Interest
could never stand; and dread nothing so much as the reviving hereof, which as
the handwriting upon the wall did ever more threaten the fatal ruin of that
Kingdom, than any Humane Power, or Strength.

6. Here also he finds just cause of Astonishment, how Kings, or great Men in
the Earth should give their Power to support the Romish Interest, which has
been so visibly destructive to theirs: When its not possible to deny how it is
first advance, and progress to that Supreme height, which it once attained; and
the declining of the Civil Empire, did by the same steps go together; until
Magistracy was turned unto a dead Image, and Shadow, except its being enlivened
by their breath and Authority, as it was during the whole height of that
Antichristian Power. Nor will it be denied, that, in these late times, the
French Monarchy was never more near its Dissolution in its right Line, than by
the Catholic League there; and it would seem not easy to be forgot, how Henry
the third, who had most sought to crush the Protestants in pursuance of that
league, was at last constrained to flee to such for help; or by whom he was
killed; and that Heroic Prince Henry the Fourth, who was first stabbed in the
Mouth, and then in the Heart; yea that the public Records of that Nation
cannot possibly deny, but the House of Bourbon owes its Power and Preservation
more to the Protestants, (without whom it had been fully extinct,) than
Ahashuerus did to Mordecai the Jew, for what he found written in the Chronicles
of Persia, when the Decree was then past to destroy all the seed of the Jews.

7. As in no times past was ever a greater Expectation than is now, which way
the Scale will turn, and what will be the end of these wonders, when the
nearest events of Providence are so dark and amazing; so does he find this, in
some extraordinary way called for, to be still, and see what God will do for
his Church, and with humble Confidence look for some such Dispensation as has
not hitherto been in this extreme Exigence. And tho he do not appear in that
way, and manner as in former times, that it shall be in a way more signally
glorious, beyond what has formerly been; yea he does in Faith thus judge, that
then is the Churches day broke, and has found the sure way of her Strength,
and right Line of Duty; when her Hope, and Confidence is taken off from all
visible refuges, and entirely settled on her invisible Head, and his Promise put
to suit by Prayer without fainting herein. It is sure the Truth, and
Faithfulness of God stands engaged for Antichrists fall, as well as for
Salvation by Christ, and since he has said this Adversary shall be broke and
brought down, it must surely be, tho the dust of the ground should rise for
this end, and now is the Faith of the Saints called for becoming the greatness
of such an Assurance, on which are the Eyes of men, of their own Consciences,
of the Elect Angels, yea of the glorious God, to see who does indeed Credit him
in this day, when there is no sensible support herein; and tho it now threatens
sorely the departure of many from the Faith, who had some visible Profession
thereof, yet may it be hoped for, that the turn of the next Tide shall bring in
more, with a Solid, and true Increase to the Church, than these sad days do now
take off.

CHARACT. VI. It is thus a Confirmed Christian should be specially considered,
as one who is not only at rest on the known certainty of his Faith, but is
ready to render some account of the solid rational grounds and demonstrations
hereof, unto all who ask after the same, and does thus judge, 1. That these are
the proper and appointed means which the Lord has afforded for the greatest
Confirmation of men's Faith within time; yea preferable to any external
Miracles, which are more extraordinary and remote Assistances thereto. 2. That
these are given as such a great help to his Joy, and Excitement of his
Affections to follow the Lord fully, as may make him wonder how the greatness
of these things, (which men are called to believe,) can come near their
thoughts, and yet no more take them up about this Confirming Work. 3. That the
too visible neglect hereof, both with respect to the Youth and Community of
Professors in the Church, seems one of the sad, and fundamental defects of
this day. The Reasons h^reof, with some clear view of these means which ^ight
most answer such an end, are briefly offered, in this preceding Work.

CHARACT. VII. A truly Confirmed Christian may in the last place be herein also
considered, as such whose Faith being often tried through all these Stages of
Christianity he has been taken; has some proper Record of the most choice,
and signal Confirmations of his Life, to improve the same not only for his own
support in that last warfare of death, but for strengthening the Faith of
others; wherein he does thus judge, 1. That there could be no true support or
relief from Religion here in the Earth, if it cannot bear out then. And that
Death is the great To^chstone and Trial, when the true value and difference
betwixt things of an Eternal Truth and substance, and the things of this World,
will be best seen. 2. He reckons each real Christian, by his Profession then
engaged and accountable, (even by some explicit personal Testimony,) to put to
his Seal that God is True, and bear the same witness with his last and dying
breath to the Truth of Christianity, which he gave in the whole course of his
Life; and of that joy, complacence, and assurance of Mind, which he has found,
and now has in the way of Truth: So as to press the same on his dearest
Relations, as their alone true Interest. 3. He sees also, how honorable it is
for the Lord, that such whose Faith has been often tried, (and when thus with
Joy, and Admiration he can look back on the most pressing and conspicuous
Conflicts of time,) should have it their last work to pay in some Tribute of
Praise, unto him, whose Word, and Promise unto them did yet never fail. 4. He
accounts the more weighty Trials he has been carried through in his Christian
warfare, do both add more to this Service, and impart more to the value of such
a Testimony. 5. He judges this one special way, and advantage, whereby one
Generation might declare the Truth and Faithfulness of God unto another, in a
Family Line and Relation, to show forth thus that the Lord is upright; that he
is their Rock, and with him is no Unrighteousness. Yea which should be matter
of unspeakable Joy, when now in his turn he can say that such has the Lord
been to him; what were David's dying Words, 1 Kings 1.14. Who has delivered my
Soul out of all distress, how that in no trouble, or exigence of his Life, he
was ever left without a door of Hope, and thus also with Caleb, Josh. 14.10. To
give in some such witness for God, I am now near the close of time, and do
testify, that the Word of his Truth, and Promise, he has surely accomplished;
which has brought me safe and honorably through, when such as did distrust
the same by misbelief, and sought after another refuge, found all their
Confidences fail. 6. And knowing likewise how great a suprizal Death may be;
and that such as have shined in their day, may yet set under a cloud and go
silent off the Stage; he judges it the more needful to have such a piece of
his dying work prepared, as one of the choicest Legacies he can bequeath to his
Surviving Friends, in a season when it has usually the greatest advantage of
weight and acceptance: it being still qualified with Christian Prudence, and
Humble Sobriety; so as all may see its whole intent is to commend to men's
Conscience the way of Truth and Godliness and not themselves, and thus direct
it, for the proper use, and improvement of their nearest Relations. I know it
may be strange to some, what is spoke upon this Head; but as it is sure the
present day has its Duty, and each time of out Life has some proper work, so
I humbly judge, that this seems to fall in, as the last Service of a dying
Christian to his Generation, to deliver off his hand the Truth which he had
received and has often proved, with his Confirmatory Seal and Testimon^ thereto.
And now is it in some more than ordinary way called for in this hour of great
darkness, when if the Security of the Absolute Promises stood not good to the
Church, we might fear Religion might quickly wear out, and Truth perish from
the Earth; and as so solemn and weighty a thing should it be managed with much
humble Prudence, so that it may be judged that there is no serious, and
observing Christian, but has some peculiar engagements under which they find
themselves held even beyond others, yea some such Singular Confirmations in the
Journal of their Life, that should not be easy to hide under the ground; where
the strengthening of others hereby is concerned; and that such should not then
leave the Cross of Jesus Christ at a loss, or part therewith without their
Testimony, which has left them at so great an Advantage. And though this is
not to offer particular Rules in such a Duty, but that Christian Wisdom must
direct herein, as the present Case is circumstantiated, yet might it be hoped,
were this more taken to Heart, it should be a singular means to make more deep
Impressions of men's dying Work on their Spirits. Even whilst they are in
health, to excite their surviving Friends, and to keep Religion thus alive in a
Family state, and Relation, and gain a more venerable respect to the same on
men's Consciences; yea to fix also stronger engagements on the succeeding
offspring.

Thus is presented here a short Idea of the solid and judicious Work of
Christian Confirmation in the Truth, under these foregoing Characters, to show
how rare an attainment of Religion this is, yea to present herein a special
Series and Scale of the greatest steps in this Confirmatory work, by which it
should be followed. And none of these may be parted from other, though some be
of an higher, and more absolute use for such an end. And if it should be
objected here, What needs any such expense of time, or pains in this Case, when
it is sure the Essential Truths of the Gospel are not questioned, and that
without internal evidence of the Spirit, no external means of this kind can be
of use. I know that it is the alone work of the Holy Ghost, to beget a Divine
and supernatural Faith; without which the furthest Light, and Objective
Evidence, though backed with a continued Dispensation of External Miracles,
could never bear Christians out, either as to Duty, or Comfort, in their
passage through time; yea nothing is in the least here to subject the Credit of
our Faith to men's Rational Comprehension, but rather tends to enervate wholly
the str^ngth of any such Tenet, and take off all pretense for the same: But
it is sure also, I must quit all solid Security in the way of Religion, and any
clear founding in the Light and Certainty of the Scripture, or admit these
things as undeniable, 1. That supernatural Faith is the most highly rational
Light that is within time. And that none who profess the Name of Christ can be
of so low a size, as should not be pressed, and excited to be much about this
Groundwork of knowing the Truth, and Principles of their Profession upon its
own Evidence; yea are thus called as new born Babes to drink in the sincere
Milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. Which, as it is clearly in the Original, is the
rational Milk of the Word, to be thus received no less on Conviction, and
Certainty of the Judgment, than with the out going of their affections. 2. That
as it is not conceiveable how a true and firm Assent can be to Divine Truth, but
on its known Certainty, so here is no resolving of the Christians Faith on the
strongest rational Evidences hereof, which must still be resolved on the
Testimony of God, made clear and evident to them to be such. 3. It is sure
also, the Lord has not given so large a measure of these Grounds, and
Demonstrations of his Truth with such redoubled Arguments of that kind, to be
of so small regard, as is with most. But for some great, and universal use
hereof to the whole Church, and knew how needful such Assistances to the Faith
of his People would be, whilst they are on the Earth. 4. That these means,
which tend most convincingly to found a rational Assurance in the Judgment, are
the proper Vehicle of the Spirit of God, by which his sealing Work, should be
both sought and expected; nor can I judge how the Credit, and use hereof should
be so small, and not on the same Ground quit any External Ordinance of the
Gospel; which without the Spirit of the Lord can never profit, nor how we
should expect and suit his Confirming Work on the Soul, when these greatest
Confirming Means, which he has given to the Church, have no just weight: But
oh! how wonderful a Teacher is the Holy Ghost, when such ordinary means fail,
and are inaccessible, by furnishing his People then with these strongest
Arguments of Love, and Power, who having had but small Measures of Light, yet
were not unfaithful to improve the smallest degree of such a Talent? 5. Yea so
great a thing is it, to attain a solid Faith of Things wholly remote from our
Sense, and so far above the reach, and Apprehension of Nature, or to have an
absolute reliance on an invisible Refuge, for our present and Eternal State, as
no common Assent can answer, when the very rest and quiet of the Soul must
needs lie in the sure and firm Persuasion hereof. 6. It is too visible also how
little the Practical Use of such a mean has yet been essaied in the Church,
tha^ all who are members thereof might no less know the Strength and Firmness
of the Foundation of their Faith by its own Evidence, than the General Articles
of Religion. The most usual instructing work lies almost wholly about the
Noetick part of Divinity, there seems not that serious regard to press the
Dianoetick part hereof on Men's Conscience, as if this were to be restrained to
a few who are more Knowing, Learned, and of an Inquisitive Spirit about the
rational Certainty of the Truth, and for whom these choice and abundant helps
of this kind, which are in this Age, seem more peculiarly directed. It Is sure,
that the Christian Faith in the first-times did remarkably then spread, and
prevail, by these clear Evidences hereof to the Judgment, made Effectual by the
Spirit of God, more than by extraordinary Miracles. Nor knew they otherwise
wha^ lt was to be Christians, but by embracing the Truth with a full Assurance
of Understanding, no less than of Delight and Affection. But if it be objected,
it is not the Case now, where Religion is planted in a Nation, and has an
uncontrollable Public Profession under the support of Humane Laws; I know no
admitted weight this can have, except that it should be granted, that
Christians now be Born, and not new-created. 7. Yea is it not sure, (tho it
seem little understood,) that the primary Grounds, and Evidences of our Faith
are not only as to their End demonstrative of the Truth, and Divinity of the
Scripture, but are upon the Matter, such Demonstrations also which most
natively result from the same by infallible Consequence; and are thus to be
accounted not as Humane, but Divine Arguments, given us by the Spirit of God.
8. I shall but further add, how such as do seriously ponder things, will find
this Demonstration to be no more important than clear, that to be a Confirmed
Christian, and a Confirmed Protestant are Convertible Terms; and that if they
that are under that Deplorable Bondage, and Darkness of Popery were but once
awaked to see the Truth, and Certainty of the Christian Faith, by its
Intrinsic and Objective Evidence, and taken off that brutish Credulity, and
Dependence on the alone Credit of others herein, it might be said the strongest
Engine to hold up that Profession were then broke, and we should see the
Doctrine, and Rule of Faith to be of such full, and perspicuous Evidence from
the Scripture, as without Blasphemy they could not seek from the Lord to give
them a plainer Rule, than what he has there given.

READER,
IT IS like thou may think strange, how these few Sheets in the close fall in
here, after the foregoing part was finished; but the they meet in one Design,
and Interest, yet was not this then intended until the former was done, and if
it might tend to a solid use, and Fruit unto any, I shall forbear a further
Apology herein. I may truly say, the weight of the Subject has carried it some
further length than was designed, when I so much sought to be short, as I aim
at in any thing of this kind, that through my desire to avoid any unnecessary
multiplying of Words, I fear lest it may make some things ^^em a little dark at
the first view: Tho I hope, not upon any serious perusal of the same. Two
things I must further crave leave to add; 1. That when some Succinct View of
the great Assistances, and Confirmations of our Faith is here offered, which
these of the lowest Capacity of the Church, might with that advantage improve,
as in a few hours, by reading it some times over, may be so far impressed on
their Mind and Judgment, that they could give some clear and judicious account
thereof; it may be by such but seriously weighed, and taken to Heart of what
concern the use hereof is, 2. That I humbly judge also it were a most special
Service for the Truth in this day, to have some short Directory, and
remembrancer of the great Acts of the Lord, and Monuments of his Providence now
under the New Testament, in that manner held forth as might most tend to some
Universal Use of all within the Church. I Confess my desire pressed me to some
small Essay herein, with intent to have joined it to this Work, but having with
much Convict^on laid this wholly aside, as to any further appearance that way,
so is it with an Earnest Desire, that some more qualified, might take to Heart
and under their Hand so great a Service both for their Generation and
Posterity. It is sure the Lord has designed his People to be taught the
greatness of his Works as well as the precepts of his Word, and as no Duty is
more pressed than this under the Old Testament, both as to Public and Family
Instruction, so are we no less accountable in these last times for this
Improvement of such as are of known, public, and uncontrolable Evidence, and
should be the care of each Age to have that Solemn Remembrance kep^ up hereof,
so as not a few, but the very Multitude within the Church might be as a public
Library, and Repository of the same.

FINIS.

