Mr. FLEETWOOD's SERMON AGAINST CLIPPING.

Lane, Mayor.
Cur' specialis tent' die Dominico xvi die December is 1694. Annoque Regis and
Reginae Willielmi and Mariae Angl', andc. Sexto.
This Court does desire Mr. Fleetwood to Print his SERMON, this Day preached at
the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord MAYOR and Aldermen of this City.

Goodfellow.

Imprimatur.

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
December. 18. 1694.
A SERMON AGAINST CLIPPING, Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor
AND Court of ALDERMEN, AT GVILD-HALL Chapel, On December. 16. 1694.

By W. FLEETWOOD, Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin, and are to be Sold by John Whitlock, near
Stationers' Hall, 1694.

GENESIS xxiii. 16.And Abraham weighed to Ephron the Silver which he had named,
in the audience of the Sons of Heth, four hundred Shekels of Silver, current
Money with the Merchant.
AFter a generous Contest betwixt Ephron the Hittite, offering freely as a Gift
the Cave of Machpelah, and Abraham handsomely refusing so to take it, but
desiring earnestly to purchase it for a possession of a burying-place amongst
them, at an appointed Price, it was agreed, That he should pay Four hundred
Shekels of Silver for it. And Moses tells us in the Text, That Abraham weighed
to Ephron, etc. Of which Words, the Use that I intend to make, at present, will
be this, to take occasion from them to consider. First, The Use and Necessity
of Money to the carrying on the Trade and Commerce of the World. Secondly, The
Mischiefs of corrupting and debasing Money, the coining of bad Metal, or the
clipping and stealing from good. Thirdly, The Reasonableness and Justice of the
Laws that punish such Offenders.

I.
First, Of the Use and Necessity of Money to the carrying on the Trade and
Commerce of the World.
Men finding it, at first, impossible to subsist of themselves, and by the
immediate Product of their own Labors, were constrained to have recourse to
one another, to supply their Wants: They carried what they had the greatest
plenty of, and best could spare, to purchase what they needed most, at
another's Hands; who gave them what they came for, in consideration of what
they brought, if he found it valuable with others, or useful to himself.

This was, it is agreed, the way Men took at first, in the Infancy of Time and
Trade, to furnish themselves with the Necessaries, and some of the
Conveniences of Life, by Bartering and Exchanging one Commodity for another.

But this was found to be very inconvenient, upon the account of its being
difficult to agree upon the Price and Value of what each had in his Possession;
and the trouble of carrying and transporting Goods and Cattle from Place to
Place, and losing oftentimes their Pains and Labor, by reason that no one
wanted what they brought, nor would exchange, unless they would part with it,
to their great loss. And therefore, to prevent these Inconveniences, it was
agreed upon (we know not when, nor how, exactly) that something should be used
in common by them all, with which they should be able to purchase every thing
they wanted, from another; and by which they might rate and value all things
that they had themselves: To set up (in a word) some one particular thing, to
be the common Measure of the Worth and Price of every thing besides: And this
was to be something that was portable, for ease and convenience; something
durable, that it might not by constant use wear soon away; and something not
over-scarce, nor overcommon; and something, lastly, that was beautiful. All
these Qualities concurring in Metals, such as Brass and Copper, Silver and
Gold, they were each of them pitched upon, by several Nations, according to the
Plenty, or the Scarcity they had of them, to serve to all the above-named
Purposes: And this great thing that was to counter-balance, and (as the
Preacher says it does, Eccles. x. 19.) to answer all things else, was what we
now call Money.

How long this thing has been in practice in the World, is of no great* Use to
enquire; the mention of it in the Text, is older than we can find in any Book
besides, by at least Seven hundred Years, and yet there is no doubt but Money
was used before the Days of Abraham. But what is to our purpose to observe, is,
That it was valued both by Buyer and Seller, according to its Weight; and all
the Money that was received, was first weighed, as being the only means to
remedy the former Inconveniences; for by this, a Man was sure, that he
received so much Money as he rated his Goods at, and with which he might
purchase as much of what he wanted, as he could have had in exchange for his
Goods, without the trouble and hazard of carrying them up and down. For Money
is the common Pawn or Pledge, that one Man takes, in hopes of parting with it
to another, for what he wants, whenever he sees fit. But this could never be,
unless its weight were certain and determined. It is therefore sure, that
weight is Men's security, and the true intrinsic worth of Money.

But because it was too troublesome, and took up too much time, to carry
Scales, and weigh whatever they received, Men found it convenient to have a
Stamp or Mark set upon every Piece, to signify its weight and value; by which
Men knew what they received or paid away, with little or no trouble.

Yet something still was wanting to secure the truth of Payments: Men might be
fraudulent and false, and bring their Money, truly Marked and Stamped, and of a
just Weight, but of somewhat a baser Metal, and more alloy than it should truly
be; by which a Trader should receive as much for quantity and denomination as
he ought, but not of equal fineness and goodness with the current Coin. To
guard Men therefore against all these Mischiefs, and to keep them from doing
and receiving Injuries, and from imposing one upon another, and to secure
Trade, it was judged absolutely necessary to entrust the Kings and Governors
of Nations with the Care and Charge of Coining all the Public Money. For who
are so fit as they, who are presumed to be the Fathers of their People, the Men
of greatest Honor and Integrity, who are the most concerned, and have the most
to win or lose, and who are appointed and set up by God and Man, for no other
end and purpose than to consult, procure, and conserve the general Good of
their respective People: Who are so fit as they to have this Charge committed
to them, that is of such Importance, and so universal a concern? So that now we
have the Public Faith and Conscience, Interest and Honor, all engaged to
secure to the Receiver the Weight and Fineness of every single Piece of Money.
The Heads of Princes are not only stamped for Ornament and Honor, and to
declare who are and have been Governors of such a Nation, but publicly to
vouch the true intrinsic worth of every Piece, and tell Men that they there
receive so much Silver, and of such a fineness, and that that Image warrants
it: And for this cause it has been always highly Penal to Counterfeit the
Public Stamp, and to Coin Money, though of equal Weight and Goodness with the
King's: Not that any great evil is hereby done to any Man, but that if this
were indulged to private People, the World would fall again into distrust and
fear, into suspicion and uncertainty about their Money, and return anew to
weighing and trying all they took.

This is the short Account and History of Money. Necessity (which grows
continually, and will do so to the World's end) first introduced the use of it;
and it could not be useful but by being the common Standard and Measure of the
Price and Worth of every thing besides; and it could not be this, but by being
of such a certain and determined Weight and Fineness; and of this we could not
be secure, without much Pains and Trouble, but by entrusting the Coinage of it
to Kings, and such as they Commissionate and Appoint, to see that the
Commonwealth receive no damage.

II.
We are now in the Second Place, to see the Mischiefs of corrupting and
debasing Money, the Coining bad Metal, and the Clipping and Stealing from good.
The Coining even of good Metal and full Weight, is (we have seen above) of ill
Example, and of ill Consequence, when done by Private People, and without
Authority, because it lays the way open to Deceit and Fraud, and takes away the
Trust and Security Men have in the Princes faithful and honest dealing with
them, and brings them again to a state of jealousy and caution each of one
another. But, to be sure, the Coining of bad Metal, must be mischievous: Just
so much Mischief and Injury must needs be done to every individual Man that
takes it, as there is wanting of the usual Weight and Fineness in each single
Piece. Suppose, for instance, Men should mix one third of baser Metal with
their Silver, and put it off for good and true, and such as it pretends to be;
it is manifest, that every one receiving such a Piece would be imposed upon, and
lose one third of what he ought to have: For the Public Faith engages, that
every Man receiving a Piece of such a Mark and Denomination, shall receive in
it so much Silver, and of such a Fineness; and here a Man receives but Twenty
Pence for Half a Crown, whose Stamp proclaims it is to go for Thirty. The Case
indeed is not so well as I put it, for they who Coin false Money, give us
neither a fifth nor sixth part of good Silver; and all that is wanting is so
much Cheat and real Injury: So that that impudent Demand of Who is hereby
Wronged? can find no Place; for every one is wronged that takes this Money, and
every one is actually a loser more or less, by reason it quickly stops, and is
not current: Here every body sees and feels the Injury; and if it falls upon
the Poor and Laboring Man, he loses, it may be his Day's Work, and the Family
its Subsistence and Provision: But I put the Case so fair, that I may not
multiply particulars, but join the Clipping of good Money with the Coining of
bad, and mixing baser Metal with Silver: For if Half a Crown be Clipped to
Twenty Pence, it is equal to Half a Crown not Clipped, that has but Twenty Pence
of Silver in it. And the Injury to Private People is the same; and therefore I
consider them as one and the same Offense, in that they both alike defraud the
Receiver of what is his due; for there the Injustice lies: that is the Sin at
the bottom; there is so much stolen from every Man as there is less given him
than he should receive.

And this administers occasion to People, either Strangers or Natives, to Cheat
us even with true Silver; for they may secretly Coin us (as it is probable they
do) a great deal of true Silver, but not of full Weight, and putting it off
under the shelter of Clipped Money, do gain thereby at least one third. Now no
one gains but what another loses in such Bargains. By this the Foreigners (that
are but dextrous and will venture) have opportunity of purchasing what
Commodities they please, and paying us with little Money, for which they must
otherwise (were there no Money Clipped) give us good Silver, and full Weight,
either of theirs, or our own Coin.

Thus Clipping lays us open to the Cheats and Injuries of all the World, as
well as of our own People. I do not say that Strangers do, but that they may
improve the Villainy and Injustice of our own Clippers, to their own advantage,
and to our farther Mischief; and it is a wonder if they do not: For it is not
very likely that one Nation should raise the value of its Money above its true
intrinsic worth (which is indeed its Weight and Fineness) but that its
Neighbors will have some advantage by it, by Importing Money of the like
Weight with that which goes Current. Now the passing of Money Clipped, for Money
of just Weight, is, in effect and truth, raising our Money, and making that to
go for Thirty Pence, which is indeed but worth Twenty. And therefore there is,
at least, some hazard of Foreigners Coining and Importing Money of equal Weight
and Fineness with our own, which cannot possibly be done, without our great
prejudice: Now this could never come to pass without our Clipping, for that
alone it is that gives them opportunity; that is the handle they may take their
hold of: And if we do not see Money of this kind pass commonly about, it is no
Argument that there is none Imported from abroad, nor Coined at home, for a
little Art is sufficient (they say) to cover that deceit, and make it pass for
old.

Well, but the Money passes still for good and current Coin, and where is then
the Mischief? a little Shilling buys as much as a great one, and the Name and
Character of Pieces are as good a Standard and Measure of the Price and Worth
of all things else, as if they were full Weight, and answered to their Name and
Character; and therefore where is the Offense and Injury? who is hereby
wronged? This indeed is the last resort of all the Patrons of this Practice;
the Refuge to which the Guilty fly themselves, and the consideration that stirs
the Peoples pity at their Sufferings; they think that hereby none is Injured,
but this is a mistake, for every one is Injured more or less by Clipping. The
Merchant that Exports more Goods from home, than he Imports from abroad, must
unavoidably discharge the overbalance with good Money; this he can never do
with Clipped, for it is not Caesar's Face and Titles, but Weight and Goodness
that procure Credit: And if a Foreigner Import more of his Country Goods than
he carries away of ours, the overbalance must be paid in weighty Money, for
the Clipped will not go abroad: Now, if the Exportation of our weighty Money
(which is only now the Milled) be a mischief to the Nation, we see it is
occasioned chiefly by the Clipping: for if the Old were of the same due Weight
with the New (as it is before these Thieves steal from it) the New and Old
would be Exported alike; and then the Complaint would only be of the
Exportation of Money in general; which, whether it be Good or Evil to a Nation,
I have nothing to say: Only one cannot help seeing, that as there is Law on one
side, so there is unavoidable Necessity on the other, if we Import more Foreign
Goods than we carry out of our own Kingdom. I am only concerned to say, that if
Exporting our New-Money be a mischief, it is owing especially to the Clipping
of the Old; and that therefore Clipping is Injurious. And if we do not give
these Foreigners our weighty Money in exchange for their Commodities, because
we cannot get it, yet we must give them Goods proportionably more or better;
They will not be Losers by our Clipping: They will either contract for Money of
full Weight (if they be to carry Money home, or to another Trading Country) or
for proportionable allowance in the Goods they take for what they bring. And
what is the consequence of a Merchant's paying more for what he buys of a
Foreigner, but that he will ask a better Price of the Retailer? And the
Consequence of that must needs be, that every one that buys must make amends
for the Defect of clipped Money. And thus the Injury is universal; all that
consume Commodities of Foreign growth or make, are affected more or less by
this first Injury; but because the Mischief is so general, and diffused, and at
such distance and remove, Men either think not at all, or but slightly of it.

An Instance, it may be, will make the Matter plain to every one. Suppose then
that a Foreigner import (and it is the same thing, as if we fetched) from
abroad, Goods to the value of Thirty thousand Pounds; but it is Silver only,
and not Goods that he will have in exchange for what he brings: You are
therefore sure, that he means not Thirty thousand Pounds in clipped Money, for
that he sees is no more worth than Twenty; and you may call it how, or what you
please, at home, but it is not, as the Text expresses it, Money current with
the Merchant; i. e. with one that Trades abroad, unless it be of full Weight.
The Commerce therefore is at an end, unless you can procure him full Money;
which being impossible, (we may well enough suppose it so, for so it will
shortly be, without all peradventure) it must be made up of the clipped, and
then he receives what is but as Thirty to him, but it may be very near Forty
from us. And who must make up this, but we that buy these Goods at second, or
third, or farther hand? The Merchant will not sell that for Thirty which cost
him Forty, we may be sure; and therefore it is evident, to a Demonstration,
That every one pays proportionably more for what he buys, by reason of
Clipping, and therefore every one is cheated by it, and cheated constantly,
although he mind not the particulars.

This Evil is indeed avoided, where Foreigners will take our clipped Money, in
assurance of putting it off again, for Goods they want to carry home; but it is
only avoided for the present; the Nation will unquestionably feel it, ere long,
to their great smart; the Punishment is indeed deferred, but every one knows
that that is no acquittance.

Suppose a little farther. That a Company of ill-designing People should buy up
all the Plate in London and pay for it in clipped Money: The Goldsmiths will by
these means give more away than they receive, by at least one third of Sterling
Silver. This opens the way to their prodigious loss, for if the Money should be
called in then, (and why not then, as well as any time after or besides?) they
must undoubtedly be losers so much by it; and why should any Body of Men be so
exposed to Ruin, by such Villainy? Well, but they are content to Traffic at
this Rate; yes, and so must every one besides, by a strong Necessity; but it is
still in hopes that they shall pass away what they receive, at the same Price:
But will not this Hope perish sometime or other? Yes, unquestionably, but
because we know not when, we do not value it.

But is not Clipping, notwithstanding this uncertainty of Time, an Injury and
piece of Theft? Because we do not feel at present, do we never fear a Mischief
for the future? We think not so weakly in any other Case. What makes Men plant,
in their Estates, the Trees, they know that they shall never reap the Fruits
of? What makes them build the Houses, that will last for many Generations after
they are dead and gone, but the Care and Concern they have for their Posterity,
that it may be well with their Children, and with their Childrens Children
after them? We see Men guard, in all their Contracts, as much against Evils to
come, as those that are present, or near at hand. If a Man should undermine our
House, we should not be content and easy, although the Men of skill should
assure us, it would last and our time, with all security; we should be fearful
that it might not do so; or if it should, we should be careful for our Children.

Whoever lays the Foundation of our Misery, does then begin to make us
miserable, though we may not feel it for some time after. So when we decline
toward old Age, we often find our selves pained and diseased, with the Strains
that happened in Youth, and vigorous Exercises, which then were overlooked and
quite neglected. No one can tell exactly when this Mischief will break out, and
what the Effects will be; but let them be as kind as they can, they will be
very heavy to the Nation. When once the suspicion of calling in this Money
shall appear, there will unavoidably be a sudden stop of Trade, among
Retailers, for some time; for no one will receive what he is sure to lose by;
and this, though it be short, will yet be hard and grievous to mean People, and
such as live by the Day, who will not know how to find themselves and Families
with Necessaries for some space of time, till Money get into its old Current.

This Mischief may appear short and inconsiderable; but be it so, what is the
Good that counter-balances it? What need is there of any Mischief? Why should
these Villains hazard the Distress and Misery of poor and laboring People,
though it were but for a Week? The Common People then, will see and feel the
Injury and Mischief that is done by Clipping, which now they cannot understand,
or will not well consider. They will find that the little Money they then have,
will not go for more than its just weight; and be convinced by Hunger and
Thirst, that Clippers are as truly Thieves and Robbers, as those they find upon
the Highways, or breaking up their Houses, and do as well deserve their Chains
and Halters.

And who can tell, whether every single Person must not bear his own Burden,
and stand to the loss of all that is wanting of due Weight, of all the Money he
is Master of? And if he must, the Cry will be like that of Egypt, loud and
universal, for every Family will be a loser: But it will fall severest on the
Poor, who from a little can spare none.

One of our Historians [W. Hemingford, Anno 1180.] tells us, That in H. the
Second's time, the Money of the Kingdom was so corrupt, that it was fain to be
changed and called in: It was indeed necessary, but it fell exceeding hard upon
the Poor and Country People. So it was also in the time of Hen. III. upon
calling in the old and clipped Money [M. Paris, Anno 1248.] by Proclamation, the
People were more distressed, than if Corn had been at Half a Crown a Bushel,
(which was then, I believe, equal to Twelve or Fourfteen Shillings now) for the
new Money was not yet come to their great Towns; and when it was, they received
no more new, than their old came to by weight; paying also, over and above,
Thirteen Pence in the Pound for Coinage; so that besides the loss of Time, and
the great Charge they were at, to come to the several Places of Exchange, they
were sent away with hardly Twenty Shillings, for every Thirty, that they
brought along with them. Arctabatur Populus, non mediocriter damnificatus. The
People were straightened, and received no small damage; they lost, you see, one
Third. The Poor still suffered most, and so it will always be; for a small
Weight is heavy to the Weak and Faint; and a little Loss grievous to such as
have but little.

Neither, Lastly, Is the Evil far removed, although the Public bear the Loss,
for every Man is Part and Parcel of the Public.

And if the Mint receive the little Money in, and deliver out good and full,
yet must it needs be, that these Particulars must fill the Exchequer, in return
for what they have received of new Money. That is, a general Tax must answer
for the Robberies of these Villains; the Good and Innocent, the Careful and
Industrious People, must contribute to the making up the loss the Public
sustains by the Injustice and Theft of Clippers. And how soon this will be, no
one can tell, but by the haste that is made to make it necessary, it cannot
well be far off.

I have spoken exceeding modestly and moderately, when I supposed we were only
cheated of one Third; I did it to make the Case plain, for every one sees, that
near to half is taken away, which opens the Passage to a Suspicion, that
Covetousness as well as Luxury, is at the bottom, in the Crime of Clipping; and
that some People will grow Rich thereby, as well as others feed their Vices and
Necessities; for it does not seem very probable, that so much Money should be
spent by those poor and mean Wretches, who are commonly discovered to live by
this unjust and wicked Practice: The Sum is much too big for them; and one
cannot well account, how almost all the old Silver that circles round the
Nation, should come into these Clippers Hands in the compass of a few Years.

But with this I have little to do. It is enough to answer my Design and
Purpose, if I have shown you with any clearness, the Mischiefs of corrupting
and debasing Money, the Coining bad Metal, and the clipping and stealing from
good; for then the way is open to the justification of the Laws, that are made
to punish such Offenders; which was the Third and last Particular.

III.
Nothing can justify the severity of Legal Punishments, but their Necessity;
and nothing evidences this Necessity, like the sight and knowledge of those
Evils and Mischiefs the Laws design to prevent as well as punish: And
therefore, the laying open the Injuries and Mischiefs of Clipping and Coining
is the readiest way to clear the Reason and Justice of such Laws, as doom to
Death such Malefactors.

This I have been already trying to do, and though, there is no doubt, but the
Men of Skill and Experience in Trade, and Money-matters can see more Mischiefs
than I mention, rising from these Practices, yet certainly these mentioned are
sufficient to acquit our Laws from being Cruel or Unjust; for what can Laws do
less, than secure the Honor of the Nation (which is much concerned in the
Goodness and Weight of its current Coin) with respect to Foreigners, and just
and righteous Dealing with one another at home? And if nothing less than Death
will serve to these good Ends, then putting Men to Death for Clipping and
Coining is neither Cruel nor Unjust. And though more Pity usually attends these
Criminals than others, yet the Laws have not therefore less of Reason and
Equity, that condemn them; nor is their Fault less heinous in it self, or
mischievous to others. But our Pity arises from hence, That we see Men going to
suffer Death for a Crime, by which we know of none that are undone, or greatly
injured; the Evil is unfix'd and undetermined, and we cannot put our selves
into their Condition who are hurt by these Offenders, as we can and do in other
Cases, which excites our Indignation. Thus when a Thief breaks in upon a House
and steals, we are immediately sensible both of the Fright and Injury, which a
particular Person feels, and the Concern we have for him and his Family, that
may be undone by the Robbery, counter-balances our Pity for the Criminal. Self
is more nearly touched, for this may be the Case of every honest Man, and
therefore fear for our Selves and Families, as in danger of being ruined by the
like Villainy, out-weighs our Pity to a Felon. But in the Case of false Coinage
or Clipping, we think immediately only of a Damage to the Treasury, which we
esteem above our Pity: Or we conceive a Damage public and general, which
excites no pitiful Resentments in us, because we have our Eye on no particular
Man as ruined or undone thereby.

But the remembrance of what has been abovesaid, of the Mischiefs that are
truly done, both to the Public, and to almost all Particulars, will change
this ill-plac'd and mistaken Pity, and transferr it to those, that suffer Want
and Misery by these ill Practices, although we do not know them in particular;
for it is impossible that so much Mischief should be done, but some or other
must suffer by it.

But to show you that our Laws are neither cruel nor unjust in this Affair, it
is sufficient to say, that they agree with the Laws of almost all Nations,
which seldom do conspire in bloody and inhumane Executions.

The Romans considered this Crime of Clipping and Coining, generally speaking,
as High Treason: They made exact enquiries after these Offenders: They tortured
Men to confess their Accomplices: They allowed Rewards and Privileges to such
as would Impeach; if they were Slaves, they were set at Liberty, and the
Exchequer paid their Ransom to their Masters: If one of these Offenders escaped
out of Custody, his Keeper, if privy to it, certainly died for him: If the
Master or Owner of the House or Place where such Offense was committed, were
conscious to the thing, although not actually employed himself, he forfeited his
House, Goods, and Estate, and was himself Transported; and if he knew nothing
of the matter, yet he Forfeited his House, unless he made himself the first
discovery to the Magistrate (to oblige them, I suppose, to greater caution whom
they trusted in their Houses.) All Servants, Helpers, and Assistants, were also
Condemned to dye, as well as the principal Agent: And the Death they often
underwent, was being burnt. And yet the Romans were as sparing of Blood, and as
merciful in their Executions as any Nation whatever.

The Laws of the Wisigoths punished these kind Rerum Hispanic. Tom. III. page
957.
of Offenders, if they were Slaves, with the loss of their Right Hand; if they
were Freemen, with the loss of half their Estates, and being made Slaves to
whom the King pleased.

The Laws of our own Country in King Athelstan's time, punished them (as above)
with the cutting off their Right-hands, and fixing them over the place where
they committed the Offense. In King Ethelred's days they were to undergo the
Treble Ordeal (i. e. to carry a Red-hot Iron of three pound weight in their
hands such a determined space of Ground) and if they miscarried there, they
were to dye. In Henry I. time they were Condemned to lose, some their Hands,
and some their Eyes: And some (in allusion to the Word) who were found to
adulterate the Kings Coin, were so punished as if the Laws intended to prevent
Adultery it self: As appears in our Histories of those Times. These Punishments
were after changed into the Modern Executions, and have so continued ever
since, although it is probable that Punishments of greater Pain and constant
Shame, such as they heretofore were, would secure us better, than putting Men
to a short and easy Death.

Thus much I think may suffice to vindicate our Laws from the reproach of being
Cruel or Unjust; and (if Men will but well consider) to wean them from that
soft pernicious tenderness, that sometimes, certainly, restrains the hand of
Justice, slackens the care and vigilance of Mastrates, keeps back the Under
Officers, corrupts the Juries (for Passions and Affections bribe as well as
Gifts) and withholds the Evidence, both from appearing and from speaking out,
when they appear. These are the ill effects of a weak and undue compassion,
shown especially to these kind of Offenders, which help ('it is more than likely)
to increase their number, and the Misery of honest People, and therefore should
be better thought upon by such as are so concerned.

And now, if I have shown you (as I thought to do) That this Offense is
fruitful of Mischiefs; that it dishonours the Kingdom, and does apparently
damnifie every particular Man, and will do more and more so, and fall at last
with a most deadly weight somewhere or other, and, to be sure, with greater
violence on the Poor and Mean, who are least able to endure it; if this be
manifest, our Laws and Executions are not only cleared from all their
Imputations, but I have also found out, for these Wretches, a sufficient Ground
and Bottom for Repentance, which they, it seems, are generally ignorant of:
They can see they have offended against the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom,
and can acknowledge that their other Sins and Offenses have betrayed them to
these Practices, but they cannot see the justice of those Laws, nor the
wickedness of these Practices: They can be sorry for their great Misfortune,
but they know not how to repent of Clipping and Coining, as Sins against God or
their Neighbor; and therefore however guilty they may be in other respects,
yet the sense of these Offenses affects them little or nothing. All this
pretended Innocence depends (as I have shown) on this mistake, that No one is
Injured hereby; and they presume that no one is Injured, because they design
the Injury of no particular one, nor know of any that is Injured by it: The
Evil that is done is unfix'd and undetermined to Time, or Place, or Person, and
therefore they conclude that none is truly done. If these were not their
private conceits, why should not they conclude themselves as guilty of Theft
and Fraud, and of Injustice, as much as any other Robbers, and consequently
repent as thoroughly and sincerely of them? But it will not follow, that because
a Man either forgets or knows not whom he has Injured, that he has therefore
Injured none, nor needs to repent or make amends. For if a Man should, in the
course of his Calling, set aside the fear of God, and all regard to Honesty and
Justice, and make his advantage of People's Ignorance and Simplicity, their
Easiness or want of Understanding, and Cheat them all he could, without
intending to Cheat any one particular more than another, it will not follow
that he has Cheated none, because he intended to Cheat no particular; nor will
it follow that he has Cheated no more than he remembers to have Cheated; nor
will it follow that he is obliged to repent of no more Injustice than he can
call to mind done to Particulars; nor will it follow that he is not obliged to
Restitution and Amendment, because he has Cheated more than he remembers. The
Man knows very well that he designed his own advantage all the while, and had
no consideration of the Means; and knows that a great deal of wrong must needs
be done, and that He did it; and knows that a great deal of Wrong calls for a
great deal of Sorrow, and a great deal of Satisfaction. And this is certainly
the Coiners and the Clippers Case, which requires as full and true Repentance
as any other Robbery whatsoever, in as much as it is equal to any Theft of the
same Value, with respect to private People, and with respect to the Public
much above it.

And what is said of these as Principals, is also true in its proportion of all
that are Accessaries; all that are any ways concerned in this Affair, such as
knowingly provide or make their proper Instruments; such as go up and down,
whether in City or Country, to procure broad Money; such as sell these People
broad Money for great Gain, which cannot possibly be done without a strong
suspicion of the Purchaser; and such as are employed to vend and put off these
pieces so corrupted and debased; and lastly, such as easily receive and
purchase the Clippings and Filings of Silver, at the Hands of
justly-to-be-suspected Sellers. I know not how they can (any of them) acquit
themselves (not to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom only, but) to God
above, and to their own Consciences, who are in any sort Partakers with these
Robbers of the Public.

And upon this Account, a Discourse of this Nature may be (I hope) in this
Place, as justifiable, as any one else upon the Eighth Commandment: And I will
believe I speak to Magistrates, not only careful of the Dignity and Honor of
our Laws, but of the Welfare and Security of innocent and honest People, and
who will therefore take what Care they can, to bring to Light, and Punishment,
these Offenders. And if there appears but little of Christianity in such
Sermons, it will be to such as consider not, how great a Part, Justice and
Honesty, and fair and righteous Dealing make up of this Divine Religion; and
how great Care the Doctrines of the Gospel take, not only of Men's Souls in the
World to come, but of the Good and Welfare of their Bodies here. An honest Man
and a good Christian will never be two distinct things in a Christian Kingdom;
for the chief Design of our Religion is to make us good and honest Men in this
World, and to propose Rewards to such as will be so, in the World to come. And
therefore, if I have convinced any one, of the Fraud and Villainy, the Injustice
and the Theft, of Coining and Clipping, and thereby shall deterr them from
entering on, or persisting in, those evil Practices, or shall reclaim them from
them, and occasion their Repentance and Amendment, I shall make no doubt of
having served the Interest and Design of Christianity, in a great many
Particulars. And in this Hope I will end this Sermon, leaving it to the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; to whom be all
Honor, and Glory, now and for ever.

FINIS.
A
L. II. 9. Th. Cod. Tit. 21. Constantinus ad Januarium.
QVoniam nonnulli Monetarii adulterina moneta, clandestinis sceleribus
exercent, cuncti cognoscant, necessitatem sibi incumbere hujusmodi homines,
inquirendi, ut investigati tradantur Judiciis, facti conscios per tormenta
illico prodituri, ac sic dignis suppliciis addicendi. 2. Accusatoribus etiam
eorum immunitatem permittimus; cujus modus, quoniam dispar census est, a Nobis
per singulos statuetur. Servos etiam qui hoc detulerint Civitate Romana
donamus, ut eorum domini precium a Fisco percipiant. 3. Si quis autem Militum
hujusmodi Personam susceptam, de custodia exire fecerit, Capite puniatur. 4.
Appellandi etiam privato licentia denegetur, si vero Miles aut Promotus
hujusmodi crimen incurrit, super ejus nomine and gradu ad nos referatur. 5. Si
dominum fundi vel domus conscium esse probabitur, deportari eum in insulam
oportebit, cunct is ejus rebus protinus confiscandis: Si vero eo ignaro crimen
commissum est, possessionem aut domum debet amittere in qua id scelus admissum
est. Actor fundi, vel servus, vel Incola, vel Colonus qui hoc ministerium
praebuit cum eo qui fecit, supplicio capitali plectetur, nihilominus fundo, vel
domo fisci viribus vindicanda. 6. Quod si Dominus ante ignorans, ut primum
repperit, scelus prodidit perpetratum, minime possessio vel Domus ipsius
proscriptionis injuriae subjacebit: Sed auctorem ac ministrum poena Capitalis
excipiet. Dat. 12. Kal. December. Romans Crispo. 2. and Constantino. 2. CC. Coss.
[321.]

B
L. I. Cod. Th. Tit. 22. Imp. Constantinus, Leontio, P. P.
Omnes Solidi in quibus nostri vultus ac veneratio una est, uno pretio
aestimandi sunt atque vendendi, quanquam diversa formae mensura sit: Nec enim
qui majore habitu faciei extenditur, majoris est pretii; aut qui angustiore
expressione concluditur minoris haberi credendus est, cum pondus idem existat.
Quod si quis aliter fecerit, aut capite puniri debet, aut flammis tradi, aut
alia poena mortifera. Quod ille etiam patietur, qui mensuram Circuli exterioris
adraserit, ut ponderis minuat quantitatem: Vel figuratum solidum adultera
imitatione in vendendo subjecerit. Dat. 7. Kal. Aug. Gallicano and Basso Coss.
[317.]

C
Si monetarius reus fuerit, amputetur ei manus, and ponatur super monetae
Fabricam. Si inculpatio sit, and se purgare velit, eat ad Ferrum calidum, and
adlegiet manum ad Canfaram (candens ferrum) quod non falsum fecit. Si in
Ordalio reus fuerit, fiat ei quod supradictum est. Leg. Athelstani R. Jo.
Brompton. p. 843.

Et omnis Monetarius qui accusabitur quod falsum fecit, postquam interdictum
fuit, adeat Triplex Ordalium, and si culpabilis sit, occidatur. Leg. Ethelredi
R. 11. 26. 27. 27. 28. 29. 30. p. 898.

De correctione Pecuniae, ut una moneta per totas has Nationes sine omni falso
teneatur, and nemo repudiet eam. Et qui posthanc falsabit manum perdat unde
fecerit; and nec argento, aut auro, vel ullo mode redimatur. Si Praepositus
accusetur quod ejus licentia quis falsum fecerit, purget se triplici lada, quod
si purgationem fregerit, inde judicium habeat quod qui falsum composuit. Leg.
Canuti R. 30. p. 923.

Quicunque falsam Monetam, se sciente fecerit, aut studiose expenderit, tanquam
Maledictus, and Pauperum Oppressor, and Turbator Civitatis a Fidelium Consortio
separetur. Council. Roman. A. D. 1123.

Monetam quoque corruptam and falsam sub tanta animadversione corrigi statuit,
ut nullus qui posset deprehendi falsos denarios facere, aliqua redemptione,
quin Oculos, and inferiores Corporis parts perderet, juvari valeret. Simeon
Dunelm. A. 1108.

Joh. Brompton (p. 1000.) places it in Anno 1103. and says they were to lose
both their Eyes; so does H. de Knyghton. 2377.

D
Chron. Saxon. An. 8125.
Hoc anno, misit Rex (Hen. I.) ante Christi Festum, de Normannia in Anglorum
Terram, and jussit omnes Monetarios qui erant in Anglia privari membris;
scilicet quemque dextra manu, and testiculis; quod factum est quoniam qui
habuit Libram non potuit ullam rem mercari uno istius denario, in quovis foro.
Tunc Rogerus Episcopus Sarisburiensis misit per totam Angliam and jussit eos
omnes interesse Wintoniae ad Christi Festum. Cum eo pervenissent, sevocati
fuerunt sigillatim, and praecisa erat cuique dextra manus ac testiculi. Totum
hoc factum est intra duodecim festi Natalium dies, and quidem jure Optimo,
quippe damnum maximum intulissent toti genti tantam vim metalli vitiosi
coemendo.

E
Matthew. Paris. A. 1248. H. 3.
Ipfis quoque diebus Moneta Angliae, per detestabiles Tonsores and Falsarios
adeo intolerabiliter est corrupta, quod non Indigence vel etiam Alienigenae eam
Oculo recto, vel illaeso cord poterant intueri. Circumcidebatur enim fere
usque ad interiorem circulum, limbo litterato totaliter vel deleto, vel
enormiter deturpato. Praeceptum est igitur voce Praeconid, in Civitatibus,
Burgis, Nundinis and Foris, ex part. D. Regis [H. 3.] nequis denarius nisi
legitimi ponderis, and circularis form acciperetur, nec quoque modo a vendente
vel emente vel commutante acceptaretur, punirenturque hujusmodi praecepti
transgressores* adhibita est etiam diligentia, ut memorati falsarii
invenirentur, ut de tanto scelere convicti, condigna poena judicialiter
punirentur. Facta igitur diligentissima inquisitione, inventi sunt in hoc
facinore culpabiles Judaei, Caursini infames, and quidam Mercatores lanarum
Flandrenses. Jussit etiam D. Rex Francorum omnes tales in Regno suo compertos
patibulis laqueatos vento praesentari.

There is something remarkable in this Passage, namely, that it was made Penal
for any one to take or receive any Clipped Money; which, if we had observed some
Years ago, we had not been in the deplorable condition we are now in, in that
respect.

F
Hen. Knyghton. p. 2463. A. 1282. Ed. I.
Rex tenuit Parliamentum suum Londoniis, and fecit mutare monetam Regni, quae
illo tempore fuit viliter retonsa, and abbreviata, unde Populus Regni graviter
conquerebatur and Rex veritatem inde inquirens, and veritatem comperiens,
trecentos and plures, de illo delicto and felonia public convicit, quorum
quidam fuerunt suspensi, quidam distracti and suspensi, secundum delicti
qualitatem and quantitatem.


