TWO DISCOURSES Concerning the AFFAIRS OF SCOTLAND; Written in the Year School.

Edinburgh, School.

The first Discourse.
NO Inclination is so honorable* nor has any thing bin so much esteemed in all
Nations, and Ages, as the love of that Country and Society in which every man
is born. And those who have placed their greatest satisfaction in doing good,
have accounted themselves happy, or unfortunate, according to the success of
their endeavors to serve the interest of their Country. For nothing can be
more powerful in the minds of men, than a natural inclination and duty
concurring in the same disposition.

Nature in most men prevails over Reason; Reason in some prevails over Nature:
but when these two are joined, and a violent natural inclination finds it self
owned by Reason, required by Duty, encouraged by the highest Praises, and
excited by the most illustrious Examples, sure that Force must be irresistible.
Constrained by so great a Force, and the circumstances of my Affairs not
allowing me to be otherwise serviceable to my Country, I have in the following
Discourse given my opinion concerning diverse matters of Importance; which
probably may be debated in the approaching Session of Parliament. I shall be
very well satisfied, if any thing I say do afford a hint that may be improved
by men of better judgment to the public Good. I hope I shall not be blamed,
for giving my opinion in matters of public concernment; since it is the right
and duty of every man to write or speak his mind freely in all things that may
come before any Parliament; to the end that they who represent the Nation in
that Assembly, may be truly informed of the sentiments of those they represent.
Besides, we are now no more under those tyrannical Reigns in which it was a
crime to speak of public Affairs, or to say that the King had received bad
counsel in any thing. If in this discourse I argue against some things, which
perhaps may not be proposed in the ensuing Session of Parliament; they are
nevertheless such, as persons in public trust have in their conversation given
just cause to think they were designed.

It Is probable that the Parliament before they proceed to any other business,
will take into consideration a transaction, which having passed since the last
Session, may, if it be not abolished, import not less than the infringing the
freedom of this and all subsequent Parliaments; I mean, the farming of the
Customs to the State of Buroughs.

Corruption is so entirely disowned by all men, that I may be allowed to say,
when I name it, that I name the blackest of Crimes; and when I name any guilty
of it, I name a very odious Criminal. But Corruption is more or less dangerous
in proportion to the stations in which corrupt men are placed. When a private
man receives any advantage to betray a trust, one, or a few persons may suffer;
If a Judge be corrupted, the oppression is extended to greater numbers: But when
Legislators are bribed, or (which is all one) are under any particular
engagement, that may influence them in their Legislative capacity, much more
when an entire State of Parliament is brought under those circumstances, then
it is that we must expect Injustice to be established by a Law, and all those
consequences, which will inevitably follow the subversion of a Constitution, I
mean, standing Armies, oppressive Taxes, Slavery; whilst the outward form only
of the ancient Government remains to give them Authority. I confess I have been
often struck with astonishment, and could never make an end of admiring the
folly and stupidity of men living under some modern Governments, who will
exclaim against a Judge that takes bribes, and never rest till he be punished,
or at least removed; and yet at the same time suffer great numbers of those who
have the Legislative Authority, to receive the constant bribes of places and
pensions to betray them. But we shall have less to say for our selves, if we
suffer the Votes of the whole State of Buroughs to be at once influenced by
the farming of the Customs. For in other places the impudence of Bribery has
gone no farther than to attack single persons; but to endeavor at once to
bribe a whole State of Parliament, is an attempt of which it seems we only are
capable.

Yet to show how far I am from suspecting any man of the least bad design,
without a cause, I shall say, that as I know this business of the Farm
abovementioned was first moved without any design to influence the Votes of the
Buroughs in Parliament; so I am willing to believe that few of those who have
since acted in this Affair had any such design. But if any man, after due
consideration of the evil consequences which must follow, and are inseparable
from such a Farm, shall still persist in endeavoring to continue it, he cannot
but be an Enemy to the Liberties of his Country.

This is so bold an attempt, and so inconsistent with the freedom of
Parliament, that till it be removed it is to be presumed they will not proceed
to any other business: but this obstruction once taken away, we may hope they
will begin with that Affair which presses most, and in which the Nation is so
universally concerned, I mean that of the African and Indian Company.

I know some will exclaim against this method, and propose that the business of
the Army may be first taken into consideration, as of more general concernment
to the Nation whether it stand or be disbanded. They will not fail to say, that
before all other things the King's business (as their style runs) ought to be
done. To this I answer, that he who makes a distinction between the business of
the King and that of the Country, is a true friend to neither. And if it be
considered, that the Ships of the Company are sailed; that Scotland has now a
greater venture at Sea than at any time since we have bin a Nation; that the
accidents and misfortunes to which an enterprise of this nature is subject, are
so many and so various, either by the loss of Ships from the ordinary hazards
of the Sea, or Hurricanes; by sickness of the men, who for the most part are
neither accustomed to such long Voyages, nor to Climats so different from their
own; by the death of one or more of those to whom the conduct of this Affair is
principally entrusted; by being disappointed of fresh Provisions when those
they carry with them are spent; by being attacked at Sea or at Land, before
they have fortified a place for themselves, or a thousand other accidents, (for
all things are extremely difficult to the first undertakers) I say, if it be
considered, that Provisions, or the smallest things necessary, falling short
but by a few days, have often bin the ruin of the greatest Undertakings, and
chiefly of those of this kind; there cannot be any more urgent affair than that
of providing incessantly a supply for the necessities of so many men as are on
board those Ships, who may be brought under extraordinary sufferings by a
delay, whilst our standing Forces are living at ease. Especially since the
Nation has so great a Concern in this Enterprise, that I may well say all our
hopes of ever being any other than a poor and inconsiderable People are
embarked with them.

The reputation and power of this Nation was formerly very considerable as long
as Armies were composed of those numerous Militia's of the Barons. Our
Ancestors have often seen 60, 80, or 100 thousand men under their Ensigns,
which then might well bear the motto, That none should provoke them unpunished.
Since that time, the face of things is quite changed throughout all Europe; and
the former Militia's being altogether decayed, and no good ones any where
established, every Country is obliged to defend it self in time of war, and
maintain its reputation by the force of Money; that is, by mercenary Troops,
either of their own, or of other Countries both by Sea and Land. But such a
vast expense, the riches of no Country is able to support without a great
Trade. In this great alteration our case has been singularly bad and
unfortunate: for partly through our own fault, and partly by the removal of our
Kings into another Country, this Nation, of all those who possess good Ports,
and lie conveniently for Trade and Fishing, has bin the only part of Europe
which did not apply it self to Commerce; and possessing a barren Country, in
less than an age we are sunk to so low a Condition as to be despised by all our
Neighbors, and made incapable to repel an injury, if any should be offered: so
that now our motto may be inverted* and all may not only provoke, but safely
trample upon us. To recover from such a condition, what would not any people
do? What toils would they refuse? To what hazards would they not expose
themselves? But if the means by which they are to recover, are not only just
and honorable, but such as with restoring honor and safety to the Nation, may
give encouragement to that excellent, tho now suppressed and almost
extinguished spirit of our People, and gratify every man in the eases and
pleasures of Life: is it not strange that there should be found men amongst us
capable to oppose those things; especially at a time, when, I may say, by no
contrivance of any man, but by an unforeseen and unexpected change of the
genius of this Nation, all their thoughts and inclinations, as if united and
directed by a higher power, seem to be turned upon Trade, and to conspire
together for its advancement, which is the only means to recover us from our
present miserable and despicable condition? For hitherto our convenient
Situation and good Harbors, our rich Seas and Lakes have bin unprofitable to
us; no care has bin taken to set the Poor at work; and multitudes of Families
for want of employment by Trade and Manufactures, go yearly out of the Kingdom
without any intention to return. In such a state and condition of this Nation,
it seems these men find their account better, than if our Country were filled
with People and Riches, our Firths covered with Ships, and they should see
every where the marks of what good Government and Trade are able to produce.

But I shall be told, that I go upon a mistake; and that no Scots man is an
Enemy to the African Company: That those who approach his Majesty; know most of
his mind, and are most entrusted by him in the Government of this Nation, and
such as are influenced by them, would only have the Parliament to consider the
streights and difficulties his Majesty would be put to, if he should in an
extraordinary manner encourage this Trade, by reason, that being King of
England* and Stat-holder of the United Provinces, our interest in this point
may come to interfere with that of those Nations. The people of those Countries
solicit, each in favor of their own Companies: Will not these men so much as
advise the King to distribute impartial justice, and to let every one have the
proportionable reward of his industry? O but we have an immunity from Customs
for many years* which neither the English nor Dutch enjoy. I shall not say,
that when the English Nation shall come to a perfect knowledge of their
Interest, they will be convinced that Riches in Scotland will be beneficial to
England, since the Seat of the Monarchy is there. I need not say that the
English and Dutch are free people, and may surely procure for themselves as
great advantages as Scotland: But that Scotland offered to both Nations a share
in that advantage which they had obtained for themselves only; and to England
an equal share. I know the Parliament of England took the thing warmly at
first; but when upon due consideration they found that we had not given them
the least just ground of offense, but on the contrary, made them the fairest
offer we could; it was then let fall, and has not been mentioned in the last
Session. So that what these Gentlemen alledg of his Majesty's difficulties to
satisfy the English in this point is false, unless by the English they mean
those who having for many years oppressed the English Colonies in America, are
afraid that if any Settlement should be made in that part of the world by us,
under a free Constitution, the English Planters removing to it, might occasion
a strict inquiry into their Crimes, and their Punishment for them.

I do not hear that the Dutch have presented any Memorial to his Majesty
against our Company, and cannot imagine in what terms any such Address, either
from them or the English, can run. Should it be, that his Majesty ought not to
protect us in our just Rights and Privileges? That he should break the Laws,
and violate his Oath by our destruction? Or undermine us as the Court did the
fishing Company in K* C's time, and frustrate this second as well as that first
great attempt to make the Nation considerable? That there have bin underhand
dealings (tho without his Majesty's knowledge, as we ought to believe) the
Affair of Hamborough dos sufficiently demonstrate; and likewise that his
Majesty's Ministers abroad, paid by the Crown of England, are no more to be
looked upon as Ministers for the Crown of Scotland. Since we are separate
Kingdoms, and have separate Ministers at home, we ought to have separate
Ministers abroad; especially in an Affair wherein we may have a separate
Interest from England, which must always be in matters of Trade, tho never so
inconsiderable. Neither ought we to have separate Ministers only upon the
account of Trade, but upon all occasions, wherein the Honor or Interest of the
Nation is concerned. That we have not had them formerly, since we were under
one King with England, was, I suppose, to save charges, and because we trusted
to the impartiality of such as we judged to be the Ministers of the King of
Great Britain: But now we are undeceived* and sure the Nation could never have
bestowed money better, than in having a Minister at the late Treaty of Peace,
who might have obtained the reestablishment of the Nation in the Privileges
they had in France, which was totally neglected: And notwithstanding the great
and unproportionable numbers of Sea and Land Soldiers that we were obliged to
furnish for the support of the War, yet not one tittle of advantage was
procured to us by the Peace.

Now these Gentlemen, at the same time, would persuade us to pay almost as many
Forces in time of Peace, as we did in time of War; and like Pharaoh's
Tax-masters would have us make Brick without allowing us Straw. And all, that
these Forces* and the Regiments, which to the consuming of our people, we
recruit in Holland, in case of any rupture abroad upon the account of the
English or Dutch trade, may be employed in their Defense.

To obviate then part of so many shameful things, it is my opinion, That in
place of laying a Land Tax upon the Kingdom for maintaining Forces to defend
the English and Dutch Trade, we should raise one for the carrying on of our
own: And (since the Nation is so generally concerned in this Indian Trade, that
the ruin of it, which, God forbid, may very probably draw along with it that of
the whole Trade of the Kingdom* and a perpetual discouragement from ever
attempting any thing considerable hereafter) that a twelve-months Cess should
be levied for the support of it; and that whatsoever may be the product of that
money, by the trade of the Company, shall go to the easing of the Nation from
public Burdens, whenever they shall make a Dividend of clear profit. For it is
but reasonable that, since the Company has bin unjustly hindered of that supply
of money which they expected, and might have had from strangers, they should
have recourse for redress to the Parliament, who if they shall think sit to
take such a resolution, the Company will be able immediately to procure an
advance of* Money upon the credit of the Cess.

It will be also sit, that the Company petition the Parliament to address his
Majesty, that the three small Frigates, lately built at the expense of this
Nation, may be appointed for a Convoy to the next Ships they shall send out.

The Parliament having provided for this pressing Affair, will (no doubt)
proceed to the business of the Forces, and to consider whether a Standing Army
shall be kept up in time of Peace, as in time of War; for the Arguments used to
continue them for a year, may be improved to keep them up for ever; especially
since we have at this time a stronger Argument against them, than I hope shall
ever be alleged hereafter; I mean that of the Nation's being exhausted of Money
by a three years scarcity next to a famine: But how long this may continue God
only knows.

A long and tedious War, which has cost this Nation much blood, is at length
ended in a Peace. Our expense of Treasure has bin inconsiderable by reason of
our poverty through want of Trade; yet have we contributed our part, if the
smalness of our Stock be considered. But in the loss of our People, which is an
expense of Blood and Riches too, we have paid a treble proportion. Seven or
eight thousand of our Seamen were on board the English Fleet, and two or three
thousand in that of Holland: We had twenty Battalions of Foot, and six
Squadrons of Dragoons here and in Flanders. Besides, I am credibly informed,
that every fifth man in the English Forces was either of this Nation, or
Scots-Irish, who are a people of the same blood with us. All these, by a modest
computation, may amount to thirty thousand men. This I only mention to answer
the Reproaches of those who vilify us as an inconsiderable people, and set a
mean value on the share we have born in this War. I am unwilling to speak of
the returns that have bin made to us for our assistance, by refusing to our
Soldiers the Donative given to those who had served no better than they, and by
pressing our Seamen, contrary to the Law of Nations. Now tho resenting the last
of these during the War, would have marked us out for disaffection and
Jacobitism; yet we ought to hope it may be mentioned at this time without
offense. But some will say, that the Blessings of Peace are so great, that not
only the Calamities of War, but even Affronts and Injuries from our Neighbors,
ought to be forgot and drowned in the joys, which the hopes of Ease,
Tranquillity and Plenty must needs produce. And indeed I should be contented,
that all resentments were sacrificed to such charming hopes, if they had any
real foundation. But we have a Peace, and yet must not reap any benefit by it;
a poor Country is to maintain almost as many Forces as they did in time of War;
a Nation endeavoring to set up Manufactures, and to advance Trade, must still
see their people consumed, by continuing on foot Mercenary Forces.

I shall not insist upon the Arguments that may be brought against Standing
Forces, nor go about to show how inconsistent they are with Liberty. I shall
not mention the Examples of almost all the Nations of Europe, who by keeping up
such Forces in time of Peace are become Slaves. This has bin fully made out by
diverse Treatises which have bin lately published, and are in the hands of most
men. Perhaps also it will be said, that I am not to insist upon the point of
Right in this Case, since there is no Article in our Claim of Right to declare
the keeping up of a Standing Army in time of Peace, without consent of
Parliament, to be against Law. Yet those who are of that opinion should
consider, that the Estates of this Kingdom have made the keeping up of a
Standing Army, in time of Peace, without consent of Parliament, an Article in
the Forfaulture of the late King James. But it seems we must use more modest
Arguments than such as naturally arise from the hazard our Liberty may run, by
allowing Standing Forces, or from any Right we have to pretend that it is
against the Constitution of our Government to impose them upon us, and be
obliged to bring all our reasons from our necessities and inability to maintain
any. Indeed, as this is the most modest, so surely it is the strongest Argument;
for such Forces are not to be maintained, without increasing the Poverty of
this Country, and reducing it at length to utter desolation. It Is hard if the
Charges of a Government should be the same in time of Peace, or even come near
the expense that was perhaps requisite to be made in time of War; such a Nation
can never hope to be in a flourishing state. Now as our condition will not
permit us to keep up these Forces, so I can see no reason why we should do it
if we could. There is no protence for them, except only to keep a few wretched
Highlanders in order; which might be easily done by a due execution of our old
Laws made for that purpose, without the help of any Fort or Garrison. We are at
a great distance from any other Enemy, and cannot justly fear an Invasion from
beyond so great a Sea as must be passed to come at us. And tho during the late
War we were sometimes under the apprehensions of such an Invasion, yet the
Enemy was not so imprudent to put it to the hazard.

But some will say, that the late King James has still many Partisans in this
Nation, that we have always bin, and still are a divided People, and that there
are many ill men amongst us: They have also the confidence still to tell us of
an Invasion upon Scotland by the French King; who to cover this probable
design, has delivered up such vast Countries, and places of such great
importance. Why do they not also say, that as a man every day after he is born,
is nearer to his end, so are we every day after the Peace nearer to a War? The
party of the late King James was always insignificant, and is now become a
jest. If the Government will encourage good men, they will need no Standing
Forces to secure themselves from the bad. For of what use can any Militia be
supposed to be, that is not sit to preserve the quiet of a Country remote from
enemies in time of Peace?

Those of the Presbyterian persuasion should, I think, be the last of all men
to establish an Army; for whatever they may promise to themselves, it is certain
that either upon his Majesty's death, or upon alterations of measures, and
changes of dispositions in the minds of the Members of future Parliaments, it
will be always a sure Rod for the backs of those who have so many enemies. But
men are blind in Prosperity, forgetting Adversity and the vicissitudes of human
Affairs. And it were but reasonable that those of that persuasion, who in the
late King James's reign made so false a step as was like to have proved fatal
to our Liberties, should now think of making some amends, and showing that they
have profited by their error, and are not (as they express themselves)
time-servers.

But to discover the true reason why Standing Forces are designed to be kept up
in this Nation in time of Peace, we need only look back on the use that was
made of them during the late War. For after the reduction of the Highlands they
served only for a seminary to the forces of this Nation that were with his
Majesty in Flanders, the best of their men being drawn out yearly for
recruiting those Forces. This also proves that his Majesty knew very well, that
there was no hazard from the Invasions I mentioned before: For if there had bin
any real danger of that kind, he would not have weakened the Forces in this
Kingdom so considerably. I am very far from disapproving his Majesty's Conduct
in that Affair; I do on the contrary highly commend his Wisdom in it, and think
it to have bin the best use that could be made of Forces in this Country,
whilst the War continued. But must we in time of Peace be taxed beyond measure
to maintain Forces, which upon occasion are to serve for the defense of two of
the richest Nations in the world; Nations that have manifested their
unwillingness to let us into the least copartnership with them in Trade, from
which all our Riches, if over we have any, must arise? This is to load a poor
Nation with Taxes, and to oppress them with Soldiers in order to procure Plenty
and Riches to other Countries, of which they are not to have the least share.
Rich and opulent Nations are to enjoy the benefits of the Peace, and we are to
suffer, that they may enjoy them with security.

Therefore I am of opinion, that since we can expect no advantages from our
Neighbors or Allies, we do our selves right, by refusing to maintain any
Standing Forces for their behoof, because we need none for our own defense, and
that our Militia may be sufficient on all occasions where force is necessary.
Eighty four thousand pounds, which is the Sum proposed for the yearly
maintenance of Standing Forces, is as much money to us, as two Millions five
hundred and twenty thousand pounds is to England, since we cannot pretend to
above the thirtieth part of their Wealth. And yet that Nation allows but three
hundred and fifty thousand pounds for the forces they keep on foot; of which
sum 12000 pounds is more than the thirtieth part. If it be said that England
allows more for their Fleet than for their Land Forces; I answer, it ought to
be considered that England with all its Riches maintains only five Millions and
half of People, and that Scotland upon a thirtieth part maintains a million and
half. Eighty four thousand pounds laid out yearly in Husbandry, Manufactures
and Trade, may do great things in Scotland, and not only maintain (tho in a
different way of living) all those Officers and Soldiers, of which these Forces
are designed to consist, but also vastly enrich this Nation; whereas great
numbers of Soldiers produce nothing but beggary in any place. People employed
in Manufactures, Husbandry and Trade, make consumption as well as Soldiers, and
their labor and industry is an overplus of Wealth to the Nation, whilst
Soldiers consume twice as much as they pay for, and live idle.

It Is not the least misfortune of this Country, that the younger Sons of the
Nobility and Gentry, have in all times had their inclinations debauched to an
idle, for the most part criminal, and almost always unprofitable sort of Life;
I mean that of a Soldier of Fortune. Their Talents might have bin much better
employed in Trade and Husbandry to the improvement of their Country, and
increase of their Patrimony. Let us begin to come off from such ruinous ways of
living; and if we design to carry on a great Trade, let us employ men capable
to manage it. From all these Considerations I say, That the keeping up of any
Standing Forces in time of Peace is not only useless, but destructive to the
well being of this Nation.

If it be objected, that this would take away even the ordinary Guards; I
answer, that whilst we had a King residing in Scotland, he had no other Guard
than forty Gentlemen; and now when we have no King amongst us, we must have a
squadron of Horse and two battalions of Foot, with the title of Guards. But I
would know what Guards they are we must keep up. Are they those who yielded up
the rank of the Nation and dignity of a Crown, if it have any pre-eminence
above a Commonwealth? I am far from pleading for mutiny against a General, or
disobedience to a King; but when the meanest Officer thinks himself injured in
his Rank, he demands his Pass, and will serve no more; neither is he blamed by
any Prince for so doing. If the Officers of that body would have done as much
for the honor of their Country, sure they would have merited his Majesty's
esteem, and deserved rewards from the Nation. But how they can pretend to be
kept up after an action that our Ancestors would have thought to deserve not
only breaking, but a decimation to precede it, I cannot imagine. I know there
are many brave Gentlemen among them who were much grieved at the thing, but
they had a bad example from the then commanding Officer; and it is to be feared
that his advancement to the place of the greatest military Trust and Importance
in the Kingdom, may by his Majesty's enemies be imputed to that action.

But after all we are told, that if we will keep up Standing Forces we shall
have an act of Habeas Corpus. This would be a wise bargain: here is a price for
our Liberty; sure we may expect an immense Sum, and a security without
exception. No, no, but you shall have an Act of Parliament for the freedom of
your Persons, tho there be never so many Standing Forces in the Kingdom; that
is, we shall have the Law on our side, and another shall have the force, and
then let nature work. If there be no danger that Standing Forces should violate
the Law, there is no danger from them.

There is no pretense to speak of a Cess or Land Tax for maintaining Forces,
before the business of the Army be taken into consideration; and one would
think, if the Army be disbanded, it should not be mentioned at all. Yet it is
certain that such men as would recommend themselves by a pretended Loyalty,
will not fail to tell us, that we ought to be at the least as liberal to his
present Majesty, who has redeemed us from Popery and Slavery, as we were to
King James, who would have brought us under both: and tho they now pretend that
a Cess for Life will not be so much as mentioned in the approaching Session, we
know very well their conduct in that Affair will be regulated upon the
disposition they sind in the Parliament to grant or refuse it; and that if they
conceive any hopes of obtaining so considerable a Jewel to the Crown, they will
be sure to bring in that Affair when least expected.

The giving his Majesty a Land Tax during Life, and so great a one as that
granted to the late King James, with the Revenue already settled on him for the
same term, makes it impossible for the Subject to give more, and consequently
is of all those Affairs that can come before any Parliament the greatest, and
of the highest importance; since it tends to the making Parliaments less
necessary, and consequently to the abolishing them, with the ancient
constitution of Government in this Nation.

Those who have the honor to advise his present Majesty, if they be true
lovers of the Monarchy, ought to have a care of treading in the former
footsteps, and above all shun to advise him to desire those things of the
Parliament which King James desired and obtained. It were their duty by all
means, to endeavor a fair understanding and a continual good correspondence
between King and People, which certainly is the only true support of Monarchy.
Now there are no occasions of entertaining and increasing that confidence, and
those mutual good Offices that should, like regular Tides, ebb and flow between
King and People, greater than those of Parliaments. Endeavors to take away the
frequency of Parliaments, are endeavors to take away those frequent good
Offices between King and People. The King stands in need of Money, the People of
good Laws, which their Representatives and his great Council offer to him, that
they may have his sanction, and that he may provide for their due execution.
Money may be given at once, for a long time, or for ever; but good Laws cannot
be so enacted, the occasion and necessity of them discovering it self only from
time to time: And if the one go without the other, the mutual good Offices, and
consequently the mutual confidence between King and People ceases.

It may be farther considered, that the King has the power of calling
Parliaments; and that by giving him for Life all that we can give, we shall
make Parliaments unnecessary to him. If any man suggest that it is a crime to
suspect that so good and just a Prince as his present Majesty is, will not
always do what is for the good of his People; I answer, that I have all the
deference, respect and esteem for his Majesty that any Subject ought to have;
but it were a fulsome piece of flattery for any man to say, that he cannot be
influenced by bad Counsel, or that he is not subject to those frailties of
mistake and prejudice, from which no mortal was ever free, and Princes always
most subject to through the suggestions and bad Offices of men about them.

But let us suppose that his present Majesty will never make the least bad use
of this Tax, who shall secure as his Successor will not? If it be said that
it is only for his present Majesty this Tax is desired, and that it is in the
power of the Parliament to refuse it to the Successor; I say, with what
probability will it, and with what face can it be refused to him? These men
desire it for his present Majesty because King James had it, tho he made bad
use of it; the Successor shall desire it because his present Majesty had it,
and made good use of it; I think his Argument is stronger. So that tho this be
said to be only for the Life of his present Majesty, yet upon the matter it is
for ever. And then I need not tell you the consequence, our Parliaments shall
be abolished, our Kings shall become Tyrants, and we of Subjects, slaves.

But if we look more nearly into this demand, I doubt not it will appear very
gross. During the late War, Land Taxes were only demanded from year to year,
and we gave them cheerfully, in hopes that a few years would put an end to that
charge. When we had undoubted reasons to believe there would be a Peace, they
were demanded to be given for two years; and now God has blessed us with it, if
they be demanded during his Majesty's Life, will not this look as if we were to
have a Standing Army during the same time?

A Land Tax during his Majesty's Life, is a French Taille for that time. And we
ought not to forget that we are beginning, to the great advantage of the
Nation, to make some small progress in Trade; but if it be not encouraged, and
much more if it be nipt in the bud, there is an end of all our hopes. One of
the greatest things in Trade, is to encourage Exportation; and it is known that
the greatest Commodity of this Kingdom is Corn: if there be a Land Tax on those
whose chief riches consist in Corn, they cannot sell it so cheap to the
Merchant, that he can make any profit by exporting it.

As for the Arguments of those who are for this Tax, I need answer none of
them; they are, To save the trouble and expense of frequent Parliaments; and
because the Nation did trust King James with this Tax, who made bad use of it,
(a modest and a sensible Argument!) Are they not afraid it should be said, that
those who advise the King to ask the same trust King James had, may advise him
likewise to the same things, for which King James demanded it? Sure I am, that
many who plead for this now, are the same Persons who did the like for King
James: and as for the expense occasioned by frequent Parliaments, I believe
there is neither Shire nor Borough but will find Persons very willing to
represent them, without putting them to any charge. I know it is commonly said
in this Kingdom, that Parliaments do more hurt than good; but it is because
they are never called unless to impose money: will it mend the matter to lay on
at once, and for Life, as much as the Nation is able to pay? We were getting
some good Laws for our Money, but then we shall be excluded from that benefit.

In a word, our Forefathers had two securities for their Liberties and
Properties, they had both the Sword and the Purse: The Sword anciently was in
the hand of the Subject, because the Armies then were composed of the Vassals
who depended on the Barons. That Security is gone; shall we throw the other
after it, and thereby I may very well say, dissolve the Constitution, and the
Monarchy? For a Government is not only a Tyranny, when tyrannically exercised;
but also when there is no sufficient caution in the Constitution that it may
not be exercised tyrannically.

When the Parliament has put an end to the Affairs beforementioned, it were to
be wished that this being the first Session since the conclusion of the Peace,
and after so long a War, they would pass some Act to ease the minds, and take
away the fears and apprehensions of many men who are still obnoxious to the
Law, of whom the greater part are abroad; and all of them both at home and
abroad, for want of an Act of Indemnity, made desperate, and only sitted to
involve others in the same uneasy and distracting Circumstances under which
they themselves live. But Acts of Indemnity are the worst and most pernicious
of all Laws to the well being of any Government, unless the most notorious
offenders be first punished; and in such cases only encouragements to new
Transgressions, destroying the real security of all Government, and effect of
all Laws, by giving an entire impunity to the attempts against both. So that
there seems to be an absolute necessity, both of making an example of the
notorious enemies to the Liberties of this Country, and giving a general Pardon
to the rest; if we will either secure the Government for the future from
endeavors to introduce Arbitrary Power, cut up the Party of the late King
James by the roots; or quiet the minds of the people, and remove the
animosities that may remain in a Nation wherein two or more parties have bin
inflamed against each other, to the ruin of the public Liberty; and extinguish
the memory of those Factions for ever.

When it is confessed and acknowledged, that there have bin bold attempts and
treacherous practices to destroy the Religion, overturn the Constitution of
Government, and suppress the Liberty of a Nation, and yet no example made of
the Advisers, and those who have bin eminently subservient to such designs;
such a People has as much laid the Foundation of their own ruin, as if they had
declared that those who shall hereafter engage themselves in the like attempts,
need fear no punishment. Upon a Revolution followed by a War, circumstances of
Affairs may be such, that till the War be at an end, it is not sit to punish
great Offenders. But there was no reason, nor any well-grounded political
consideration, why immediately upon the late Revolution, the most notorious of
those Offenders should not have bin punished; by which means we should have bin
delivered from our worst men, who have since bin very bad instruments in
Affairs, and have terrified the rest by their example: We might then have
quieted the minds of the people by an Indemnity; brought the Nation to a
settlement, and prevented the War which ensued in this Country. Yet (because in
matters of prudence men are of different sentiments) tho it should be granted,
that during the War it was not fit to make any examples, what pretense can
there be now of exempting from punishment those who have bin notoriously
criminal, both under the late Reigns, and under this? Which when it is done,
what conjuncture of time can be so proper for applying the healing Remedy of an
Act of Indemnity and Oblivion to the rest, as the present, by reason of the
Peace?

Before the Revolution, the Court had bin in a formed Conspiracy against the
Religion and Liberties of this Nation; nor was there any art to introduce
Arbitrary Power, or subvert our Religion, for which the late Reigns wanted
willing Instruments; and many endeavored to signalize themselves in the ruin
of their Country. Yet no man has bin made an Example, to deter others from the
like Crimes. It will I know be thought hard to mention the punishing of
Offenses committed so many years ago, when many of the Offenders are dead; and
some men will judge it fitter to bury all in a general Act of Oblivion. To this
I answer, that having bin highly to blame for neglecting hitherto to punish the
Enemies of our Liberty, this ought to oblige us the rather to make an example
of those who are still living. And to convince us of this necessity, we need
only to consider what Crimes those men would not have punished, nor the least
example made of any that have bin guilty of them; and whether the suffering
them to pass unpunished, will not bring a guilt upon the Nation which may not
easily be expiated. Public and private Injuries are of a very different
nature; and tho we are commanded to forgive the last, yet those who have Power
and Right, are required, under the greatest penalties, to punish the other,
especially where the Crimes are enormous. But if the Parliament should follow
the advice of those men, they are not to punish any violent Proceedings,
illegal and arbitrary Imprisonments, Fines, Banishments, and Murders under
pretext of Law, that were set on foot, encouraged, and committed by those evil
Counselors mentioned in his Majesty's Declaration, in order to alter the
Religion and Government of this Nation, and in place of them to introduce
Popery and Slavery. They are not to punish those, who to recommend themselves
to the late Kings, by their Interest, Power, and Credit in the Parliament, got
to be enacted most cruel and unchristian Laws, for persecuting a great part of
this Nation upon the account of their religious Opinions, which they could not
quit without violating their Consciences: They are not to punish those Privy
Counselors who went further than those very Laws would allow them, in a
thousand arbitrary and illegal proceedings, issuing out Orders to invade such
as dissented from them only in religious matters, with an Army composed for the
most part of barbarous Highlanders, who hunted them from Hill to Hill, to force
them to take Arms, that they might have a pretext to destroy them utterly. They
are not to punish those who gave Orders to impose illegal and unwarrantable
Oaths upon all persons, even on silly women that might be found traveling in
the ordinary Road, and to shoot them immediately dead, if they should refuse
the same. Nor are they to punish those who put them in execution. Do
Presbyterians in particular imagine, that if they neglect their duty in
punishing these men, they will avoid the guilt of the innocent blood shed in
those times? Are such things to be pardoned as private Injuries? The making our
Courts of Justice, particularly that of the Session, to be the Instruments of
subjecting all men to arbitrary Power, are things to be passed over in silence,
and no account to be taken of them. Those who advised and drew a Proclamation,
declaring the late King James his absolute Power in express terms, are not to
be questioned for it. If the Parliament pass over these things without making
any example of the Offenders, they make a Precedent for abolishing the
punishment of all enormous Crimes for ever, since there never can be greater
than these. Shall there be no examples made of Criminals for enormities of such
a general influence and concernment, in a Nation where a poor man for stealing
a little food, is for Examples sake (let what I say be considered) is for
Examples sake punished with death? If there can be no stop put to the least of
Crimes, but by the punishment of some of those that are guilty; can there be
any remedy against the abettors of Arbitrary Power, if no example be made of
them? Can that Government be said to be secure, where there is no punishment,
but rewards for conspiracies against its Constitution? It Is true that it may be
fit to overlook some Crimes, wherein extraordinary numbers of men are
concerned, but not extraordinary Crimes, nor the most guilty of the Criminals.

It was thought sit to forbear the punishment of the evil Counselors mentioned
in his Majesty's Declaration for some time: That forbearance has lasted to this
day; and we have so little hopes of seeing any discouragement put upon those
who shall promote Arbitrary Government in time to come, by an exemplary
punishment of the most notorious Offenders under the late Reigns, that
notwithstanding many new provocations, and reiterated treasons under this, they
have not only hitherto escaped punishment, but have bin also encouraged. For
not long after the Revolution, the most considerable of them (I do not speak of
those who took Arms) entered into new Conspiracies against their Country, to
betray it again to the late King James, and took the Oaths to this King, that
they might have the better opportunity to bring back the other. Yet after all
this his Majesty was advised to put some of them into the most important places
of trust in the Kingdom. What are we then to expect, if we shall not now
proceed to make some examples, but that they, and men of the like principles,
will insinuate themselves into all the places of trust; and have the power as
well as the will to throw us into prisons, and by their pernicious Counsels to
betray his present Majesty into the same misfortunes that were brought upon the
late King? Is it not enough, that the punishment of those who endeavored to
enslave us under the late Reigns, has bin delayed till now? Because they have
renewed the same Practices under this, must it still be delayed, to the end
that (as they have already done in the Affair of Glenco) they may continue to
give his Majesty the same bad Counsel with which the late Kings were poisoned?
Now, to pardon them we have this encouragement, that having passed over former
Crimes, we embolden them to commit new, and to give fresh wounds to that
Country which has already so often bled under their hands.

When the greatest Offenders are punished, an Act of Indemnity will be as
necessary to the well-being of this Nation as Peace it self, since there can be
no ease or quiet without it. But so little hopes have we of this, that whilst
the evil Counselors, against whom his Majesty did so justly declare, live at
ease; an Act (as we are told) is to be brought into the Parliament for
banishing during pleasure, many thousands of inconsiderable people who cannot
be charged with Crimes any way comparable to theirs; and some of them free of
the least appearance of any. What construction would the advisers of these
things, have even those who are best affected to the Government put upon them?
One might reasonably think that such things may be sit to keep up the Party of
the late King James, and fright the Nation into a belief of the necessity of
continuing a Standing Army, that they may be sit to lead men of Estates, or
those who have any thing to lose, into snares both at home and abroad
(particularly in France, where the late King James is still suffered) by
pretending correspondence or conversation with such as may be obnoxious to the
Law: But no man can suspect the worst of Counselors of such designs. And
therefore I confess I am at a stand; for such vast numbers of people were never
yet banished for crimes of State: nor dos the multitude ever suffer for them,
except only in barbarous Countries. If it be said that ill men may have designs
against his Majesty's Life, and therefore ought to be banished; I answer,
Nothing is more likely to draw on such a mischief, than extraordinary
severities used against them. For nothing dos so much sit a man for such an
attempt, as despair; against which no distance of place can long protect.

My opinion therefore is, that an Act of Indemnity (exceping only Assassins and
other notorious Criminals, whom we cannot at present reach) is more suitable to
our present condition, than an Act of Banishment: and that to procure the
Nation so great a blessing, the Parliament should proceed, without delay, to
the punishing of the greatest Criminals, both of this and the last Reigns,
without which an Oblivion will be one of the greatest Injuries that can be done
to us.

I shall only add, That there is ground to believe some men will endeavor to
persuade the Parliament to take this Affair into consideration before all
others; because it was the first thing done in the last Session of the English
Parliament; and the Bill having past there almost without debate, they will
make use of that as an Argument why it should do so here. What the
considerations were which moved that Parliament to do so, I will not presume to
determine, neither is it my business: Circumstances of Affairs may be different
in different Nations: Sure I am, that in this particular they are different,
that a greater number of men, in proportion to the people in each Nation, will
fall under uneasy circumstances by such an Act in Scotland, than has bin found
to have done in England.

The second Discourse Concerning the AFFAIRS of SCOTLAND, Written in the Year
School.
THE Affairs of which I have spoken in the preceding Discourse, are such as the
present conjuncture makes a proper subject for the approaching Session of
Parliament: but there are many other things which require no less their care,
if the urgent and pressing distresses of the Nation be considered. I shall
therefore with all due respect to the Parliament offer my opinion concerning
two, which I presume to be of that nature.

The first thing which I humbly and earnestly propose to that Honorable Court
is, that they would take into their consideration the condition of so many
thousands of our People who are at this day dying for want of Bread. And to
persuade them seriously to apply themselves to so indispensible a duty, they
have all the inducements which those most powerful emotions of the Soul, Terror
and Compassion, can produce. Because from unwholsom Food diseases are so
multiplied among the poor People, that if some course be not taken, this Famine
may very probably be followed by a Plague; and then what man is there even of
those who sit in Parliament that can be sure he shall escape? And what man is
there in this Nation, if he have any Compassion, who must not grudg himself
every nice bit and every delicate morsel he puts in his Mouth, when he
considers that so many are already dead, and so many at that minute struggling
with death, not for want of Bread but of Grains, which I am credibly informed
have bin eaten by some Families, even during the preceding years of Scarcity.
And must not every unnecessary branch of our expense, or the least sinery in
our Houses, Clothes or Equipage, reproach us with our barbarity, so long as
People born with natural Endowments, perhaps not inferior to our own, and
fellow Citizens, perish for want of things absolutely necessary to life?

But not to insist any more upon the representation of so great a Calamity,
which if drawn in proper colors, and only according to the precise truth of
things, must cast the minds of all honest men into those convulsions which
ought necessarily to be composed before they can calmly consider of a remedy;
and because the particulars of this great distress are sufficiently known to
all, I shall proceed to say, that tho perhaps upon the great want of Bread,
occasioned by the continued bad seasons of this and the three preceding years,
the evil be greater and more pressing than at any time in our days, yet there
have always bin in Scotland such numbers of poor, as by no regulations could
ever be orderly provided for; and this Country has always swarmed with such
numbers of idle Vagabonds, as no Laws could ever restrain. And indeed when I
considered the many excellent Laws enacted by former Parliaments for setting
the Poor to work, particularly those in the time of King James the sixth, with
the Clauses for putting them in execution, which to me seemed such as could not
miss of the end, and yet that nothing was obtained by them, I was amazed, and
began to think upon the case of other Nations in this particular, persuaded
that there was some strange hidden root of this evil which could not be well
discovered, unless by observing the conduct of other Governments. But upon
reflection I found them all subject to the same inconveniences, and that in all
the Countries of Europe there were great numbers of Poor, except in Holland,
which I knew to proceed from their having the greatest share in the Trade of
the World. But this not being a remedy for every Country, since all cannot
pretend to so great a part in Trade, and that two or three Nations are able to
manage the whole Commerce of Europe; yet there being a necessity that the Poor
should every where be provided for, unless we will acknowledge the deficiency of
all Government in that particular, and finding no remedy in the Laws or Customs
of any of the present Governments, I began to consider what might be the
conduct of the wise Ancients in that affair. And my curiosity was increased,
when upon reflection I could not call to mind that any ancient Author had so
much as mentioned such a thing, as great numbers of poor in any Country.

At length I found the original of that multitude of Beggars which now oppress
the World, to have proceeded from Churchmen, who (never failing to confound
things Spiritual with Temporal, and consequently all good Order and good
Government, either through mistake or design) upon the first public
establishment of the Christian Religion, recommended nothing more to Masters,
in order to the Salvation of their Souls, than the setting such of their Slaves
at liberty as would embrace the Christian Faith, tho our Savior and his
Apostles had bin so far from making use of any Temporal advantages to persuade
eternal truths, and so far from invading any man's property, by promising him
Heaven for it, that the Apostle Paul says expressly, In what ever condition of
Life every one is called to the Christian Faith, in that let him remain. Art
thou called being a slave? be not concerned for thy condition; but even tho
thou might be free, choose to continue in it. For he who is called whilst a
slave, becomes the freeman of the Lord; and likewise he that is called whilst a
freeman, becomes the slave of Christ, who has paid a price for you, that you
might not be the slaves of men. Let every one therefore, Brethren, in whatever
condition he is called, in that remain, in the fear of God. That the
interpretation I put upon this passage, different from our Translation, is the
true meaning of the Apostle, not only the authority of the Greek Fathers, and
genuine signification of the Greek Particles, but the whole context, chiefly
the first and last words (which seem to be repeated to enforce and determine
such a meaning) clearly demonstrate. And the reason why he recommends to them
rather to continue slaves (if they have embraced the Christian Faith in that
condition) seems to be that it might appear they did not embrace it for any
worldly advantage, as well as to destroy a Doctrine which even in his days
began to be preached, that slavery was inconsistent with the Christian
Religion; since such a Doctrine would have bin a great stop to the progress of
it. What the Apostle means by saying, we ought not to be the slaves of men, I
shall show hereafter.

This disorder of giving liberty to great numbers of slaves upon their
profession of Christianity, grew to such a height, even in the time of
Constantine the Great, that the Cities of the Empire found themselves burdened
with an infinite number of men, who had no other estate but their liberty, of
whom the greatest part would not work, and the rest had bin bred to no
profession. This obliged Constantine to make Edicts in favor of Beggars; and
from that time at the request of the Bishops, Hospitals and Almshouses, not
formerly known in the world, began to be established. But upon the rise of the
Mohammedan Religion, which was chiefly advanced by giving liberty to all their
slaves, the Christians were so molested by the continual Rebellion of theirs,
that they were at length forced to give liberty to them all; which it seems the
Churchmen then looked upon as a thing necessary to preserve the Christian
Religion, since in many of the Writings, by which Masters gave freedom to their
Slaves, it is expressly said, they did so, to save their own Souls.

This is the rise of that great mischief, under which, to the undoing of the
Poor, all the Nations of Europe have ever since groaned. Because in ancient
times, so long as a man was the riches and part of the possession of another,
every man was provided for in Meat, Clothes and Lodging; and not only he, but
(in order to increase that riches) his Wife and Children also: Whereas
Provisions by Hospitals, Almshouses, and the contributions of Churches or
Parishes, have by experience bin found to increase the numbers of those that
live by them. And the liberty every idle and lazy Person has of burdening the
Society in which he lives, with his maintenance, has increased their numbers to
the weakening and impoverishing of it: For he needs only to say, that he cannot
get work, and then he must be maintained by Charity. And as I have shown
before, no Nation except one only (which is in extraordinary Circumstances) dos
provide by public Workhouses for their Poor: the reason of which seems to be,
that public Workhouses for such vast numbers of People, are impracticable
except in those places where (besides a vast Trade to vend the manufactur'd
Goods) there is an extraordinary Police: And that tho the Hollanders by reason
of the steddiness of their Temper, as well as of their Government (being a
Commonwealth) may be constant to their methods of providing for the Poor; yet
in a Nation, and under a Government like that of France, tho vast public
Workhouses may be for a while kept in order, 'twill not be long before they
fall into confusion and ruin. And indeed (next to Plato's Republic, which
chiefly consists in making the whole Society live in common) there is nothing
more impracticable than to provide for so great a part of every Nation by
public Workhouses. Whereas when such an Economy comes under the inspection
of every master of a Family, and that he himself is to reap the profit of the
right management; the thing not only turns to a far better account, but by
reason of his power to sell those Workmen to others who may have use for them,
when he himself has a mind to alter his course of Life, the profit is permanent
to the Society; nor can such an Economy, or any such management ever fall into
confusion.

I doubt not, that what I have said will meet, not only with all the
misconstruction and obloquy, but all the disdain, fury and outcries, of which
either ignorant Magistrates, or proud, lazy and miserable people are capable.
Would I bring back Slavery into the world? Shall men of immortal Souls, and by
nature equal to any, be sold as Beasts? Shall they and their posterity be for
ever subjected to the most miserable of all conditions; the inhuman barbarity
of Masters, who may beat, mutilate, torture, starve or kill so great a number
of mankind at pleasure? Shall the far greater part of the Commonwealth be
Slaves, not that the rest may be free, but Tyrants over them? With what face
can we oppose the tyranny of Princes, and recommend such opposition as the
highest Virtue, if we make our selves Tyrants over the greatest part of
mankind? Can any man, from whom such a thing has once escaped, ever offer to
speak for Liberty? But they must pardon me if I tell them, that I regard not
names, but things; and that the misapplication of names has confounded every
thing. We are told there is not a Slave in France; that when a Slave sets his
foot upon French ground, he becomes immediately free: and I say that there is
not a Free man in France, because the King takes away any part of any man's
Property at his pleasure; and that, let him do what he will to any man, there
is no remedy. The Turks tell us there are no Slaves among them, except Jews,
Moors, or Christians; and who is there that knows not, they are all Slaves to
the Grand Signor, and have no remedy against his will? A Slave properly is one,
who is absolutely subjected to the will of another man without any remedy: and
not one that is only subjected under certain limitations, and upon certain
accounts necessary for the good of the Commonwealth, tho such an one may go
under that name. And the confounding these two conditions of men by a name
common to both, has in my opinion bin none of the least hardships put upon
those who ought to be named Servants. We are all subjected to the Laws; and the
easier or harder conditions imposed by them upon the several ranks of men in
any Society, make not the distinction that is between a Freeman and a Slave.

So that the condition of Slaves among the Ancients, will upon serious
consideration appear to be only a better provision in their Governments than
any we have, that no man might want the necessities of life, nor any person
able to work be burdensome to the Commonwealth. And they wisely judged of the
Inconveniences that befall the most part of poor people, when they are all
abandoned to their own conduct. I know that these two conditions of men were
confounded under the same name, as well by the Ancients as they are by us; but
the reason was, that having often taken in War the Subjects of Absolute
Monarchs, they thought they did them no wrong if they did not better their
condition: and as in some of their Governments the condition of Slaves was
under a worse regulation than in others, so in some of them it differed very
little, if at all, from the condition of such a Slave as I have defined. But I
do not approve, and therefore will not go about to defend any of those bad and
cruel regulations about Slaves. And because it would be tedious and needless to
pursue the various conditions of them in several Ages and Governments, it shall
be enough for me to explain under what conditions they might be both good and
useful, as well as I think they are necessary in a well-regulated Government.

First then, their Masters should not have power over their lives, but the life
of the Master should go for the life of the Servant. The Master should have no
power to mutilate or torture him; That in such cases the Servant should not
only have his freedom (which alone would make him burdensome to the Public) but
a sufficient yearly pension so long as he should live from his said Master.
That he, his Wife and Children, should be provided for in Clothes, Diet, and
Lodging. That they should be taught the principles of Morality and Religion; to
read, and be allowed the use of certain Books: That they should not work upon
Sundays, and be allowed to go to Church: That in every thing, except their duty
as Servants, they should not be under the will of their Masters, but the
protection of the Law: That when these Servants grow old, and are no more
useful to their Masters, (lest upon that account they should be ill used)
Hospitals should be provided for them by the Public: That if for their good
and faithful service, any Master give them their freedom, he should be obliged
to give them likewise wherewithal to subsist, or put them in a way of living
without being troublesome to the Commonwealth: That they should wear no habit
or mark to distinguish them from hired Servants: That any man should be
punished who gives them the opprobrious name of Slave. So, except it were that
they could possess nothing, and might be sold, which really would be but an
alienation of their Service without their consent, they would live in a much
more comfortable condition (wanting nothing necessary for life) than those who
having a power to possess all things, are very often in want of every thing, to
such a degree, that many thousands of them come to starve for hunger.

It will be said, that notwithstanding all these regulations, they may be most
barbarously used by their Masters, either by beating them outragiously, making
them work beyond measure, suffer cold or hunger, or neglecting them in their
sickness. I answer, That as long as the Servant is of an age not unsit for
work, all these things are against the interest of the Master: That the most
brutal man will not use his beast ill only out of a humor; and that if such
Inconveniences do sometimes fall out, it proceeds, for the most part, from the
perverseness of the Servant: That all Inconveniences cannot be obviated by any
Government; that we must choose the least; and that to prevent them in the best
manner possible, a particular Magistrate might be instituted for that end.

The condition of such a Servant is to be esteemed free; because in the most
essential things, he is only subject to the Laws, and not to the will of his
Master, who can neither take away his life, mutilate, torture, or restrain him
from the comforts of Wife and Children: But on the other hand, for the service
he dos, is obliged to ease him of the inconveniences of marriage, by providing
for him, his wife, and children, clothes, food, and lodging: and the condition
of a Baschaw, or great Lord, under Arbitrary Government (who for the sake, and
from a necessity of what they call Government, has joined to the quality of a
Slave the office of a Tyrant, and imagins himself a man of Quality, if not a
little Prince, by such preeminence) is altogether slavish; since he is under
the protection of no Law, no not so much as to his life, or the honor of his
wife and children; and is subjected to stronger temptations than any man, of
being a slave to men in St. Paul's sense, which is a worse sort of slavery than
any I have yet mentioned. That is, of being subservient to, and an instrument
of the lusts of his master the Tyrant: since if he refuse slavishly to obey, he
must lose his office, and perhaps his life. And indeed men of all ranks living
under Arbitrary Government (so much preached and recommended by the far greater
part of Churchmen) being really under the protection of no Law, (whatever may
be pretended) are not only Slaves, as I have desined before, but by having no
other certain remedy in any thing against the lust and passions of their
Superiors, except suffering or compliance, lie under the most violent
temptations of being Slaves in the worst sense, and of the only sort that is
inconsistent with the Christian Religion. A condition (whatever men may
imagine) so much more miserable than that of Servants protected by the Laws in
all things necessary for the subsistence of them and their Posterity, that
there is no comparison.

I shall now proceed to the great advantages the Ancients received from this
sort of Servants. By thus providing for their poor, and making every man useful
to the Commonwealth, they were not only able to perform those great and
stupendous public works, Highways, Aqueducts, Common-shores, Walls of Cities,
Seaports, Bridges, Monuments for the Dead, Temples, Amphitheatres, Theaters,
places for all manner of Exercises and Education, Baths, Courts of Justice,
Marketplaces, public Walks, and other magnificent Works for the use and
convenience of the Public; with which Egypt, Asia, Greece, Italy, and other
Countries were filled; and to adorn them with stately Pillars and Obelisks,
curious Statues, most exquisite Sculpture and Painting: but every particular
man might indulge himself in any kind of finery and magnificence; not only
because he had Slaves to perform it according to his fancy, but because all the
poor being provided for, there could be no crime in making unnecessary
expenses, which are always contrary, not only to Christian Charity, but common
Humanity, as long as any poor man wants bread. For tho we think that in making
those expenses, we employ the poor; and that in building costly Houses, and
furnishing them, making fine Gardens, rich Stuffs, Laces and Embroideries for
Apparel, the poor are set to work; yet so long as all the poor are not provided
for, (tho a man cannot reproach to himself in particular why it is not done)
and that there is any poor family in a starving condition, it is against common
humanity (and no doubt would have bin judged to be so by the Ancients) for any
man to indulge himself in things unnecessary, when others want what is
absolutely necessary for life, especially since the furnishing of those things
to them, does employ Workmen as well as our unnecessary expenses. So that the
Ancients, without giving the least check to a tender compassion for the
necessities of others (a virtue so natural to great minds, so nicely to be
preserved and cherished) might not only adorn their public Buildings with all
the resinements of Art, but likewise beautify their private Houses, Villa's and
Gardens with the greatest curiosity. But we by persisting in the like, and
other unnecessary expenses, while all the poor are not provided for (example,
vanity, and the love of pleasure, being predominant in us) have not only
effaced all the vestiges of Christian Charity, but banished natural compassion
from amongst us, that without remorse we might continue in them.

This explains to us by what means so much virtue and simplicity of manners
could subsist in the Cities of Greece, and the lesser Asia, in the midst of so
great curiosity and resinement in the Arts of Magnificence and Ornament. For in
ancient times great Riches, and consequently bad Arts to acquire them, were not
necessary for those things; because if a man possessed a moderate number of
Slaves, he might choose to employ them in any sort of magnificence, either
private or public, for use or ornament, as he thought sit, whilst he himself
lived in the greatest simplicity, having neither Coaches nor Horses to carry
him, as in triumph, through the City; nor a family in most things composed like
that of a Prince, and a multitude of idle Servants to consume his Estate. Women
were not then intolerably expensive, but wholly employed in the care of
domestic Affairs. Neither did the furniture of their houses amount to such
vast sums as with us; but was for the most part wrought by their Slaves.

Another advantage which the Ancients had by this sort of Servants, was, That
they were not under that uneasiness, and unspeakable vexation which we suffer
by our hired Servants, who are never bred to be good for any thing, tho most of
the Slaves amongst the Ancients were. And tho we bestow the greatest pains or
cost to educate one of them from his youth, upon the least cross word he leaves
us. So that it is more than probable this sort of Servants growing every day
worse, the unspeakable trouble arising from them, without any other
consideration, will force the world to return to the former.

Among the Ancients, any Master who had the least judgment or discretion, was
served with emulation by all his Slaves, that those who best performed their
duty, might obtain their liberty from him. A Slave, tho furnished with every
thing necessary, yet possessing nothing, had no temptation to cheat his Master;
whereas a hired Servant, whilst he remains unmarried, will cheat his Master of
what may be a stock to him when married; and if after his marriage he continue
to serve his Master, he will be sure to cheat him much more. When the Ancients
gave freedom to a Slave, they were obliged to give him wherewithal to subsist,
or to put him into a way of living. And how well and faithfully they were
served by those they had made free, (whom from a long experience of their
probity and capacity, they often made Stewards of their Estates) all ancient
History dos testify. Now, we having no regular way to enable a Servant to
provide sufficient maintenance for his Family, when he becomes independent on
his Master, his bare Wages (out of which he is for the most part to provide
himself with many necessaries for daily use) not being enough for that purpose,
and no way left but to cheat his Master, we ought not to expect any probity or
fidelity in our Servants, because, for want of order in this point, we subject
them to such strong temptations.

I might insist upon many other advantages the Ancients had in the way they
were served, if to persuade the expedient I propose, I were not to make use of
stronger Arguments than such as can be drawn from any advantages; I mean those
of necessity.

There are at this day in Scotland (besides a great many poor Families very
meanly provided for by the Church-boxes, with others, who by living upon bad
Food fall into various diseases) 200000 People begging from door to door. These
are not only no way advantageous, but a very grievous burden to so poor a
Country. And tho the number of them be perhaps double to what it was formerly,
by reason of this present great distress, yet in all times there have bin about
100000 of those Vagabonds, who have lived without any regard or subjection
either to the Laws of the Land, or even those of God and Nature; Fathers
incestuously accompanying with their own Daughters, the Son with the Mother,
and the Brother with the Sister. No Magistrate could ever discover, or be
informed which way one in a hundred of these wretches died, or that ever they
were baptized. Many murders have bin discovered among them; and they are not
only a most unspeakable oppression to poor Tenants, (who if they give not
Bread, or some kind of Provision to perhaps forty such Villains in one day, are
sure to be insulted by them) but they rob many poor People who live in Houses
distant from any Neighborhood. In years of Plenty many thousands of them meet
together in the Mountains, where they feast and riot for many days; and at
country Weddings, Markets, Burials, and other the like public occasions, they
are to be seen both Men and Women perpetually drunk, cursing, blaspheming, and
sighting together.

These are such outrageous disorders, that it were better for the Nation they
were sold to the Galleys or West Indies, than that they should continue any
longer to be a burden and curse upon us. But numbers of People* being great
riches, every Government is to blame that makes not a right use of them. The
wholsomness of our Air, and healthfulness of our Climat, affords us great
numbers of People, which in so poor a Country can never be all maintained by
Manufactures, or public Workhouses, or any other way, but that which I have
mentioned.

And to show that former Parliaments struggling with this, otherwise
insuperable, difficulty, have by the nature of the thing bin as it were forced
upon remedies tending toward what I have proposed: By an Act of Parliament in
the year 1579. any subject of sufficient Estate is allowed to take the Child of
any Beggar, and educate him for his Service, which Child is obliged to serve
such a Master for a certain term of years; and that term of years extended by
another Act made in the year 1597, for Life. So that here is a great advance
toward my Proposition; but either from some mistake about Christian or Civil
liberty, they did not proceed to consider the necessity of continuing that
service in the Children of such Servants, and giving their Masters a power of
alienating that service to whom they should think fit. The reason for the first
of these is, that being married in that sort of service, their Masters must of
necessity maintain their Wife and Children, and so ought to have the same right
to the service of the Children as of the Father. And the reason for the power
of Alienation is, that no man is sure of continuing always in one sort of
Employment; and having educated a great many such Children when he was in an
Employment that required many Servants, if afterward he should be obliged to
quit it for one that required few or none, he could not without great injustice
be deprived of the power of alienating their service to any other man, in order
to reimburse to himself the money he had bestowed upon them; especially since
the setting them at liberty would only bring a great burden upon the public.

Now what I would propose upon the whole matter is, that for some present
remedy of so great a mischief, every man of a certain Estate in this Nation
should be obliged to take a proportionable number of those Vagabonds, and
either employ them in hedging and ditching his Grounds, or any other sort of
work in Town and Country; or if they happen to be Children and young, that he
should educate them in the knowledge of some mechanical Art, that so every man
of Estate might have a little Manufacture at home which might maintain those
Servants, and bring great profit to the Master, as they did to the Ancients,
whose revenue by the Manufactures of such Servants was much more considerable
than that of their Lands. Hospitals and Almshouses ought to be provided for
the sick, lame and decrepit, either by rectifying old foundations or
instituting new. And for example and terror three or four hundred of the most
notorious of those Villains which we call Jockys, might be presented by the
Government to the State of Venice, to serve in their Galleys against the common
enemy of Christendom.

But these things, when once resolved, must be executed with great address,
diligence, and severity; for that sort of People is so desperately wicked, such
enemies of all Work and Labor, and, which is yet more amazing, so proud, in
esteeming their own condition above that which they will be sure to call
slavery; that unless prevented by the utmost industry and diligence, upon the
first publication of any orders necessary for putting in execution such a
design, they will rather die with hunger in Caves and Dens, and murder their
young Children, than appear abroad to have them and themselves taken into such
a kind of service. And the Highlands are such a vast and unsearchable retreat
for them, that if strict and severe order be not taken to prevent it, upon such
an occasion these Vagabonds will only rob as much food as they can out of the
Low Country, and retire to live upon it in those Mountains, or run into England
till they think the storm of our resolutions is over, which in all former times
they have seen to be vain.

Nor indeed can there be a through reformation in this Affair, so long as the
one half of our Country, in extent of ground, is possessed by a People who are,
all Gentlemen only because they will not work, and who in every thing are more
contemptible than the vilest slaves, except that they always carry Arms,
because for the most part they live upon robbery. This part of the Country
being an inexhaustible source of Beggars, has always broke all our measures
relating to them. And it were to be wished that the Government would think sit
to transplant that handful of People, and their Masters (who have always
disturbed our peace) into the Low Country, and people the Highlands from hence,
rather than they should continue to be a perpetual occasion of mischief to us.
It Is in vain to say, that whatever People are planted in those Mountains, they
will quickly turn as savage, and as great Beggars as the present Inhabitants;
for the Mountains of the Alps are greater, more desert, and more condemned to
snows than those of the Highlands of Scotland, which are every where out by
Friths and Lakes, the richest in Fishing of any in the world, assording great
conveniences for transportation of Timber and any other Goods; and yet the Alps
which have no such advantages are inhabited every where by a civilized,
industrious, honest, and peaceable People: but they had no Lords to hinder them
from being civilized, to discourage industry, encourage thieving, and to keep
them Beggars that they might be the more dependent; or when they had any that
oppressed them, as in that part of the Mountains that belongs to the Swiss,
they knocked them on the head.

Let us now compare the condition of our present Vagabonds with that of
Servants under the conditions which I have proposed, and we shall see the one
living under no Law of God, Man or Nature* polluted with all manner of
abominations; and tho in so little expectation of the good things of another
Life, yet in the worst condition of this, and sometimes starved to death in
time of extraordinary want. The other, tho sometimes they may fall under a
severe Master (who nevertheless may neither kill, mutilate, nor torture them,
and may be likewise restrained from using them very ill by the Magistrate I
mentioned) are always sure to have Food, Clothes and Lodging; and have this
advantage above other men, that without any care or pains taken by them, these
necessaries are likewise secured to their Wives and Children. They are provided
for in sickness, their Children are educated, and all of them under all the
inducements, encouragements and obligations possible to live quiet, innocent
and virtuous Lives. They may also hope, if they show an extraordinary
affection, care and sidelity in the service of their Master, that not only they
and their Families shall have their entire freedom, but a competency to live,
and perhaps the Estate of the Master entrusted to their care. Now if we will
consider the advantages to the Nation by the one, and the disadvantages arising
from the other sort of men, we shall evidently see, that as the one is an
excessive burden, curse, and reproach to us, so the other may enrich the
Nation, and adorn this Country with public works beyond any in Europe, which
shall not take the like methods of providing for their Poor.

This Proposal I hope may be a remedy, not only to that intolerable plague of
idle Vagabonds who infest the Nation; but by providing a more regular
maintenance for them, go a great way toward the present relief of other poor
People who have bin oppressed by them. That which follows is calculated to
remove the principal and original cause of the Poverty which all the Commons of
this Nation lie under, as well as those straitning difficulties in which men of
Estates are by our present method of Husbandry inevitably involved.

The causes of the present poverty and misery in which the Commonalty of
Scotland live, are many, yet they are all to be imputed to our own bad conduct
and mismanagement of our Affairs. It Is true, Trade being of late years vastly
increased in Europe, the poverty of any Nation is always imputed to their want
of that advantage. And tho our Soil be barren; yet our Seas being the richest
of any in the world, it may be thought that the cause of all our Poverty has
bin the neglect of Trade, and chiefly of our own Fishing: Nevertheless were I
to assign the principal and original source of our Poverty, I should place it
in the letting of our Lands at so excessive a rate as makes the Tenant poorer
even than his Servant whose Wages he cannot pay; and involves in the same
misery Day-labourers, Tradesmen, and the lesser Merchants who live in the
Country Villages and Towns; and thereby influences no less the great Towns and
wholesale Merchants, makes the Master have a troublesome and ill paid Rent, his
Lands not improved by enclosure or otherwise, but for want of Horses and Oxen
sit for labor, every where run out and abused.

The condition of the lesser Freeholders or Heritors (as we call them) is not
much better than that of our Tenants: for they have no Stocks to improve their
Lands, and living not as Husbandmen but as Gentlemen, they are never able to
attain any: Besides this, the unskilfulness of their wretched and half-starved
Servants is such, that their Lands are no better cultivated than those labored
by beggarly Tenants. And tho a Gentleman of Estate take a Farm into his own
hands, yet Servants are so unfaithful or lazy, and the Country People such
enemies of all manner of enclosure, that after having strugled with innumerable
difficulties, he at last finds it impossible for him to alter the ordinary bad
methods, whilst the rest of the Country continues in them.

The places in this Country which produce Sheep and black Cattle, have no
provision for them in Winter during the Snows, having neither Hay nor Straw,
nor any enclosure to shelter them or the Grass from the cold easterly Winds in
the Spring; so that the Beasts are in a dying condition, and the Grass consumed
by those destructive Winds, till the warm weather, about the middle of June,
come to the relief of both. To all this may be added the letting of Farms in
most part of those grazing Countries every year by Roop or Auction. But our
management in the Countries cultivated by Tillage is much worse, because the
Tenant pays his Rent in Grain, Wheat, Barley or Oats: which is attended with
many inconveniences, and much greater disadvantages than a Rent paid in Money.

Money Rent has a yearly balance in it; for if the year be scarce, all sorts of
Grain yield the greater price; and if the year be plentiful, there is the
greater quantity of them to make Money. Now a Rent paid in Corn has neither a
yearly, nor any balance at all; for if a plentiful year afford a superplus, the
Tenant can make but little of it; but if the year be scarce, he falls short in
the payment of his Corn, and by reason of the price it bears, can never clear
that Debt by the rates of a plentiful year, by which means he breaks, and
contributes to ruin his Master. The Rent being altogether in Corn, the Grounds
must be altogether in Tillage; which has bin the ruin of all the best Countries
in Scotland. The carriage of Corn paid for Rent, to which many Tenants are
obliged, being often to remote places, and at unseasonable times, destroys
their Horses, and hinders their labor. And the hazard of sending the Corn by
Sea to the great Towns, endangers the loss of the whole. The Master runs a
double risque for his Rent, from the Merchant as well as the Tenant; and the
Merchant making a thousand difficulties at the delivering of the Corn if the
price be fallen, the bargain sometimes ends in a suit at Law. The selling of
Corn is become a thing so difficult, that besides the cheats used in that sort
of Commerce, sufficient to disgust any honest man, the Brewers, Bakers, and
sometimes the Merchants who send it abroad, do so combine together, that the
Gentleman is obliged to lay it up, of which the trouble as well as loss is
great. This causes him to borrow Money for the supply of his present occasions,
and is the beginning of most men's Debts. We may add to this, that by a Rent in
Corn, a man comes to have one year 1000 l. Rent, and the next perhaps but 600,
so that he never can make any certain account for his expense or way of living;
that having one year 1000 l. to spend, he cannot easily restrain himself to 600
the next; that he spends the same quantity of Corn (and in some places where
such things are delivered instead of Rent) Hay, Straw, Poultry, Sheep and Oxen,
in a dear, as in a plentiful year, which he would not do if he was obliged to
buy them. Now the Tenant in a plentiful year wastes, and in a scarce year
starves: so that no man of any substance will take a Farm in Scotland; but
every Beggar if he have got half a dozen wretched Horses, and as many Oxen, and
can borrow Corn to sow, pretends to be a Tenant in places where they pay no
other Rent than Corn.

I know there are many objections made to what has bin said concerning the
advantages which a Rent paid in Money has above one paid in Corn; but certainly
they are all so frivolous, that every man upon a little restections may answer
them to himself. For the chief of them are, either that the Tenant will
squander away Money when he gets it into his hands; or that the Master can get a
better price for the Corn by selling it in gross to Merchants in the adjacent
Towns, or else by sending it to be sold at a great distance. To the first I
answer, that no substantial man will squander away Money because he has got it
into his hands, tho such Beggars as we now have for Tenants might be apt to do
so. And to the second, that the hazard of sending Corn from one place of the
Kingdom to another by Sea, and the prejudice the Tenants suffer from long
carriages by Land, do in part balance the supposed advantage; besides, if those
wholesale bargains were not so frequently made, nor the Corn so often carried
to be sold at the great Towns, the Merchants would be obliged to send to the
Country Markets to buy, and the prices in them would rise. In short, the
changing of Mony-rent into Corn, has bin the chief cause of racking all the
Rents to that excessive rate they are now advanced. And upon reflection it will
soon appear, that the turning of Money Rents into Rents of Corn, has bin the
invention of some covetous wretches, who have bin the occasion that all Masters
now live under the same uneasiness, and constant care, which they at first out
of covetousness created to themselves; and all to get as much as was possible
from poor Tenants, who by such means are made miserable, and are so far from
improving, that they only run out and spoil the Ground, ruin their Neighbors
by borrowing, and at length break for considerable Sums, tho at first they were
no better than Beggars.

The method of most other Countries is; That all Rents are paid in Money; That
Masters receiving a Fine, grant long Leases of their Grounds at easy Rents: but
this supposes the Tenant a man of considerable substance, who cannot only give
a Fine, but has wherewithal to stock, and also to improve his Farm. But in
Scotland no such men are willing to take Farms; nor in truth are the Masters
willing to let them, as they do in other Countries. And tho the Masters may
pretend, that if they could find substantial Tenants, they would let their
Grounds as they do in other places; and men of substance, that if they could
have Farms upon such conditions, they would turn Tenants; yet we see evident
marks of the little probability there is that any such thing can be brought
about without a general regulation. For in the West and North Countries where
they let Land in Few (or Fee) the Superiors are so hard, that besides the
yearly few-duty, they make the Fewer pay at his first entrance the whole
intrinsic value of the Land: and the people, tho substantial men, are fools
and slaves enough to make such Bargains. And in the same Countries, when they
let a small parcel of Land to a Tradesman, they let it not for what the Land is
worth, but what both the Land and his Trade is worth. And indeed it is next to
an impossibility to alter a general bad custom in any Nation, without a general
regulation, because of inveterate bad dispositions and discouragements, with
which the first beginnings of Reformations are always attended. Besides,
alterations that are not countenanced by the public Authority, proceed slowly;
and if they chance to meet with any check, men soon return to their former bad
methods.

The condition then of this Nation, chiefly by this abuse of racking the Lands,
is brought to such extremity, as makes all the Commonalty miserable, and the
Landlords, if possible, the greater Slaves, before they can get their Rents and
reduce them into Money. And because this evil is arrived to a greater height
with us, than I believe was ever known in any other place; and that, as I have
said, we are in no disposition to practice the methods of most other Countries,
I think we ought to find out some new one which may surmount all difficulties,
since in things of this nature diverse methods may be proposed very practicable,
and much better than any that hitherto have bin in use.

I know that if to a Law prohibiting all Interest for Money, another were
joined, that no man should possess more Land than so much as he should
cultivate by Servants, the whole Money, as well as People of this Nation, would
be presently employed, either in cultivating Lands, or in Trade and
Manufactures; That the Country would be quickly improved to the greatest height
of which the soil is capable, since it would be cultivated by all the rich men
of the Nation; and that there would still be vast stocks remaining to be
employed in Trade and Manufactures. But to oblige a man of a great Estate in
Land to sell all, except perhaps 200 pounds Sterling a year (which he might
cultivate by his Servants) and to employ the whole Money produced by the sale of
the rest, in a thing so uncertain as he would judge Trade to be, and for which
it is like he might have no disposition or genius, being a thing impracticable:
and also to employ the small stocks of Minors, Widows, and other Women
unmarried, in Trade or Husbandry, a thing of too great hazard for them; I would
propose a method for our relief, by joining to the Law prohibiting all Interest
of Money, and to the other, that no man should possess more Land than so much as
he cultivates by his Servants, a third Law, obliging all men that possess Lands
under the value of 200 pounds Sterling clear profits yearly, to cultivate them
by Servants, and pay yearly the half of the clear profits to such Persons as
cultivating Land worth 200 pounds Sterling a year, or above, shall buy such
Rents of them at twenty years purchase. The Project in its full extent may be
comprehended in these following Articles.

All Interest of Money to be forbidden.

No man to possess more Land than he cultivates by Servants.

Every man cultivating Land under the value of 200 pounds Sterling clear
profits a year, to pay yearly the half of the clear profits to some other man
who shall buy that Rent at twenty years purchase; and for his security shall be
preferred to all other Creditors.

No man to buy or possess those Rents, unless he cultivate Land to the value at
least of 200 pounds Sterling clear profits yearly.

Minors, Women unmarried, and persons absent upon a public account, may buy or
possess such Rents, tho they cultivate no Lands.

By the first Article, discharging all Interest of Money, most men who have
small sums at Interest, will be obliged to employ it in Trade, or the
improvement of Land.

By the second, That no man is to possess more Land, than so much as he
cultivates by his Servants, the whole Land of the Kingdom will come into the
hands of the richest men; at least there will be no Land cultivated by any man
who is not the possessor of it. And if he have a greater Estate than what he
cultivates, he may lay out Money upon Improvements; or if he have bought a small
possession, tho he may have no more Money left, he may, by selling one half of
the Rent, procure a sum considerable enough, both to stock and improve it. So
that in a few years the Country will be every where enclosed and improved to
the greatest height, the Plow being every where in the hand of the possessor.
Then Servants, Day-labourers, Tradesmen, and all sorts of Merchants, will be
well paid, and the whole Commons live plentifully, because they will all be
employed by men of substance: The Ground by enclosure, and other improvements,
will produce the double of what it now dos; and the race of Horses and black
Cattle will be much mended.

By the other Articles; That no man cultivating Land under the value of 200
pounds Sterling clear profits yearly, can purchase Rents upon Land from any
other man; but is obliged to pay yearly the half of the clear profits, to such
persons as shall buy them at twenty years purchase; and that only those who
cultivate Land worth at least 200 pounds Sterling a year, can buy such Rents*
The men of great Land Estates having sold all their Lands, except so much as
may yield 200 pounds Sterling yearly, or so much above that value as they shall
think sit to cultivate, may secure, if they please, the whole Money they receive
for their Lands, upon those Rents which the lesser possessors are obliged to
sell. And so those who had formerly their Estates in Lands ill cultivated, and
Corn-rents ill paid, as well as the other three sorts of persons excepted from
the general rule, and mentioned in the last Article, will have a clear rent in
Money coming in without trouble, for payment of which they are to be secured in
the Lands of the said lesser possessors before all Creditors. The reason of
excepting the three sorts of persons before mentioned from the general rule, is
evident; because (as has bin said) it were unreasonable to oblige Minors, or
women unmarried, to venture their small stocks in Trade or Husbandry: and much
more that those who are absent upon a public account, should be obliged to
have any stock employed that way, since they cannot inspect either.

The small possessors by this Project are not wronged in any thing; for if they
are obliged to pay a Rent to others, they receive the value of it. And this
Rent will put them in mind, not to live after the manner of men of great
Estates, but as Husbandmen, which will be no way derogatory to their Quality,
however ancient their Family may be.

The method to put this Project in execution is, first to enact; That Interest
for Money should fall next year from six per Cent. to five, and so on, falling
every year one per Cent. till it cease: And to make a Law, that all those who
at present possess Lands under the value of 200 pounds Sterling clear profits
yearly, should cultivate them by Servants, and sell the half of the clear
profits at twenty years purchase to the first Minor, woman unmarried, or person
absent upon a public account, who should offer Money for them; and in default
of such persons presenting themselves to buy, they should be obliged to sell
such Rents to any other persons qualified as above: and likewise to make
another Law, that whoever possesses Lands at present to the value of 200 l.
Sterling clear profits yearly, or more, should at least take so much of them as
may amount to that value, into their own hands. This being done, the yearly
falling of the Interest of Money would force some of those who might have Money
at Interest, to take Land for it: Others calling for their Money, would buy
estates of the landed men, who are to sell all except so much as they cultivate
themselves: and the prohibition of Interest producing many small possessors,
would afford abundance of Rents upon Land to be bought by rich men; of which
many might probably be paid out of those very Lands they themselves formerly
possessed. So that all sorts of men would in a little time fall into that easy
method for their Affairs, which is proposed by the Project.

What the half of the yearly clear profits of any small Possessors may be, the
usual valuation of Lands, in order to public Taxes, which because of
improvements must be frequently made, will ascertain.

But it will be said, that before any such thing can every where take place in
this Nation, all Teinds (or Tithes) and all sorts of Superiorities, must be
transacted for, and sold; that the Tenures of all Lands must be made allodial,
to the end that every man may be upon an equal foot with another; that this
Project, in order to its execution, dos suppose things, which tho perhaps they
would be great blessings to the Nation upon many accounts, and in particular by
taking away the Seeds of most Lawsuits, and the obstructions to all sorts of
Improvements; yet are in themselves as great and considerable as the Project it
self.

Indeed I must acknowledge, that any thing calculated for a good end is (since
we must express it so) almost always clogged with things of the same nature:
For as all bad, so all good things are chained together, and do support one
another. But that there is any difficulty, to a Legislative Power (that is
willing to do good) of putting either this Project, or the things last named in
execution, I believe no man can show. Sure I am, that it never was nor can be
the interest of any Prince or Commonwealth, that any subject should in any
manner depend upon another subject: And that it is the Interest of all good
Governments at least to encourage a good sort of Husbandry.

I know these Proposals, by some men who aim at nothing but private Interest,
will be looked upon as visionary: it is enough for me, that in themselves, and
with regard to the nature of the things, they are practicable; but if on
account of the indisposition of such men to receive them, they be thought
impracticable, it is not to be accounted strange; since if that indisposition
ought only to be considered, every thing directed to a good end is such.

Many other Proposals might be made to the Parliament for the good of this
Nation, where every thing is so much amiss, and the public Good so little
regarded. Amongst other things, to remove the present Seat of the Government,
might deserve their consideration: For as the happy situation of London has bin
the principal cause of the Glory and Riches of England, so the bad situation of
Edinburgh has bin one great occasion of the poverty and uncleanliness in which
the greater part of the people of Scotland live.

A Proposal likewise for the better education of our Youth would be very
necessary: and I must confess I know no part of the world where education is
upon any tolerable foot. But perhaps I have presumed too much in offering my
opinion upon such considerable matters as those which I have treated.

Since I finished the preceding Discourses I am informed, that if the present
Parliament will not comply with the design of continuing the Army, they shall
immediately be dissolved, and a new one called. At least those of the
Presbyterian persuasion, who expect no good from a new Parliament, are to be
frighted with the Dissolution of the present (which has established their
Church Government) and by that means induced to use their utmost endeavors
with the Members for keeping up the Army, and promoting the designs of ill men:
But I hope no Presbyterian will ever be for evil things that good may come of
them; since thereby they may draw a curse upon themselves instead of a
blessing. They will certainly consider, that the interest which they ought to
embrace, as well upon the account of prudence, as of justice and duty, is that
of their Country; and will not hearken to the insinuations of ill men who may
abuse them, and when they have obtained the continuation of the Army, endeavor
to persuade his Majesty and the Parliament, to alter the present Government of
the Church, by telling them, that Presbyterian Government is in its nature
opposite to Monarchy, that they maintain a rebellious principle of defensive
Arms, and that a Church Government more suitable and subservient to Monarchy
ought to be established.

Now if at this time the Presbyterians be true to the Interest of their
Country, all those who love their Country, tho they be not of that persuasion,
will stand by them in future Parliaments, when they shall see that they oppose
all things tending to Arbitrary Power: But if they abandon and betray their
Country, they will fall unpitied. They must not tell me, that their Church can
never fall, since it is the true Church of God. If it be the true Church of
God, it needs no crooked Arts to support it. But I hope they will not deny that
it may fall under persecution; which they will deserve, if they go along with
the least ill thing to maintain it.

FINIS.

