Mr. FLEETWOOD's SERMON BEFORE THE Lord Mayor, etc. JAN. 30. School/9.

Child Mayor.
Jovis nono die Februarii, School. Annoque Reg' Regis Willi. Tertii Angliae, etc.
decimo.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Fleetwood to Print his Sermon Preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, the Thirtieth of January last, before the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON PREACHED at St. PAUL's Cathedral, JANUARY 30. School/9.

Before the Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR, AND Court of Aldermen,

By W. FLEETWOOD, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Newborough, at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, School/9.

1 SAMUEL xxvi. 10, 11. David said furthermore, as the Lord lives, the Lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into Battle
and perish.

The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the Lord's
anointed.


THOUGH one must needs be sensible, that Arguments and Inferences fetched from
the Jewish Government, cannot by any means conclude with Certainty, another
Nation and a different Constitution; and that the Scripture-Instances
themselves, without some general positive Command to follow them, can oblige no
farther than they carry Reason and Convenience along with them; yet because the
World is governed mostly by Examples and Scripture-Examples, chiefly urged and
fittest for our Imitation, it may not be improper to consider, in this History,
the Provocations Saul had given to David, and the Opportunities that David had
to avenge himself, and take away his Life: This I will do in the first place:
and in the second, consider the Reason David here assigns for his Proceedings;
It is the Lord's anointed: And in the third and last place, apply my self a
little to the Occasion of this Day's Assembly.

I. The Persons here concerned are Saul and David, the King of Israel and his
Servant, the Father and the Son-in-law; and the State in which the Text shows
us these two, was that of Enmity; it was the second time that Saul, with a
premeditated formed Design had hunted after David to destroy him; and 'twas the
second time that God had put the former in the latter's Power, and given his
Life into his Hands, which he was tender of the second time, and spared it with
his old and usual good Expression, God forbid that I should stretch forth my
hand against the Lord's anointed; a noble Instance this, if 'twere alone, of a
most excellent forgiving Nature, of firm and solid Virtue, of steady and
unshaken Loyalty; but when considered with its Circumstances that attended it,
the Provocations Saul had given, and the Advantages that David had, it will
appear an Act so brave and generous, that it would be flattering up our selves
in vain, to hope to see it ever paralleled throughout.

Consider therefore first, the Prince that was his Captive now, and at his
Mercy had somewhile since descended so below himself, as to become the Envier
and Detractor from his Praise, was poorly jealous of the Honors he had
purchased, and tried to blast the Laurels he had gathered, at the expense of so
much painful Toil and Hazard; and it is no little share of Grace and Goodness,
that can restrain a young aspiring Hero, from taking Vengeance on the Maligners
of his Praise, and from removing all Impediments in his pursuit of Fame and
Glory.

Consider, Secondly, This was the Prince that had attempted twice to murder
him himself, had thrown his Javelin twice to fix him to the Wall, and chose to
make himself the Executioner of his own Choler and Revenge, hearkening
ungratefully to the Suggestions of that Evil Spirit, which the good Youth was
at the present laboring with his Music to appease and charm; and when Men's
Lives are so apparently sought after, they usually lay all Respects aside, and
listen to the Dictates of unruly Nature.

Thirdly, He was a false perfidious Prince, under pretense of honoring and
advancing him, he had removed him from himself, and made him Captain over a
Thousand; and still to make the Matter less suspicious, said unto him, Behold
my elder Daughter Merab, her will I give to thee for Wife, only be valiant for
me, and fight the Lord's Battles. But what follows? For Saul said, let not mine
hand be on him, but let the hand of the Philistines. Nothing affects a generous
Mind so sensibly, as being cheated under show of Friendship; and Treachery is
never viler, than when it is covered with the Mask of Godliness.

But, after all, it came to pass, at the time when Merab, Saul' s Daughter,
should have been given to David, that she was given to Adriel the Meholathite
to Wife; an affront in its own Nature very great undoubtedly; but such as,
according to the Maxims of our modern Gallantry were never to be pardoned. But
worser yet; When Michal's voluntary Love had amply satisfied the disappointment
he had had in Merab, the unrighteous Father, hardened in his Cruelty, would
make his Daughter instrumental in the murdering of his Son-in-law, would have
the Left Hand cut the Right one off, the Wife conspire against her Lord and
Husband, and betray the Life she loved and prized above her own. And when a Man
has thus apparently attempted to debauch the Loyalty, and break the Union of
the Marriage Bed, to dissolve those Sacred Bands, to interrupt the sweetest
Commerce of Man's Life, and violate all the ties of Nature, Reason, and
Religion, by a practice of such horrid and unnatural Wickedness, there is
hardly any excess of Fury so exorbitant, but seems at first excusable, in a
thus injured and abused Husband. But God forbid, said David, notwithstanding
all this, that I should stretch my hand against the Lord's anointed. The
Villainy of this Attempt, the Wickedness of Saul, and David's Virtue, might yet
be raised, by considering what were the effects of this his Rage and
Disappointment; he was so cruel that he took the Princess from her Husband,
broke off the comfort of her Life, and sent her to a Strangers loathed
unhallowed Bed; and even when Jonathan himself, his noblest best beloved Son,
the prop and comfort of his Age, the light and joy of Israel, the glory of his
House, and the support of his Kingdom, came but to intercede in his Friend's
behalf, and to excuse his Absence, Readiness Anger was so enkindled at him, that
he cast a Javelin at him, to have nailed him to the Wall; a piece of Rage and
brutal Violence that Nature wants a name for, but a sure Indication, that such
a settled Wrath was never to be appeased, and therefore never to be ventured
more, and therefore now secured for ever.

But farther, he was Perjured, He had but lately taken a solemn Oath before the
Lord and Jonathan, David should not be Slain; when behold, upon the first
awakening of his Evil Spirit, even whilst his Vows were warm upon his Lips, he
threw himself the second Javelin at his Heart, and threw away all Faith and
Honor with it. And when a Prince has thus abandoned common Honesty, broken
the sacred Cords that knit Societies, and keep up Governments and mutual
Correspondences, together with Relations Natural and Civil, and by his
Perjuries, provoked the Vengeance of God, and is delivered into the Hands of
those whose Innocence and good Credulity he had imposed on, and abused almost
to their Destruction, Oh! what a mighty measure of God's Grace must fill the
Heart of him, that then could say, The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth
my hand against the Lord's anointed.

There are some things besides our Lives and Persons, in which if we are
touched, we think our selves extremely Injured; and they are specially our
Friends, our Fortunes and Religion; and David was in every one of these
affected more or less by Readiness implacable pursuit, and hunting after him. He
was constrained to change his Habitation, carry his Father and his Mother, and
his whole Family, into a strange Country, aged and feeble, as they needs must
be. To be forced, when one is growing old, and stooping with Infirmities, to
forsake ones Native Place, the Dwelling of ones Ancestors, the Comforts of good
Neighborhood, the usual Prospects and familiar Objects of ones Sight, with all
the old Conveniences of Life, in the way one is in, for a strange Country,
barbarous Neighbors, new Laws and Usages, and Tongue unknown, must needs be
hard and troublesome to humane Nature, and an Oppression scarce to be endured:
Yet this was David's Case, who felt these Evils in himself, but much more
sensibly in the Distresses of his Parents, who, by the fury of the King, were
driven to Mispeh, of the King of Moab.

And then for his Estate, it could not otherwise be but he must suffer much in
that respect, it was impossible to remove his whole Effects: King's have long
Hands, and piercing Eyes, and by their Officers can reach and see at mighty
distance: And Saul had Harpies in his Court undoubtedly, as well as other
Kings, ready to beg and seize upon the Estates of such as by their Crimes or
their Misfortunes, were obnoxious to the King's Displeasure.

Lastly, for his Religion, Although he suffered nothing for or by it, yet much
he suffered for the want of it; to be driven away into wicked and idolatrous
Country, and be debarred the exercise of his Religion, to be hurried from God's
Temple, and the communicating in the appointed daily Service of that Holy
Place, was little less than painful Martyrdom to one so zealously and so
devoutly bent, as David was.

Let any Man recount the Evils I have mentioned, sum up the Persecutions and
the Provocations of King Saul, and set before his Eyes, himself, or any one in
David's Case, wronged in his Honor, divorced from his Nuptial-Bed against his
Will, despoiled of his Estate and Property, wounded in the Distresses and
Afflictions of his Parents, attempted privately to be destroyed, pursued in
Public as an Enemy, and hunted like a Partridge on the Mountains, and forced
to wander like a Fugitive, and seek his Bread out in desolate Places, and in a
manner Excommunicated, by being barred the use and exercise of his Religion.
Let any Man, I say, but put himself in these bad Circumstances, and find
himself in a capacity of delivering himself from out of them, as David was, and
think with himself what he would do. No, -- it is not that I would advise him
to, -- Let him rather think what David here did, -- The Lord forbid, that I
should stretch forth my hand against the Lord's anointed.

There Is hardly any one of all these single Passages that happens to our
selves, or our Acquaintance, but puts us to extremity, and provokes us beyond
all Patience, we call it an intolerable Oppression, and weary Heaven and Earth
with our Complaints, and think our selves undone, till we have found our
Satisfaction or Revenge. How restless are we in contriving Snares, how quick in
catching Opportunities, and how malicious in improving them to our ill-natured
purposes! Much otherwise was it with Righteous David here, who called not to
his Mind his past Wrongs, nor cast his Dangers and Oppressions up, to make a
terrible Account; who consulted not with Flesh and Blood, nor debated the
Matter with those ill Advisers within, his Choler and Revenge, who cure one
Evil by a hundred worse: Yet He, as he had most Reason, so had he most
Opportunities, and most Advantages, to carve out whatever Satisfaction he might
judge sufficient: Which is what for his Honor, and our Instruction I must
Secondly insist on.

He was, first, the King's Son-in-law, one of the greatest Honors in the
Kingdom, and an Advancement that must needs draw after it, a great many Friends
and Favorites, and make him strong Alliances at Court; and though those
Friendships commonly live but like Flies, while the benign and quickening
Influences of the Sun continue, and dye upon the Frowns and Lowrings of their
Prince; yet 'twere too hard a reflection on the lightness of those places, to
think such solid Virtue, and unquestioned Merit, as eminently shone in David,
had not acquired him a considerable Party, and a well-grounded Interest at
Court.

But, Secondly, he was a mighty Man of Valor, he fought the Lord's Battles; he
was the Sword and Shield, the Horsemen and the Chariots of Israel. He was the
Scourge of the Philistines, and indeed of all the Idolatrous Nations round; the
great Defender of the Jewish Faith, and the Supporter of God's Worship. And
it is hard to think a Man thus qualified, should fail of bearing sway amongst
the Soldiery, and being gracious in the Camp; and all Men know, how far that
tends to the promoting and securing any great Designs.

Thirdly, This David was beloved of all the People, the Favorite of his
Country, the very Idol of the Crowd. His Youth, his Beauty, his attractive
Grace, and popular Deportment, together with his Virtue and his Valor, had
stolen the Peoples Hearts, and charmed them so to Love and Admiration, that he
became the Theme of their perpetual Talk, their Songs and Dances were composed
in honor of his great Archievments, and all their Instruments of Joy and
Music, were tuned to his invidious Praises. How harsh and rude must those
Expressions of their Pleasure be, how unmannerly and ill-natured a Triumph, to
have the Women come to meet the King himself, and grate him with the burden of
their Song, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. I do
not wonder much, when I consider humane Nature, that Saul, (as it follows in
the next Verse) was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and then upon a
repetition of that Sentence, 'twas very natural to infer, What can he have
more but the Kingdom? It Is fatal to a Prince to lose himself, or suffer any
else to get the Affections of his People. A King may be as wroth as Ahasuerus
was, and may decree terrible things, and Priests may preach up Patience and
Obedience long enough; but 'twill not do, unless the Affections of the Subject
go along therewith. He that has never gotten these, or lost them once, may
find to his cost, when ever he comes to try, that the ties of Duty are not half
so strong as the bands of Love; nor the Service of the Body comparable to the
Affections of the Mind. Whereas he that has gained the Heart, will certainly
be Master of the Hand and Service on Occasion. And this was it that Saul
foresaw and dreaded so; and this was it that David was already in possession
of. But notwithstanding all this, great as he was in Court, great as he was in
Camp, and greater yet in favor of the People, he would not venture on the
impious Fact, still it was, The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand
against the Lord's anointed.

The Lord forbid; -- yet David knew it was this very Lord, that had rejected
Saul from being King, that rent the Kingdom from him, and that repented he had
ever made him King at all. Nay, David knew himself the Man designed by God to
be his Successor, and had accordingly been anointed King by Samuel, at the Town
of Bethlehem.

It Is surely with Ambition, as with other Passions, the fantastic and
imaginary Joys are greater than the experienced and substantial ones: The Hopes
and Expectations far exceed the pleasures of Possession. Whatever Cares belong
to Crowns, they lie concealed within their Circles, and are more seldom seen
than felt; and therefore more engage in their pursuits, than are contented when
they get them. But this Temptation found no place with David, young, and gay,
and vigorous as he was, and even so near the Crown, that by conniving at
Abishai's Blow, he might have been in full and sure possession of it; yet he
suffered not himself to be transported beyond the Bounds of rigid Honesty and
Loyalty; and still cries out, The Lord forbid. --

Now, to conclude, and to complete this Character, add, Lastly, to these great
Advantages, of being Son-in-law, a mighty Man of Valor, and accepted in the
sight of all the People, of knowing Saul rejected, and himself designed for
Successor, the greatest yet of all Advantages, and that is Opportunity; that
without which all others signify but little; and that with which alone Men
serve their turns, and make up the defects of all the rest; that Pandar to all
Sin, and fatal Snare of Virtue! That that has ruined many thousand Souls, and
betrayed them into most detestable Commissions; sometimes against the best
Convictions of their Understanding; nay, and sometimes against their Vows and
Resolutions; Opportunity, that few have Virtue, few have Strength sufficient to
withstand! and of all Opportunities, none are so strong, and work so powerfully
upon the Minds of Men, as those that look like Providential ones, and seem to
come from God. Yet this was David's Opportunity, and yet withstood. Behold,
said the Men of David to him, Chap. 24. and ver. 4. Behold the day, of which
the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will deliver thine Enemy into thine hand,
that thou may do unto him as shall seem good unto thee. And again, in the
Chap. of the Text, and ver. 8. Then said Abishai to David, God has delivered
thine Enemy into thine hand this day; now therefore let me smite him, I pray,
with the Spear unto the Earth, at once, and I will not smite him the second
time. As if he had said, Look round you, noble Youth, and see how Heaven and
Earth conspire in your Advancement; mark how the Providence of God has ordered
every thing in your behalf, contriving every Circumstance to concur in setting
the Crown upon your Head. How many Psalms have you composed, how many Vows, how
many earnest Prayers have you put up, that God would visit your Afflictions,
confound your Enemies, and redeem you from Distress? Behold then, in this
Opportunity, your Prayers are answered, and your Vows returned. This is the
Day, this is the Time, of which the Lord said, I will deliver thine Enemy into
thy hand. Is it not he, and he alone, has wrought this great Salvation for
thee? with his own Right Hand, and with his holy Arm, has he bestowed on thee
this Victory; what could our few and feeble Troops have done against a Royal
Army, had not the Finger of God been visible in all this Action? Had not his
gracious Providence disposed of all Events in favor of your Claim? It is the
Lord's doing, and mavelous in all our Eyes; improve it therefore to his
Honor, and the advancing his Designs, in setting you over his chosen People.
Will you withstand the Purposes of God, or will you not concur with his good
Providence? God has delivered Saul into your hands, and do not tempt the Lord,
by slighting or neglecting of his Times and Seasons; 'twere Madness and Impiety
to let him 'scape: You must not think the Lord will work out such Deliverances
every Day; to Day you are a Conqueror and a King, if you but please; to Morrow
you may be a Rebel and undone, and who shall pity you? You shall not need to
imbrue your own Hands in his Blood; you shall not need to incurr the Odium of
Commanding such a thing to any else; I Will spare your Fame, the Guilt of both;
permit me only, by my self, to be the Minister of Providence, the Executioner
of God's Designs. This was the sense and purport of Abishai's Speech, and
carried so much force and worldly Reason with it, that none but one that had
the fear of God continually before his Eyes, could possibly withstand it, or
say with David, The Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the
Lord's anointed.

And now having done what right I could to the particular State and
Circumstances of Saul and David, King and Subject, and showed such Provocations
on the one hand, and such Temptations and Advantages on the other, as it may be
never did before, or never will again hereafter happen

I am to proceed, and consider, Secondly, the Reason David gave for his refusal
of Abishai's, and the Soldiers Proffer, It is the Lord's anointed.

By the Lords anointed is here meant, the Man that was by God's designation and
appointment, anointed King or Captain over all the People, which was done by
the Ceremony of pouring a Vial of Oil upon his Head, and kissing him: So that
the anointed of the Lord, signifies no more than an ordinary King with us.
David therefore would not stretch forth his Hand against Saul, because he was
his King: He would fly from before him, though he was his King, as he did from
Keilah; and he would gather up 600 Men to guard him from the Violence of (I
will not say the King, but) his illegal and blood-thirsty Servants that pursued
him: But he would not touch the King's Life; and because he has expressed no
other reason, than that he was the Lord's anointed, that is, a King, we must
either conclude, that the Laws of God, or the fundamental Constitutions of the
Nation had guarded the Persons of their Kings from any Violence; or else that
David abstained, out of a principle of Tenderness; or from the unreasonableness
of the thing it self; or from the Infamy that always waited on that wicked
Practice. The Laws of God, did certainly secure the Lives of Kings as well as
other Men's, if it did no more. And it appears, by the very name of Treason,
that the Civil Constitution had preserved the Royal Person sacred and
inviolable; and if we take our Measures from the absolute and arbitrary Sway of
all the Eastern Monarchs, we cannot but conclude the Customs of Judaea, amongst
the rest, must have conciliated a mighty Awe and Reverence to their Princes. --
And for the unreasonableness of such Attempts, it is plain, that a Government
cannot possibly subsist for any time, where any kind of Violence is allowed
against the Magistrate. We see what wicked work is made in some unhappy States,
where private Executions of Revenge, betwixt Particulars, are indulged, or
frequently connived at. But Government is at an end, where Rulers are exposed
to popular Assaults, or private Assassinations. Besides, there is a great
indecency in the nature of the thing, to see the Lord and Master of a Nation
reduced to wretched Villainy; to see the Man, whom all the Kingdom honored and
adored, despised and trampled on; but most of all, to find a Sovereign Arbiter
and Disposer of his Subjects Lives, to be despoiled of his own: But, Lastly,
it is, and has always been, and always will, I hope, be infamous, to shed their
Blood.

Although Mankind has generally a relish of Liberty, and has for every Age
received the mention of its brave Asserters, with Reverence and Esteem; yet, I
know not how, wherever it has been vindicated by the Blood of Kings, (though
they were truly very bad) it gives some kind of Shock to human Nature, and
blemishes the glory of the Action.

Never, perhaps, was any Man more sitted for the vindicating the ancient
Liberties of Rome, than M. Brutus was, a Sober, Virtuous, Honest, and
Disinterested Man, freed from all imputation of Revenge or Malice, by his
Enemies, and one that had no other prospect in the World, than the redeeming of
his Country from its Slavery; and yet, because he could not compass his Intent,
but by the death of its brave Ravisher, his Virtues and most noble Qualities
have all been lost under the Infamy of Parricide and Traitor; so natural an
abhorrence have all Men for shedding of Princes Blood, and taking away their
Lives.

But what then, is the World provided for no better than so? Has God indeed
subjected all Mankind to the tyrannick, impotent, and arbitrary Sway of some
few Men, who have sometimes less Wisdom, and frequently less Virtue than their
Neighbors? it fares but ill, it seems, with us, when our Estates and
Properties, our Lives and Persons, Wives and Daughters, our Liberties and our
Religion too, are put into the hands of some weak, wicked, or perverse, yet
uncontrollable Humor; will not this Impunity breed greater Licentiousness in
Princes, and augment the slavery of the Subjects to such degree, as it can go
no lower; and so the sacredness of one Man shall be the ruin of many
Thousands? In answer to this, we must acknowledge, that according to Nature and
good Reason, there seems to be a great deal of Iniquity and Partiality in these
Cases; but we must say withal, that Religion is neither chargeable with these
Hardships, nor answerable for them; God has declared himself in favor of no
one sort of Government, with respect to all the World, nor laid it, by Command
on all People: Our Savior said, His Kingdom was not of this World, and did
indeed concern himself with nothing of it. St. Peter and St. Paul did press
Obedience and Subjection on the Christians, as they found occasion; but then it
was Obedience and Subjection to the Laws and different Constitutions of the
different Governments they lived under, and did not thereby change, or think of
changing them.

There were, no question, in the Apostles Days, very different Forms of
Government in the World, some Absolute, and some Limited, some made their Will
the Law, and others governed according to known and settled Laws; some
succeeded by way of Inheritance, and others were elected to the Rule: Now, if
when St. Peter and St. Paul press the Christians they wrote to, to Submission
and Obedience, they only mean, that those particular Christians should obey the
parcular Governments they lived under; then there arises no Obligation to any
other Christians to obey their Governors, by Virtue of any thing said by these
Apostles. But if all Christians are hereby understood to be exhorted to
Obedience to their Governors (as most undoubtedly they are) then are all
Christians exhorted to pay such Obedience to their Governors, as the
particular Constitution of the Government they lived under called for and
required. And then the Christians who lived under an absolute Monarch were to
pay such Obedience as that Government required; and the Christians who lived
under a limited and mixed Monarchy, were to obey as that Government required;
and so of all the rest, they were all to submit themselves to the several
Governments they lived under; for it is not to be presumed, that St. Peter and
St. Paul by their pressing and commanding Christians to submit to and obey
their Governors, changed the several Forms and Constitutions of Government,
and required the Christians of a limited and mixed Monarchy, to obey their
Superiors, in the same manner, measure, and degree, as those of an Absolute one
did theirs; but Christianity required such Obedience as the Laws and Customs of
the Country called for, and exacted at their hands: And truly, it would be
strange to imagine, that Christianity should press Men to obey, in Instances
where the Laws of the Country require no Obedience, since every Country is
presumed to understand, and consult its own Interest best, and to secure such
Obedience from the Subjects, as would best procure and continue such their
Interest. And therefore if one Country had liked and approved of such a Form
and Constitution of Government, and found it best and fittest for it, with
respect to its Situation, and its Neighborhood, and to the Temper and the
Genius of its People and Inhabitants; if it had pitched upon such Laws, as it
found by Experience most convenient for it, if such and such were the Powers
and Prerogatives of the Superiors, and such and such the Privileges and
Immunities of the Subjects, Christianity did not intend to alter this, and say,
that the Superiors shall have more Power and a fuller Authority over the
People, and the People shall have less and fewer Privileges than what are
already agreed to on both hands. Neither did it come to set the People higher,
and the Princes lower than they were. Christianity did not meddle with these
Matters, nor say any thing on either side; but coming to settle Peace and
Quiet, Truth, and Honesty, Justice and Religion, in the Hearts of all Men, and
to make the whole World easy and happy; it commanded Governors to exercise
their Power with Justice and Uprightness, with Clemency and Prudence, and all
Subjects to obey with Reverence and Submission, with Patience and
Contentedness; but it came not to alter Constitutions, nor to give either
Governors or People more Power and Authority than they had before: For if it
had, it had brought a Sword along with it, it had come to set the Princes of
the World at variance with the People, and the People with their Princes, to
prejudice Men's Civil Rights and Liberties, and put them in a worse Condition,
as to this World, than they were in before, by overthrowing settled Laws, by
undoing Compacts and Agreements, the only Preservatives of Civil Society. In a
word, there would be no end of the Mischiefs that would ensue upon
understanding Christianity, to oblige all People of the World alike to
Obedience and Submission to their Rulers, without respect to the different Laws
and Constitutions of different Kingdoms and Governments; and it would be a very
bad Account and Character of that Religion. Whereas, if Christianity came to
urge Obedience to the Laws of every Country (not Barbarous, Obscene, nor
Impious, nor any ways execrable) it came to secure that Country in the way and
manner it thought the best and fittest for its Interest and Happiness, and
brought a Blessing with it, and showed both to Prince and People, what was the
Measure and the Rule of the ones Power, and of the others Obedience; a thing
most necessary to be known, where the Event is of so great Importance, both in
this World, and that to come. Since therefore Christianity came not to make the
Laws that Subjects must obey, but to urge the Subjects to obey the Laws made by
the Legislative Power, wherever that resides; there is no reason why it
should be charged with any of the Mischiefs or the Inconveniences of a
Government too absolute, or too much limited* And therefore, (to bring the
Matter home) the unlimited extent of Power, placed in the Princes hands, or the
sacredness of his Person, or his being unaccountable to any one for his
Proceedings; are things that depend entirely on the Civil-Constitution, and we
must know them from the Laws, and the continued Usages and Customs of the
Country, immemorial, or agreed upon.

No doubt but Kings may take up Crowns on pitiful and wretched Terms, as well
as Subjects willingly submit their Liberties to the Will of Princes; and each
of them must stand to the Conditions, though very inconvenient ones, till they
can honestly obtain better. I know no better, and no other certain Rule, for
all the World to consider, than this, Look to the Constitution, look to the
Laws and Customs of a Country, if you would know the Prince's Power or Peoples
Privilege. It is not to the Men of great Reason, and much Reading, the finest
Speculators and Essayers, one should be referred to, upon these Occasions, but
to the Histories and Records, the Laws and Statutes, Customs and Usages, that
are accepted in a Nation; and therefore, where, by these, we find the Lives and
Liberties of Princes are held Sacred and Inviolable; it is to no purpose to
object the Inconveniences, both real and imaginary, that may arise from such
Impunity. Look to the Laws and Constitution. I see, in such a Case, no way is
left, but to say with David, in the Text, -- The Lord shall smite him, or his
day shall come to dye, or he shall perish in the Battle, but God forbid, that I
should stretch forth my hand against the Lords anointed.

The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come, or he shall perish in the
Battle, that is, I leave him to God's disposal; let God, the Judge of all the
Earth, do with him as he pleases. And though we think the leaving wicked Kings to
God, is the lightest and the kindest Expression of nothing in the World that
can be; yet we would quickly alter our Opinions, and be of David's Mind, if we
would give our selves leave to consider,

First, That he hates Injustice more.

Secondly, That he is much more ready. And,

Thirdly, Much more able to punish it than we can be.

First, He hates it more: He hates it purely for the malice of its Nature, and
its intrinsic Evil. We only for our own, and Interests sake, because we either
feel or dread its Mischiefs. He hates Oppression, Tyranny, and Cruelty, because
they are the Contradictions of his own Divine, and the Corruptions of our
Humane Nature: They are directly opposite to his most glorious Attribute of
Justice, to his most gracious ones of Mercy and Compassion. He looks with
Indignation on those haughty Sons of Violence and Injustice, that abuse the
Power that God entrusted them, and the great Titles that he honored them
withal, for the use and benefit, to the destruction and confusion of the World,
only to satisfy their cruel Rage or vain Ambition. There Is not a Groan nor
Murmur of the poor oppressed, but makes its way to Heaven, and finds accession
to the Throne of Grace; He numbers all our Sighs, and counts our Tears, and
notes down our Afflictions in his Book, and treasures them in Wrath, against
the Day of Wrath. And if we would be strong and patient for a while, and tarry
but the Lord's leisure, we should certainly see, he is a God that hates* and
punishes Iniquity.

Secondly, He is much more willing to punish wicked Governors than we can be.
Not that the Goodness of God is so ready to afflict or grieve the Sons of Men,
as they are to deserve it, or that the human Fury does not sometimes anticipate
the divine Vengeance, but that it is more present to his Nature, and more
immediately his Will, to punish Sin, than it can possibly be with us. The love
of Justice, and the hate of Sin is so essentially united to his Being, that one
may sooner fancy no Divinity at all, than that it is not willing to reward the
proud Oppressors after their deservings.

Men may be bribed by Passions, Interest and Affections, some from persuing,
others from administering the Justice due to great Offenders. The fears and
threatenings of Displeasure, the hopes of Favor and Advancement, the charm of
soft Words, and the natural pity of Mankind, have oftentimes diverted the most
Resolved, and laid the fury of the most Enraged. But God, as he sees not with
Men's Eyes, so neither is he moved with human Motives; but is inflexible in his
Decrees, which are to punish great Delinquents with great Wrath; and has
declared, that nothing but sincere Repentance can prevent his Judgments.

And, Lastly, He is much more able. He is able to punish them in this Life, and
in the next: He can punish them in this Life, by defeating all their
Enterprises, and blasting all their Purposes; by infatuating their Counselors,
and turning the Wisdom of Achitophel to Folly and Destruction; by suffering the
Enemy to sow Dissentions, Strife, and Discord in their Nations; by alienating
the Affections of the People; by scattering the Spirit of Fear and of Distrust
throughout their Armies, and causing them to turn their Backs upon their
Enemies; and by reducing them themselves to Misery and great Distress; and
sometimes suffering them to perish by the Sword, or some more ignominious
Death, as well as common Men. But if this be not enough, let them know, that he
is able, after he has destroyed the Body, to cast both Soul and Body into Hell
Fire. Tophet, says Isaiah, the 30th and the 33d, is prepared for the King, he
has made it deep and large; the Pile thereof is Fire, and much Wood; the
breath of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it. Hear therefore,
O ye Kings, (in the 6th of the Wisdom of Solomon) and understand; learn ye that
be Judges of the ends of the Earth; give ear you that Rule the People, and
glory in the multitude of Nations; for Power is given you of the Lord, and
Sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your Words, and search out your
Counsels; because being Ministers of his Kingdom, you have not judged aright,
nor kept the Law, nor walked after the Counsel of God; horribly and speedily
shall he come upon you; for a sharp judgment shall be to them that be in high
places; for Mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty Men shall be
mightily tormented.

And is it not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, thus
sharpened and prepared to execute full Vengeance on ungodly Governors? it is
not therefore so unreasonable and trifling a thing, as is commonly reputed, to
say, that wicked Princes must be left to God; it is saying, they are left to
one that hates them with a perfect Hatred; to one that will and can pour out
the Vials of such Wrath upon their Heads, as neither Eye can see, nor Tongue
express, nor Heart of Man conceive, and that to all Eternity.

And having thus gone through my Text, I should in the last place, apply my
self to the sad Occasion of this Days assembling; but having been so free in
handling the first Parts, I shall scarce be allowed to do right at full to
this; and there is, I hope, the less occasion for it, because the sad History
is so well known, and so sufficiently regreted and deplored by honest Men; and
the design especially of this Anniversary, being more for the Use, Instruction,
and Advantage of the living Subject, than for the Praise and Honor of the dead
King, the Discourse I have raised from the Text, will, if attended to, answer
the greater and the better end; and there is little need to meddle with the
second and the less.

That Princes Praises speak themselves aloud; and though Misfortunes add great
luster to Men's Virtues, and set them off to great Advantage (as Tears show some
fair Faces yet more beautiful,) yet Charles the First might well have past for
one of our most excellent Kings, although he had not had the exercise of such
Afflictions as he met withal, but had been always Fortunate. But having had the
advantage of those Trials, and thereby practiced many other Virtues rare and
unseen in Kings, I know not now whom to prefer before him; and God forbid I
should be thought to put him under the disadvantage of representing Saul in the
Comparison. He was (and that is as much as I can say) no more like Saul, than
any of his Murderers, was like David. If there was some Misgovernment, and
some unhappy Maladministration in his Reign (as who can be so ignorant and
partial to deny it) we must, if we will be just to the Truth, discharge his
Person, in great measure of it, and lay it where it ought to lie, much of it on
some of his indiscreet and zealous Servants, who were unquestionably Men of
better Meaning than Abilities, and who appear (atleast at so much distance) not
to have understood sufficiently the Ground they stood upon, the Times they
lived in, and the Men they had to deal withal: And some what on the Passions of
Her, who (though she could intend no ill to him, yet) through her fondness for
her Party (that constant mischief to this Nation) embroiled him first with his
distempered People. But having taken this liberty, I ought to add, that never
were Miscarriages improved to such a height, nor aggravated with more Malice.
Their Adversaries got some Truths, and used them, as the Devil does the
Scriptures, always perversely, and to bad Purposes; they mingled them with
odious Calumnies and Slanders, and treacherous Insinuations; and made them help
to make the stronger Poison, and to disperse it more effectually into the
Peoples Veins.

As to the Personal Virtues of this Prince, Envy it self has never yet found
any thing to say against them. Sober and Temperate to a wonder, Chaste to his
Queen, and faithful to his first Vows; of so pure Innocence, and such unspotted
Sanctity in that behalf, that Calumny has never fixed so much as a Suspicion on
his Reputation. And for his Zeal to God, and his Devotion to his Service, his
constant Attendance, and good Behavior in his Prayers, his firm Adhesion to
the Church, not out of Prejudice or pertinacious Obstinacy in what he had been
educated, but true and solid understanding of her Constitution, with his great
Care and Love to all her Ministers, as they were made his Crimes and Accusation
by his Enemies, so by his Friends they have been made an Objection to God's
Providence, in suffering such a Righteous Prince to fall into the hands of such
abominable People; and such an Objection as must stay (they think) to be solved
by that great Day, when all such Arguments will certainly be fully answered,
and all such Clamours silenced, and all the World shall see and feel that God
is Just, and no Unrighteousness dwells with him.

And yet we cannot strictly say, this Days Offense has hitherto been
unaccounted for, and unavenged. No Man (I think) can assign any one Head, to
which we may so properly ascribe the continual Troubles and Alarms that have
for many Years disturbed this Nation, the vast Calamities and most amazing
Distresses it has labored under, as to the atrocious and most execrable Action
of this Day, and its most cursed Consequences, the debaunching both the Morals
and Religion of our Princes and great Men. Had not our Sins increased with our
Afflictions, I should have hoped, this Days Offense had now been fully
expiated, by that long train of Mischiefs that has followed by way of
Consequence, if not Retaliation. But if there yet remain any dregs of Wrath for
us to drink, I know of nothing that can possibly prevent them, or support us
under them, but true sincere Repentance, which through the Merits of the Blood
of Christ, will wash away all past Offenses, reconcile us again to God, and fit
us for what future Favors we shall want, either as private People, or a
Nation, and he in his abundant Wisdom and Goodness shall see expedient for us.

FINIS.
These Books Printed for Tho. Newborough, at the Golden. Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Sermon Preached at Guild Hall Chapel, December. 11. 1692. before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, Feb. 12. 1692/3.

A Sermon of the Education of Children, Preached at Guild Hall Chapel, November.
1. 1696. Before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

All Three by W. Fleetwood, Rector of St. Austin's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty.

Kettlewel's Measures of Christian Obedience, showing what Obedience is
indispensibly necessary to a Regenerate State, and what Defects are consistent
with it. 8vo.

-- His Practical Believer, or the Articles of the Apostles Creed, drawn out to
form a true Christians Heart and Practice. In Two Parts, 8vo.

-- His Companion to the Penitent, and to Persons troubled in Mind. 12o.

-- His Companion to the Persecuted, or an Office for those who suffer for
Righteousness. 12o.

-- His Four Tracts, Quarto.

-- The Christian indeed: or, a serious Exhortation to the Holy Communion.
Together with some plain Directions for a due Preparation for it, Behavior at
it, and a seasonable Admonition to Live and Act after it, as becomes Persons
publicly professing to be Christians. With some necessary Prayers designed
chiefly for the Use and Benefit of those who have not better Helps. 12o.


