A SURVEY OF Quakerism, As it is STATED IN THE Professed Doctrine and
Principles OF THAT PARTY: With a Serious REFLECTION ON THE Dreadful Import
thereof, to Subvert the very Being and Reality of the Christian Religion.

By a Lover of the Truth.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the Lower
end of Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1677.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

To the READER.
Christin Reader,
IT should be a sad and unpleasing Subject, this to converse with, in a time
when so much is on every hand to cause grief, if the defense of the Truth, and
a Being guarded against the contagion of so horrid a way, did not necessarily
require the same; which, besides a surprising call, and pressing desire of
some, for whom I owed greatest respects, has occasioned these few lines to go
forth to the World; I may say, with much aversion of spirit otherways thereto.
It seems peculiar to this Age, to have out-gone all former times, in a new and
unusual way of sinning, and a daring insolence to oppose the Truth, whilse such
amazing Prodigies of Atheism, Prophanity, and Error do at once meet together:
To let this generation see how inexcusable they are, if Judgment from the Lord,
yea some unusual and stupendous stroke thereof, do surprise them, where so
loud a cry goes before of its coming. But it is well the Truth abides sure and
immovable, and we know must outlive, with a growing splendor and brightness,
this so remarkable an hour of the power of darkness; yea, has that Authority,
not only on the Conscience of such who embrace it in love, but on its Enemies,
as must enforce some awe and dread on the greatest blasphemers of the time,
whether they will or not. The Virgin-daughter of Zion has despised thee, and
laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee;
whom has thou reproached and blasphemed, and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high, even against the holy One of
Israel? Should it not deeply affect such as love Our Lord Jesus Christ, to see
such a party crouding in the streets and highways of Britain, whose express
design is so obvious, not to darken only, but subvert the whole of the Gospel
in the Incarnation, Death, and Sufferings of our glorious Redcemer, and of his
being truly God and Man in two distinct Natures, united in one Person? (Oh, if
we should be bereaved of this inestimable treasure, we were bereaved indeed!)
Yea such, whose work is to depress the credit and authority of that great and
sacred Instrument of Truth, the Scripture, in the light whereof the redeemed of
the Lord, now in Glory, have got thus safe to Land, without any other Light or
Rule besides

this to walk by; and on which so innumerable a company have adventured
hitherto, bearing their witness to its truth and faithfulness, whose record we
know to be true: and some should reckon themselves under singular engagements
to seal this Truth though with their dying breath; That in all the steps of the
Lords way, even such as seem most dark to these who look on them at a distance,
assuredly he is what he has declared himself to be in the written Word. I
shall only add, what with much confidence I may here witness, that as I know no
quarrel but one, with any of that way, which is for the Truths sake; I could
not but judge I had too sure ground, to charge these as their Principles and
Doctrine upon them, which they have publicly owned to the World, (if they keep
not some reserved sense, contradictory to their own words) and so far as I can
reach, without any known retractation.

SECT. I.
THOUGH it is undeniably sad, and one of the most searching Trials of the
Church, at which many are ready to be shaken, when the Truth seems entangled in
a consusion of contrary Doctrines, and the spirit of Error let loose to darken
the same, and that we see it also one of the greatest strokes from God
inflicted here; yea greater than that on the Affections, in the delivering up
of men's Reasons and Judgments to strong delusion, with these fearful
productions, which are this way often found, because they received not the love
of the Truth: yet it is well we know the Faithfulness of God is sure, and
stands good, to bring the Elect safe unto Glory, whatever Rocks and Shelves be
in the way, on which so many have visibly made shipwreck; nor can the Truth
conflict with such a Trial, but for its farther Triumph, and some more bright
breaking forth of its light; and that no evil eye, nor the cursing of any shall
ever blast that Interest which God has blessed. One thing I confess seems
strange, and most threatening in this time; whilst Religion, and the Christian
Faith is in such eminent hazard, and the Devil in an unusual manner let loose
to deceive, to see how great a part of those who professedly own the Truth, are
fallen as in a dead Palsy, and indifference about the things of Christ, though
never more vigorously moving about their own things: nor seem they with such
suitable fear, to be jealous of the corruption of the mind, and intellectual
Errors, as they are of moral Corruption; as though diseases in the Head were
not to be feared, which are usually found of all to be most mortal; yea, when
so discernibly, this is one of the depths of Satan, and his known devices, to
bring in Atheism and Irreligion by Error, and turn the World from all settled
persuasion of the Truth, by some high pretenses thereto; for which one sad
instance I must here give, that I am sure, except men shut their eyes, they
cannot but see. No engine could have a more native, and effectual tendency to
bring such as were unstable the farthest length of Vaninus, and his followers,
even to deny and blaspheme a Deity, than to unhinge them once from founding on
the Scripture, and turn them over to that way of the Quakers, which now seems
to have such a formidable growth in the Church.

What these are, who under this name, and peculiar cognizance of Quakers, have
become so known, and stated an adversary to the Truth this day, the account
they give of their own Doctrine and Principles, can too clearly witness: nor
needs there any great search to be made about their rise and descent; it is too
late, and but a few years since the World knew such a monstrous birth, though I
confess in its complex frame, if it be seriously considered, it is a most
discernible compound of these ancient Heresies that have sprung up in the
Church, which did formerly, each in their turn, essay to ruin the Truth. But
this also we may know, how at an ebb-tide, after much former abuse of Light,
and in an hour of great Temptation on the Churches of Christ, these did
adventure to creep forth, to whom once the Light and authority of the Truth
would have been a terror, and while the Watchmen slept, has the Devil essayed
to sow such seed, having that advantage, which in the like case Calvin said of
Servetus, Fatuitas dogmatum me securum reddit. It Is true, they are skilful to
put themselves in such different forms as may make it something difficult how
to handle them, being under a visible awe and dread to be found out in what
they are: But I am sure, if what they own to the World in their Writings, bear
any sense, and their words be not such as none possibly but themselves can
understand; it may be easy to see the undoubted tendency of this way, is to
subvert the Christian Faith, to explode the Scripture from being the alone rule
and standard of our Religion, and incite those they converse with to a real
Apostasy from Christianity.

Now in speaking to this subject (which is such as should make it a sad and
unpleasant work to rake in so horrid a dunghill as the known Tenets of this
Party are, if a testimony to the Truth, and for its Vindication, did not
necessarily require the same) 1 must here offer a few things to be considered,
which in this following discourse seem to be of greatest use to be cleared. 1.
What Positions these of the Quakers are in which they do most visibly agree and
unite and how direct a sendency they have to subvert the Faith, in the great
Foundations of Christianity? 2. What should be the meaning of this so strange,
and amazing an assault, they do adventure upon against the Faith; and how sad
an account it gives of the temper and complexion of this time when, with
day-sight, such dare come sorth to express themselves at this rate. 3. It is of
special use to consider what advantage Christians have here, even from the
strange appearance of this Party, to clear the holy and unspotted way of the
Lord, and for being more sixed, and strengthened in the Truth, whatever cause
others may pretend on this account for stumbling. 4. It seems needful also to
consider the great influencing cause of this contagion, and it is too evident
growth now in the Church, whilst such horrid things are by these vented with an
amazing confidence, as, we should think, a natural Conscience in men, who have
but any sense and impression of a Deity, and are not wholly given up to
Atheism, could not but tremble at. 5. We would consider what is of greatest use
to guard Christians now against such mortal poison, that they fall not from
their stedfastness, nor be carried about with this cloud driven with such a
tempest. 6. I must shut up this with a twofold appeal, one to that Light which
Quakers so much cry up in every one; which I am sure, in the most favorable
sense it can be taken. is the Conscience, that high Court of Justice, set up
under the Authority of the great Judge, in every man's Breast, which does enforce
the soul to some reflection on it self, even when they tremble at that sight; if
before this Light, these can possibly stand. and be but in earnest therewith,
without horror, and amazement at themselves: A second is to the most ordinary
observers in the time, if without shutting of their eyes, they can shun the
clear discovery of the horrid imposture of such a Party, whatever high
pretenses they seem to have; how visible a contradiction their way is not only
to Scripture and Reason, but to it self.

SECT. II.
FOr the first of these which concerns their Doctrine and Principles (That I am
sure. none needs pretend is latent, and hid from the World, except what an
expressing themselves with a reserved sense, and palcable equivocating, may
cause to some) I have confidence to say, that without passion, or prejudice in
the least, or without any quarrel, but for the Truths sake, I have in earnest
sought to know the certainty of what they own herein, which in these following
Positions I shall briefly touch.

Position 1. It is undeniable, they own a sufficient light in every man, to
guide him in the way to salvation, which he is expressly obliged to follow, and
lean to; a Tenet above all they most closely keep by, and on which their whole
Doctrine seems to found it self. We know such a Light did once shine brightly
in Adam, in the State of perfection, so as he needed no light or voice without
to be his guide; but since that time none ever knew how to guide himself, and
they must think the Christian World in a strange darkness, if it be easy to
obtrude such a Light upon them, which, when brought to the test of Scripture,
and solid Reason, does resolve in most direct Paganism, and is an express
setting up of a Light and Spirit in opposition to the Holy Spirit speaking to
us in the Word; where we are taught, 1. That such a Spirit is not of God, which
hears not Gods voice, as Christ reasons with the Jews, John 10. 3, 4. Nor can
it be his which leads not into all truth, and brings not these things showed
forth there to our remenbrance, John 14. 26. and 16. 13. Which made Luther say,
if any Spirit should suggest an opinion for which he had not Scripture, he
should spit in his face, knowing assuredly that it was the Devil. 2. This
expressly owns a common, universal, and sufficient grace to all, as that which
knocks at every man's door, whether Christians or Pagans, and that it is in his
power to open, and entertain the same; and that no spiritual advantage does
accrue to Christians by the Scriptures being revealed unto them, but what
Pagans may have also by this Light within; yea, that they have no other Teacher
but that inward teaching, and guide, common to them with the most savage
Indians. 3. But is there a sufficient and saving Light in these who are
spiritually dead? Ephesians. 2. 15. Or could that Light be a sufficient instructor
to Paul, when he thought verily he ought to do many things against the name of
Jesus of Nazareth, and in his following that Light within did consent to
Stephens Death? 4. How should this Light possibly be known, when so often stated
in a direct opposition to the Light within others, who may reckon they have as
much advantage for the same as they, if both be not brought to the Scripture
for trial? 5. Did this Light within give the Heathens a check for Idolatry, or
could it let them see the alone way of being saved by that unconceiveable
contrivance of the Gospel? or restrain these from swearing to whom that moral
prohibition of the third Command was never known? 6. The Scripture shows, that
the natural man cannot discern the things of God, which to him are foolishness,
1 Cor. 2. 13. and that there is a necessity of the spirit of wisdom and
revelation, that the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, we may know
what is the hope of our calling and what are the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 17, which none can say, lies common to
all. 7. From this blessed Record it is likewise clear how inseparably these are
conjoined for the Churches conduct within time, the written Word without, and
the Spirit within, for opening our eyes to see the Truths that are there: The
Law without as the alone Rule and Pattern, and the same Law within as the
Transcript bearing both one witness. 8. Is it not clearly seen also, that where
reason has been most refined, and the greatest improvement of men's natural
abilities, even there, The world through wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. And
none among the Heathens have made greater opposition to the Gospel than such.
Nor can an instance be given of any one among all those, who by this Light, or
by the furthest length gone in a right use of natural abilities, has ever
attained saving-grace, or a discovery of those supernatural Truths revealed to
us in the Word: nor could this Light teach Aristotle, that great Naturalist, to
know the Worlds having a beginning, or restrain Cato, the greatest Moralist
that ever was among the Heathens, from being his own murderer: For that
Scripture John 1. 9. That is the true light which lightneth every man that
comes into the world, on which they seem so much to build, it is most clear,
what is the plain and express sense thereof: That as no true and saving Light
is but what must be derived from Jesus Christ; so is he the alone Original,
being truly God, whence every one that comes into the world, is eniightned
also with that Light of Nature and Reason.

Pos. 2. Since this Light which seems to be their alone Bible, and the
Scriptures of Truth are incompatible, we find them enforced to disown these as
the infallible Rule of Faith and Practice, and to own them but as an Historical
rule only; and its Commands are but as Commands from the Letter, which oblige
not, but in a silent posture of heart to wait on an inward teaching of this
Spirit. A Position, were it once admitted, we might then say the Christian
Cause is lost: they who have fallen asleep in Christ are perished, who knew no
other way for founding both their Faith and Practice, but on the express Letter
of the Word; yea in what a strange mould should men frame a Religion to
themselves, if but once left to such a Rule within, and not that given in the
Scripture? But it is well the Holy Ghost speaking to us there, taught never such
Divinity; but expressly shows, 1. That such a rule the Scripture is, as is
suited to make the man of God perfect, and is profitable for Doctrine,
Instruction, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2. This is the Scriptures record, that in the
whole of Religion we must betake our selves to the Law, and the Tistimony, as
the alone rule and measure thereof, Isa. 8. 20: and though strengthening
physical power, by which we are enabled to duty, is from the Spirit working by
the Word; yet is it sure, that all obliging power thereto is from the Letter of
the Word alone: nor is the Spirit without this a moral Rule for our acting now,
when the Canon of the Scripture is closed; but to obey we must found this, that
it is intimated to us in the Word; and to be strengthened in the inward man,
for the same is the immediate work of the Spirit concurring therewith. 3. Is
not the Scripture such a Rule as is given to be the sole Judge of all
controversies? To whose decision Christ himself refers the greatest question
that ever was, whether he be the Son of God or not, Search the scriptures, for
they testify of me, Joh. 5. 38. 4. Did ever the Holy Ghost put such a style as
this on his own Word to be a Historical Rule and dead Letter only; who so
expressly shows, that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,
Romans 10. 14. as one active mean instrumentally concurring with the Spirit to
beget the same; and how it is mighty through God for the casting down of
strongholds, and every hight and imagination which exalts it self against
the Lord? But we known, this Honor does the Spirit of God put thereon, that he
still moves, and acts according to the Word, as it moves and acts; nor does he
make intercession within the Saints, or utter one groan, but according to the
will of God revealed therein, Romans 8. 26. But it is indeed not strange, that to
a dead Heart this is as a dead Letter; and such who under a judicial stroke of
induration have a Bar drawn betwixt them and the power of the Word. 5. Can
these possibly find another rule for trial of the Spirits, whether they are of
God, but by the written Word, and to know that it is not the Devil in Samuels
appearance they have met with, who is not now to learn that Art of transforming
himself into an Angel of Light: Since it is so clear, there is the spirit of
the word, 1 Cor. 2. 12. and a spirit which rules in the hearts of the children
of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. a living spirit, 1 Kings 22. 22. and a spirit of
error and delusion, 1 John 4. 6? And is it not too known, so as the world
cannot be in the dark here, How an enthusiastic spirit leaving the Scripture,
has licensed some to such abominations as the Heathens would abhor, and from a
pretended impulse, has the brother killed the brother?

Pos. 3. However they seem to own the appearance of Christ in the flesh, yet
nothing can be more clear from most of their Writings, than how expressly they
turn the History of the Gospel, and the incarnation, death, and resurrection of
Christ into a mere dispensation and allegory; and upon the matter deny Jesus
Christ as a distinct person without us, and a Being saved by him who died at
Jerusalem, holding forth such a view and pourtraiture of the blessed Redeemer
of the Church, as must leave the world in a muse how to take hold upon any
Reality of the Gospel, or to find Jesus Christ, but in some airy, abstract, and
mystic notion of the Light and Spirit within every one, which they thus
confound as reciprocal terms: A design by which I may say, Satan does at no
ordinary and common rate essay to ruin the Truth, whilst by some high
pretenses to the Spirit he seeks to make us part with the express Letter of the
Word. 2. He does thus essay to shake Christians at the root, and in the great
foundation of their faith, by putting the Gospel in such a dress as may put it
beyond all possible understanding to know the same, or on what solid reality
they can found their soul. 3. Thus does he in a special way attempt to darken
that great and most desirable mystery that ever was revealed to men, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, that he is assuredly Man, and this no Allegory:
(O! blessed he in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily) as though it
were some low and carnal dispensation, to know Christ and him crucified, but as
he is within. But it is sure, if any reality be in the Christian Faith, and the
whole mystery of Godliness no delusion, the Christian Church will never debate,
1. That it is the same Jesus who is preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in
the world, that is received up into Glory, 1. Tim. 3. 16. and the connection
there indissoluble: nor can another true conception of him be possible, than
what the Scripture has given. 2. It is sure, the literal sense of the Word is
no new distinct sense from the spiritual, though by a different Light, and
evidence understood; and this great Truth, That Jesus the Son of Mary is the
Savior of the World, revealed within by the Spirit, does found no other
objective Christ, nor has any different sense from what is objected to us in
the Letter; but is the very same, though seen with another Light, and
irradiation thereof on the Soul. 3. We know there was no dispensation, nor
Allegory meaned, Acts 5. 30. The God of our Fathers has raised up Jesus, whom
you hanged on a tree, him has God exalted to be a Prince, and Savior; and
that we must seek him else where than within, even he whom the Heavens must
contain, till the time of the restitution of all things. 4. We have sure
warrant to say let him be accursed, though an Angel from Heaven should come to
give another account of Jesus Christ, than what we have in the Scripture; and
that this is he, 1. Who was the Faith of the ancient Church, to whom all the
types, and shadows under the Law did so expressly relate, concerning whom the
Prophets did diligently enquire, searching to what, or what manner of time, the
Spirit in them did point, concerning his being revealed to the World, and the
precise time set thereto. 2. He who has passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son
of God, and is still there the glorious Object of our Faith and Worship. 3. He
who surely was wounded for our transgressions, and hruised for our iniquities:
the chastisement of our peace was on him, and by his stripes are we healed,
Isa. 53. 5. O blessed, and unexpressibly sweet Truth! that we know to be no
notion or allegory; and that all these Sin Offerings and sacrifices under the
Law, pointing at this, were not the true Victim offered to God, but had a
discernible respect to that one great propitiatory sacrifice now offered up for
the Sins of the people. 4. It was in truth, and an undoubted reality, that
Thomas knew a Christ without, when his Master gave him leave to put his hand in
his side; and when his Disciples beheld his Being taken up into Heaven, whilst
a cloud received him out of their sight; even the same Jesus who shall in like
manner come again at the last day. We know there is an unexpressibly near and
spiritual Union betwixt Christ and his People here, which is undoubtedly sure;
and that as he is truly revealed within, so he leaves a resemblance of himself
on the soul, such as neither the World, nor the Powers of darkness can ever put
a counterfeit in his room; but such is this Union, as his body here upon the
earth, does still know her head to be in heaven, at the right hand of God,
rejoicing in hope of that day, when they shall be translated to that blessed
place where he is, to see, and for ever wonder at that inconceiveable mystery
of the glorious Godhead dwelling bodily in the man Christ.

Pos. 4. This also is a part of the known Doctrine of the Quakers, That by no
righteousness without us, which Christ has fulfilled in his person, we are
justified, but by a righteousness wrought within; and that there is no truth in
Christ's Satisfaction to justice, for the sins of the Elect: but in this they
are not alone, nor is it strange, that in all times, now under the new
Testament, men have been acted forth in a high degree of opposition to this
head of the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, even beyond other
Scripture-truths; and that so great an assault is made to poison this Fountain,
when of such import to the Church, as it may be called articulus stantis and
cadentis ecclesiae. But I must say, in this the Quakers seem to have taken the
most effectual way, and have the advantage of others who own the same Doctrine
with them, that they first essay to depress the credit and authority of the
Scripture, without which their Cause is lost, since nothing possibly can be
more express and clear than it is there; 1. That our high Priest has entered
into the holy Places, having obtained eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12.
and is that sacrifice, which being offered without spot to God pacifies all,
whose blood alone could silence that cry that sin has for vengeance, having
nailed that handwriting of ordinances which was against us, and contrary to
us, to his cross, Col. 2. 14. and has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. 2. Is it possibly conceivable, if our
sin was imputed to Jesus Christ as the Surety, and on him all our iniquities
were laid; but there must be an imputation of his Righteousness to us, and if
the Debtor be acquitted by the Cautioners payment, and the fruit of Christ's
Satisfaction at all redound to us, that it must needs be by Imputation of the
same? Now it is clear, thus the Scripture reasons; yea, I may say, with such a
plainness as it is strange men can be in the dark here, without making it their
choice. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 1 Cor. 5. 20, 21. and having fulfilled all
Righteousness, and so fully satisfied the Law, as Surety in our stead, as a
common person representing the whole elect Church; Must it not undeniably
acquit those at the hand of Justice, and be accounted theirs, who were then
thus represented, and judicially one with him? 3. We know the Scriptures show
one great end of that blessed contrivance, into which the Angels with wonder
desire to look, is not only to manifest grace, but to declare the righteousness
of God, that he is just, and the justifier of them that believe, Romans 3. 20.
And no way could ever have been conceived like this, to make these two shine
forth together in one and the same work, or how the Law and Justice could have
had such satisfaction as by this blessed Surety, who at once, and to the full,
has satisfied, beyond all that the united Obedience of Angels, and Men, though
extended, and multiplied to Eternity, could ever have done. 4. Nor is it
possible to suppose how works should be concauses with Faith in the
Justification of a Sinner; since this acts only instrumentally, as the hand
embracing that inestimable jewel of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, as
having a peculiar intrinsic aptitude, and fitness beyond all the Graces of the
Spirit, for applying him to the soul. 5. Must not all serious Religion begin
first at this great Truth of an imputed Righteousness, since no access can be
to perform new Obedience, till we have got once from under the curse of the
Law, and be found that in another which we are not in our selves. It is a
blessed and inseparable tie, by which these are conjoined in the Scripture,
which none may essay to divide, but upon that dreadful penalty of being shut
out of all possible right, or claim thereto; that Christ is made over to be
both our Righteousness and Sanctificacation; yet so as the alone weight of our
peace and acceptance with God must still lie on what Jesus Christ has done
for, and not what he has wrought in us, but as it is an assured evidence of
the former; our Faith being thus made discernable, and justified by works.

O what can thus influence so strange an opposition to the Doctrine of Grace as
is this day in the World, and to that unexpressibly sweet, and excellent Truth
of the Righteousness of the Gospel; the clear breaking up of which Light in
these last times, has been as life from the dead to the Church, after a long
and dark night of Antichristianism had gone before to obscure it. It is clear,
the Holy Ghost has indissolubly conjoined our being justified by faith, and
having peace with God through Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. And in this, I can
attest such as ever knew the sensible intimation of pardon, and what it is to
have a spirit broken and wounded under the sense of sin, put under the hand of
the great physician, and a solid cure thereunto; if this ever came in another
way than by some clear, warming discovery, and sensible application of the
Righteousness of Christ; and that the alone sure, and effectual way to heal, is
by appplying his blood, and laying that blessed propitiatory sacrifice as a
salve thereto. But oh! what another thing is the power and efficacy of the
Truth on the soul, than can be expressed in some scholastic notions about it?
such as brings a demonstration of its certainty to those who know it indeed,
that all the disputers of the World could never answer; yea I must say, if a
possibility could be for such a choice, as to carry Heaven by works of our own,
I should think it a sad evidence of those, whose heart did not warrant them to
witness, that no choice could be to them here; but to this alone blessed way of
being saved by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, does their soul cleave, and
it is that which gives a more indearing sight of Heaven, in holding the same
only of him who has purchased it for them, and them for it, by his own blood,
which shall thus draw forth, and intend their love to the highest pitch for all
eternity.

Pos. 5. It is one of their known Tenets, that none should move in the
commanded ^^^ties of a Christian, but by some inward call and motion on their
spirit, and that we ought to forbear, where this is wanting: but it is sure,
herein we are taught from the Scripture: 1. To have the command as the rule,
and object of our Faith, and not any spiritual disposition; nor is there a
restriction thus showed to the Church, when it so expressly injoyns, pray
without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. Trust in him at all times, etc. Psalm. 62. 8.
nor gives it any Latitude, to sift our obedience upon the want of actual
influence. 2. It is clear, moral Commands are perpetually obliging, though the
breathings of God, and his immediate assistance be not in our power: But the
wind blows where it lists, John 3. 8. And though it is ever true, that it is
in vain for one to rise early, or essay any work without God, Psalm. 127. 1. Yet
this argument should then conclude for the Husbandmans restraining his plowing,
and sowing in the season thereof, until he be sure of the Lords joining his
influences with the same; since it is as impossible to sow without the common
influence of God, who is the first Cause, as it is to pray in Faith without the
special breathings of the Spirit* 3. It is not such Doctrine can darken the
undoubted experience of all the Saints, whilst nothing is more known to them
than this; what singular advantage they have found in essaying duty under the
greatest indisposition and deadness, and how often ere they were aware, their
spirits, with a blessed surprisal, even to astonishment, have been revived and
enlarged. 4. What assurance can men have the next hour, or to morrow, more than
in the present time, of the Spirits moving on their souls, or that they shall
be thus at a farther advantage, by waiting the call of the Word for duty, until
they have some inward call and motion thereto.

Pos. 6. Though these men pretend to own Teachers of their own wav, and mould,
such as they say are commanded by the eternal Spirit to that work; yet do they
expressly deny a fixed ministry in the Church, with a mediate call thereto, or
any Scripture-institution thereof. But I confess, it needs be no wonder, that
such, whose great intent is to destroy the City, have the first and sorest
thrust at the Watchmen, and that in so strange a manner, their rage and
passion should burst out against the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, whom
by all possible means they seek to withstand in their work; since the more
enforcing convictions there are of the Authority of God, and his Power with
them, the more does their pain and torment turn them enraged; though in this
they are such a sight, and should be to us, as calls for some sad and
compassionate resentment, when there seems no access to convince those, who do
but express the greatest cruelty against themselves, in making them the But of
their wrath and revilings, who before the Lord dare say, they have no other
revenge, but how to pluck such out of the fire, and if possible, reclaim their
soul from perishing: But who is that Party here, against whom they thus
quarrel? sure it is not the Ministry so much as the Scriptures of Truth, in
which it is express warrant is too clear: and there is no possible access to
debate. 1. That such a marvelous erection of the Church as a politic body is
undeniably there showed, with its peculiar offices and service, and a fixed
Ministry thereto. 2. That this Ministry given by Jesus Christ is a perpetual
standing ordinance in his house to the end of the world, Matt. 28. 20. Ephesians.
4. 11, 12. 3. That it lies not common, but has a peculiar guard, and hedge set
about the same; For no man takes this honor to himself, but be that is called
thereto as A^ron, Heb. 5. 4. And what this calling was, is told us in the first
verse, that he was taken from among men, and ordained for men, in things
pertaining to God. 4. Not only is this Ministry, and it is perpetual use held
forth, but we see also a mediate call thereunto by the Church, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The
things thou have heard of me before many witnesses, the same commit thou to
faithful men who may be able to teach others. Where not only the calling
Authority, and Power is express, but a necessary cognition by the Church of the
fitness and qualification of those who should be set apart to that work. 5. I
must here add, since there is no possible access to deny that convincing seal,
which in all ages Christ has put to this Ministry, that they so much revile; I
may say, without giving a lie to the Holy Ghost: In these marvelous effects it
has had on the World, to save them who believe, which a Divine immediate power
accompanying the same, could only effectuate; and how? by the simplicity of the
Gospel, and foolishness of Preaching, have the moist savage and rude been
tamed; the Conscience of the most daring and stubborn Enemies of the Truth
forced to tremble under the conviction of an Authority more than humane joined
with it; yea, which none can debate, by this way was the Pagan-World turned
Christian.

Pos. 7. It is known at what rate they disown, and revile those great
Scripture-Ordinances of Baptism, the Lords Supper, the Observation of the
Sabbath, and reading, or hearing of the Word preached, as being carnal, and
Commands of the Letter: In which, I confess, the Devil knows his game, and
could have taught no more effectual way to gain Proselites, than by such a
mould of Religion suited, and pleasing to the flesh: but they must not think it
strange, 1. That their Bible is no guide to us, I mean the Light within, so
much cried up as a sufficient Rule; and when the Holy Ghost prefers the
Scripture as more sure, even to an immediate voice from Heaven, That the
Christian Church gives it a preference to any voice that can speak within the
Soul. 2. I am sure, it cannot be known, why Christians should part with those
Ordinances enjoined by the express Authority of the great Lawgiver, upon such
unquestionably moral and perpetual grounds, and not part with the whole
Scripture of God also. 3. Why do they not also lay aside those ancient
Ordinances of eating, and drinking as carnal? I am far from intending a jest
here upon so serious a subject; but does the enforcing necessity to keep up
their natural Life, let them know the perpetual use of the same as a duty? and
is there not a sure ground to know that none can be a Christian in earnest
without an indispensible necessity of those blessed Ordinances of the Gospel,
for their spiritual life; to keep close by the footsteps of the Flock, and to
feed among the shepherds Tents, by reading and hearing of the Word, a spiritual
observance of the Sabbath, and that great sealing Ordinance of the Lords
Supper? Nor know we another way of getting beyond those Ordinances but one of
two, a being safe landed, through grace, in Heaven, even there where no Temple
is; or a judicial arrest, from the Lord, of Induration, which may be truly said
to be an entering into the very Suburbs of Hell, even in this life.

Pos. 8. Such is the Doctrine of this Party, as expressly owns a perfection in
this life to be attained; in which if they intend only a perfection in kind,
which is indispensably necessary to the lowest size of a Christian, or a being
perfectly justified, and complete in Christ, we believe the same also: but
since they have no reserved sense here, nor hide their intent and meaning, that
a perfect freedom from sin is in this life to be attained, I must then ask, 1.
To which of all the Saints in the Scripture will they turn? Who knew ever such
a thing? sure not to Moses, unto whom the glorious God spoke face to face; not
to that beloved Disciple, who leaned on Christ's bosom; not to him who was
caught up into the third Heaven; whose sore wrestlings, and groans under a body
of Death are to this day on public Record, in the Church. 2. Did the Church
know any such thing in Isaiah's time? But we are all as an unclean thing, and
all our righteousness is as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. or in those pure Primitive
times of the Christian-Church, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and make God a liar, 1 John 1. 8.

3. Why are such observable failings recorded in Scripture of those to whom the
Holy Ghost did bear that witness, that they were perfect in their generation,
such as Noab and Job? Is it not to show what perfection that is which the
greatest of the Saints can attain here? 4. Nothing is more clear from the known
experience of the Saints than this, that the greatest Hights in Christianity
have still kept them most low, under the humbling sense of a Body of Death, and
that contrariety between the flesh and the spirit, which does never cease,
until Death once decide that strife: but were any such thing attainable here, I
am sure, none more visibly contradict its Truth, than this Party, and are at a
greater disadvantage to pretend thereto, except wrath, passion, reviling of
others, in the most reproachable scurrilous terms that can be expressed, be some
part of tht perfection they mean.

Pos. 9. It is their professed Doctrine, that the soul is a part of the essence
of God without beginning and infinite: A strange Position, that the Heathens,
whose sole guide was the Light of Nature, in their search of the souls Original
could have no confidence to own; though these things we know to be undeniably
clear, 1. That the soul of Man is one of the rarest pieces of the Creation of
God. 2. That in its frame it is a simple, immaterial, and active substance,
which is not compounded of Principles, and therefore can be resolved into none.
3. That the soul has no cause of Corruption from any opposition of contraries,
as the body has, through the prevalence of heat or cold: but to assert its
being infinite, and without beginning, is a blasphemy almost beyond President,
even among those whom the Devil has most visibly acted forth against the
Truth; since, 1. This is the incommunicable propriety of the glorious God
alone, from whom, and for whom are all things. 2. This does deny the Creation
of Man, of whom the soul is the noblest part; for to be created, and infinite
imply the greatest contradiction, and are terms incompatible. 3. Thus a part of
the essence of God should go to Hell, and the souls of the damned there must
have the same Prerogative with the great former of all things, to have had a
duration without beginning. I confess, this Principle, as most of their
Doctrine, is such as might make them Quakers in earnest, and cause their
Conscience to tremble with horror and amazement, if upon any serious reflection
they could see how sad a subject the Truth of an immortal soul, and its being
for ever, it to such whom the Devil has so far got under his Command and
Power, as those visibly are at this day.

Pos. 10. This they professedly own also, That not the same individual body is
raised again, which is laid in the dust: but there is a change thereof in
substance, as well as in qualities; which is no new opinion, but what was the
Heresy of the Marcionites, and the Valentinians of old: but according to the
Scripture it is clear, 1. That there shall be a transforming of those vile
bodies at the resurrection, to be fashioned after the glorious body of Christ,
Phil. 3. 21. and no forming of a new one, which could not possibly be
understood, if the same numerical body should not be raised; and that this
change here is but in qualities, not in substance. 2. If the resurrection of
the Saints be conformable to the resurrection of Christ, then must it be the
very same numerical body, that is raised up from the dead, and not another. 3.
This was not Job's testimony only, but the Holy Ghost's speaking in the
Scripture to us, what was his assured hope herein, that though worms destroy
this body, yet in his flesh should he see God, whom he should see for himself,
and his eyes behold, and not another, Job 19. 26, 27. 4. We may humbly
adventure to say, it is suitable to the holy and unspotted Righteousness of
God, that the same very body which did accompany the soul here in the pain and
labor of duty, and under much tribulation for the Truth, should be its
companion in Glory; that those who strove together, and run in one race, should
be both interested in the same crown and reward; and the same body also, which
was the souls Organ and Co-partner with it, in committing of sin, should
partake also of that punishment after the resurrection.

One thing farther I must here add, in which they seek to make themselves
remarkable to the World, by these austere appearances of Mortification and
strictness, in denying all civil respects to others, which they seem to intend
as a visible badg of their prefession; but if this be a matter of such weight,
whereon serious Religion and Mortification to the flesh leans so much, as they
would have us believe; it is then clear, 1. That the Popish-Capucchins, and
Mahumetan-Dervices, to whom this way has so visible a resemblance. can
sufficiently pretend to, and contend for a preference. 2. Then the Christian
Church must take a new Copy, and have no regard to the Example, and deport of
the Saints this way in Scripture; such as Nathan the Prophet, of whom the Holy
Ghost records, when he came in to the King, he bowed himself to the very
ground, 1 Kings 1. 23. Or the Apostle Paul in his expressing himself to Festus
and Agrippa, Acts 26. 25. Or Luke the Evangelist in the designation he has of
Theophilus, Luke 1. 31. 3. If a conformity to this mode and way, must be an
essential requisite to Religion, we must quit the Scripture-Rule also, Lev. 19.
32. Thou shall rise up before the boary head, and honor the face of the old
man; the reason of which Precept is undeniably moral, and founded upon
immutable grounds; and that Romans 13. 7. Give honor to whom honor is due: nor
does this suit the Apostles Rule, and practice in things indifferent, I was all
things to all, that I might gain some; which would be far from denying an
humane civil deport to others, where this might be gaining. 4. But oh! what
amazing confidence is this, for those who find it easy to turn the great
Realities of the Gospel, and most express institutions of the Word, into a
shadow and allegory, yet to lay such a stress of duty on an outward gesture? Do
they think the World is such as they may impose upon it what they please; and
has so far lost reason, though there were no sense of Religion, as not to
discern such an imposture?

SECT. III.
HAving touched a little the most concerning Tenets, which these great
adversaries of Jesus Christ, and his Truth, do public own in their Doctrine;
we would in the second place seriously consider, what so strange and amazing an
attempt against the Truth can mean, or what these possibly intend, except they
have concluded the Christian World to be turned wholly Atheistical, and to have
so far lost all Sense and Impression of Truth, as that they need not hide their
design to persuade men to quit Religion and Reason at once; whilst with so
strange a confidence they own, yea thus in the open Light, dare offer such an
assault to the Church.

1. To give up at once the whole of Christian Religion and quit that good and
old way, wherein since Abel the Righteous, and Enoch who walked with God, it is
so clear the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, yea the whole race of the
Saints have to this day walked, to come over, and embrace a way, that if no
other were known for Religion in the World, it might give Atheism some warrant
to judge there were none at all. What have we to leave to posterity so precious
as the Truth? or what can any other gain, and advantage amount to, if this be
lost? And why did such an innumerable company of Martyrs, on whom the Spirit of
God, and of Glory was seen to rest, seal it with their blood? Was it not to
stand in defense of the Gospel, and of these Truths which they so visibly
oppose?

2. And is the Night so dark, as such a Party dare come forth, to have us
believe there has been no true Church in the World, but since these twenty or
thirty years past (except what has its rise from John of Leyden, Thomas
Muntzer, etc. whose steps, in most of their Doctrine they seem to follow); yea
that the great substantials of Christian Religion, until now, have been but
some imposture or mistaken thing; and all such, who were the excellent of the
Earth in their time, who expressly owned the same Doctrine, and died in the
Faith thereof, which the Protestant Church does at this day, as can be
unanswerably demonstrated, have been but false witnesses against God? for
however they may seek to shift this, by undeniable Consequence it must follow,
either Quakerism is a horrid Imposture, or the Truth, and way of God has not
been found out till now, and the Church both under the old and new Testament
has steered her Course by a wrong compass, in taking the Scripture for her
Rule.

3. Is all sight of the Truth so far lost as that it should be easy for some
to come forth, and impose upon the World a new Bible, a new Guide to follow,
which every one may find within himself, to persuade us to build on another
Foundation than that of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20? Yea thus put in our hand, instead of the
great Realities of the Gospel, a new device, and mould of their own framing? Or
do they think their Authority such as is enough to patronize a Doctrine, that
gives an express lie to the God of Truth in the most clear discoveries of his
Word.

4. It may seem a strange and amazing assault, to obtrude a way of Religion, in
the face of the Christian Church, in so manifest a contradiction to the whole
experience of the Saints, and that seal, which in all ages they have put to
this Truth, that the Scripture is the Power of God to Salvation; and is that
mean whereby he makes the simple wise, that it is the very way whereby Jesus
Christ keeps intercourse with his Church here on Earth; and such as no line,
nor tittle thereof did ever deceive any that adventured on the same. This we
are sure, is, and has been, the Testimony of the followers of the Truth, ever
since that great Trust of the Oracles of God was committed to the Church, which
they have put in their Testament, and with their dying breath have owned; how
often in this blessed way of the Word has the Lord sealed their instruction,
whilst under sad and dark plunging, yea thus has made Life, Power, and
enlivening Influences, even to the melting of their heart, break up when under
their greatest deadness?

5. It is a strange attempt, and seems a new essay the Devil intends to try in
acting forth a Party not to dispute the Scripture, and Christian Faith out of
the World, but to brawl it away in an unusual manner of reviling, as if they
would outcry the Truth with a continued flood of noise and reproach; whilst
they know there is no serious and sober Christian, but under the A we of God,
is restrained from answering them at their rate. But yet for answer, here is
nothing needs seem strange, when we see, 1. How hard it is to fix in such a way
as error and delusion, or find land, when men once are carried off the Truth,
and do lanch out into that horrid gulf of error; but seducers must wax worse
and worse, 2 Timothy 3. 13. 2. How in all times it may be discernable, that a
delusion is a turning men judicially mad, and their deliberate acting to
deceive others, has the very same effect on themselves; nor is it strange such
aremarkable stir and noise is made by the Spirit of Error which thus rages,
when at this day let loose, knowing his time is short: and that such an hour of
the Power of darkness does but go before some great and remarkable restraint,
yea that this is near; for which with an assured hope upon that blessed
Warrant, and Security of the Scriptures of Truth we wait and believe.

SECT. VI.
IN pursuance of this subject, whilst such a darkness is over the Churches of
Christ, and the very Foundations like to be shaken; It should be this day a
serious call for our enquiry, what solid Improvement might be made of such a
Trial in this strange appearance, and growth now of Quakerism for clearing of
the Holy and unspotted way of the Lord, and our being farther strengthened in
the Faith; since it is sure, that nothing is here before our eyes, but what
brings a convincing Seal therewith to the Truth, and may be an antidote against
its own poison; if we but consider,

1. That the necessity of Day and Night, and of the Ordinances of Heaven, to
continue as they are, is not more clear from the Truth of the Word, than that
Heresies must be in the Church, that such as are approved may be made manifest,
1 Cor. 11. 10. And if these were not, the Scriptures would want an undoubted
witness of its Truth and Certainty.

2. That it is undeniably clear, this is the very time and season of bringing
forth those monstrous Births in the World, according to the
Scripture-Prophecies thereof; for the Spirit speaks expressly to the latter
times, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and gives warning, that this will be one of the special and
greatest Trials of the Christian Church, whereof the Old Testament does make
but little mention: yea thus it may be understood, why such a Party now must
have some blacker dye, and a singular edition of grossness, beyond all that
have gone before, as suiting to a greater Light, and more flourishing times of
the Church, than former ages have known.

3. Is there not advantage here, for being more confirmed in the good ways of
the Lord, that no such length the Principles of this adversary come, and
there is nothing so horrid and amazing in their Doctrine, which in the Scripture
has not been foretold; such as damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. even such as tend not to darken the Truth only, or a
building hay and stubble on this Foundation, but most visibly raze the same?

4. It should be for our strengthening also in the Truth, that nothing is so
strange in this marvelous depth of error and delusion, as to the way and manner
of its spreading in the Church, but what has been foretold by the Holy Ghost;
to be brought in privily, by subtle insinuation, and a sowing of these tares
while men sleep; yea how such shall make merchandise of their souls, for in
nothing more is the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in
wait to deceive, known to the World, than in this Trade which seducers drive,
to turn those they converse with from that simplicity which is in Christ: but
as thus Error in its first approaches knows how to take on a cover; Is it not
seen also where once this is aloft, and delusion drunk in, with what
discernable fury and violence such are then driven: so as all may know what
mean these clouds (which the Apostle speaks of) carried about with a tempest, 2
Pet. 2. 17. which are then hurried by a judicial stroke, and can find no fixing?

5. This one thing, I confess, seems astonishing, and that whereat some pretend
most advantage for their stumbling at the way of God, to see at what rate such
have walked under a profession of godliness, not only as to Light, but with a
convincing evidence of their being serious and tender therein, who at last to
the amazement of the World have fallen into a visible Apostasy from the Faith,
so as to come even to that dreadful length therein of being Quakers; yea thus
may seem to bring in question that great Truth of the perseverance of the
Saints. But it is well we have the Scripture to go to, and know what this means,
whilst nothing here is such as does not convincingly answer to what is expressly
showed us there, and should confirm more than shake; if we consider, 1. Though
it is true that Heresy, as other works of the flesh, may be consistent with a
regenerate estate; yet is it impossible for the Elect to be deceived into a
falling from the Faith, without some gracious recovery, as is showed Matt. 24.
But we know this way is the purpose of God made effectual, concerning all he
has from Eternity predestinate to life, as is express from Scripture, 2 These.
2. 13. That they are chosen to Salvation, through sanctification of the spirit,
and belief of the truth, though the evidence of this recovery in some, where it
has been in Truth, may be but little discernable to others: The Lord so
disposing in his infinite Wisdom, that his People may be taught an alone
recumbence on the Word, even when his Works seems to justle therewith. 2. We
know no such length in profession of the Truth, from which any have fallen
through the prevalence of Error, can go beyond those who after they have
escaped the pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, are yet again entangled therein, and overcome, 2 Pet. 2.
20. or beyond those degrees of Conviction, and common Illumination, that may
even have some transient taste of the good Word of God, and of the Powers of
the World to come, Heb. 6. 5, 6. To which the Apostle shows some may come, even
that length by a temporary Work of the Spirit, who have yet fallen into a most
dreadful Apostasy from the Truth, and opposition thereto, with the greatest
hight of malice; in both which Scriptures may be seen, that it is such an
Apostasy there meant, as follows upon the prevalence of Error and Delusion. 3.
With what marvelous plainness does the Holy Ghost in the Word speak to this
Case, that we may know what it means, and have no cause for stumbling, when it
shall become the Churches Trial, as we see Mat. 13. 5. in that seed which fell
upon stony places, where it had not much earth, and forthwith sprung up,
because it had no depthness of earth; but when the Sun was up, was scorched,
and because they had no root, withered: a Truth, I may say, is not more express
in the Scripture, when we read it with our eyes, than its ratification in
aftertimes in the Church has often been on many a sad instance, such as after
their being enlightened have sprung up, yea. forthwith, with a hasty growth, and
too early appearance, but no solid growing to the root; yet such, as for a time
have most remarkably seemed to outrun those who had in Truth received the
ingrafted word, by a more forward profession, than whom none have been a sadder
sight to the generation they lived in, and by as remarkable a withering, have
too visibly witnessed the want of root; in which I must say, and with some
confidence appeal to any serious discerners of the time about this remark, if
in such who have most observably fallen from the Truth, and plunged into that
gulf of Error, some precious evidence has not been of such springing up
forthwith, and hasty appearance in profession of the Truth, that has taken the
growth more to the blossom, than to any sure founding under the sense of their
sinful, and lost estate by Nature.

6. This also seems strange, and may be shaking to some; How tenacious and
violent such usually are found in this way, even when silenced with the
clearest discoveries of the Truth: so as it is rare almost in an age to find an
instance of one, who after some observable Hight of Illumination beyond others
has ever found a recovery, or shown their returning by repentance after he
has thus fallen into damnable Heresies, as the Apostle terms them. But is not
here also a convincing and marvelous seal to the Scripture; if men will but
seriously read what is so clear, 2 Pet. 2. 20. and that Heb. 6. How dreadful an
arrest, thus in the Holy Judgment of God, is put on this kind of Apostasy, even
beyond the most gross falling away from the Truth in practice, which should
cause fear to all that stand, and do yet retain their stedfastness? Yea is not
the reason of this there also held forth, that it is a putting the Son of God
to open shame, and so direct a doing despite to the Holy Ghost, in
counteracting his Workings and Discoveries once put forth in the soul? For my
self, I must confess, nothing in those times I have found more shaking (who
before a higher Judge than Men, have some confidence to say, The greatest joy I
have upon Earth, is to know that assuredly the Lord is God, and the certainty
of his Truth): But I must here also profess, how in this I have found cause for
being more confirmed, yea with admiration to consider, How many ages past, such
things have been foretold; what sore assaults the spirit of Error and Delusion
should give the Church, with so express circumstantiating of this Trial, in its
whole frame, conveyance, and manner of appearance, as has been seen in the
Event, and at this day before our eyes, which by the Holy Ghost only could be
revealed to the Church, and could never have been supposed, or entered into men's
thoughts at a distance.

SECT. V.
A Fourth particular that calls for some serious enquiry upon this subject,
is what should be the grounds of so strange and prodigious a contagion of this
way of the Quakers, as is at this day in the Church, whose Doctrine and
Principles are such as the very recital thereof might be judged a sufficient
antidote against its own poison; yea this after such clear and bright times of
the Gospel: but here none needs be in the dark, if these things were seriously
considered.

1. That where a form of Knowledge, and men's receiving of the Truth, but not in
Love, comes some great length in the Church, there is then cause to fear, and
foresee some remarkable flood of Error, and Delusion to follow; for in this the
Scripture is express, 2 Timothy 2. 10. and lets us see how nothing does more ripen
the harvest, to make the field white for the spirit of Error's putting in his
Sickle, than most solemn times of the brightness of the Gospel, if no suitable
fruit be found thereof. Light is one of the greatest Talents of the Church,
that must bring either some remarkable gain, or loss with it: nor need any
wonder, seduction from the Truth bear some blacker dye now in those days, and
have a more singular addition of grossness, even beyond all former times; since
thus the Stroke and Judgment must keep proportion to a further degree of the
Churches Exaltation, and more clear discoveries of the Truth, than former ages
have known.

2. As the formentioned culpable, and provoking cause may at this day be
discernable to all, should the Holy Judgment of the Lord inflicted thereupon,
be strange to us in a visible Tradition, and giving up such a Party unto strong
Delusion, with a withholding of the very exercise of their Reason and Judgment,
that they do not see the Light, when it is most clearly shining forth before
them; since this a convincing seal also to that Scripture, 2 These. 2. 10. I
confess, it is one of the marvelous things of God, and of the greatest depths
of his Judgment, whereby he makes himself known in the Earth, yea such as may
enforce on Atheists the conviction of a Deity, and that Dominion which the Holy
God exercises over the soul; but such as none can pretend cause for stumbling,
where his unspotted righteousness does so clearly shine forth on these grounds:
1. That so immediate a stroke, and judicial arrest in delivering one over to
the Power of this Plague, is not inflicted, but where some choice and consent
has gone before, and is the very execution of that sentence from the Lord,
Rev. 22. 21. He which is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still. 2. Since the greatest contempt of God, which
any can witness, is a not receiving the Truth when clearly offered; should it
be strange, if that which is certainly one of the greatest strokes of God upon
men, answer thereto, by giving up their Reason and Judgment to such strong
delusion? 3. If the Heathen, who did not glorify God with the Light of Nature,
were in his Righteousness given up to a reprobate mind, to do that which was
inconvenient, and morally absurd, Romans 1. 26. Need we then be in the dark if
those who dishonor God under the revealed Light of the Scripture, be given up
to such spiritual wickedness, as to believe Error, and lies for the Truth? 4.
Nor should any wonder to see what confidence this Party now pretends to in
their way, and though under so sad a stroke of obduration, that may be seen by
all others, yet how little it is felt by themselves, since the want of Light
and feeling is a part of that disease, and is a Judgment which walks in the
dark, and gives the sorest wound when the pain is least felt; Men being thus
judicially bound over, as under chains in the prison, that they cannot once
stir, until the last stroke be given.

3. When a previous disposition, and tendence amongst many, to stumble at the
way of the Lord, is so manifest, this day, through the Church; should their be
cause to wonder, though it quickly Land here? These things being considered, 1.
That the motion is then down the hill, where it is not easy to stand; and
instead of a humble serious enquiry after the Truth, under an awful Impression
of God, whose word it is, such are upon another sent, how to oppose the Truth
against it self, and have it made subservient to their Bias. 2. The ground
then needs not be prepared for this seed; there is so much within to make its
entry, and acceptance easy, (for a snare enters not without a call); but where
such an impoisoned Nature is, it must needs seek to strengthen it self by
bringing in things suitable, yea, can suck that poison of Error out of those
Truths, that would seem the most proper antidote against it. 3. It is then men
do insensibly wear at a distance from under these former Impressions which once
they had of duty, and of the way of the Lord; so as ere they be aware, then
Judgment is determined by a judicial stroke to what was before their desire;
things representing themselves suitably to that predominant humor which is
within: yea it may be too clear, as a disposition to stumble takes root in the
soul, How passion and sensual lusts get ground, which as the Apostle shows,
cannot endure sound Doctrine, or a being searched by the word? 2 Timothy 4. 3. But
thus are unawares sucked up into this gulf and whirle-pit of some predominant
lust that leads them captive at its pleasure.

4. A not keeping that distance from this contagion, which the Holy Ghost
expressly requires, has given too visible a rise to the falling off of many to
this horrid way of the Quakers; nor should this be strange to any: Why, thus
the Lord is provoked to desert and leave such to themselves, who do so far
adventure out of his way; when it is so clear, 1. How express the command is
not to receive such into their house, or give them a friendly salute, as they
would not be partakers of their evil deeds, Tit. 3. 10. 2 John 10. but should
be rejected as men void of, and enemies to the Truth, whose words eat like a
gangrene. 2. That this is a peculiar mean of the Lord appointed for their
reclaiming, to keep such a distance as may witness that abhorrence, and holy
indignation, which the Zeal of God should have at such a Party, so as they may
be ashamed; for it is sure, Error and Heresies would soon dye of themselves, if
they got not free vent, and too favorable a countenance from others. 3. Where
men will pass over those bounds the Lord has set in his holy Word, by an
unnecessary converse with seducers from the Truth; Is it strange, though the
Devil have them at such advantage, since he finds them on his own ground? And I
doubt not, upon serious enquiry, but it might be easy to find the first rise,
and occasion of most that are infected with this plague, has been upon a
familiar and (...) converse with such a Party: as one sad (...) I may here
mention of a young man in this Country, who would adventure on going abroad by
Sea in a Ship, when the Master of it was a Quaker, having then no respect to
that way: but upon some familiar converse, when he had so far put himself out
of Gods Protection, was quickly drawn, first to a listening, and then a liking
of those Principles, until he had fully drunk in that poison, which was the
account he himself gave of the first rise of such a change.

5. A fifth ground why Quakerism should in so strange a manner be at this day
contagious, is its discernable suiting to the Principles of the World, and that
inbred Enmity that is by Nature in men against the way of God. When thus they
are taught that all days are alike, and no need of outward Teaching, but by the
Light within; yea to cry down the Ministers of Jesus Christ as hirelings, with
most of the weigty duties of a Christian, which to them are as an abomination:
and when it is thus, can it be strange, How many gross, and visibly profane are
carried with this stream, or why the greatest adversaries of godliness are
sound to pursue those with less heat and aversion of their way, and have more
easy suiting therewith, than with the way of the Lord?

6. I must further add to those forementioned grounds, that except men shut
their eyes, a most visible discovery of the immediate power and influence of
the Devil, and his actual concurrence may be convincing to all who look
seriously thereon; when it is so clear, 1. How this change they are under, who
once turn that way, has a rage and fury therewith, in their opposition to the
Truth, beyond the ordinary rate of men's natural Enmity thereto; yea that
without the least shadow of provocation, they are driven by some violent
pressure, and incitement from such an Impulse as they seem to have no freedom
in their own motions; but though before, of most discernably calm and sober
dispositions, are then acted forth to those strange expressions of railing and
reproach, as can leave it under no debate from what spirit they move, and how
far they are from that wisdom from above, which is first pure, and then
peaceable. 2. This strange appearance, and change such are under, who once
embrace this way of the Quakers, is seen to be by no moral swasion, or
conviction suited to a reasonable soul; no receiving of the ingrafted word, or
any discernable impress thereof to show the Laws being written in their heart:
but as has been greatly observed by some, is by a strange rude leap, and
enthusiastic impulse, sudden and violent, the Conscience being made sound, and
whole before it be lanced, and their false peace broken. 3. It may be clearly
seen, whatever Impulse these pretend to for such a change, that this is from a
spirit of blasphemy; even to a denying of Jesus Christ, the blessed Head and
Redeemer of the Church, except as a Principle within; yea from a lewd and
profane spirit, such as counteracts Holiness in hearing, reading of the
Scripture, praying, singing of Psalms, sanctifying of the Sabbath, the use of
the Sacraments. 4. That it is from such a spirit also (whatever pretenses they
have to follow a Light within them) as counteracts the most express dictates of
a natural Conscience, in these notes of difference, which by the Light of
Nature have in all Nations been betwixt Man and Man, to a denying that due
reverence Children should have to Parents, Servants to Masters, Subjects to
Magistrates. 5. And is it not here most discernably a strange bewitching of
their Judgment and Reason, who once fall in with that Party into such absurd
extravagancies, both in their Tenets and Practice, as no reason can possibly
comprehend, but that it is the very immediate power and working of Satan?
Whilst it is so clear, that this is such a Religion and way as none can close
therewith, but by engaging upon these two Principles to forego their Reason and
Judgment, and all subjection to the Scripture of God: a Religion which is so
far from rendering a reason of the ground thereof, with meekness, to these who
ask, that it turns visibly enraged upon the most sober Christian essay for
bringing of it to the Light.

SECT. VI.
IN the fifth place, let us consider on this subject, what might be of most
special use to guard and preserve all who profess the Truth against this horrid
and spreading contagion, now in these times: for clearing of which some few
Preservatives I would seriously offer.

1. To live much by Scripture, and have more near intercourse therewith, as
that alone rule, without which none can write one line in Religion aright, but
according to the same; and is so marvelously suited to enlighten, and take the
wayfaring man through all these snares here by the way; so as the whole race of
the Saints, since the beginning to this day, could not possibly have wished it
another thing than it is. Oh! what do such part with, that can part with this
guide which reveals the whole Counsel of God, and shows us what is good,
lovely, and just, gives Law to the inward man, and commands his very thoughts;
yea that which the God of Truth has magnified above all his Names? Sure it is,
if such blasphemers knew what converse a serious humble Christian has often
found this way, with Jesus Christ, and which his soul knows well to be no dream
or shadow; they should rather wish their words choked them in the throat, than
to adventure to speak at the rate they usually do. I know this quarrel they
have therewith, which Ahab had with the Prophet Micajah, that it prophesies
sad things to them, and therefore they must hate it, and seek a new Light,
because this is their torment; for it is sure, the Scripture, and Quakerism are
no more compatible to lodge in one heart, than the noonday and midnight can
meet together; but their appeal herein is cast, for whether they will or not,
by this word they must be judged in the day of the Lord.

2. That great Counsel of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 13. I would press on
Christians at this day, for holding fast the form of sound words, as one great
intent of the Scripture, to give the Church a full model, and standard of
saving Doctrine, whereon every one may know how he foundeth. Now this great
duty is the more pressingly called for in such times, when most satisfy
themselves with some loose notions of the Truth, and to know things at random,
who seem but little concerned to be stable, and rooted in the faith, so as to
know that close contexture, and dependence of the Truths of God in the
Scripture; and how they are linked in the nearest tie and correspondence, as
there can be no essay for corrupting of one part, but must have the same
tendence against the whole; yea, thus reach a thrust at the very life and being
of Religion. It will be rare to find such as are in earnest for a solid
founding on the great Foundation-Truths, and Principles of the Word, and to
feed much thereon, to have ever become a prey to delusion and error.

3. A third safe Preservative against this contagion, should be more deep and
serious thoughts, How horrid a way this of Quakerism is? And to consider, 1.
What the Apostle shows, 2 Pet. 2. 2. that such damnable Heresies bring swift
destruction therewith. 2. How hopeless the recovery of such prove, and how rare
it is to bring them of, who are once Prisoners to an erring Conscience, or to
see them either seek or find out a way of escape: these being Trees twice dead
plucked up by the root.

3. The very near approach of this to that sin against the Holy Ghost, where
there is a falling once into those destroying Heresies which subvert the Faith,
especially where some remarkable work of the Spirit has gone before to
enlighten and convince, as we see Heb. 6. 4, 6. For it is impossible for those
who were once enlightened, if they shall fall away, to renew them again to
repentance. 4. And what an awful Impression should this also have on men, that
such as are thus subject, and reject means of conviction, are condemned of
themselves, as the Apostle shows, Tit. 3. 11. Since they choose Delusion, and
will not hearken to the Truth, thrusting the Word from them, whereby they judge
themselves unworthy of erernal life.

4. It should be a singular guard also against this way for Christians to walk
humbly, and have such a disposition much their study in these times; while it
is so clear, 1. That the most solid, and eminently fixed Christians, in the
Church, who have shined most brightly, even to the setting of their Sun, have
still been the most humble. 2. That this is a remark seldom fails, where
delusion and error get place, a swelling, and being lift up under much
self-confidence and esteem might be visibly seen to go before; nor is it easy
to find an instance of a sober, humble prefessor of the Truth plunged in this
gulf: it is a sad mark the Scripture has set at their door who know not this,
Behold the soul which is lifted up is not upright, Habbak. 2. 4. 3. I may say
there should need no dispute against this horrid way of the Quakers, were men's
eyes kept more within themselves, and in the humbling sight of a body of Death,
under which the choicest of the Saints have been still kept most pressed, yea
nothing has helped them to shine more brightly, and to a transmitting of their
remembrance with the most sweet and fragrant savor to after-ages, than this.

5. To attend on the Ministry of the Word, and a close keeping by that
Ordinance given by Jesus Christ to the Church, should be found a blessed
Preservative against this way; and therefore are they so strictly conjoined by
the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4. 11. and 14. He gave some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, etc. and that we be not henceforth children tossed to
and fro; and it is sure, if men shut not their eyes, they cannot but behold,
that where once any begin to fall off here, there is no standing or getting
their ground farther kept, till either Error or Atheism has made them a prey.
This is no personal Interest I plead, but the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, though
never more trampled upon by the World than at this day; And I hope, with much
confidence it can be said, that many such of the Ministers of Christ yet are,
whom Quakers do, in the most hateful Terms that can be expressed, Revile as
Hirelings, Baals Priests, who yet would bear such contempt and opprobry, and a
sad outward Lot with much joy, so they might get acceptance for their Work; and
as Ambassadors of Christ, whose Commission they carry, and can show his
credential Letters for the same, to all with whom the Scripture has any
weight, might find access to drive on that great Interest of Reconciliation
betwixt God and Sinners.

SECT. VII.
NOw in the close, I shall touch a little the appeal formerly proposed to that
very Light within, which this Party of the Quakers so much cry up as an
infallible Guide, since it cannot possibly be understood another thing than
that Tribunal of the Conscience, under the great Judge, set up in every man's
Breast; If even before that Light they can stand, without horror and amazement
at their own way, and some enforcing conviction of the Truth of those
particulars, I attest their Conscience in.

1. If a corrupting of the Affections did not previously concur to corrupt
their Judgment; and if this change in their way might not, to their own
discerning, be sound to begin first in some reigning, and predominant lust. It
is sure, the Scripture finds the root of Error and Heresy to be there, Gal. 5.
20. 1 Timothy 2. 19. And it is easy for the World to see how visible a rise
discontent, cross events to their designs about outward things, a begun
wearying of the very form of Godliness, yea some hope and insinuation of
advantage from another airth has in many instances, given to this, and
effectually influenced their taking up a lax conception of Religion, and then
turning over to such a way.

2. I may here appeal to the Conscience of most who have engaged with that
Party: if they were sincere, and earnest in professing the Truth before they
quilt it, or knew what it was to be swayed by Principles of their own, with
that solid founding thereon, as they could say, no incitement from example, or
the Testimony of others, but the felt Power of the Truth on their soul did
influence such a profession: Since it is undeniable, how many from extreme
leudness, and ere they had any appearance of being Christians, have made this
leap over to the Quakers; so as it can be no wonder, that they on easy Terms,
part with that which they so lightly took up, and never in earnest knew: yea it
is notoriously known how some of the chief among them have as an Argument for
persuading others to desert the way of the Lord, expressly owned this; that
while they were once under the same profession with them, and seemed to be most
serious therein, yet 'twas but for a show only, and they found never any Truth
or Reality in this way, which is indeed not strange, for they could not find
that which they were not then at all seeking after.

3. To that Light within, that they so much pretend to, I must appeal, If they
can possibly cast the Judgment and Authority of the Scripture, without having
that very Light within to rise up, and witness against them; and if their
Conscience be not wholly struck dead, can deny that witness thereto; How? by a
clear manifestation of the Truth, it commends it self to the Conscience of
every one, as a safe ground whereon to repose their soul; yea, If it bear not
that visible Impress of its Divinity, that all may know how it is framed to
correspond with the inward Man, and to judge and exercise a Power over the
Conscience, with the most retired thoughts, as well as the Actings of Men.

4. Let the Conscience, and that Light within speak, if Natures Light can be a
test and measure of supernatural Revelation; when, except they do violence
thereto, they cannot but know that the greatest Truths of Christianity
indispensably necessary to Salvation, yea the whole contrivance of the Gospel,
is such as could never possibly have entered into the hearts of Men, if the
Scripture had not revealed the same.

5. Can they, without a contradiction to that very Light within, deny what in
all times is made obvious to the view of the World, that irresistible and
efficacious Power of the Word accompanied by the Spirit, to be such as
converteth the Soul, enlightens the Eyes, and makes wise the simple; and what
innumerable Instances of real Conversion from the Power of Satan to God, has
in all ages been thus wrought; in whom it might be evidently seen, that the
more vigorous luster the Power of Holiness in these had, the more close also
has their adherence been to that Doctrine now opposed, and trampled on by the
Quakers.

6. As they can give no reason for that bitterness, and wrath against those who
own the Truth, and from whom they can pretend no personal injury or provocation
but for the Truths sake; let their Conscience also speak, if against any they
are thus more stirred than these, where the most convincing appearance of God
in his Image shines forth; yea if they do not more easily comply with them, in
whom nothing of serious Religion can be seen, than such, being indeed scorched
with that heat that enforces them to rage and blaspheme.

7. Must not their Conscience enforce this conviction upon them, that in the
Church of Christ, from which they are gone out, there are still Ministers of
the Spirit, and not of the dead Letter and empty sound, and a Ministration of
Power and Life found to go along with these blessed Ordinances they so avowedly
contemn; yea, that by this Doctrine of the Church they have now quit, the
followers of the Truth do in these times, as well as in former ages, receive
the Spirit, and know the certainty thereof, that it is the Spirit of Holiness
most exactly corresponding with the written Word.

8. Does not that conviction also follow them, though they flee never so fast
from it, what burning and shining Lights there have been, and yet are among the
Ministers of Christ in these late times, such as were Mighty in the Scriptures,
servent in Spirit, clothed with the Power and Authority of God, before whose
Ministry the most daring and stout-hearted have been made to tremble, than whom
none have witnessed more zeal for the Truth, and that Doctrine so much now
cried down by the Quakers; yea, how some also of these we have known to have
had very extraordinary discoveries, and immediate in-breathings of the Mind of
God, in particular cases, who in this were led by a Scripture-spirit, and in no
other path, but in the way of the Word, though by some more singular enforcing
Application of the same.

9. Are not such enforced also to see, so as their Conscience cannot
contradict, What unspeakable joy and peace Christians do witness in their
sufferings for the Truth, and bearing Testimony to that way, to which they are
so known and stated Adversaries: yea, that when such are a-dying, with what a
marvelous gale of assurance and joy they have parted from time, putting their
Seal to the same Doctrine of the Church, and Ministry thereof, which they so
virulently revile, blessing the Lord, that ever they were made acquainted
therewith; even then, when all that looked on might perceive their soul raised,
and under some present Transport, with these begun unexpressible Tastes of
Heaven, and that some sight thereof was there broken up unto them which no
Words could express.

10. I must attest their Conscience, if they be not constrained to justify
such as are most serious in adherence to the Truth, even over the belly of the
greatest prejudice; that they are such as are real, and serious in what they
profess, and may be known to make no naked and empty show thereof, but are
willing to be tried in what is their Testimony, and render a reason of that
hope within them, with the greatest seriousness, by bringing it to the Trial of
the Scriptures of Truth.

I shall but further appeal to their own Conscience and Light within, if they
do not see this way of Holiness, and serving the Lord according to that Rule of
the Scripture, which they so expressly disown, to be that good and old way, in
which the footsteps of the Saints may be found since the beginning; and how it
is no new Light broken up in the World, but a continued succession has been
still of those who from one time to another delivered over the same Truth to
succeeding ages: yea, can they possibly deny that as at the first up-breaking
of the Christian Faith, so in these late times the Lord has put to his Seal by
extraordinary Signs and Confirmations, with such an immediate appearance of
himself, to the same Truth now owned, and professed by the reformed Churches,
as the greatest Atheists will stand in a we to question?

I must shut up this with one Word more of appeal to the World, and most
ordinary observers in this time, If without shutting their eyes, they can
consider this way of the Quakers, and not see the imposture thereof also. 1.
How their work is, as the Serpent deceived Eva, to engage more by enticing
words, and laying baits before the Affections, than to clear and convince the
Judgment; so as it is not stange, though such are induced to change their
Religion as had never yet in earnest embraced any. 2. Can they see here any
thing else but the grossest Atheism under a new dress, when such do expressly
deny (whatever they pretend) the only true God revealed in Jesus Christ, except
as an abstract Notion and Principle within every one? 3. And may not the most
ordinary observers of the time be struck with the conviction of a more
excellent spirit in such, as seriously own and embrace the Truth, with that
savor their way has of humility, self-denial, without daring to revile; and
what a more convincing resemblance this has to that perfect Rule of the
Scripture than that imbittered, raging spirit, which in such horrid, scurrilous
expressions fears not to vent it self among this Party? 4. Do not all see this
also, their taking advantage to wrest the Scripture, so far as they can see the
least shadow there to bring it to their Interest, whilst yet they fear not to
throw off the whole, and deny subjection thereto in its being the alone Rule of
a Christians Faith and Practice; as though these they converse with were in no
case to discern so gross and visible an Imposture?

A Postscript.
READER, This sad subject, with the threatened effects of such a contagion in
any of the Churches of Christ, may have a serious voice to us this day, if we
could hear, or be awaked to read, from the sin and distemper of others, and our
own duty: concerning which I shall in a few lines further add some things,
which thus seem to be convincingly pointed at.

First, To be more deeply affected with such a plague on the spirits of men, as
we would be with the sword, or pestilence breaking forth in the Land; when
withal it must be considered. 1. That it is no consequent of ordinary sins, but
may be seen to follow some remarkable hight of resisting the Holy Ghost, and
rejecting of the Word of Truth, in more bright discoveries thereof, than most
parts of the Christian World at this day have had. 2. That this Meteor of
Quakerism does so obviously threaten, and has its proper aspect on the
Churches of Britain and Ireland, beyond any else of the Reformed Churches. 3.
That in all times the abounding of spiritual plagues, in any place where the
Truth did shine, are still found to go before the saddest of temporal
Judgments; and can there now be found such threatening symptoms in any
Church History, or Records of ancient time, to have gone before the most
desolating stroke, which does not in some unusual manner meet in our case this
day? yea such prodigies both of Error and Profaneness, and the highest daring
of the glorious God to his face, as cannot be instanced by any parallel since
the first dawnings of Christianity. 4. And should not this also make it the
more affrighting to us, that it speaks with so audible a voice, where some
great pretenses to Religion may yet end, and what cause to fear, lest many
professors in this time be under an irrecoverable woe in the matters of
Eternity, when profession is so much turned into the form of godliness without
the power thereof; which should be nothing else, when it is native, but as the
shadow appearing, that must needs be, because it cannot cease to follow the
body.

Secondly, As we must not despise or look lightly on such an amazing sight as
that Party now is, so it should concern us to guard also against any stumbling
at serious godliness on this account, but how to improve the same, for being
more fixed and confirmed in the good ways of the Lord; when it is so evident,
1. How one and the same spirit, and with one concurrence to the same work,
moves in this Party, with the most flagitious and open persecutors; and though
under some different form* yet they do all vigorously unite in that common
Interest, to counteract Truth and Holiness, to decry the Scripture, cast
reproach on the great Ordinances thereof; and how to make that Ministry given
by Jesus Christ to his Church, contemptible and vile; which, as it may be seen,
is the very same work, the most profligate Atheists are at, and so must have
from one airth their Incitements thereto. 2. Whatever be of the falling in of
some to that way, who once seemed to love the Truth and embrace it; yet is it
not evident, as to most of this Party, how remarkable the earth has been made
to help the Woman, by drinking in such a flood, as the Devil had cast forth to
ruin the Church, whilst so many have thus parted with the Truth, of whom no
known or convincing evidence could be given, that ever they had received it,
but a most discernible tendency in their way to such an infection, had broke
forth before the spots of it from that small regard they were known to have to
the solid saving, and substantial Truths of the Word.

3. This sad subject, with such shaking winds as now blow almost from every
airth on the Church; should it not press us to some further length, than most
seem to satisfy themselves with, in a sure and solid founding on the
Scripture; when it is so clear, that none can ossuredly know the Scriptures
being the Word of God, but may have a sufficient antidote against this deadly
poison; and by these great Demonstrative evidences thereof, must thus know, 1.
That it is undoubtedly a full and perfect Rule, such as the whole race of the
Saints to this day could not have wished it another thing than it is, for their
Counsel and Conduct within time; and takes off all possible ground, for the
adding either Traditions, or any Revelation thereto: yea, that it is such a
Rule as manifests it self with that sufficiency of Light to all, as none can
reject this one evidence but these whose eyes the God of this World has
blinded; since there is no want of Light in the Truth it self, but from men's
blindness, and a defect in the ^isive faculty. 2. It is thus they assuredly
know, how it is no dead Letter by that Divine Power and Efficacy thereof, and
to be no Historical Rule, which is sharper then any two-edged sword, to a
dividing asunder the soul and spirit with the joints and marrow, Heb. 4. 12.
that gives Law to the Conscience, makes it tremble, and searches in to the most
secret recesses of the hearts of men. 3. Thus also we know the Holy Ghosts
speaking in and by the Scripture, to be no private voice, and such an
Impression as comes in a divided way, or by bearing witness to the Truth and
Authority of the Scripture in any other way than by the Scripture, and an
imparting thereto its Power, Efficacy, and Majesty, and enabling us to know and
discern the same. 4. That such are these great supernatural Truths revealed
there, as could only have been revealed from Heaven; and never possibly could
have been once thought of, or conceived in the mind of Man by any reasonings,
or natural helps, without Divine Revelation; so as it is no pretended Light
within, can let us know what are the things of God, further than it is derived
from the Scripture. 5. And is it not thus known also what an undoubted
certainty is in the verification of these supernatural Truths, in the
experience of the Saints, as they can know they live or breath* which is not
witnessed to some individual persons only, as if from any advantage of Nature
and Edification they might have it; but in every time, in all the Churches of
Christ, yea by the whole generation of the Saints, has still with the greatest
oneness of consent been undeniably attested: when it is so clear also, How much
a great part of professedChristians is wholly stranger thereto, and how it is
no less above men's reach by Nature, to know or discern what thus belongs to the
state of the Saints than for a Beast to know what concerns the state of Man:
and what advantage should it then be, as this Party pleads for all persons to
follow a Light within themselves?

Fourthly, Though we must own no such austere mode: or appearance of
Mortification, as this Party of the Quakers seek to amuse the World with, being
visibly stretched beyond the Rule of the Word, yea so false and ridiculous a
show of strictness therein, as is a reproach to serious Religion: yet is it a
clear and indispensable Duty to guard against conformity to the World, in these
sad extravagant fashions of the time; so as Christians may let their Moderation
be known to all, and their faith of the Lords being at hand, may commend the
Truth by that true adorning, which is in the hidden man of the heart and a meek
and quiet spirit, not by plaiting of the hair, or putting on of apparel. 1 Pet.
3, 4. Which often as a public sign stand at the door, to let others know what
pride, lightness, and vanity dwell there; as though they had not an eternal
salvation to work out with fear and trembling, or did not believe the third of
Isaiah, from the 16. verse. to the close, to be the Scripture of God, and to
have the same Authority, the same theratning Aspect in this generation, whic in
had then on Israel: yea is this a being accountable in the Improvement of what
some have beyond others of the World as a Trust put under their hand, now when
it is such an hour of great Tribulation on the Churches? I confess this ground
I have last mentioned, is such as may cause many in this age fear they be under
a sad mistake in their Claim and Title to Heaven; and has often put me to wonder
what kind of peace many have on this account, who seem to outrun others in a
profession of the Truth: Since, if the Scripture be undoubtedly sure, and no
falling to the ground of the least Tittle thereof, should not these clear
discoveries, which are there, he as that Handwriting on the Wall, to make
their knees smite one against another. 1. That riches, and what any has
received beyond others of the World, is not theirs, but is a Talent in Trust,
to Trade with for the Masters use; for which each must be accountable according
to their measure, Mat. 25. 15. Luke 19. 15. What a sound will that once be,
which is hastening on all. Come give an account of your Stewardship? 2. That it
is clear on what Negatives this dreadful sentence, Matt. 25. 41. Depart from me
ye cursed, etc. is there stated; and what is intended by that parable, Luke 16.
19. of the rich man, of whom no such account is given us, as a glutton, or
notoriously wicked; but that in his lifetime be had his good things, though
with a small regard to such a case as Lazarus's. 3. And is it not thus clear,
why then there is such a hardly being saved for the Rich, as is expressly by our
great Master told, Matt. 19. 24. Luke 18. 26. It being so rare an instance for
such to be kept humble, or truly faithful in that trust, yea kept off some
snare thereby, that plungeth men into eternal perditions? Oh how many have
riches weighing them down to the pit! and what a dreadful noise is now there:
We have lost a heaven and eternity of joy, for things of the earth, which were
but for a moment, and are now gone! But it seems most in this day shut their
eyes, and cannot see what Light shines so clearly in the Scripture about it.
Else I am sure, it were not conceivable how they could own any true claim to
that blessed Inheritance above, in such a way as they embrace and improve their
Interests here in the earth; whilst so much more ground may he to fear, their
account for the fruit and product of this Talent in any suitable proportion to
the measure received, shall be found no other at their appearance before Jesus
Christ the great Judge, than a hiding it under the earth, or putting it in a
napkin.

Fifthly, Let it discourage or weaken the spirit of none who now follow the
Lord, that it is such a thick darkness on the Church; and that when personal
sufferings are so sore on the one hand, there should be on the other such
assaults to darken and subvert the Truth: Since there is much more to
countervail all, if we seriously consider, 1. That it is sure, if there be a
safe founding on that foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, then may such as
have embraced the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and received it in love,
have a sweet and secure calmness amidst the raging fumes of this time, as
knowing assuredly, they build on the same Foundation, and no other, and are in
that good and old way, in which the Saints in all ages have revealed the
Spirit, and been sealed to the day of Redemption. 2. Is it not clear also, if
there wanted not an observing spirit, and our eyes were not so much withheld
from seeing the Glory of these times, there wants not such great convincing
discoveries of a Godhead, and stately acts of Providence, as might silence our
complaints with wonder and amazement; to see that marvelous way the Holy God
takes in building his House, (...) unfolding his design, and bringing forth his
Word, in most surprising appearances both of Judgment and Mercy; and whilst we
wait, and wonder he comes not one way, when we are ready to stint our thoughts,
he comes very remarkably another way, to let all see his faithfulness fails
not, if man had but eyes to perceive the same. 3. Should not the Tribulation of
these days be a confirming Seal to the Truth and Doctrine of this Gospel, more
than a stumbling block to discourage or shake the spirits of any; since it is
sure, salvation by Jesus Christ is not more plainly discovered, than the Worlds
hatred and opposition to his way yea to what Hight it should come, and in what
different ways and manner the Truth and its followers should suffer. 4.
Whatever sore wrestlings now are, when the Waters seem more to rise and swell,
than to have any discernible abatement; yet it is well, we may know by the
clearest Scripture Light, that the strongest difficulties when overcome, yield
the greatest victory, and shall be not only matter of joy here, but to all
eternity, they having with patience and hope endured, and got well through such
a throng of Temptations, and assaults in adhering to the Truth. O that Glory
which is coming, where each of the Saints shall then get an account of the way
of the Lord, and whole series of Providence toward them in their journey, so
as to see no way could have been so unspeakably fit, and safe for them, and
thus become matter of praise joy, and admiring for ever, evermore!

FINIS.

