A DISCOURSE OF Earthquakes; AS THEY ARE Supernatural and Premonitory Signs to
a Nation; with a respect to what has occurred in this Year 1692. And some
special Reflections thereon.

AS ALSO On that Security and Assurance of Mind, which is attainable in the
Light and Power of Religion, under the greatest Surprizals, and Terrors of
Sense.

WITH SOME Enquiry upon the Grounds both of our Fears and Hopes, as to the
public State of the Church of Christ in this day.

By the Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhust at the Three Bibles and Crown in
Cheapside, and Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1693.

THE PREFACE.
IT is sure that the great Intent of Religion, is to bring Men unto a near
Communion and Intimacy with God, whilst they are here on the Earth, both by his
Word and Providence; and where this End is not designed, it is a very low
Interest that can be made by the Profession thereof: For it may be evident, how
the Intellectual Part of Man, when it is in a serious and true Exercise, must
tend either to their greatest Torment, or to an unexpressible Joy, when they
cannot but see that their Good is not in their own Hand, but must every Moment
be dependent on an invisible Refuge and Support; since Men are no Statues, but
in the solid use of Reason, must have deep Impressions, both as to fears and
hopes of future Events, and how sad and surprising Changes may be near, in the
Public State of Nations and Cities, as well as of Persons, when all Humane
Refuges and Assistances will fail; yea, when then the great Lawgiver's Right
and Authority to a Passive Obedience, will be found indisputable in the way of
Judgment, over such, who would not acknowledge the same by Active Obedience,
under a Treaty of Grace. But yet, such is the tender Regard of the Majesty of
God to Humane Race, and to the Work of his own Hand, that in the most severe,
judicial Procedure with a People and Nation, he does not surprise without
previous Warnings before the Decree go forth, and has a time of Patience
herein, if so be, the Voice of threatened Judgment might be regarded; and
whereby such Strokes, as have at last made desolate, might have been prevented:
Tho I find not either in Divine or Humane Record, that any Kingdom or People,
did truly meet God in the way of his Wrath, to put a Stop thereto, upon
extraordinary premonitory Signs, except that one Instance of Nineve. I know it
is no easy thing to understand Warnings from Heaven aright, and to have a
clear Interpretation of such Providence, or to discern the Approaches of
Divine Vengeance, when such tender Intervals of Forbearance, as are usual
betwixt one Step and another thereof, takes off all Fear of a greater Woe that
may be to come. There are Two things which may occasion some deep and serious
Thought about the same, with respect to this Juncture of Time we are now in:
The First is, as to that Difference which is betwixt extraordinary Warnings in
the way of a Treaty, and such astonishing Providence, as are of a predicting
Nature, as presaging Signs, and as a Signal of Judgment in its near Approach to
particular Places, which speaks the Certainty of what is signified thereby:
This is a Subject that may surely cause matter of great Reflection upon what
has been both of late, and for some considerable time past, made visible by
strange and unusual Discoveries of God this way, both from the Heavens, and the
Earth beneath: Nor can it be in the Dark, how such are become then portentous
Signs and Prognostications of future Events; when they cease to affect and
warn, or to work in a monitory way upon Men's Spirits; when the saddest of moral
Signs does not awaken, nor tend to reclaim; when the Dread and Reverence of God
does not accompany the most extraordinary Occurences of Providence, but Men
thus become rather more hardened; yea, when such unusual Signs meet in an
extraordinary Season of Sin, and point as with the Finger thereat; which is a
Conjunction of another kind, that has a more dismal Aspect, than all that was
ever pretended, or feared from the Planets: But oh! who shall live when God
does this, and does cease to warn any more, after renewed and unusual Methods
he has taken with this Generation for this end? But there is a Second thing to
be matter also of serious Thoughts herewith, for what ends such extraordinary
Signs may be directed, since they never be in vain, when now there seems no
promising Efficacy or Influence therewith, on the Spirits of most, and are so
easily past, as if they had no Commission from Heaven to discharge: But sure
then is it that the Majesty of God will make known, he has not forsaken the
Earth; so that when his Word has no Regard or Intercourse with Men's Souls, he
will not yet leave them without some sensible Demonstration of himself, and of
a Divine and Invisible Power above them; as this way he will also awake and put
his People more on their Watch, and to be on a preparatory Work, whatever Storm
may be to blow.

This Scripture on which the following Discourse is founded, does give a most
singular Account, how far a Christian may be raised above his ordinary reach,
by a special Faith, in the Power and Evidence thereof, when it can have no
possible Rise from any natural Cause; yea, as there is a Supposal here made of
such a prodigious Concussion of the Earth, as if the Frame of Nature should be
dissolved by some Earthquake, and is there literally to be understood; it did
give a special Call to speak thereon in the first part of this Discourse, when
such a concurrent Call was also in the way of Providence thereto, and to offer
some special Reflections on what has in this last Year 1692 occurred. I know
the Publishing thereof, might seem now too late, tho I hope it may be the more
seasonable to revive the Sense and Remembrance thereof, after some others have,
(I doubt not) with much Advantage discoursed on the same Providence, tho I knew
not thereof, when this was writ.

And I had not the least Thought to have touched any thing of that Additional
Discourse which is in the Close, if (in the Blessed Disposal of the Lord) there
had not then been some remarkable concurring Providence, which thus put me to
some deep and serious Thoughts on such a Subject, and to have my Soul more
nearly joined in therewith, for keeping Sight of the way of the Lord, in such
Steps thereof, as needed his special Conduct and Teaching, in a more than
ordinary way.

A DISCOURSE OF Earthquakes.
Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3.God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be removed: And though
the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Though the Waters thereof
roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof.
IT is one of the most adorable Mysteries of Truth, that for an Eternity the
glorious God would hide himself within himself, in that unconceivable
Fellowship, and Enjoyment of the Blessed Trinity when there was no created
Existence. But as such a Reflection must be bounded with a Becoming Silent and
Humble Admiration, as being too wonderful for us to think on; so is it Matter
for the highest Joy and Exultation of Spirit, that we should have this day such
a Being as admits us to see and enquire upon the Glory of that Work, which he
has brought forth within time, so infinitely becoming the Perfections of the
Deity; and to have so clear a Discovery of the same, not only in the whole
Dispensation of Nature and Providence, but as it is more nearly relative to us
in the Dispensation of Grace, and in the Speciality of that Work that he has
about each of his People in this Militant State; yea, thus to see on what
Security we are fixed against the greatest Hazards, and fear of future Events:
It was on this account that the Psalmist here, bears so great and wonderful a
Testimony for God, and to the sureness of their State, who have him to be their
alone Refuge, and trust in the most extreme Case.

This is indeed a rare passage of Scripture, and does imply, 1. A Supposal of
that which is one of the most tremendous Providence that can occur, a
Concussion of the Earth, whereby the whole frame of Nature would seem not only
to be shaken, and cast into a trembling posture, but turned out of its place:
And there is nor eason to account a Metaphor that the Psalmist makes use of,
but to be taken in the literal Sense, as that which is supposable may occur to
the most excellent on the Earth. But 2. What is more wonderful here, is a
Supposal made of such a Stupendous Earthquake by this Man of God, as though it
were present and visible to his Sense, without any Trepidation or Earthquake on
his Soul, to show what a pitch sometimes the Faith of Assurance may be at, and
what Relief thus is attainable amidst the greatest Terrors of Sense, in the
Light and Power of Religion, as is above the Comprehension of Nature. He was
one who had made a great Trial of God, and of Acquaintance with him by inward
Converse, and does thus speak in a Dialect that is not intelligible to such who
may pretend the highest Flight by Reason in the Searches of Nature.

I shall offer some Propositions for a more clear Understanding and Improvement
of this Scripture; the first whereof is this, That the most select and eminent
of the Saints may meet with such a Trial to their Faith of the same nature as
is here mentioned, of some extraordinary Concussion of the Earth, as would seem
to overturn the settled Course and Constitutions of Nature: It is true, such a
strange Providence is not still alike in the same manner or measure, but
sometimes is with the most tender Reguard, as a premonitory Warning and Sign
only, when at other times it is with the greatest Terror of an immediate
desolating Judgment.

That a Supposal of this kind may be suitable to the most endeared Favorites
of Heaven, needs be no strange or difficult thing, when it is considered how
it is by no external Providence the Lord has designed the more special
Discoveries of his Love to his People, and that no Trial can be so astonishing
or at such a pitch, as to exceed the measure and allowance of their Grace; but
that the Expense this way be ever proportioned to their Receipts, and Measure
of Faith; yea, how it is to the most dismal Trials and Extremity the Lord has
reserved the greatest Experiments of his distinguishing respects to Christians,
and where his leading into the one by an immediate Conduct, has been made so
observable to make way for the other, and some more extraordinary appearance of
himself in such a case.

It is not needful to insist on any Concurrence of natural and occult Causes,
that may be in so stupendous a Providence, when such Difficulty and
Contradiction is to be seen amongst the late Writers, and such as have made the
greatest search upon this Head; and is so conjectural and problematick a thing,
to know what Influence herein the Sun may have, or Subterraneous Fires, as
Descartes speaks; or mineral Vapors and Irruptions of Winds, penned up in the
Caverns and Bowels of the Earth; so dark is the Judgment that is on such an
amazing Phenomenon, though it fall in within the Sphere of Nature, when it is
so visibly preternatural, besides the Course thereof. But it is a remarkable
Reflection which Aristotle makes, speaking upon this very Subject, that they
must be brutish and stupid who are not deeply affected with so amazing a thing
as an Earthquake, not only upon the Hazard, but as to the Original and Cause
thereof; yea, whatever subserviency the Majesty of God may make of inferior
Causes in such Providence, when he does in so stupendous a way appear; yet it
calls us to a deep and tremendous Sense hereof, as his alone Work.

But since this is a Subject of such Weight, and what may justly cause great
Thoughts of Heart in the present day, I shall speak a little to some special
Enquiries hereon. The First is this, on what clear and infallible Grounds such
an astonishing Concussion of the Earth by an Earthquake, should be reckoned as
a divine Sign, and to have a supernatural Causality in directing the same to a
Nation, and some particular place more than to others; for giving Light
thereto. 1. It cannot possibly be denied that such as are Sacred Signs, and
expressly foretold in the Scripture to take place, must have a divine and
supernatural Causality for accomplishing the same, that go above all inferior
or secondaryCauses, and can have no dependence thereon. 2. It Is sure also, how
this stupendous Providence is in a peculiar way reserved by the Lord to be a
Demonstration of himself to the World, in the greatness of his Power and more
immediate Presence, by making that which he has settled and made firm in it
self, not only to shake, but cleave asunder; to show his absolute Dominion over
the most settled Constitutions of Nature. Thus did he in such a way cause the
Earth to rent in two, and swallow Dathan and Abiram, to set up such a
stupendous Sign of Judgment hereby, where Nature could have no Concurrence;
yea, in this way, though in a promissory Sense did the Lord give so
extraordinary a Demonstration of himself and of his immediate Presence upon
that marvelous Effusion of the Spirit, Act. 4. 31. when he caused the House and
Earth to shake underneath; both to seize their Spirits with a more deep Fear
and Reverence, and as a Sign that he would make the Nations to shake and
tremble before his divine Power by the Gospel. Yea, in the same manner did he
bear Testimony to the Divinity of Christ in his Sufferings, by such a
tremendous Earthquake, as an immediate and supernatural Sign; in which sense
through the Scripture as it is ever given, as an extraordinary appearance of
God for some special end, so it is unquestionable, the greatest Commenter we
have on the Scripture, is that which is writ by the Finger of God himself in
his Work. 3. It is with an undeniable Evidence, we see a supernatural Influence
and Causality in such a Providence, has in all Ages been matter of solemn
Observation upon these remarkable Events have followed such a Sign; so as in
the most judicious Records of History, we do rarely find the one mentioned
without respect to the other: Thus Josephus does most punctually relate these
Earthquakes, that did so nearly preside the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the
Expiration of the judaical State, as they were predicted by our Lord himself,
Matthew. 24. 7. 4. Yea, it is beyond question how sometimes such Earthquakes fall
out with these tremendous Circumstances, and clear Evidence of an immediate
divine Appearance; as serves a Constraint herewith, on a natural Conscience, to
see and acknowledge a supernatural Cause, and that they have some extraordinary
Commission; so as it is not possible then for the worst of Men, to keep off the
Terror and Impression of an invisible God. And we see little what Interest the
Ministry of the Angels has herein, who have surely a more peculiar Delegation
and Service in such extraordinary Acts of Providence. 5. As it is needful to
understand the Rule of Providence, e're we can discern aright the Seals
appended thereto, so is it evident that a great and stupendous Earthquake is
foretold to be one of the strange Events of the last Trumpet; which must
assuredly take place in these last times, and have a literal Accomplishment:
And though its Appearance then will be something we may judge of an
extraordinary kind, with some astonishing Marks of Judgment; yet is the intent
of that Prediction clear herein, that when there is any appearance of God this
way, it calls the World to a very solemn and awful regard of the same, and for
some Correspondent acts of Reverence and Homage, as is suitable to a Providence
whereon he does put so signal an Impress of his Terror and Greatness. But it
were well if Men's Spirits were more prepared and inclinable, not only to
entertain any such Intimation with Reverence and Fear of the Divine Majesty,
but to improve the same for a greater strengthening of their own Faith of his
glorious Being, and of the Divinity of his Word, when it is also directed for
such an end.

A Second Enquiry upon this Subject and of great Use, is what may be more
specially judged as the Grounds of any such extraordinary Warnings and Signs to
a Nation, where God has clearly revealed his Counsels and Judgments by his
Word, and of his making use thereof. Though here the Sovereignty of his Will
should both silence and subject our Spirits in such a case, yet there can be no
Darkness therein, to any of a serious and judicious Spirit, when they see, 1.
Such a suitable Congruity therewith, to that Tenderness which the Son of God
has to Mankind, and to Kingdoms and Nations in his Government of the World,
that he will not only speak by his Word, but go to the utmost, by more
extraordinary Warnings of some great and unusual Stroke of Judgment e're it
come, so as nothing may be wanting either to reclaim, or render such a People
unexcusable: And it has a most sad and fatal Aspect, if this has no suitable
Impression in the present day. 2. This can be no dark or strange thing, when
the times we are in, are such, that the Honor and Glory of the Godhead is
interested to appear in some unusual manner before Men, when no Application of
Light to the Judgment, either from his Words or Works, in an ordinary way does
prevail, when his Name is in so visible a way blasphemed, and all wherein he
has placed his Name of so low a regard with this Generation. 3. Yea, may not
yet some more strange and immediate Appearance to this Generation be expected,
when such a visible Tendency now is to sacrifice to natural Causes, whatever
has the greatest Evidence to bring near an affecting Sense of the Deity unto
Men's Conscience; and to account it a small thing to arraign and subject the
greatest of his Works to the Comprehension of their dark and limited Reason;
and that their Wisdom has such a Dominion and Influence on future Events, as
they can give Law to Providence, and lay Wagers on what the next day is to
bring forth: Oh! may not some unusual Application be yet more than expected, to
let Men know they are under the Dominion of that God, who can in a Moment,
break the most promising Means and Measures taken by Human Counsel, by one
touch of his Hand; and what has been thought most infallible in the course of
Humane Affairs. 4. And may it not be feared, that when these are so rare, who
tremble at the Word and Threatenings of an invisible God, they should meet with
such awakening Signs, as cause the Earth to tremble beneath? which in the very
Nature thereof, is suited to beget an awful and trembling posture of Spirit,
and let us see how every Moment it is dependant on Heaven, and in the Reverence
thereof, that the Earth does not rent and swallow Men up. But it is clear also
that extraordinary Appearances of God, not only in Judgment, but in the way of
Grace, have been most discernable, when things have come to an Extremity in the
Trials of Christians, and when their Faith and Patience have been ready to be
overset by Disappointments, and contrary Appearances, answerable to that of
Isa. Now will I arise, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self, says
the Lord.

A Third Enquiry, That I humbly judge is of Concern here, is what suitable and
safe Application may be made of such extraordinary Providence, to the present
Day and Place we are in; since it is requisite that any Impression of Fear on
such an account, be fixed on solid and rational Grounds, and we be not
affrighted with Shadows, but according to that Evidence they bear of being
supernatural Signs and Forewarnings, to have an answerable Sense thereof; on
which account, as to a clear and applicatory Judgment in such a case, I shall
yet further offer a few things to be considered for this end. 1. That when
something astonishing and unusal, above any Influence of natural Causes, is
given to be a premonitory Sign to a Nation or People, and has an extraordinary
Call with it, it does surely speak there is some more than ordinary Piece of
the Work of God than in bringing forth there, and on a near Approach; yea, that
it is on some great and important Ground, when the Lord does this way appear.
2. It is of undoubted Evidence which we must peremptorily hold by, that where
the Majesty of God takes an unusual way to awake and warn a People, they must
either answer the same, or else they are infallible Prognostics of Wrath and
Judgment, and some dismal Night coming on: Nor can any Sign be more mortal than
this, that Men will not consider the Work of God, or regard the Operation of
his Hand, when it has unavoiadble Evidence to be his alone Work. 3. There may
be a clear and infallible Application of what is more extraordinary in any
Appearance of God to a Nation, when such Forewarnings have most immediately
gone before some astonishing Judgment, on a People who have not been under more
aggravating Circumstances of Guilt; yea, not comparable to the height that is
this day in our case: Since such Precedents of the Severity of Judgments in one
place, are undoubtedly given to be a premonitory Sign to another. 4. Yea, when
there is some more singular Conjunction, and reiterating in a successive way of
such awakening Signs, it then has not only a distinct Sound, but a loud Cry of
some near and immediate Approach of Judgment, and that it may come upon the
last Call. I know it is one of the greatest things of practical Religion, that
needs a near intercourse with God, to have any such Application brought near to
Men's Souls, both in order to fear, and to account also the more immediate
Appearances of his Power and Workings, as a matter of their greatest Joy, that
the sense of a Deity might thus more strongly work on such a Generation: But
oh! how sad a Token is it, when such are not only rejected, but have a
sinistrous and false Application made of the same; and to see the Earth
trembling at the near Approaches of divine Wrath, when such as dwell thereon,
have no fear of this kind, as Habac. 3. 10. The Mountains saw thee and they
trembled, the overflowings of the Water passed by, the Deep uttered its Voice;
but says the Prophet there, Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers? Was his
Anger against those Elements, etc. No, it was against Humane Race, and given to
be a Sign thereto.

But there is a Fourth Enquiry, which comes more close and near to us on this
Subject, to know what Evidence such late extraordinary Providence do bear, as
was at Jamaica, June 7. and here, September 8. to be the alone Work of God in
such an immediate and unusual manner, and to go forth on a special Commission
to England, and to this great and renowned City of London; yea, the whole
Island: For Answer thereto, I must crave leave with humble Sobriety, to offer
some Reflections on both, according to the express Signature and Impress, they
bear not only of an extraordinary Appearance of God herein, but of his Counsel
and Intent in this day.

1. As to that tremendous stroke on Jamaica, we cannot but see 1. Its being
directed to a place where the whole Country was purely English in its Interest
and Inhabitants, and thus a part of the same Nation, though at a distance; so
that it can be no more evident that such a strange Stroke was real and no
imaginary thing, than that it has a proper Aspect in a monitory way on this
Island, and set up as a public Beacon and Monument of Judgment in this
respect, to show how terrible a thing it is to fall immediately into the Hands
of the Living God, when a People may seem most secure from all humane Power,
yea, that there can be Safety on the Earth, where their Adversary is above
them, and is God. 2. We see its being directed also with a special Commission
to that one place, which alone was the most flourishing, populous Part of the
whole Country; and thus made the Scaffold on which so dreadful an Execution of
Judgment was acted, as did in Two Moments, swallow up near 2000 of its
Inhabitants, whilst no part else of the Island had any such dreadful Effects;
and was this a contingent and casual thing only, if Men do but exercise Reason
herein. 3. This as it is publicly known, was after some remarkable
Forewarnings, given by a trepidation of the Earth there, a short time before
though in that manner, and with such tenderness then, as might show a holding
of the hand of Judgment, even when it was lifted up. 4. It Is yet further
remarkable as I find it related from some who dwelt in that place, that no
Instance of traditional Conveyance, was before ever known there, not only since
the first english Plantation, but under the Spanish Power; so as in that sense
as Moses spoke, Numb. 16. 13. The Lord did thus work a new thing in such a
place of the Earth, as it is thus circumstantiate. 5. But that which may most
direct our Eyes to see an immediate Appearance of God herein, and a Causality
above Nature, was, as is by all acknowledged, when such a prodigious height of
Impiety and Wickedness seemed to have filled up its full Measure, and no
ordinary means could reclaim; so as the Holy God upon the Honor of his Justice
and Government, was thus interested to put so astonishing a Mark of his
Severity and Wrath on the same, and make known what one Day and Hour, may at
last bring forth on a City and Country after a long Forbearance, when it is
least expected or feared.

But it is on this last Sign and extraordinary Concussion by an Earthquake,
that was in the 8th. of September, I must offer a few Reflections further, that
has come nearer to our Sense, with so unusual an Aspect. 1. That it was given
in so near a Conjunction with the former, and with such Evidence as the Lord
speaks to Moses, Exodus 4. 8. If they will not hearken to the Voice of the first
Sign, they may yet hearken to the Voice of the second; yea, when the first had
the less Influence, that it was so remote in its Distance, this comes and
speaks in that manner as Jeremiah, I am a God near at hand, and not a far off
only. 2. If we look on the manner of it, it is so astonishing, as is
unaccountable to all Humane Reason, that so discernable a trepidation should be
in one Room in the same House, and not in another, as was certainly known; yea,
in so distinguishing a respect, that it was most perceptible and terrifying to
one in the same Room and not to another; though both in the sober Exercises of
Reason. 3. And whence should such a Correspondence in this great Sign have a
Rise, that almost in the same Hour it made the Earth to tremble at London, and
in the Seacoasts there, in so astonishing a manner, and then also give the
same Signal and Warning through the whole Low Countries, with other adjacent
parts of Germany, when so great an Extent of Sea lies betwixt the same; since
it is not possible that in the ordinary course of Nature, the Influence of any
subterraneous Fires or Vapors, should have so immediate a Conjunction with
Places so vastly remote, and separate from other by so great an Extent of the
Sea. I find some famous Searchers into natural Causes, writ that an Earthquake
is simply impossible in Nature, to be of any universal Extent. 4. And though we
read in the English Histories some strange extraordinary Instances that did
occur of such a kind in Queen Elizabeth's Reign at London in the Year 1580, at
Marcly Hill in Herefordshire in the Year 1571, where it removed it self from
the place where it stood, and traveled to another place; as also a Prodigy of
the same kind, which was in Dorsetshire 1582, yet was none of these, in the
least, of such a Nature as this, or in any respect parallel thereto; but were
restricted only to particular Bounds, though they were then matter of great
Observation in their day: But I humbly judge if the most exact Search were made
into History both Modern and Ancient, under such Circumstances, no Instance so
strange and unaccountable, as to any natural Causes herein will be found. 5.
And what a State should we have been in, if it had continued but Three Minutes
more? Or was there any Humane Counsel or Power, that could either prevent or
restrain the same in the least, of its going so far and no further, but we
might see at once, our Hazard and Deliverance set in our sight, from an
invisible Power.

But as all the Works of God, even such as fall under the Observation of each
day, should be matter of special regard; such wherein his Appearance is more
extraordinary, calls for some greater Advertence and enquiry about the same. I
must therefore offer a few Reflections further on this late astonishing
Providence. 1. That as it was now Ten Years ago since the Lord gave a Sign in
an unusual manner from the Heavens above, by that great and remarkable Comet in
the Year 80, so now after such an Interval of Patience to this Generation he
has given a Sign of another kind, which is from the Deep beneath, that comes
more near to us, answerable to that of Isa. 7. where we may see how it is most
eminently in these two ways the Lord does appear, when he is to give some great
and significative Sign to the World of unusual Events; and as nothing can bring
more Terror therewith, than an Appearance of such a kind, so needs it not be
strange that this day, when the Earth has so near a Resemblance to the
Infernal State, why this should be from beneath, and have so dreadful an
Aspect. 2. Though there might be cause why such a Concussion of the Earth
should cause just Fears and Tremblings of Heart, yet does it exceed all Humane
Comprehension such a Circumstance herewith, which was so universally noticed of
its affecting the Head with a sensible Giddiness, even before they did
apprehend, and understood any thing of an Earthquake; which was so obvious to
the most judicious Observers, that it seemed as if an Apoplectick Distemper had
seized upon them, without any known Cause for the same: This I have found so
general a Remark, as I could not pass it over, though without any Application
else, but that no natural Cause can be supposable herein. 3. And if we regard
the manner of this Sign, as it is directed to such a time we are in, and in so
strange an Extent thereof, may it not also as with clear and articulate Voice
be understood, that what is signified thereby will prove matter of Trembling
and Astonishment, and may cause a Trepidation in these western parts of Europe
answerable thereto, so as to shake the most settled Constitutions of Nations, if
so solemn a Call be not regarded. 4. And though it might seem a strange
Criticism, yet I hope not unsuitable to be noticed, that this last Warning was
given in the 2d. Week of September, as directed to revive the Sense, and
Remembrance of what had been so highly remarkable to this great City in the
first Week thereof, and with a new Call tho in a most tender premotory way, but
with that Evidence, as we are sure was immediately from Heaven; only let me add
herewith, that is sure Divine Threatenings, and the most tremendous Warnings to
Kingdoms and Nations, are in their primary Intention, designed to keep off Men
from the Judgments threatened, and not to be gazed at for a matter of Talk and
Report: But oh! if the furthest Measures of this kind can have no weight to
answer the Intent hereof: It is sure that God will be known to be God this day
unto Britain, and before this Generation, by such an Evidence and
Demonstration, as will at last work effectually.

But having now so far touched these two extraordinary Signs that have so
lately occurred, I must for the same end point at a Third, as so nearly
contemporating with the former, though it may be feared, is gone out of sight
and forgot, when the Bitterness of Death seems to be past, but did cause such
Fears in the present time, and Consternation of Mind: It is that unusual and
astonishing Rain, which in these parts, through most of the Summer continued,
when thus these sweet Influences from Heaven by moistning Showers, to restore
and ripen, were in that manner changed to be destructive, when we might see the
Heavens with fo extraordinary an Aspect, as it were mourning from above over
the Earth, if hereby Men would be awakened to the Fear and Dread of that God in
whose hand both our Breath and Bread is; yea, when it was come to that
Extremity in its continued Course, as threatened to make void the Harvest, and
when but one Week almost seemed to stand betwixt us and such an unavoidable
Stroke; when no Humane Counsel or Power, could save the Nation from perishing
in such a case: It was then the Sovereign God did stay his hand, and with an
eminent Testimony of his Tenderness, not only shut up the Clouds, but gave such
a Compensation by a most serene desirable Season, as might recover in a short
time, what the former Months had spoiled, and seemed in an ordinary way to Men's
Thoughts, irrecoverable.

But I shall shut up any further insisting on this Subject, with a short Touch
only at some Improvement hereof for these ends. First to a solid fixing of our
Judgment and Light about the same, there is nothing more amazing and dreadful
to the Spirit of many in this day, than any supernatural Appearance in the
Events of Providence, as renders the Sense and Impression of an invisible God,
and his Dominion over second causes, to be unavoidable, and on this Account, as
these seem to be in such a Fear upon the Truth and Existence of Devils, since
their Faith hereof, must needs bring them to the same with the Devils, to
believe and tremble: So is it in this case, Men are so much on the Rack how to
solve all by natural Demonstration, that may darken any immediate Appearance of
God; as Jannes and Jambres in Egypt, until at last they were constrained to see
and acknowledge it was a Divine Power alone they opposed themselves to; but
such as will peruse what the most judicious of modern Philosophers speak on
this Head, may see how dark and perplexed their Inquisition is hereon, and how
strait Bounds they are penned up in, whilst they jointly confess that an
Earthquake is by no natural motion of the Earth, but is impetuous and violent,
that moves contrary to the settled course of Nature, and fixedness of the Earth;
but that some extraordinary Stop and Obstruction is herein, and when they come
to fix on the particular Cause hereof, think it most probable to be either ab
aqua, a flammis subterraneis, vel ab halitu: But if they will rise higher upon
another Principle, to give a true Idea of Nature, they must then see also how
it is acted by God as his Instrument, to do whatever he will, and that the
Motions of all inferior Causes must be ultimately resolved, both on an
immediate Divine Concurrence to their working, and on his directing Counsel to
answer his Intent; since as the Eye of God is still on the whole Circle of the
Creation in its Motions, so is his Dominion over the deep and darkest Caverns
of the Earth, to move upon his Call; which can never be subjected to the Rule
of natural Causes. It is true, that in the ordinary course and procedure of
Providence, the only wise God has a special Respect to the order of inferior
Causes, and his own Ordination herein, and does thus exercise his Dominion over
the World, and the Motion of things there, according to their particular nature
wherein he has fixed them; but when sublunary things step out of their natural
Course, and do either move against or above their own Nature, it is surely then
upon a supreme Determination for a great end, and some notable Step of
Providence is to be understood herein; yea, it is most conspicuous in the way
of God, when great Events of what is foretold in the Scripture, are in bringing
forth as to any piece of his Work, wherein he designs some higher discovery of
himself to Men, that it is when Secondary Causes and the whole concourse of
Nature would seem most to control the same; and in this present case, if with
a serious and prepared Mind, Men do consider these two late Earthquakes under
their proper Circumstances, then it is not possible but they must see them to
be such Events, as cannot possibly be ascribed to another Cause, than an
immediate Divine Power exerted in the same.

There is a Second Improvement, which on this Head is now called for, to have
our eyes thus carried up toward God by serious Observation: I know this is not
easily attained, to be in a due capacity and posture to converse with him this
way, wherein lies one of the nearest Intercourses betwixt Heaven and our Soul
within time; but it is of great use to know aright where the intent of
judicious Observation on such an account should be most fixed, as 1. On the
immediateness of such Acts of Providence to be from God alone, as can be
ascribed to no created Power, which is a discovery that comes not with more
Terror to a profane World, whose Study is to live without God therein, than
with unspeakable Joy it meets these of a serious Spirit for a more full
establishment of Faith, and to see it with that Evidence, as makes it
unavoidable to terminate their eyes otherwise than on God alone herein, Deuteronomy.
32. See now, I even I am he, and there is no God, else; I kill and make alive,
I wound and I heal, etc. 2. It is then our Observation is suitably fixed, when
it respects the clear Impress of Divine Truth on any extraordinary Step of his
way, no less than of his Power, since as his Work is ever answerable to his
Being, and the Perfections of his Nature, so is the outgoings of his Truth, and
Faithfulness herein to be intensly observed; who does rule and govern the World
according to these established Laws and Constitutions of his revealed Truth. 3.
It is essentially requisite also to consider and see such Providence as are
more extraordinary, under these Circumstances, which most remarkably attend the
same. It being sure how great a weight one Circumstance may have to render a
Providence in some singular way, to be both instructing and comforting, which
otherwise would not work in that manner. Thus did the Ruler so exactly inquire
and observe at what Hour it was when his Son recovered, and found it answer to
that very time when Christ had given him the assurance thereof. It is herein
one of the great Duties of our day lies, and I am persuaded that great things
for Observation, do yet wait upon this time. Providence has been a long
Teacher to Britain, and it uses to be the last Teacher that is made use of,
and the last way that the Spirit of God does strive with a People or Nation,
before approaching Judgment: We have seen it go by on the right hand in most
singular dispensations of Grace and Mercy to these Nations; as also upon the
left hand in extraordinary Acts of Justice, yet have we little seen or
perceived to this day, the most special Intent of the Lord herein: But since I
have spoken more expressly thereto elsewhere, I forbear to touch it further;
only this Improvement further, might be suitable on such a Subject, to impress
Men's Spirits with the Fear and Dread of walking contrary to Providence,
especially in any more extraordinary Discoveries of God this way, since this is
the highest Contempt and Opposition upon the Earth, to his Providential
Government, and does in an unusual manner, hasten and prepare such for the last
Stroke: This seems to be one of the Signs of our time, that has a sad
Resemblance to these in the Primitive times, 2. Pet. 2. who turned divine
Patience to be a matter of Scoff, and said, Where is the Promise of his coming,
since we see things continue yet as they were, and have yet outlived many
threatening Tokens, and Presages of Judgment? But it is usually seen, that such
who have looked on premonitory Signs with the greatest Confidence, and have
counted any serious regard thereto, to be a superstitious Weakness, have been
beyond all others, seized with the greatest Terror and Amazement, upon a
surprising Stroke: A reverential Fear and Dread of Divine Warnings, and of the
evil day, is most highly becoming such who may have the greatest Security of
Mind, as to their own personal Lot therein; such as Habac. 3. 16. When I heard
this, my Belly trembled, my Lips quivered, etc. that I might rest in the day of
Trouble.

A Second Proposition that has the same clear Evidence with the former from
this Scripture is this, That such an Assurance of Faith is attainable here on
the Earth, as can bear out, and secure the Soul of a Christian in a present
Extremity, and amidst the greatest Terrors of Sense, when there is no possible
Support from Nature, or things seen in such a case. To this does the Psalmist
here bear a most clear Witness. I confess it is one of the most astonishing
Mysteries of our Religion, which is wholly unaccountable to the Spirit of this
World; and it has been matter of Wonder to me, in how ordinary a way such a
Subject is often spoken of, and what length is come in the Notion and Theory,
when so little of the experimental Light hereof, seems to be found on the Earth
in this day: But where it is known in Truth, it is surely one of the greatest
Demonstrations of God, and of his immediate Power and working on the Soul in
this Militant State, yea, such as may supply the room of any external Miracles
to these, who know the same; it is a thing of that Nature, as exceeds the
Sphere of all created Power to work, and goes far above the reach of Angels to
impart the same; but to him only it belongs who is both the Author and Finisher
of our Faith; yea, which according to the out-lettings of his Spirit, herein
makes so unspeakable a difference betwixt such and themselves to whom it is
thus known, how in one time then they are made to differ from another, and
where the Sorrows and Pains of a doubting Heart, about the Warrant of their
Hope is understood, it will be then known what unexpressible Joy the Truth of
such an Assurance as we find here in the Text does raise, and be as a
Resurrection from the Dead in that case. It Is true such a particular Confidence
and Trust, that has nothing from things seen, or on any natural account to
fix, cannot bear out in the way of Light only, even on the most clear Grounds
of a Divine Promise herein, but is immediately dependant on that measure of the
Spirit of Faith, which is then given to answer to the height and measure of
their present Trial; but yet it is sure and unquestionable, that such a Faith as
is not founded on Appearances, has a Ballast as will not be broken by contrary
Appearances; and since this may look as a very dark and amazing thing, what
relates to such singular workings of a Christians Faith in an Extremity, I
would speak a few things to be previously considered in what manner this acts
on the highest Principles of enlightened Reason, as well as by supernatural
Influence, and how nothing can be more rationally deduced than such a
Conclusion which David here makes from the foregoing Premises, since it is
undeniable,

1. That such a sweet and absolute Necessity there is for Men to betake
themselves to a Divine Power and Relief, only in a present exigence of Trial,
when it is sure that God has afforded nothing to Man without himself in the
whole frame of the Creation, to bear up that weight of Dependence and Trust; so
as we must herein either cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, in
the way of Reliance or Part with God: Nor can any time ever find that to be
Blessed, on which the God of Truth has by any irrevocable Sentence settled a
Curse. But this is one of the rare Characters of a Christian, when in such a
manner, both his Choice and Confidence does center in God alone, as he is
resolved to trust him only or none else; and to ly at Anchor on his revealed
Truth, or perish. The great Former of Heaven and Earth will not bear the empty
Name and Show of being his Peoples hope, when the Interest and Weight thereof,
is laid on things beside himself.

2. It is no less demonstrable and known on this Head, that there is no
possible rest or quiet to the Soul of Man amidst the Hazards and Terrors of
time, but in an entire Dependence and Trust on an invisible God and his being
their alone Refuge and Help, for the Profession of the only true God, and of
our Souls adventuring entirely on him, as the alone Object of our Trust, is one
and the same; and as there is a receding from the one, so is there
consequentially from the other also, in denying to him the Glory of his
Godhead. Nothing is indeed more usual than to see Men's Confidence still Ebb and
Flow, according to the visible posture of their Affairs, tho it does sadly
evidence such a Trust and Reliance that has its greatest Weight on something
else than God, however he bear the Name thereof. It is unquestionable that the
greatest Princes and Monarchs, need to have their Dependence no less settled on
God, even for outward Supplies, than the Poor; whose holding hereof, is no less
absolutely from him, than those who may be put to live on Humane Charity, and
are ever in his Reverence, who can make the Scarlet to embrace the Dunghill,
when it would seem not conceivable to Humane Reason: It is in this respect that
one of the highest Trials of Faith is, when external Advantages do most abound,
and in that Sense Riches prove so mortal to those who enjoy the same, and as
Christ himself testifies, is no less hard for such to be saved, than for a
Camel to go through a Needle's Eye: It Is so rare for Men to have the World in
their Hand and not upon their Heart also, as the ground of their Confidence and
Trust.

3. This should be also considered for giving Light to the work of Faith in any
extraordinary Trials, that it is sure the utmost Perfection of this excellent
Grace, not only in its Truth, but in the Degree and Measure thereof, is alone
in this Life attainable; so, that this is not possible to be at a higher Pitch
than in this Militant State, or to have another Season for paying in that
Tribute of Glory and Praise unto the God of Truth, and to his faithfulness,
which is so highly called for in the way of believing, but within time only;
but, in a more special way in the greatest exigence and strait which may be in
a Christians case, when their Hope seems most visibly stated against them. It
is in this Sense, the Apostle speaks of the filling up of the work of Faith in
a Christians day, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. as one of the highest Designs of Providence
in the Conflicts of their Warfare, though the same measure in this Work and
Trials hereof, be not allotted to some as to others; yea, it is in that respect
only James speaks, Chap. 1. 4. for the Patience of Faith to have its perfct
work, and to attain this in the utmost Degree, since it belongs only to this
Life.

4. But is it not a Compensation to the hardest Lessons of a Christians
Confidence and Trust, and to the most remarkable Hour of Extremity, that we
know God has reserved thereto, the most immediate and extraordinary
Discoveries of himself, and of his being God alone, above what is known in the
ordinary course of his Providence: Said I, not unto you, if you would believe
that ye should see the Glory of God, Joh. 11. which was a sight that our Lord
would not give until all Support in the way of Sense was taken off, and that it
was put beyond the possibility of Nature. And it is sure, that on such rare
Experiment and Trial of God in a Christians Life, and in a case where none but
God can act, is of such value, as to be a continued matter of Admiration; yea,
is an earnest of that kind, as may bear Evidence to to their Security by a peci
al Conduct of Providence in all aftertimes, when this is enjoyed not only as
it is demonstrative of the greatness of his Power, but on the account of his
Promise, and as a Seal thereto in the way of their Relyance on him.

5. It is surely here in the powerful workings of a Christians Faith, in an
extraordinary Hour of Trial, that one of the great Demonstrations of the Truth
and Excellency of our Religion, is exhibited before the World: And what a
temporal Interest does thus accompany the same, to support and quiet the Soul?
yea, to bear the full Expense of the saddest afflicting Times, which is not
known to the residue of Men besides. For it should be a sad part, if any case
were of that kind in a Christians Lot, as did exceed a supernatural Relief by
Reliance entirely on God; when nothing besides in any visible way is left: But
here does the glory of our Religion with an eminent Brightness shine forth,
when such as look but at a distance, can see the effects thereof, to afford
Quiet and Rest to the Mind, where it is sure Nature could give no Assistance,
when Humane Refuge has most visibly failed, when Lovers and Friends have stood
afar off, and when the frownings of Providence have been such, as if their God
was become a Party against them, and their Eyes made to fail in waiting for his
Appearance; yea, as it is sure all natural Causes must still have their
Operation and Effects, congruously to their proper Nature, so is this alone
peculiar to that excellent Religion we enjoy in the Truth thereof, to afford a
supernatural Virtue and Efficacy therewith, so as to give Rest and Refreshment
to the most perplexed and weary Spirit; and to commend its Institutions by the
influential presence of the Spirit of God, as that way whereby Man here on the
Earth in this visible Sat, is advanced, and made capable of an immediate and
familiar Converse with an invisible God, which is one of the Wonders of
Religion, that might in another manner affect and work upon us, if it were
truly believed. Oh! what a Subject is this to converse with, that such a
Demonstration of the Christian Faith is known and sure, as a vital Intercouse
and Communion betwixt our Blessed Head, and these who are united to him by
Faith here on the Earth; so as the greatness of that local Distance, which is
betwixt the third Heavens and this lower World, can be no Let thereto, when
yet the least moral distance by any Impurity and Defilement through Sin does
separate betwixt God and the Soul, and obstruct this Enjoyment.

But since this is not conceivable at a distance in what manner a surprising
extremity may work, when it is the present Object of Sense, and Men's Confidence
is resolved entirely on a supernatural Relief; when it is no Theory or Light in
the Judgment can express the same as in an experimental way is known; yea, when
the actings of Faith in the Power thereof, in such a Trial is so rare and
wonderful a thing above natural Comprehension. Let me yet offer here some of
the most choice Improvements that are called for, to the attaining such an
assurauce and establishment of Faith, when things may come to some unusual
Exigence.

1. How then, such whose acquaintance with God is not to begin, can have this
Reflection alone with their Soul, that they know whom they have believed, and
his being able to keep that which was committed to him, and give an account
thereof, in a day of Extremity, 2 Timothy 1. 12. yea, knows the God of their Trust
is such, who can extend his Power and Relief unto things that are unconceivable
to us, and past finding out; who can serve himself of means visibly destructive
to save in a way contrary to their proper Nature; whose help tarries not for
Man, nor waits for the Sons of Men; and is ever at work to make his Providence
serve the Interest and Accomplishment of his Truth to such who have settled
their Reliance thereon, though the whole visible state of things, would seem to
conspire against the same; and, can then look up to that God (when there may be
no look downward, but to cause Terror) whose Kingdom and Dominion, is not only
over all but can immediately act on their Souls, to quiet and settle the same,
though the Earth about them, should be in a visible Disorder and Confusion.

2. It is then, even under the most dismal Aspect of external Providence, that
such can betake themselves to the Certainty of Divine Truth, and cast Anchor on
that ground on which they must shortly adventure for an eternal State, in that
greatest Trial at Death: Thus did Abraham rest his Soul when he had such a
strange Tide of contrary Providence to shake him, and was not staggered at the
Promise, knowing it was given by that God, with whom it was unpossible to lie;
and oh! what a Hell should this Earth be, if the Enjoyments of a Christians
Faith and Hope, had another Dependence than on God alone, and were in the
Reverence of outward things; yea, if there were not such a Certainty of
supernatural Evidence and Assurance, as in a Midnight Hour, can bearup against
the greatest Contradictions of Sense.

3. There is this great Assistance to improve in the darkest Trial, what former
acquaintance with the ways of God has been attained for discerning how the
Designs and Methods of Grace, do lie toward them, by the light of his Truth:
Thus when present Affliction and Distress, seems most astonishing, they are not
in the Dark herein, to understand what unusual Measures the most endeared
Favorites of Heaven have had of such a Trial, whilst they were on the Earth,
and that they are upon no strange or unknown ground in such a case: They know
thus what an illustrious and essential part the most deep distresses and
straits in a Christains Life, has in the great frame of divine Providence, to
bring forth the greatest Comforts and Mercies thereof; and that according to
the measure both of their Grace and Services for God; they must expect his way
toward them, to go out of the ordinary Road of his dealing with others.

4. It is likewise in the most dismal Hour, when all Humane Refuges do Succumb,
that such can with Delight, reflect on that ancient Friendship and Intercourse
of Love has sometimes been betwixt God and their Soul, as being still an
undoubted earnest in their hand, though they may not have the same inward Sense
and Evidence therewith, on their Heart as formerly: Yea, the singular Comfort
and Advantage which is in a judicious Observation of these more extraordinary.
Acts of Providence, that have met them formerly, will be then understood, when
they come to a serious recollecting of the same. It Is true, the measure of such
a Talent with some, may much exceed that of others, whose Life has been filled
up with more singular Experiments of this kind, what God has been to them in
some unusual way, and in the more immediate Interpositions of Providence; yet
where something is in any measure of such an Assistance for a clear and sweet
review on the same, it is not expressible how this will work in a new exigence;
when the Comforter indeed brings it to their Remembrance, it is a strong
Argumentation that the Spirit of God affords this way to raise the Confidence
of his People, in the most extraordinary c^^^, Job 5. He will deliver in Six
Trouble, yea in Seven; by which in Scripture, Style is to be understood a note
of Perfection, when it comes to the highest and most extreme part of Trouble,
that then these Experiences were assured Pledges, that his Power will not fail
in the Seventh, or come short for bringing forth so great a Deliverance. It Is
true, one day may come in a Christians way to heighten the Trial of their
Faith, more than all the preceding part of their Life: But it is no less
remarkable in the way of Grace, how these also have been in some singular
manner then trained and ripened for such an Assault e're it came; and, as the
greatest Paroxism of a Disease is usual upon the height of a Crisis, and when
it is on a turn, so is it experienced, how astonishing a darkness does often fall
down, when some eminent Appearance of God in the way of Comfort and Light to a
Christian, has been most immediately near. It is not conceivable also until it
be tried what Satan's greatest Design and effort means, which each of the Saints
does once prove in some time of their Life, though not in a like measure; yea,
how singular a time this is found to be, for some higher Trial of God beyond
their former Experience: But it may be a strengthening Remark to our Faith, how
the design of those Powers of darkness, are most deeply laid against the
Followers of Christ, according to their room in the Body, and any more special
Services for him that may be allotted to such. I remember a Passage of Luthers
in his common places with respect to himself, very remarkable; videtur mihi
Satanas a pueritia mea aliquid providisse in me eorum, quae nunc patitur, ideo
ad perdendum, ad impediendumque me incredibilibus machinis insanivit, ut
saepius fuerim admiratus, egone Solus essem inter mortales, quem ita peteret.

5. There is one singular Assistance also, that such who have attained foam
near Intercourse with God in the way of his Truth, have beyond others, in the
darkest Hour, by a review on these peculiar Promises that have been with the
most full Evidence and Seal of the Spirit of Promise, sometimes enjoyed in a
sensible Application of the same: It was this gave David so strong an Argument
to plead and prevail with God, Psalm. 119. 49. Remember the word unto thy
Servant whereon thou causest me to hope; and it is clearly in that Sense it must
be understood, Heb. 11. Of these who by Faith obtained Promises from God, being
made theirs by such an immediate Seal and Application, that gave them as clear
an Interest therein, as if they were in the Performance. And surely where the
Testimony of the renewed Conscience is kept clear herewith, as to the Truth of
the Condition to which these Promises relate, the very Life and Comfort of a
Christians Trust lies in such a Support, above what is expressible, than in an
Hour of Temptation.

6. But there is one Improvement further in order to a Christians Faith and
Support, in the most extreme case to consider, that in a short time he is to
make a Trial of Faith, that will be of another Nature than he has ever known
before; and no Trial within time can be like this, which is at Death; when the
whole visible part of Man, must be shut up in a dark and narrow Grave, which
had once the spacious Earth to move in, and did enjoy the Light of the same,
where in one Moment there is a parting with all Interest and Comforts in this
lower World, and an immediate entry on the Decision of their eternal State,
which is then irrevocably cast; where they can have no Intelligence from all
who have gone before, what it is to die, or what manner of Sight that will be,
which is at the first opening of those Gates of the Second World, either as to
Blessedness or Torment; yea, where there can be no possible Assistance from
Nature, in the shutting of this dark Gulf, nor is conceivable by Humane Light,
the Way and Manner of that Passage; so that any Exigence which may seem most
trying to a Christians Faith here on the Earth, is but as a Prelude, and
preparatory part to this last step of their Warfare: And as Death was in its
first Constitution purely penal, and is no natural Accident, which meets us not
as we are Men, but as we are Sinners, there is no true Support possibly
attainable then, but in the Virtue and Power of Religion.

But it is now in a more applicatory way I must yet speak further, with respect
to so great a Subject, and what in order to Light has been held forth thereon.

1. That if Men do not design a resolute Opposition to God in those late
premonitory Signs of this present Year, it is not morally possible then, to
withstand such a Concatenation of Evidences, of a supernatural Discovery
thereby; and that they were surely directed with a special Commission from him,
and Forewarnings of such a kind as are suited to the Design of Providence in
this day; and when there is so little Faith now on the Earth, with respect to
any Threatenings of the Word, is it strange though there be some unusual
Demonstrations of God in the way of sense, to speak to the World by a monitory
Voice: It is true the Lord did never give forth Miracles, to attest before Men
the Truth of his Deity, which has a Witness thereto in every Object of Sense,
and from the whole Constitutions of Nature, yet have these been most specially
directed to awake a more deep, and tremendous Impression of the Majesty of God
on Men's Souls, when the Voice of his revealed Truth is not regarded: And there
is just cause to believe that the Design of Providence this day, is in another
manner now, than in times past taking place, to let this Generation know, That
surely there is a God who judges in the Earth, before whom the greatest of Men
must either bow or be broken; and that the time is not only near, but is now
come, for his taking to himself, his great Power to reign, with another
Appearance of his Greatness and Terror, than was ever known before in the
World. And oh! what must be expected to work for greatr Excitements to Fear,
and a more awful Sense of a Supernatural and Divine Power, and of his supreme
Government over the World, when no instituted means in a moral way, does answer
to this end: Though it is sure, if that Relation we stand in to the Deity, and
the Interest of our Engagements to him, with the Greatness of our hope from him
alone, were taken to Heart, we could not but accountsuch, to be most desirable
Acts of Providence; yea, rejoice herein, where he gives the most near and
immediate Discoveries of himself, when the Vindication of his glory is so
visibly concerned in the same, even though it should cause trembling to Humane
Sense, and be at a very dear and expensive Rate to a secure World.

But it is on another Head that I must more specially insist in a practical
way, as to the great Security of Faith with such a full Reliance on God, as is
here held forth in this Scripture, and to what a Degree the Elevation of a
Christians Soul may be thus raised with that inward Assurance, as can bear out
against the greatest Terrors of Sense: This is a Demonstration of God by his
immediate working on the Souls of Men, which is wonderful, and should be matter
of great Improvement in the saddest Trials of our Warfare, to know in what
manner divine Power is thus exerted, as can in a Moment, dispel the most
extreme Fears and Darkness on the Soul, so as to make Day arise, and a Sun
shine there, when it has been as Midnight otherwise. And since this is a
Subject of such Weight, as the very Life, Comfort, and sustaining of the Soul
amidst the innumerable Hazards and Trials of time lies herein, as to a full
Assurance and Acquiescence of the Mind, but the certainty of our Faith that we
are thus safe, and in sure Terms with God, it may be needful to answer a few
Proposals for giving Light thereto.

1. How we are to apprehend aright, so great an Attainment of Grace as this is,
and to have our Judgment settled, and clear about so wonderful an Experiment. I
know it is no ordinary Standard or Example, what is here held forth in such
Assurance of David's Faith, when no Supposal of Hazard or Extremity, was then
too great for the same; for, even this great Man of God, had at other times his
low Ebbs and Faintings, that were as remarkable, as such a Triumph and
High-Spring-Tide, which we see here in the Power of believing; but on the other
Hand, this is a strange Riddle to the Spirit of the World, and unaccountable to
all Reason in the Eyes of many who profess the same Doctrine of our Faith; as if
it were something that alone works in the Power of some strong Imagination,
whilst they take up Religion in a natural way only, which goes not above moral
Inducements, and the Power of Freewill: I must therefore speak a little in a
special way, to such a Proposal. 1. That the great Design of the Gospel, does
most eminently ly here, not only to reveal the Mystery of Grace and of
Redemption, in what Christ has done for us, but to acquaint us also with the
immediate and internal work of Faith on the Soul, which he does work and
perfect in us, as the Author and Finisher thereof; which was so wonderful a
thing, as put one of the Disciples of Christ, to that strange Enquiry, Lord how
is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not to the World? and in such
a distinguishing way by inward Evidence and Power. 2. This cannot be understood
aright, but by such a Discovery thereof, as one of the essential parts of that
rare Divine Workmanship of the new man, which in its whole Life and Actings,
has no other Subsistence, but by immediate Supplies from Heaven; and as in one
time of a Christians Life, his Faith will need a more extraordinary Allowance
for Support, than in another; so I must humbly judge the present time we are
in, is such as needs in a more than ordinary way, some clear Understanding of
this Mystery of Faith, by practical Light, and the virtue thereof in an Hour of
Temptation, when the times seem to be growing so dark, as the Spirits of the
most Judicious discerners of things, are put to Astonishment, to think what
Providence may be bringing forth, when the Sea-Compass seems as it were to
fail, and so little of any conforting Signs, but for a long time past, have
been in Paths so untrodden, as is not easy to trace or find a clear way before
us. 3. But this cannot be understood as some singular and powerful Operation of
the Spirit of God, which upon some special Service for him, may be imparted to
such as never knew his graci-Inhabitation in their Soul, or what it is to be
entered in such a State of Communion with the Spirit, as is by his settled
Residence and abiding with them, John 14. 17. For such is this mystery of Faith
in the Nature thereof, as it is true acting and work, is not attainable without
a vital influence from Heaven, and where it is gradual Increase and Advance is
made a Reward to frequency in the Acts thereof, and these resolute Adventures
and Reliance, which has through Grace, been attained on a Divine Power. 4. But
for a more full understanding hereof, it is not possibly attainable, without a
supernatural Evidence accompanying the same; such whereby it clearly sees both
the Excellency and Certainty of things that are above Sense, how they are no
less sure than great: And though the highest Enjoyments of Faith, whereby the
Soul rests about things to come, as if they were present, has no such
immediate Evidence thereof as they are in themselves, and are the Objects of
our Sense; else they could not be hoped for, if they were thus seen: Yet it is
upon no Credibility, but upon the highest Certainty, that this quieting work of
Faith, is founded: But how this supernatural Evidence does work on a Christians
Soul in an Hour of greatest Trial, is not expressible by Words, though it does
then clear it self in the same manner, as the Daylight does when the Sun
shines. For, when it is known in the Power thereof, in times of Fainting and
Distress, it has then such a Call therewith, by a present Efficacy, as Psalm.
116. 7. to return unto their rest; a rest of Tranquillity and Assurance from
God, in the way of a Promise, when there may not be the least Appearance of its
Performance. Thus did Abraham know the Truth and Power of such an Evidence upon
his Soul, when he staggered not at the Promise through Unbelief; when both the
way of Povidence and the course of Nature, upon his hopes of Isaac, did most
visibly control the same. But let me add herewith, that the most choice and
experienced in the Work and Advantages of Faith, has not done with the
Settlement hereof, even after the greatest Confirmations; for whilst he is
within time, he must still look out, both for new Assaults, and further
Experiments of Assistance for this end, and to attain a higher Growth: But oh!
how dark and strange a thing is this, and how disrelishing to most in this
present day? who count it enough to have their Religion in the Bibls, but not
in their Sonl; and to have it in external Ordinances, and a visible Form, but
in no inward Enjoyments of the same.

A Second Proposal upon this great Subject of the quieting Power of Faith,
amidst the Hazards and Terrors of Time, is to know the Truth hereof, in the
sureness of its Principles, and on what a clear Warrant, so wonderful a Piece
of our Religion does found: This I must touch a little, to clear the same, both
from any presumptive Confidence, and enthusiastic Pretenses on such an
account; and that its holding in the way of Right, on the Warrant of Divine
Truth, is no less sure, than the Enjoyment hereof is sweet; when we can with
such Evidence see.

1. How it has this fundamental Principle to hold by, that the God of Truth
has taken the establishing of his Peoples Faith, under his own Hand, as his
alone immediate Work, and is such a Work, that none but he can accomplish: Thus
we see 2 Cor. 1. 20. the sureness of the Grounds of our Faith held forth, that
all the Promises of God in Christ, are Yea and Amen in him, unto the Glory of
God, etc. But though here is enough as to a Divine Warrant and Right, yet will
not this alone bear out, without it be Gods immediate Work also, when a Storm
rises; therefore Verse 21. it is expressly showed, that he who establishes us
in Christ, and has anointed us, is God; and has given us the earnest of his
Spirit, to raise the Faith of his People, answerable to the Height and Measure
of any present Trial.

2. Is it not on this sure Principle of Truth also, that Faith in the Power,
and Supports hereof, even in the most extraordinary case of Trial, does found?
That the Lord Jesus Christ, has not only given himself for us, by a legal
Substitution in our Room, to satisfy Divine Justice, but has given himself to
us, to be enjoyed in the nearest Intimacy of Relation, and a vital Union with
himself, so that thus he is not only the Purchaser, but the Dispenser also, of
such potent Influences, as the Faith of his People, in the most extreme case
does need; and as he knows the ways of the Righteous, in their Necessities,
Temptations and Hazards; so he has fixed them this way, in such an immediate
and absolute Dependence on himself, by taking off visible Refuges, to give them
a more special discriminating Testimony of his Respects, though then in the
present time, it may have a very strange and dismal Appearance, whilst it is not
understood in such a case, how his gracious Design to accomplish the great ends
of his Love to his People lies so near him, as to defer often, an answering of
their natural Desires, until things come to that Extremity, as may make way,
both for the highest Trial and Victory of their Faith.

3. It is one of the most fundamental Grounds and Principles of Trust, that no
doctrinal Knowledge of this Mystery of Faith, in its supporting Power against
the greatest of Trouble, can avail, without the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
For here does the Communion of the Holy Ghost, with the Saints on the Earth
most eminently lie, and the Enjoyments of Faith in the saddest Hours of
Temptation are experienced, how the Joy and Peace of believing in such a
Security of Mind does thus work, when there is no natural Cause, or visible
Appearance for the same; and how in so strange a manner, a Christians Spirit
has been often carried above the present Temptation of their day, with such
Quiet and Composure of Mind, as even in the midst of great Waters, they have
not come near unto them, so as to shake and stagger their Confidence; and I
doubt not, that many humble and tender Christians, have at some times, been
sealed with that inward Assurance by the Spirit of Faith, and with such
Strength and Clearness of Evidence, in an oblignatory way to their Souls, as
the greatest Assaults and Oppositions of Satan, which have been after made
thereto, were never able to break the same, so bright and convincing has the
Conveyance of such a Seal been in that time, as they could thus humbly take
Instruments, that it was assuredly given them of God, and was Truth, and no Lie.

4. And is it not one of the Principles and Grounds of our Faith, that the
great Author thereof, has made its Security so full, and with that Evidence,
as may fully countervail the want of ocular Demonstration by outward Sense: For
thus does our Blessed Lord testify, Joh. 14. 17. when he has there promised
the sending of his Spirit to his Church, whom the World cannot receive, because
they see him not, and can be no Object of Humane Sense, which is the only
prevailing Evidence and Demonstration, with a terrene Spirit; but then shows
his Disciples, that they had a more full and sure Testimony: For you know him,
says he, and I have made you sure by a higher Evidence, as can leave no room
for Doubtfulness; for though herein does the excellency of Faith most eminently
appear, in believing things not seen, and contrary to all natural Sense, on the
Credit of Divine Revelation, yet is there no Darkness this way, from want of
Evidence, since this must be understood only, quoad evidentiam rei, sed non
quoad evidentiam testimonii; which is made as full, as that which we have seen
with our Eyes, or have touched and handled in that Security which God has
given to us, in his way of believing.

5. I must yet add one Principle of our Faith, for giving Light to that strong
Influence and Power thereof, amidst the greatest Fears and Terrors of future
Events; that it is sure such who are Christ's, have not only things present, but
things to come made theirs, Cor. which is one of those great Assurances of
Truth, that seems little understood, or improved by most, as being not only
founded on that fundamental Right of our being Christ's, and made thus Heirs of
those Promises which are in him yea, and Amen to his People; but that such an
entry is also on the Enjoyment of this right, by the Power of believing, and
inward Testimony of the Spirit, as can fully quiet the Soul of a Christian, and
make things to come in another manner: There Is then the Residue of the World
know. It Is true, there is a rational Prospect and Discovery upon future things,
by humane Wisdom; and the prudent Man sees and foresees the evil day, to
provide for the same as Solomon speaks: Yea, what a thing should Man's Life be
without foresight and sagacious decerning of what may be the Issue of things,
in a due Application of proper means for such ends? and of those successive
Removes, that in the settled course and way of natural Causes, seem most
unavoidable; for on this must all true humant Policy found: But on the other
hand, they see not how the Designs of a supreme Providence may be taking place
above the reach of humane Thoughts, which does control their Measures and
Hopes, and how it was above the Sphere of ordinary Reason or their Foresight,
that Events have often occurred betwixt the entry and close of a Year, as they
could neither see or prevent. But there is a Divine Foresight which is of
another Nature, by the Evidence of Faith of things not seen and future, without
extraordinary Revelation, as can render the Enjoyments of Hope on the Certainty
of a Divine Promise, to be matter of unexpressible Joy and Support, when it
would in an ordinary way seem to be against Hope.

There is a Third Proposal, of great weight also on this Head, to know what may
have the most near and immediate Influence on such a Raisedness and Security of
a Christians Soul in an extraordinary Hour of Trial, and does then give the
greatest Advantage to such an Appearance, when it can have no visible Cause for
the same; for Answer thereto, it is indeed a Secret betwixt God and the Soul of
Men, and a matter of Power rather than of Words, what can raise such a
Confidence as has no possible rise from Nature herein? and in this respect,
those who look at a distance, can never know where a Christians Support, and
his great Strength lies: Yet since this seems so strange and dark a thing to
most, who may give some Assent to the Doctrine of our Faith, I must speak a
little further, so far as may tend to clear their Judgment, who would know what
manner of Persons these are, who both in a judicious and experimental way, move
in so high a Sphere, and are thus skilled in the way of Trust, and secure
Reliance on an invisible Refuge. But to render it the more clear, I shall touch
this in the way of Example, by some peculiar View of such, of whom I hope there
be many this day on the Earth, to show that none goes upon higher Principles of
true and enlightened Reason. And though the Measures of a Christians Faith and
Establishment, be not alike, but of a very different Size, yet may this clearly
appear and be understood by some special Characters to illustrate the same, 1.
That he is one who in a serious Recess, and Retirement of his Soul, has made a
just Reckoning of such surprising Trials, as liable to a Christians State here
on the Earth, where the alone way of believing against Sense, must either be
his Support and Security, or else perish. And that no present Condition he is
in, can be so prosperous or promising, but dark and black Clouds may fall down
when least expected, as all humane Comfort and Assistance may fail, and have no
visible Refuges to rest on; which has thus brought the serious Thoughts of
Religion and his Soul, more close together, to know such an infallible way, as
can never fail, and will bear the whole Expense of the most extraordinary and
dismal Trouble; and that there is indeed, such a temporal Interest lying
thereto, as an immediate Communion with Heaven, when the lower Springs of
Comfort and Supply from the Earth, may be shut up; yea, such a Reality, as
supernatural Comforts in the Peace and Joy of the Holy Ghost, which are best
known in the saddest Hour, to be undoubted and sure. 2. But when he has thus
judiciously reasoned himself to such a Supposal, he is one who is no less
deeply awakened to provide for the same, not only with respect to that last and
great Adventure of Faith upon an eternal State, but to know where his Strength
lies, when such a case may occurr; for then it must in a special way lie near,
to have a Stedfastness of his own in the Truth, and to know the strong and firm
Conveyances of the Security of our Faith on Divine Promise in such a manner, as
should not need the Seal of a Miracle, or the Testimony of an Angel, to support
the same; since as such a Settlement on the Testimony of God, is surely
attainable, so he cannot conceive how Men can possibly walk in the Light of any
true Joy and Comfort on the Earth, until they once be at Rest here. 3. He knows
also, that the greatest Trials wherein he is sisted within time, is upon the
Work and Actings of Faith, in an Hour of Temptation, both in the Truth and in
the Strength thereof; yea, how one day in his Life, may have some special
Commission for this end, more than many Years formerly have had; but does
consider herewith, how great the Recompenses are even within time, that wait on
the Issue, when the set Measure shall be perfected of such unusual Trials that
it shall be the same as in Job, 23. to bring them forth as Gold: And as he
considers how high a value the Lord does put hereon, since the great
Dispensation, whereby he deals with his Church in this militant State is in the
way of Trust, and upon the Credit of his Truth, when there is no sensible
Evidence; so it is the most important Study of his Life, how he may acquit
himself, and stand to the Proof hereof, for the Honor of his God, and Master,
who has counted him worthy to put him on some hotter Service and more
remarkable Conflicts this way than others; and that he may hold fast the
beginning of his Confidence unto the end. 4. He must be reckoned one, who has
attained to a special Communion with God in the ways of Providence, by frequent
and deep Observation of the same, and who thus can discern the great ends and
designs which he has upon his People, in such Methods of his dealing with them
that may seem more strange and astonishing to others, and in what dark Paths he
does usually lead such to whom he has reserved the greatest Testimonies of his
Love and Respect; so that what proves most staggering to others, as to the way
of the Lords training of his choicest Followers in this State of Warfare, is
made a special Assistance to his further Establishment. 5. But more especially
wherein his great Strength lies is, on that acquaintance he has attained with
the Communion of the Spirit of God, which was once so dark, and not conceivable
by Report; but now knows that it is an acquaintance of such a kind, as is not
remote or at a distance, but by near and sensible Approaches to his Soul; and
is not by Words, but by things of the greatest Substance and Reality, with the
sanctifying Virtue of the Spirit made so evident, as can make his Work and
Services for God, to be matter of the highest Delight and Enjoyment; yea, he
now knows what a spiritual Faculty and Life, is for corresponding with those
Divine Communications, so as with a judicious and discerning Ear, he can know
the voice of his beloved Master, from the voice of a Stranger, both in its
Sweetness to allure, and in its Power and Efficacy to draw, and conform their
Soul into a nearer Resemblance to himself, with that Tenderness and Fear, which
is the native Result of such an Intimacy of Converse. 6. But as to this
marvelous Acquaintance with the Spirit of God, in order to a higher Increase of
Faith; He is one who can give an Account hereof also, that in no singular way
it was attained, but as it does respect the whole Community of the Saints by an
unchangeable Rule, as attainable, not only in the retired Duties of Communion
with God, but by an invisible Trade and Commerce with external Ordinances, and
the Out-lettings of Sanctury Strength this way, answerable to that Psalm. 20. 2.
in both which Respects, his Faith has often gained a higher Interest and
Establishment, than by external Providence, as being more immediately
dependent on the Spirit of God; and as all Causes must work answerably to the
Nature thereof, so can he put his Seal and Testimony to that hid Virtue and
vital Influence, which those Divine Institutions of the Gospel has on Men's
Soul, and is only peculiar thereto; yea, when others who stay only in the
outward Court, are bounded this way with an audible Voice to their Ears, and
literal Discovery of sacred Truth to the Judgment, such can witness what
unexpressible Support has been then enjoyed for a more full Settlement of
their Faith, by immediate Conveyances of Power and Life to their Spirits, as
has made it sweet matter of Admiration; what invisible Strength has in a
moral way been thus imparted, and what remarkable Returns of Light they have
had upon such a Trial of enquiring in the Temple, from the Fountain of Divine
Light, in the way of his Word, under their darkest Hours; which sometimes have
been like Elijahs Meal, in the Strength whereof, he was enabled to go Forty
days, without Faint and Weariness. 7. But for a further illustrating of such an
Example whatever in a preparatory way he has thus attained for a special
acting of Faith in the most extreme Case: Yet when this is not at a distance,
but becomes a present visible Object of Sense, and comes so near as cannot but
in some extraordinary way affect his Spirit, then does it yet more appear where
his Strength, and immediate Relief does lie, in making that great Trial of
turning his Eyes wholly to God, by a present Address for such a special
Allowance from Heaven, that his Strength may be according to his day; and then
it is in his improvement of that way which God has consecrated for the most
extreme Exigences of a Christians Life, he knows the high Value and Use of such
great Experiments he has formerly made of sensible Acceptance, and Audience in
the most astonishing Straits, with such Testimony from Heaven herein, and
inward Evidence on his Soul, as if Fire had come from thence to consume the
Sacrifice, so as he could then speak in that manner Psalm. 20. 6. Now know I
that the Lord saves his Anointed; and Psalm. 40. 11. I know I shall yet praise
him; yea, as he knows the way of humble Wrestling in Prayer, is not bounded in
its Warrant, by the greatest Extremity, so, it has been in such a case, that
when God does take some unusal Trial of his People and of their Faith, he then
designs to give them some great and singular Trial of himself. 8. It may be
further applicable to such an Example, that though the workings of a special
Faith in some great Exigence and Distress be such, that he cannot speak to
others, as it is then felt in the Light and Power thereof; yet does he then know
the Security hereof, and present Settlement of his Spirit with such Evidence,
as he sees as well as believes, when he cannot possibly demonstrate this to the
Conviction of others, but as he knows with Assurance his Trust in such an Hour,
to be one of the most highly rational Acts of his Life, so is this no less
evident and sure, how the whole supernatural part of Christianity, whereby a
Christian is raised above himself, and the Workings of natural Light and
Reason, has its alone Dependence on a near and immediate Converse with Heaven;
wherein his great Strength then lies, that when a Tide from without may be such
as should quickly overwhelm his Soul, he is thus put on a higher Trial than at
other times, of the Certainty of Divine Support by a present gale of the Spirit
to stemm the same; such as rises higher than the Work or Assistance of Angels:
Yea, how it is not habitual Grace only, that could make the practical use of
the Shield of Faith to be clear and comforting in an Extremity, if there were
not some very immediate Supplies. But if it be inquired what is the Ground
whereon they must adventure, and rest their Soul in such an Hour, and should
specially fix their Anchor on, it is not conceivable, without respect to two
special actings of Faith, by which Abraham and Sarah did enter on the Enjoyment
of the Promise, when nothing seemed in an ordinary way more impossible, than
this, that he was persuaded, God was able to perform what he had promised, Romans
4. And she judged him faithful who had promised, Heb. 11. 9. But yet now let me
add this more with respect to such an Example; that he is one who in a Season
of greatest Trial, knows the greatness of that Witness he is then sisted under,
to be of another kind; than any humane Observation that may be upon him, when
he has so difficult and hazardous a part to act on the Theater of his Life;
and that he has herein, not only the Witness of the elect Angels, the watching
and considering Eye of the Powers of Darkness, who are against him, but above
all, that he is in a more singular way than at other times, stated under the
immediate Witness of the Glorious Trinity, to see how he acts suitably to the
greatness of a divine Refuge, and these Assurances which the God of Truth has
given him to adventure on; then is it also that he knows the Trial of his
Faith, does not alone lie, when he is now at so eminent a Step thereof, for the
quiet and support of his own Spirit, but for such an Appearance before Men, as
may tend to sanctify God before the World, and for a putting his Seal hereto,
that he is faithful and true; to whom these have concredited themselves; and
that they durst follow him, with a resolute Reliance, when both Sense and
natural Reason did fail, and could give no Support in such an Hour. Thus I have
offered a View in such an Example, where the Support and Strength of a
Christians Faith, in the most astonishing Hour of Temptation does lie; and of
the solid judicious Actings thereof, both in the way of Light and Power: And
there is herewith presented, a special Series and Scale of these Steps, whereby
such a Measure of Establishment is attainable under that blessed Conduct of the
Word and Spirit of God, as it keeps close by the Line of Truth, betwixt Hazards
both on the Right and Left Hand; so that we may see on what firm and sure
Ground such are, and have their Anchor fixed, who thus know the work of Faith
in an extraordinary case of Trial.

But now in the last place, I must yet in an applicatory way, shut up this
Discourse with a more special respect to the times we are now in, when such
great Thoughts of Heart, may be both from those strange Providence that have
of late gone over the Churches of Christ in those Three Nations, and what my be
yet expected, and on a near Approach; since it is sure Men does not know their
day, nor can take to heart, Time and Judgment, where there is no suitable
Regard to the Voice of God in his Works, as well as in his Word, and what is
given to be the most remarkable Talent of Observation, on such an account. I
have spoke a little to such a strange Supposal the Psalmist makes, as to what
might be the Trial of his Faith, in the day wherein he then stood: But let me
speak a few things that may be judged more than supposable with respect to the
present time wherein it seems in some singular way to be stated from other
times; and though with humble Sobriety I have desired to exoner my Soul on such
an Account, in a late Essay, which has been published; yet having a rise, both
from this Subject, and the present Aspects of Providence, I must crave leave
to offer some Thoughts farther.

1. Is it not more than supposable that such an Appeal from the Lord, as we
have Isa. 5, 4. has a most peculiar respect beyond former times to this
Generation? What could I have done more to my Vineyard than I have done, by new
Methods and Trials, both in the way of Grace, and in the Severity of Judgments,
to bring the Churches of Britain, again unto God? Or has there been such
Precedents in the way of the Lord, with any Churches else, and in that manner,
as these 50 Years past, he has made use of? And oh! what must be expected to
work for such an end, when no instituted means does answer thereto? and that
it is evident what the highest Improvements of Men's natural Power can do, which
is so much exalted by this Generation, to shut out the Necessity of
supernatural Influences of Grace, with so little Fear of such a judicial
Restraint thereof, as is at this day: For if Men do but sincerely reason their
Soul unto serious Thoughts of such a cafe, what can be seen now by ordinary
means, to beget a deep and awful Sense of God on Men's Souls, if he do not in
some more immediate and extraordinary way appear; but, such an astonishing
Confidence and Contempt of all Divine Signs and Threatenings, seem discernable
as nothing in a monitory way does work or affect in Men's Spirits: Nor is
Judgment from Heaven, a matter of Fear with most, if it be not felt. But the
same Spirit which we may see Isa. 5. 19. may be visible in the present times,
when they said, Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it;
and let the Counsel of the Holy one of Israel draw near, that we may know it;
which was in an express way to speak, that neither their Faith nor their Fear,
did rise higher than sensible Evidence and Demonstration of what was present in
their sight.

2. It Is a matter of Truth also, is more than supposable, that the Stability of
the Earth beneath us, can give no Assurance and solid Quiet of Spirit, to those
who dwell thereon, until they be at Peace with Heaven: But whilst they reckon
that nothing is more sure to build their Hopes on, than this lower Earth, and
thus have their Hearts on the same Level therewith, may see how amidst their
greatest Confidence and Expectation, their Judgment may then immediately have
its Rise from the same, so as in one Hour, to make the alone Support of their
Confidence, to be the Grave thereof; and whatever some have writ as to the
foregoing Presages of any remarkable Earthquake, before it took place, yet was
it never known, that an Appearance of God this way, either to forewarn as a
Sign, or as a present Judgment, did occurr but with a present Surprizal, when
nothing hereof, was feared or supected: And it has ever been one of the most
immediate Signs of sudden Destruction, when a Peoples Security has come to
that height, as nothing could be awakning in such a case, answerable to that 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. when they said, Peace, Peace, then was a destroying Stroke most
imminent and near: And I may speak this with Assurance, that either these late
Providence by which God has in so remarkable a manner made himself known,
shall be regarded as Signs, and carry Men's Spirits above any Product of natural
Causes herein unto God, or will at last be felt, by what is signified thereby.

3. I hope, it can be no questionable thing with any of a serious and
considering Spirit, that as the standing of the World, and its being secured
from the Extremity of Justice, is alone by a Dispensation of Grace, and the
Tenor of the Second Covenant, with respect to the Church therein, so is it in
no other way but of Grace only, that Britain has this day, any Claim or
Charter of Right, to the Blessings of Providence, and for having the Hedges of
Divine Protection kept up: Nor could the furthest of humane Strength and
Counsel avail then, if once the full measure of the Long-suffering and
Tenderness of God, should be summed up, that has assuredly its set Bounds, to
the most eminent Churches where sometimes God has most remarkably shined; and
oh! what a thing should this World be to live in, were it but fore one Day or
Hour, if there should be a withholding of an immediate Divine Care and
Inspection over the same, or for so small a time, that Door could be shut up of
Intercourse betwixt Heaven and the Saints here, which by a Divine immutable
Constitution of Grace, is kept open, whilst they are within time: But this is a
thing as to any public and national Interest, that seems to have little Credit
or Regard with Men, what invisible Influence such a hid Party, who makes least
Appearance in the Earth, has on the greatest Changes thereof; and how a
filling up the Measure of the Elect, in a Nation and Continuance of the
Candlestick there, with the oversight of a special Providence, is still of the
same Extent.

4. It is a Dilemma of undeniable Evidence, as to the public State and
Interest of those Nations, that we must either have God for us, in the Efficacy
and Outgoings of his Providence, or against us: That God, who in the supreme
Administration of his Government over the World, stands not as Nouter, or as a
Witness only to the Actings of Men; but if he be not on our side, and
interested in our Cause, we must then know him as an Adversary: For there can
be no possible midst herein, that God, whose Room all the World cannot supply,
if he should be shut out of our Counsels; yea, such a God we have both to fear
and rely on, who is not one like to our selves, to be put off with Words, or a
complemental Address in a stated Form only, or can expect in Faith, that this
will bring Assistance to turn the Scale of Providence on our side, if he be not
according to his revealed Counsel, with an entire Reliance on him alone, adored
and feared as God: Yea, it is sure in no humane Affairs, he does more
immediately appear, and by an extraordinary Ministry of the Angels, than in
the decision of War and of Battles, For which cause he does in so special a
respect, take that Style unto himself, to be the Lord of Hosts. It should seem
a strange and astonishing thing, how Men can live in the Earth without God,
without whom they cannot live for one Moment, and in whose Hand their Bre^^h
is; yet if we look to the public state of Religion this day, nothing may be
more applicable to the most numerous part of the Reformed Churches than this;
and that the Sense of a Deity, has more Power and Influence amongst Heathens,
who walk in the Name of their God, than it has amongst Millions of professed
Christians; for except we shut out Reason, such must be surly said to live
without God in the Earth, and not to walk in his Name, who live without any
resolute dependence and trust upon him in the course and conduct of their
affairs; whose great business in the World lies only with Men, and are much
more influenced by such a fear, than of his srownings, and terror, who made
Heaven and Earth; when it seems now easy with most to lose God, if they may
gain Men, and make an intrest that way, tho the purchase will never bear the
expense; yea, can go the farthest length of external Worship in Church
Assemblies, and yet be without God, then as to any internal converse or
enjoyment of him by inward acts of adoration; and what account can such
possibly make of an invisible God, who know no other measure of their
confidence, but as visible things do either smile or frown upon them; but there
is one respect further wherein we may see how most, who profess the name of
God, do this day live without him in the Earth, which is in the way of
observation of what passes betwixt him and them, whether by providence or
influences on their Soul, but take all things at an adventure, without any
higher look than what is from Secondary causes, though it was in this way that
an Enoch, an Noah, and the whole race of the Saints, who have gone before, knew
what it was to walk with God in the Earth, no less in discerning his
appearances, and work toward them, than their way and services toward him;
But oh! what will he do with us, when it may be feared that the most prevailing
suffrage and vote of the generation we are now in, should be this (if their
Soul might speak for them in such a case) let God depart from us, for we desire
not the Knowledge of the Most High, since this lght tends only to be
tormenting, and does afford no comfort to such; or can it be expected, that he
will allow in this age a Restoring Miracle to bring men again to the faith and
sense of the Deity, as he did in the days of Elia, when we have a much greater
Talent to be accountable for, than these had, or any former Ages past, having
the whole income of their Confirmations and improvements added to our Stocks?

5 Tho the great intrest of that mystery of a Christians Faith, which is the
special Subject of this Discourse, does in the first place respect our
Reconciled State, and justification before God, yet is it too evident that the
most usually trying and difficult part thereof, is, with respect to the Trials
and conflicts of time, and sucha day, when they must live immediately on God,
and give him the Glory of his Godhead when no visible means can support, which
is that wonderful experiment of Faith in the power thereof that is here
expressly pointed at, when it is by the Spirit of God as his immediate work
alone proportioned to the most extraordinary hight of a Christians Trial; but
as to the filling up of this great work of Faith in the appointed measure
thereof, it does principally 1. respect the whole State and times of the elect
Church, and on this account, there is still a growing increase as to the
measure of the work of Faith since Abel the righteous, and is not yet come in
many degrees to that full hight of perfection which it must have before the
close of time; yea, herein has each of the Saints their proper share and
interest for bringing forth the Glory of this excellent Grace to it is greatest
display before Angels and Men, which is an end worthy of all the Trials, and
suffering times which have ever gone over the Church, because this way of
giving glory to God is only within time. 2. But it must be understood also that
in each age of the Church there are some more illustrous examples that the Lord
does afford to the World this way, in whom his Grace in the power thereof has
a greater triumph in the way of passive valor than in these, who have been
most admired upon their Heroic Actings and conquest over Men. 3. It is
undeniable also what eminent experiments have been thus afforded, upon these
adventures of a Christians Faith, which did not then answer the ordinary
Standard of the Trials, which others have had; and though we may confidently
hope, that the highest measure of the suffering times of the Church is now
accomplished and past, and of the trial of the passive Graces of the Spirit,
yet it may be matter of fear that the Faith of Christians in this day may have
some more extraordinary Essay in the way of Judgment, as to the public State
of the Church, and of these Nations now in these last times of the Gentiles,
than what has been in ages past, and may need more than ordinary ballast to
bear up against the darkness thereof, when such a midnight hour seems
immediately to preceed the dawning of that bright Sunshine, which may be truly
reckoned the brightness of Christ's second coming, in that last state of time.

6. May it not be matter of unavoidable evidence also as to the present State
of the Church that there is surely some eminent period of providence, to which
so swift and extraordinary a courses of remarkable changes, as has in a
successive way still attended these Nations, have aproper tendency; these being
so unusual and astonishing, and out of the way of the Lords ordinary working,
as the most judicious, and deep discerners of things could not to this day have
reasoned their falling out on principles of humane reason; yea such, as I must
humbly judge, will not cease, until the Spirit of God be quieted in that great
Design which he is to accomplish hereby answerable to that Zach. 6, 8. on which
he has set his heart, who leaves not his work unperfected, which has also the
same sense, and intent. Isa. 66. 9. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause
to bring sorth, etc. nor (I am persuaded) will any humane counsel make civil
establishments to be effectual, until that great design of Providence be more
understood, and concurred with.

7. It is now a day of great expectation how the next scene of Providence may
open for a farther clearing of this design of the Lord about which I judge
these who have nearest converse with God this day by his Word and Spirit, see
cause to give their fears the first place before their hopes, as to some very
extrordinary work of judgment that from all signs seems to lie nearest now to
the reformed Churches in the frame of providence, tho we are like to have
little either of Faith or fear, when it comes, until it be made an object of
Sense; but I am sure a few of these evident prognostics that now are in our
sight, would have deeply affected the Spirits of ous Fathers, when we may see
no Providence are so extraordinary, as to have any sanctifying influence on
Men's Souls for the most part, or to advance the public state of Religion as
formerly; when an outward Calm and a dead Lethargy herewith does so visibly
still go together, which has a more mortal aspect on the present state of
Britain than might be judged from the highest Paroxism of personal sufferings;
when the Christian interest this day for accomplishing the great designs of
Grace under a reformed profession thereof is as a low thing in Men's eyes in
respect of what is more extrinsick, and foreign thereto; when also the long
decrease of that tide of power, and influences of Religion on Men's Souls has
at last come to such an ebb by these judicial removes of the Spirit of God,
that without some very immediate appearance from Heaven we might fear lest
Truth should quickly perish from the Earth; yea, when it is so evident that God
is yet calling for some to stand in the gap, and make up the hedge before
Judgment go forth, butt almost none sound to answer it is voice; so intently are
Men's Spirits now, even of such, who outgo others in a profession set upon
designs about their own things; and it has surely ever been a dismal sign to a
Nation, when it becomes rare to find any suitable Instruments, and Tools to
answer a restoring work therein, or to see that raisedness of Spirit for such
an end, as has been formerly, which may be feared speaks the long shadows of
the Evening before some horror of great Darkness are too visibly stretched out.
But if Men do count these things small and remote from their eyes, and will
raise a confidence, that it shall be Peace, until there be another Appearance
for God and the Interest of his Kingdom, than has yet been. It may make the
Disappointment Sad, and Dreadful in the Issue: One thing I have thought
strange, how there can be a National Love and Respect to its Interest in
another way, than to have God Interested both in their Case and Cause, in the
first Room; or how Solemn and Public Thaksgivings, in a stated external Form
for the most eminent Appearances of God, whether as to a Nation, or to a City,
or to Persons, is so visibly divided from such an essential part thereof, which
is by Thankofferings, and some Returns to him in a promissory way by Deeds and
Performances, as well as by Words, suitable to the Weight of such Engagements.
But this is a rare Practice now to be found on the Earth, to design some
special Consecration of the Gain of any eminent National Mercies unto God this
way.

8. Yet whatever may be too evident in the matter of our Fear, it is sure that
the just Grounds of our Hopes in behalf of the Church, does far exceed the
same: And though there be many extraordinary Signs to cause Terror and
Consternation of Spirit, there is one Sign of another kind, that will compense
all, which is that Sign of the Son of Man, Mat. 24. 30. as it is to be
understood in a promissory Sense; and how that great Mourning of the Tribes of
the Earth, which is there spoke, to attend such a Sign, has the same Sense
with that, Zach. 12. 10. and is clearly expository of the same, They shall look
on me whom they have Pierced, and Mourn, etc. as also that evident Parallel,
Rev. 1. 6. since these do so jointly bear evidence to the Nature and Intent of
such a Sign, as will then have an eminent Appearance with the first entry, and
returning of the Jews unto him, whom their Fathers did pierce. I know some of
the greatest Writers of this Age, such as Usher, Twiss, and Mead, and of late
that Worthy Man Mr. Mather of New England, take this in the same Sense, only
seem to reckon this Sign to be the thing signified of Christ himself, in a
visible Appearance then to the World: But this will be e're long in another
manner understood in the Event. Yet I have found it so sweet a Subject of
Thoughts in these dismal and sad Times, when other Signs are so tremendous,
that in some things which are most clear herein, and suitable to humble
Sobriety, I must speak a few things. 1. How it is unquestionable, this is that
one Sign by way of Singularity, which our Blessed Head and Redeemer, does
appropriate to himself as his, and to be the Sign (...) of the Son of Man, such
as has never been given to the World like thereto, nor will ever be, until he
come himself to Judgment. 2. It is surely a Sign which must be Public and
Conspicuous to the World, in some extraordinary Vision to humane Sense; for
therein is the Intent of that Prediction made express and clear: But as to the
Nature hereof, or its Duration, I judge it suitable not to enquire, where the
Holy Ghost has not more particularly cleared the same, and reserved a further
Discovery thereof, to the Event. 3. It is sure also, when this great Appearance
shall be to the World, it will be with that demonstrative and undubitable
Evidence as the Sign of the Son of Man, as will beyond any Contradiction,
expound it self, and verify such a Prediction of our Blessed Lord, before
Angels and Men. 4. It must be understood as a Sign that will be deeply
affecting, and work in an extraordinary way on Men's Spirits, to cause so great
and universal a Mourning, which will not be as some have understood, a Mourning
from Horror, but what will be a Result not only of the Greatness and Certainty
of the Sign, but of an extraordinary Concurrence of the Spirit of God herewith,
to answer that eminent Design of Grace, with a peculiar respect to the Jewish
race, as may be clearly seen Zach. 12. 12. And herein I humbly judge, as in the
first times of the Gospel, the Jews did require a Sign from Heaven to engage
them to the Christian Faith, as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 1. 22. so that this
way now in the last times, both with an eminent Rebuke to their Infidelity, and
marvelous Condescendence of Grace, he will yet in such a manner appear. 5. But
it must still be according to what the Scripture expresses, a Sign, and not the
thing signified, or personal Appearance of our Blessed Lord in his humane
Nature, whom the Heavens must contain until the full Restitution of all things;
wherein I must differ from the Judgment of such great Interpreters, who take it
in the other Sense, though this will assuredly be such a Sign, as is then to
have some extraordinary Impress and Signature upon it, to be demonstrative to
the World, and the Jews more peculiarly, of the Humanity of our Blessed
Redeemer. 6. But whatever may be the Glory and Splendour of so extraordinary an
Appearance, it must be still reckoned such as the state of Mortality can bear,
since that Vision that he gave to his beloved Disciple John, of himself in his
glorified State, Rev. 1. was so overpowering, as he who had sometimes leaned on
his Bosom, whilst he was on the Earth, did then fall as dead at his Feet; and
except it were supposed that he should put a Veil on his Glory, in such a
visible and immediate Appearance of his humane Nature, it is not conceivable,
how even the Saints on the Earth, much more the residue of the World, could
bear a sign of that Nature: And herein my Soul does rest with Assurance, as to
the Sense and Intent of the Scripture, about that much desired Sign, after
serious and humble enquiry about the same. Though I must crave leave to add
this further, with a special Confidence, that this Sign, which is to be the
greatest, is to be given in a Monitory way gof his Second coming, is now surely
on a near Approach, as being both that great Signal of Grace to the poor Jewish
World, and of its being very near to a perfecting of the Work of time, and his
coming to judge the World; yea, since the finishing of the times of the
Gentiles, and that great Tide and Effusion of the Spirit, which will then bring
a Resurrection therewith, from the Dead to the Jews, does contemporate
together, the promissory Evidences of the near Approach hereof, are such as I
hope many of this Generation now in the Earth, may be made Witnesses thereto.

9. I know it is reckoned usually, that the accomplishing of these great
Designs of Providence, which are yet to take place now in the last Ages of the
World, and the Exhibition of this wonderful Sign of the Son of Man, may be at a
great distance of time, as to the Event thereof, upon which I have had the same
Thoughts, until a more deep enquiry and search about the Counsel of God herein,
has brought me under a constraint of Light, to see how the work of time in all
its Intents, is nearer to a final close, than seems to be apprehended by most;
and that we are now surely near to an entering on the last Watch of that long
Night of the Churches Militant State, when her Warfare shall for ever be
accomplished, and there will be no more such long Stages in the Course and
Procedure of Providence, as has formerly been; but when the last part of
Scripture Prophecy is once come to the Birth, and full height of
Accomplishment, then i'ts to be hoped that a few Years will bring forth more
than has been formerly attained in some Ages; yea, to this does the Spirit
speak expressly with respect to that great and wonderful Revolution in the last
times, by the incalling of the Jews, and final Destruction of Antichrist, that
then he will cut short his Work in Righteousness, and finish the same; because
a short Work will the Lord make upon the Earth, Romans 9. 28. by which the way
and manner of the course of Providence, is clearly expressed, as it will be in
the evening of time, from what it has been formerly; the Word there in the
Original, is (...) to show that as the work of God which he has upon the
Earth, is the alone Product, and Accomplishment of his Word, so when the
Administration of Providence, is drawing near to its last Period and Close,
then will he cut it short, and hasten the same in some extraordinary way; yea,
allot more to a Day or Year, than he did to many Years before, in the ordinary
course of his working; and as the first bringing forth of the Creation was a
short Work, and a swift course that Omnipotency took herein, so may the last
Consummation and Close of the great Work of Providence, be expected to make no
Delay: I am sure the Holy Ghost speaks expressly for this end, in that
aforecited Scripture, besides other Passages of Sacred Truth, which give Light
and Confirmation thereto; but in what Sense the cutting short of the Work of
God in the last times, and his making a short Work in the Earth is to be
understood, I must humbly offer what I am in Faith persuaded hereof, as
agreeable to the Intent of that Scripture. 1. How it is to be a short Work, and
a very swift Motion that shall be then in the Churches Increase, and in
gathering of the Elect, as what will be answerable to that great extent of the
Church Universal, when it is made up both of Jews and Gentiles, and in such a
day of Power, as the Dew of his Youth, shall be as the Womb of the morning,
Psalm. 110. 3. For though it be clear that the last Triumph of Christ's visible
Kingdom, and the Glory of his Grace in order to Conversion, must assuredly have
a great Harvest therewith, for in-bringing of the Saints, and filling up of
that large Room, which is yet void in the Church Triumphant, in the whole
appointed measure thereof, yea, may be judged such as shall bear a Resemblance
to that Progress of Grace, and wonderful Product of its Efficacy in the first
times of the Gospel, so is it to be expected that this last Tide of the
Effusion of the Spirit of God, shall be so strong and prevalent, as to attain
the Work of an Age formerly in a very short time, and verify that Scripture to
the Amazement of the World, Isa. 66. 10. how a Nation and People should be
Born, and formed to the Lord in a day. But I must herewith speak to a sad
Mistake, that I humbly judge many are upon, as to the measure of that
Prophetic Millennium, and highest Glory of Christ's visible Reign herein, as if
that definite time of a Thousand Years, should be understood extensively of
such a precise number of Years, and of so long a Duration, when the Intent of
the Holy Ghost herein, seems so clear and evident, that it is rather intensively
to be taken in the Value and Splendour thereof, when the Light of one day will
be as of seven in one, and the Work of God in a short measure of time then,
will virtually amount to a Thousand Years. I know it is accknowledged by all,
and clearly understood as David speaks Psalm. 90. and the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2. how
a Thousand years with the Lord is but as a day; yet seems the Sense of this to
be little apprehended by most, how a day before the Lord, may be as a Thousand
years: And how it is intended there, to show his ing such a Value and Glory
thereon, as it may amount to the Product of a Thousand years formerly in the
ordinary course of Providence. 2. It is in this respect also that the Lords
making a short work in the Earth, in the last times of the Church, may be
understood by a more swift course than usual, in order to the perfecting of the
Saints, who then are on the Earth, and ripening of them for Heaven; so that
answerable to their Seize of Grace in a more extraordinary growth herein,
their Translation to Glory will be the more hastened, and the Measure of the
Work and Services of their time, more quickly perfected: This with humble
Sobriety, I have sometimes, and do still judge, that the Lords cutting short
his work then, may be no less remarkable in the short Period and Duration which
the Saints shall have on the Earth, after their Calling, than that long Measure
which was allotted to Men in the first entry of time, as congruous to this
design of Grace, to make a short work then, and hasten the full Translation of
the Church to its Triumphant State. 3. It is to be judged in this respect also,
will appear that cuting short of the Work of God in the last times, by bringing
forth the great designs of Providence, which are then to have their full
Accomplishment, with so extraordinary a gale of Divine Power, and swift course
thereof, as will admit no Halting or Delay, but shall attain that in a very
short time, which to our Thoughts, would seem great for an Age to bring forth.
We can see now with full evidence for what great ends the Service and Use of
time has been from the first entry thereof, and what designs the Blessed
Author of the same, has had on the Ages past: But when we look forward to the
last Intent and Work thereof, there seems to be very dark and strange Thoughts
hereof, by many, though the Spirit of God by Divine Revelation, is clear and
express about the same, as to what must be yet filled up of the Work and
Administration of Providence before the end: The Testimony of Christ, which is
the Spirit of Prophecy, was most specially directed under the Old Testament,
upon his Priestly Office; but now is the Glory of this Testimony, as to the
Prophesies under the New Testament, in a peculiar way, settled on his Kingly
Office, in the whole Progress and Gradations of his visible Kingdom, until the
close of Time; and it is in a Twofold respect, that the Spirit of Prophecy does
reveal the great designs of Providence, which are yet to be perfected before
the end of time: The first is as to a breaking down, and final Overthrow of the
Kingdom of Antichrist under the last Vials; yea, as to the Methods of
Providence, and the manner hereof, is also express and clear, that when the
time is once come for this great and magnificent Act of Judgment on that City,
and Seat of the Beast by the Fifth Vial, it will then make a strange and
unusual dispatch, and be an amazing Surprizal, as the Scripture speaks Rev. 18.
7, 8. when she says, I sit as a Queen, and shall see no Sorrow; then in one day
shall her Plagues come; for strong is the Lord God who judges her. Nor can
this be more marvelous in our Eyes when it comes, than what we have seen of the
degrees of Wrath and Judgment, that are already fulfilled on this Adversary; so
as I must judge by Scripture Evidence, this will be a work of short time, as it
will bear an extraordinary and immediate Appearance of God therewith: But there
is one great design further in that way of breaking down, and overturning which
must yet take place in the final Judgment of the Mahumetan Empire, both as to
Turks and Persians; which as it may be clearly understood by the Sixth Vial,
and does with great evidence relate to what is foretold of this Adversary, Rev.
9. 14. under the Sixth Trumpet, so as to the manner hereof, in that Allusion of
drying up the River of Euphrates; when formerly we see how these Angels were
let loose for Destruction, who were bound thereat: We may see how the same
Allusion does speak such a work of Judgment, as will be strange, sudden and
surprising, as the drying up of Euphrates, by Diversion of that River, did in
one Night, make way to finish the Babylonish Empire in the time of Cyrus; and
now some prelude and remarkable Steps of Judgment, as to the fall of that
Empire, have been of late very obvious: But yet in a Concurrence herewith,
there is one great design of Providence, to be accomplished before the end,
which is for building up, and a restoring work on that great and long Ruin of
the scattered Jews; and thus for gathering together in one, in the Dispensation
of the fullness of time, all things in Christ, even in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. which
Scripture, I must humbly judge, speaks peculiarly to that last uniting work
about the Church Universal, both of the Jews and Gentiles: When the times of
the Gentiles are once Accomplished, which as I have a little touched before,
then will it be understood in the Event, how the Value and Interest of a day,
may be by the Lord in that manner heightened as to sum up and abridge therein,
what had not been attained in a Thousand years before: It was in the first
times of the Gospel, that the Effusion of the Spirit of God, and Outgoings of
his Power was so wonderful and strong, as in Forty years, the extent of the
Christian Church, after the Ascension of Christ, was then greater in the World,
than it seems to be at this day; which I do not question, shall yet once more
before the close of time, be no less wonderful in the swift Course and Conquest
of Grace, both as to Jews and Gentiles, than it was at that time. But as no
great Excellencies, or extraordinary Splendour in any Appearances of God, have
been of a long Duration, whilst the Church here is Militant, so the nearer all
things are to the Center in the final close of time, we should expect as God
has expressly spoke, that it will be with a remarkable cutting short of his
Work then; and that the World will be in a strange manner surprised with his
last coming: Yea, that the greatness of such a Harvest of Isreal's Conversion,
will bring in more in a short time, than many Ages has done formerly. 4. It is
also in this respect that the making a short work in the close of time, may be
judged, that after such extraordinary Discoveries of God, and Methods of Grace,
the final Opposition then made thereto by the World, will to the furthest, make
way for the last decision of Judgment, when the Harvest of the Earth is thus
ripened and made White, under such prodigious measures of Guilt, more than in
all Ages past; as the Righteous God will then be Interested in Vindication of
his Glory, to shut up for ever, that long Period of his Patience and
Long-sufferings. 5. Let me but add upon this Head, that I account it a peculiar
Demonstration of God, which he has reserved to the last times of the Church,
to show before Angels and Men, what use he can make of a short time, for the
greatest ends, and how far he can cause it to amount in perfecting of his Work,
to bring forth such wonderful things in a few days or years, that would seem as
incomprehensible to Reason, as for the Earth to bring forth in a day, or for a
Nation to be created therein, Isa. 66. 10. It has been the Glory of God, that
some should live more in a few years, and act a greater part on the Stage, than
others in a long Age; the first Service of time was beyond all that ever
followed upon this Account, made wonderful and glorious, when one day brought
at once forth the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and set them in their proper Orbs, and
another day brought forth that Intellectual Being of Man, made after the Image
of God; and can it be strange that the same God give such a Demonstration of
himself, and of the glory of his Power, in the last shutting up of his Work, as
the World may see it is not in the Reverence of Time, nor of Ages, when his
Design and Counsel herein is to take place: But if Men will raise and build
their Hopes on the long Duration of this horrid and sad World now in its Old
Age, and think their Houses shall be continued for many Generations; it will be
a sad Surprizal in the Close, when they are found in the same Posture at the
coming of the Son of Man, as it was in the days of Noah: And I doubt not the
swift motions of Providence, for making a short Work in the Earth, will be yet
rendered more astonishing than all we have hitherto seen; Blessed are they that
watch and wait with Joy, for the drawing near of this great day of their
Redemption, though the precise day and time hereof, be alone known to the Lord.

10. It is true, that the way of the Lord may seem to control any swift Motion
and Course of Providence in his Procedure this day, when the Wheels do to our
Sense stand still, and things yet kept in a Suspense, as to any great or
remarkable Decision in the public State of Affairs; yea, when after such
Expectations now for a considerable time, there is so strange an Interval of
Silence, as to the Work of God in this Part of the World, and the Balance kept
in an unusual manner, equal betwixt the French and the whole Confederates,
which are against him: It is unquestionably, matter of great Thoughts of Heart,
what the Event may be e're long of such an astonishing Calm and Stop. But in
order to this, let me humbly speak a few things to be considered. 1. How in all
times of the Church, it has been made observable, That when the Lord is to
bring forth some great Work of Judgment on the World, and on particular
Nations, he does not only reinforce Warnings, and gives time herein to answer
his Call, but even when his Hand is lifted up, will yet hold the same: But
where the most Signal Delay and Forbearance has gone before, it is sure the
more dreadful and sad, is the Stroke when it comes at last. 2. Though there
needs a Divine Light to make a right Estimate and Judgment of things which
relate to the present day, yet if Men admit Reason, it may be too easy to see,
that there is no slow motion in the visible tendency of things, as they now
move in these Three Nations to some fatal and sudden Period; except these
things which should thus awaken our Fears, have a more special Influence to
direct unto these Duties, which might yet prevent the same: For even judicious
Reason may Prophecy what Aspect such Evils have, as by a native and unavoidable
Result have the most near and immediate Influence on a Nations Ruin, when they
are come to that Height, as will admit no Cure: And when the most numerous Part
of a Protestant Profession therein, are so visibly stated in Emnity to other,
pursuing different and contrary Interests, as cannot but lay a dead lift on all
public Actings this day: When also the Contagion of Example is so prevalent
and mortal, but the Comfort thereof so rare, as to any of a truly Raised and
Heroic Spirit. And if we look to these who have a leading Interest in these
Nations, as to their Stations and Qualities, how few of such may be now found,
whose Ancestors had an eminent Appearance for God in their day, that have the
Spirit of their Fathers resting on them?

But now in the 3d. place, I must crave leave to speak a little more fully in
order to a trying and inquisitive Judgment on a very great and affecting Head,
what it should mean that there are such threatening Appearances of Hazard to
Britain from the French Power, in these times we are in: I know it may seem a
hopeful Sign, that such a Party as we have to deal with, are such also against
whom the Blood of Thousands of Protestants is crying to Heaven. And I am
persuaded, that the Holy God will in due time, avenge these strange measures of
Cruelty exercised there, upon the House of Bourbon; and have Indignation
against that Race, until the Sun cease to Rise and Set: But on the other hand,
I must speak, that surely there seems something in an unusual way, threatening
in the present Aspect of this Adversary; on which I shall offer a few serious
Reflections. 1. That for several Years past there has been such remarkable
evidence of a Seal of their Commission for Judgment, not only to take Peace
from this part of the Earth, but to be the Rod of Divine Indignation against
the Refomed Churches: For it has been under this Rod, that hitherto the most
destructive Ddsigns have had the most visible Successes; and when an Instrument
of Judgment is of Gods choosing, and has an anointing for this end put upon
him, it proves then to be very formidable, as it has the Impress of his Terror
and Greatness put thereon, beyond what is at another time; and is thus acted
with an invisible Power and Concurrence, until such a Work of Judgment be
accomplished. 2. We see this is an Adversary who in this late Design against
the whole Protestant Interest in the Kingdom of France, has had such
prevailing Successes, to carry on a ruining and judicial work of that nature,
when in former times the Protestants there, did with an Heroic and Invincible
Spirit, bear out against the utmost Power and Violence of Four Kings
successively; and could see them by an extraordinary Divine Hand broke: But oh!
now was the day turned no less remarkably, and the Attempts of this King
followed with that Terror, Fainting and Lowness of Spirit, as to any self
Defense, that it might be seen, as in the case of Samson, their Strength this
way was departed, so as nothing could avail until such a Work both of Trial and
Judgment, was accomplished: This I confess has often had an affecting Sense on
my own Spirit, and brings a more extraordinary Call therewith, to have our
Reliances more absolutely fixed on God, and promise less to our self from
visible means; yea, how to prevent such a Hazard at the Fountains Head, as is
still threatening, when there may be just matter of Fear, that the date of his
Commission is not yet expired. But 3. Is it not known that this is such an
Adversary, over whom the English Nation once had so great an Ascendent in times
past, as they were a Terror unto that People who now does not only keep, but
gain Ground against the united Strength of so great Confederacy? so that there
may be cause for a higher Look than to what is humane, in the Standing,
Supports, and growing Strength of that Party: And it is surely one of the great
Demonstrations of Providence in the World, which is both in the rising and
depressing of the Genius of a Nation and People, answerable to the Designs
which God is accomplishing hereby: But this I leave to the more serious
Thoughts and Judgments of others, what Appearance such a Sign has to us this
day. 4. It is in some singular way that it may be said the French have attained
beyond others, to be united within themselves; and on the other hand, no less
skilful to divide and promote Discords amongst those who are against them, and
who now in this critical Juncture of Affairs, know how to graft their deepest
Designs on these intestine Distempers, and Convulsions which are so visible in
the Politic Body of these Nations; yea, know how to foment the same, whilst
intestine Conslicts, even amongst the most serious part of Protestants, are so
uncessant as to shut out all fear of this kind, and despise any moral Relief or
Cure. 5. Though it may be of small Notice or Remark, upon any threatening Aspect
of such a Party, yet I must look otherways thereon, even in this Particular,
that there has been such a long and resolute conforming amongst us to the way
of that Nation, in the most Prodigions Fashions and Attires, who have delighted
herein to copy after such a Pattern, that they may be at last in the
Righteousness of God, made to have as sad a Trial of them in the way of
Judgment, as of that continued Instuence and Ascendent they have had over them
in the way of Sin. 6. But there Is one Reflection I must yet further offer upon
this Head, which in this day has had a special Impression on my own Spirit,
that the last Effort and ultimus conatus of the Kingdom of Antichrist before
its final Fall, may be feared, is not yet accomplished as to the ultima clades
of the Reformed Churches; yea, that this work has fallen under his Hand as the
Instrument waited and fitted by Divine Providence for such an end; which has
often made me judge, that the date of his Commission is not yet expired, when the
same provoking Causes of such a desolating Stroke as has been of late on the
Church of France, are no less visible amongst us, and may have the same Ground
to fear, when we see such a remarkable Beacon in their case set before us. The
God of the Reformed Churches is no Respecter of Persons and Nations, who will
not still bear with a naked Show, and an uninlivened Profession of that pure
and excellent Religion we enjoy; yea, when the most near and immediate Signs,
which in former times have gone before some extraordinary Stroke of Judgment on
Nations and Churches, are rather in some further Degree, applicable to us:
There may be more than ordinary cause to meditate Terror on such an account,
that there is a Sound of great Wrath on this Generation, yea, that a Sword is
fourbished and sheathed in Heaven, which is to have some great destroying work
under its Hand, before it be put up: But oh! nothing is like to do until
something more extraordinary than we have yet seen, draw aside that Veil of
Security we are now under, and hide these things from our Eyes. But I shall add
herewith, as it should be a Blessed Surprizal, if the God of Patience might yet
spare and prolong a Season of Grace, and Respite so threatening a Woe; so on the
other hand, an experimental Knowledge of the Truth of Divine Premunitions, when
it is too late, and is had at so dear a Purchase, will be very sad, when no
Conviction or Repentance, can regain such a Season as we now have, if it be
once lost: But as the Proverb speaks, non licet in bello aut morte bis errare.

There is one thing yet further now in the shutting up of this Discourse, which
I must in a few words touch; that as it is the alone Prerogative of the Deity
to declare things to come, before they spring forth, and who has bounded the
Prospect and Evidence of his People as to future Events, or what he is yet
bringing sorth of his work in the last times, according to the extent of Divine
Revelation herein, (since this is to be the measure of our Light and
Discoveries, until the second coming of the Lord.) So it is no less evident and
sure, that any Pretense or Prospect of the Events of Providence, which have no
Dependence on any natural causes, is beyond the possible reach of all natural
Science, or of that horrid Profession which is so much aloft in these times of
judicial Astrology, as it relates to future and contingent Events; wherein Men
as free Agents do act, when besides the known Vanity of any such Pretense, the
God of Truth has put them in the same Class with Sorcerers, Isa. 47. 12, 13.
Stand now with the Enchantments, and the multitude of thy Secrets, and let the
Astrologers and Stargazers, stand up and save thee. It is little taken to heart
how deep such real Homage to the Devil, under a splendid show of a Dependence
on natural Causes herein, may draw to a coming under greater Invasions of his
Power, when it is so far a giving up with their Baptismal Covenant. I could
speak what has been with too sad evidence known of its Tragic Effects, but
one Instance leads me now specially to speak thereto; that before this last
Tremendous Earthquake at Jamaica, there was so strange and universal a Tendence
in that Place, to consult Astrologers in their usual Undertakings as to the
Event, as did enforce a serious Minister of the Gospel, who was there a little
time before that Stroke; not only to Preach, and appear against such a
Contagious Wickedness, as that which brings some remarkable Judgment with it,
but to Publish something in Print against the same; which is here extant: But
they could not thus foresee their own Destiny that was so near approaching. I
might further add a very sad Instance as to a Person who was unquestionably of
eminent Piety and Parts, who by a too eager Curiosity, was carried to make some
Trial of that Study, which tended not only to be his Snare, but to most Tragic
Effects in his own Personal Lot: Though I forbear to speak more particularly
herein, only that God is a jealous God, who will not pass some Evils, without a
severe Remak thereon.

An Additional Enquiry on that singular Conduct of Providence, which is about
the Saints here, and upon some of the greatest Depths thereof, for giving
further Light to the foregoing Discourse on that Subject.
I Hope there may be many this day on the Earth, who are indeed on so desirable
a Scent, and to whom this will be a Subject of great Weight, to know the way of
the Lord, and Outgoings of his Providence toward them, amidst the various
Changes of their Life, and in the more eminent Periods and Stations thereof:
But this proves in another manner, an exercising Subject in an Hour of great
Temptation, to carry the Strength of a Christians Soul thereon, and to
penetrate on such Reasons and Designs, that the Majesty of God has in more
strange and extraordinary Providence, which may for a time, put them in an
Amaze when Darkness does overshadow the same; since for Men thus to be skilled
and discerning in his ways, is surely one of the highest Seize of
spiritual Wisdom within time. There are two Mysteries of Divine Truth to be
matter of deep Thoughts and Reflection, the one is a Christians Conduct and
Passage through Time, the other is his Way and Ascent to that blessed World
which is above, at Death; which is by the immediate Ministry of the Angels: But
it is surely the first that is most marvelous herein, since the special leading
and Communion of the Spirit of God is so Essential thereto; yea, the
Concurrence of the whole Glorious Trinity, and where every Step in that Passage
is watched by Infernal Spirits, whilst they are beset with a Body of Death: But
this is an Experiment also does never fail, that the most dark and searching
Trials, which may be in some unusual manner measured out, do still make way for
the greatest Discoveries of Providence, and giving more Light to the deep
things of God herein.

What I shall now speak to, is on some special Enquiry for attaining a more
clear Light upon this Subject; in the Resolution whereof, it will be found how
much the highest Assistance and Support of a Christians Faith in the Conflicts
of their Warfare, when it comes to the most trying part thereof, does lie here;
and for having some clear and experimental Acquaintance with the same, which is
one of the most choice Improvements of Grace, that we are called to within time.

1. Enquiry that may be suitable here, is to know in what special manner a
Christian is stated, with respect to the Administration of Divine Providence in
his Militant Course, and how he is interessed herein, above the whole residue
of Men in a most singular respect; for clearing of which it is evident,

1. That it is sure with their immediate entry unto a new State by converting
Grace, they come then under a special Conduct and Care of a watching
Providence, and of the delegate Ministry of the Angels, which will never cease,
no not for one Moment, until the putting off of their Armor, and a being
carried into the eternal Imbracements of Divine Love.

2. They are in such a manner stated also, under the Interpositions of this
special Care and Oversight of Providence, as if such a Christian were alone on
the Earth, and not another, about whom so great a Business and Regard from
Heaven is put forth; so high is that Value which God does put upon one of
these, who are the immediate Objects of his Complacence and Delight.

3. It is in such a manner he is interested herein, as a Talent under Trust of
the highest Concern, how to be answerable thereto, both by judicious
Observation of what this way passes betwixt God and them, and how their Suits
have been returned after much waiting hereon; as also for answering the several
ends thereof, in their Improvements of the same.

4. Yea, It is in this respect he is stated under so great an Administration of
Providence which is ever about him, as it is the Seal of Heaven put to the
certainty of Divine Truth, and the Adventures of his Trust thereon, wherein he
can see with Joy and Admiration, that he on whom he did believe and not see,
has in the Issue, made him see what he did believe, to be undoubted and real.

5. He stands thus also related thereto, in the matter of a Testimony, and
Sanctifying of God before others, upon the account of any remarkable Issues of
Providence, and to keep the Remembrance thereof, up as a part of the most
valuable Interest he has upon the Earth; when this way one Hour in his Life
may occurr, that can fully clear the By-gons, and Conflicts of many years past.

2. Enquiry upon this Subject, is to know wherein the Singularity of some Steps
of Providence, with respect to some of the Saints beyond others, do most
specially appear, when they are directed for some eminent Design of Grace
herewith: For a right understanding whereof, we may see,

1. What strange and different Measures the Sovereign God does take in his
refining and trying Work, about some of his People, which he does not with
others, as Isa. 45. Behold I have refined you, but not as Silver; when it is at
a much higher Pitch, that David upon his proper Trial speaks hereof, Psalm. 66.
Thou have tried us as Silver is tried; which is there spoke as the most intense
Degree of Exactness in such a Trial, by a hotter Furnace, whilst herein, some
eminent Project of Love, has been found still then in the Issue.

2. To what an Extremity also he will sometime bring such to, in a trying work
before it be accomplished, so as to kill first er'e he make alive, and render
the case wholly dependant on a Divine Miraculous Power, as in that Sickness of
Lazarus, and that last Conflict of David's at Ziglag, which proved the sorest of
all, when it was on an immediate turn of Providence, and so singular an
Appearance of God was breaking up herewith.

3. Thus appears in so strange a deferring of Light, and concealment of the
Thoughts and Counsel of God toward the choicest of his People, that may be
seen even under such a duration of afflicting Providence, as may be ready to
faint and stagger their Faith, so as no Entreaties, no Tears or Wrestlings can
prevail herein, until they have stayed out their time wherein they must be
tried, as was in the case of Jacob on Joseph's supposed Death; who was so
familiar with God, and yet kept so long in the Dark therein, as also of Joseph
under so strange a Scene, and Mystery of Providence toward him, until once the
word of the Lord had tried him.

4. In his taking some of his Followers by a most signal Conduct of Providence,
of all visible and ordinary means of their Relief; and crossing all their
natural Inclinations and Desires herein, in an irresistible way, that nothing
may interpose to darken his more immediate Appearance in the Deliverance.

5. But which may seem more astonishing and singular is in such a Conduct of
Providence, as is by Contraries, and directing of Means, that in their natural
Tendency, seem only destructive to such an end; yea, when by a falling down of
the greatest Darkness, he brings their case to some higher Paroxism, as may
have all mortal Signs, when yet such Providence do then most powerfully work
to hasten a comforting Issue, above all which had gone before.

6. In an entering of the choicest of his People, with a more singular Seal, and
frequenter Confirmations of his Love than at other times, into some
extraordinary Course and Series of trying Conflicts, which have been as the
falling down of a dark and long Night, immediately following so great a
Brightness; yea, thus also by such a Constraint of Providence, leading them
into the same, as David speaks Psalm. 66. Thou broughtest us in the Net, and
laidst Affliction on our Loins, etc. and as the Disciples of Christ were
constrained to go to the Sea, when a Storm was to follow thereon.

7. When in following the most express and clear Call to some special Service
and Acts of Duty, there occurrs greatest Oppositions, and cross Providence
thereto, as was in Paul's Voyage to Rome, when his Commission from Heaven
herein was given, under so great a Seal and Evidence: And nothing did shake
Jeremiah's Faith more, than that strange and growing Tide of Opposition, which
was still in the way of his Work, when his Call herein was so clear and
extraordinary, as put him to speak thus unto God, Chap. 20. 7. Thou have
persuaded me, and I was persuaded, etc. when he was almost overpowered by the
Enmity and Violence of Men in his work.

8. In that strange length, to which a deferred hope may be continued before
its Enjoyment, even where the Earnest, and Confirmations thereof, have been in
some unusual way made evident, until it seemed wholly desperate, and beyond
hope; yea, when under such a Delay they have been exposed to all kind of
Temptations, which in the Nature thereof, as well as Duration, seemed to
contradict the same, and give it the Lie.

9. By such a Concurrence also in some part of a Christians Warfare, as at the
same time there may be Fightings without, and Fears within, as the Apostle
speaks, such as may render it a strange Mystery to others, when yet there is
nothing penal herein; yea, when this may be for a time, wholly in the dark to
them, until that Design of Grace appear for their being trained thus by lesser
Conflicts for such a time in their Life, wherein usually Satan's greatest Effort
lies against them, and the highest Probation of their Grace, which God has
designed to take whilst they are on the Earth.

10. I shall but add on this Head, that as the Lord has designed something in
his way toward each Christian, that is peculiar to them alone, so is that
Variation in the Methods of Providence about such, remarkable, whilst some have
their most choice and comforting times first, as was Solomon's, and his last
days the worst, whilst the latter days of Job were his best. But there is also
some Singularity in the Trials of the Saints, which it is sure will never be
reiterated, either in the Kind or Measure; such as in Abraham's being tried in
his Faith; upon the offering of Isaac; the Intent thereof being purely Typical:
And it may be judged that Job was given for an Example, to have a Room only
proper to himself, until the Church ceased to be Militant.

A 3d. Enquiry which is of great Concern on such a Subject, lies here, in what
respects it may be said that the light and comforting side of some very dark
and astonishing Providence is gained, which had held such under greatest Fears
and Suspense formerly; so as they can now keep Sight of the way of the Lord
toward them herein: It Is true, this is not attained in the way of Light only,
but of Power; and one day may fall in to raise the Trial of a Christian, more
than many Years past have done; when the Night may be both dark and long,
without either Moon or Stars then appearing, before there be any Daybreak: Yet
may such a rare Enjoyment in a special way thus be understood, when there is
some clear breaking up of Light herein upon these things.

1. How congruous such Steps in the Spotless way of God, that seemed to have so
dismal an Aspect, are to the Excellencies of his Nature, to the Testimonies and
settled Constitutions of his Word, and to these usual Methods, which he has
taken with his greatest Favorites, in cases of Trial of the same Nature, and
under, as trying Circumstances.

2. When they can thus see how great a Design it is, which the Holy God has on
the hottest Conflicts of his Peoples Warfare, and in redoubling their Assaults,
and that it is more than on the highest civil Interest of Kingdoms and Nations:
And how intensely his Eyes are fixed on what part his People does then Act,
wherein the Honor of his own Grace, and their Victory over the Infernal World,
does so much lie.

3. How there is surely an appointed Measure, which the Work and Trial of Faith
has to be filled up, not only with respect to the personal case of Christians,
but to the State of the Church Militant, from the entry, to the close of time;
which has still a growing Increase, wherein each of the Saints has some
proper Interest that is allotted to him, for perfecting of the same.

4. When they can also discern by what a special overruling Providence, the
Lord has usually bequeathed the choicest Mercies, and prevented great Hazards
in such a way, as was most grieving and contrary to their Thoughts in the
present time; and has ever reserved the most rare Experiments and Trials of
himself, to the most trying times of his Peoples Lot, when their Support was
beyond the Possibility of Nature.

5. When they can see what a Foord and strange Passage others have been taken
through, in extraordinary cases, by that alone way of Reliance on an invisible
God; which could have no Rise from ordinary or natural Causes; and how sweet a
Remembrance such Providence have thus transmitted to the Aftertimes of a
Christians Life, to witness that no Joy or Comfort on this Earth, is comparable
to that which has followed the deepest Agonies and Downcastings.

6. When there is some clear breaking up of Light upon the Design and deep
reaches of Providence, which are in the most strange Methods thereof, to
promote the Interest and Service of many, by the personal Conflicts of some of
his People; yea, for their being thus made a more public Blessing to the time
they live in, by Example, and their special Improvement of the same; since for
this end, more singular cases of Trial, are usually allotted by the Conduct of
Divine Wisdom, in order to Services that such are designed for, beyond others.

7. When it is evident both from Scripture Light and Observation, how no notable
Mercies and Enjoyments of Divine Respect, have ever been attained, without
something no less remarkable in the proving of their Patience and Faith, which
has gone before: Yea, in how strange a manner the Lord has then chosen, to
hide his Work for a time, and shut up their way, that the Returns of Light
after the same, might be more sweet and discernable.

8. How it is unalterably fixed by the standing Laws of Heaven, that the
Testimony of God in his revealed Truth, must first be the Object of his Peoples
Trust and Expectation, e're it be made the Object of their Sense and Enjoyment
in its Performance; and that it is an inviolable Connection which lies in such a
Method as is said of Abraham, Heb. 6. 15. That after he had patiently endured,
he obtained the Promise; so as they can thus see how signal a part this has in
the great Frame of Providence, when a long Term of enduring in Hope, and under
greatest Conflicts, goes before the Return and Enjoyment of the same.

9. How clear it is also in the way and order of Grace, that God will first have
a sore Trouble, and depths of Affliction to be deeply exercising and humbling,
before it be made Comforting; but with such Advantage thereby, that these will
be least broke by their Conflicts, who have been most bruised and bowed down by
humbling Exercise and Work herein; this being ever sure, that his great Power
will never be employed to ruin, but to raise, and revive the Spirits of such.

10. When they see also these tender Methods of Divine Providence, as are made
use of in the training of Christians by lesser Essays of Trial, with some lucid
Intervals betwixt one Degree, and another thereof, before the Lord bring forth
his Design upon some more solemn and extraordinary Trial, which should have
otherwise crushed and overset their Spirits, if it had not been thus gradually
brought on.

11. But in this respect most specially it may be said, the light side of the
most dark and astonishing Providence, is turned toward a Christian, when he
can discern and prove his way toward God, with such an humble Reference as
that, Job 23. 10. But thou know the way that I take: And when it is thus made
evident in the hid Actings of Grace and that Prevalency it then has to keep
close with God under the greatest Temptations; in their Applications also, and
Retirements of their Soul with him, where they can have no Witness but himself,
who sees in secret, that he may reward openly; when it is evident likewise in
their Designs, and being acted from internal Motives herein, to have another
Service for God, than such as stand with him upon the Wages of the Hireling;
yea, can prove their way in a Counter-motion to such Evils, that are most
Contagious and Exemplary in the times wherein they are; so as thus, to save
themselves from such an untoward Generation: When also their Work has not only
been to prove their State by sure Evidence, but to know of what manner of
Spirit they were in such a case toward Men, and these who might have had the
greatest Influence on their Trouble and Grief.

But there is yet a 4th. Enquiry, of highest Consequence in order to Light
herein, to know where the Life and Comfort of a Christians Confidence in an
Hour of Temptation does lie, and what has the nearest and most immediate
Influence on the comforting Work of Faith, not only in cases of personal Trial,
which may be most searching, but under any Surprizal of public Judgment, that
may be on a nearer Approach than seems apprehended by most. It Is true, it is
Honorable for God, both to try his People above the Power and Support of
Nature, and to bear them up herein, in the View of the World: But as on the one
Hand it seems astonishing, what Providence may occurr to some of the Saints of
that Nature, as are amongst the Arcana of the Divine Government, so is it no
less wonderful on the other Hand, what he has afforded to be assistant
thereto, which lie not in the Reverence of the World, but are a Secret betwixt
God and the Souls of his People; who has not left them in the Dark, as to the
hid Spring of their Supplies. This I must improve further here, though it be a
little touched in the foregoing Discourse, in these respects.

1. That there is surely then such an undoubted Assistance, as an immediate
Communion with the Spirit of God, in Addresses to Heaven by Prayer, when no
visible things can be comforting, such as goes above the Support of Miracles,
or Ministry of the Angels, though this be not comprehensible by the Spirit of
the World; which can in a Moment raise the Soul above its greatest Fears, when
there is no cause by Humane Sense herein; and affords also one of the highest
Demonstrations of the Christian Faith.

2. That there is herewith such an Enjoyment attainable, as an ineffable Sense
and Evidence of Divine Love, shed abroad on the Soul by the Holy Ghost, which
goes above any external Providence for this end; and does efficaciously work,
when no Light, no former Experience, nor habitual Grace can stemm the the Tide
of some extraordinary Afflictions.

3. Yea, There is also such a Support to be known then, as the sensible and
immediate Presence of the Comforter in his reviving Power, and their Fellowship
with him, which no local distance can possibly obstruct in such an Hour, when
their Release must either come out of Heaven, or utterly fail. These are indeed
great things, which cannot be believed and not admired, that have thus the
nearest Influence on the Joy and Peace of Believing, such as are no abstract
Notions, but the greatest Realities within time.

4. There is the comfort of such Divine Promises, which by some special
Application of that Seal of the Spirit of Promise, has been formerly known,
will in a dark and sad Hour, afford a most singular Assistance: But it is no
Contemplation can speak the Power of that Evidence which has accompanied the
same, when in an obsignatory way this is given unto the Soul, or the great
Improvement that has been made hereof, when all visible Refuges are failed.

5. There is likewise the Support of Sanctuary Strength, that is in a most
peculiar way designed of the Lord, for a Supply in the most overwhelming case;
when by the public Ordinances of the Gospel (where such a Door is kept open)
and under the Blessing of that Institution, such hid and immediate Conveyances
of Power have been then experienced, as has made them return with Admiration
upon the directing of Truths to their present case, when nothing could be more
seasonable; yea, has been so evident a return often to some humble Reference and
Enquiry in the Temple herein, as if it had been by a Voice from Heaven, both in
the Light and Power thereof.

6. There is the Improvement of former Experience of ancient Friendship and
Love betwixt God and their Soul, which in the sadest Hour, is of a singular
use; as also of Providence which have been more extraordinary in their Life
past; since it is thus Experience works Hope, not only upon our reasoning from
the same, but in the way of an established Mean and Ordinance for this end, by
that indissoluble Connection, which God has fixed betwixt them.

7. Nor is it personal Experience only, (though that takes the deepest
Impression on Men's Soul) but the Improvement of such eminent Acts of
Providence, as have been most discernable in the case of others, under their
greatest Exigencies, and under some observable Seal of Gods immediate
Appearance therein; since there is a public Interest that the residue of the
Saints have in the same, for strengthening of their Faith, as well as these who
are most immediately concerned herein; to make some new Accession to the
Churches Treasure, when the Issue of some resolute and great Adventures of
Trust and Reliance on God, has been made clear and conspicuous to the World.

8. There is likewise that rare Assistance to a Christians Faith, and its
comforting Work in the saddest Hour, which is ever then found in the actings of
Love, and fervent Emotions thereof to him, who is the Determiner of their Lot;
since it is proper to Love, that it thinks no Evil, but has still Honorable
Thoughts of God, even under the most dismal Appearances of Providence; and is
thus watchful, that nothing should estrange or separate betwixt them and the
Love of Christ, whose severest Act of Smiting, is to heal, and is ever saving:
And where this Love is in Exercise, it has such a piercing Intelligence with
its Blessed Head, as to discern his Heart, and the sounding of his Bowels
toward them, even when his Hand would seem to destroy; which renders the way
of Trust so sweet and delightful, that if this way could fail, they should make
no other Choice.

9. Yea, There is to be known then, how the comfort of Hope does work upon
their being in the Issue made Overcomers, when the Triumph shall be
proportioned to the Measure and Greatness of these Conflicts, which have been
in their way; and that it is so near when this shall be made the Object of their
Sense, which is now such a Wonder to their Faith; and that even in this
Militant State on the Earth, they stand in Right, as a Part of the Church
Triumphano, who are insert as Members thereof, on the Records of Heaven; and
though they be not yet in Possession, yet have a proper Room secured them in
these Regions of Glory, who may have no Title, or comforting Interest now in
this World: And how short a View are we to take of the things of Time, whilst
that other World, in both the States thereof, is each day filling up, with a
growing and new Increase?

Let me add this further, that as each observing Christian should have some
Record and History of himself, both as to what has been most remarkable in the
ways of God toward them, and of their Designs and Improvements of Grace, which
in any measure they have attained: So is it not expressible, what an Interest
this makes as a helper to their Joy, when there may be a surrounding of them
otherwise, with matter of Heaviness under manifold Temptations. It is by this
short View which is now offered of Assistance, that have the most immediate and
prevalent Influence on a comforting Reliance and Adventuring on God, though
Trials should be at the greatest height, may let us see what an Advantage such
have above these who seem to have the most Support and Security from visible
things; yea, we know little how near such a day may be to these, who now are at
ease, when no Comfort or Relief shall be found in another way: And oh! that Men
would in the way of Reason, inquire more deeply about the Truth hereof, and
what they will do when Humane Confidences are blasted, if they have no Interest
in such a Support.

I should have entered on a 5th: Enquiry about the present Appearances of the
time we are in, but having both in the foregoing Discourse, and another Piece
lately Published, spoke at some Length thereto, as to what may be just Grounds
of Fear, and for Confidence and Hopes; I shall forbear to add further on that
Head; but whatever Regard may be to the same, which I must say, has a
directing Call in a special way to these, who are in the highest Station and
Power, this day in Britain; I can with humble Confidence speak that what is
there offered to be awakening to us as matter of Fear, when such unusual
Grounds are for the same, was under the Dread and Fear of that God, to whom I
must e're long give an Account of the Commission I have received, as a Watchman
to his Church; yea, with such inward Quiet and Assurance of Mind hereIn, as if
the Close of this Discourse, should be the last of my Work and Service within
time; though something may possibly seem strange of what has been offered on
such an Account: But I hope therein will be found nothing which may not be
convincing to any of a serious and considerate Spirit in the way of solid
Reason and was for this Intent designed, that by our answering to the Call and
Warnings of God, which have been very extraordinary and evident in our day,
there might be yet a meeting him whilst he is in the way, to prevent threatened
Judgment, which tarrieth not for Man, nor is dependent on visible things, when
the time thereof, is once come: Only I must shut up this with Two serious
Reflections on the present Juncture of things, as may be too Obvious. 1. That
it is now some Years past, since an unusual and conspicuous Signal of Judgment
has been given, not only to these Nations, but to the whole Reformed Churches,
in that astonishing Stroke, and Devastation of the Church of France, where has
been a plucking up of what was so eminently planted there, and casting down of
what was built, so as for a time, the Candlestick is removed thence: This I
must confess has had to me, a more sad and affrighting Aspect, that the
Correspondence which is this day in the Public State of the Reformed Churches,
does so evidently in as high a Prevalence of Sin, and of wasting Distempers,
(if not in a higher Degree) than could be than charged on that Church. 2. That
when the Holy God sets up so great and eminent a Beacon as such a Ruin is this
day in our sight, he does usually for some time, allow it to be Warning and
Awakening to other Places for whom it is designed; and herein as to this
Instance, has he graciously held his Hand, that the Outcast of his People
there, might have both a Retreat and Relief in other Churches; but oh! when the
Intent of such an astonishing Beacon is not answered, and cease to be
affecting to our Spirits as at the first, I must refer it to the Thoughts and
Enquiry of others, whether the Design of such a Rod as has been there raised
and made use of for Judgment and breaking down, as well as Trial, be yet
sisted, and has no further Work for the same Interest and Vindication of the
Glory of God, as to other of the Churches; or if there be no cause now to fear
that the Dregs of such a Cup is not yet wrung out? which may be feared to be
more severe at last, than what was in the first part thereof, if Grace do not
in a singular way, interpose: And it is on that Account my Heart cannot but
meditate Terror this Day.

FINIS.

