(...) OR The true Dignity of St. Paul's ELDER, Exemplified in the LIFE Of that
Reverend, Holy, Zealous, and Faithful Servant, and Minister of Jesus Christ Mr.
Owen Stockton, M. A. Sometimes Fellow of Gonvile and Caius College in
Cambridge, and afterward Preacher of Gods Word at Colchester in Essex.

WITH A Collection of his Observations, Experiences and Evidences Recorded by
his own hand.

To which is added his FUNERAL SERMON, By John Fairfax M. A. Sometimes Fellow
of C. C. C. in C. and afterward Rector of Barking in Suffolk.

Heb. 11. 4. -- He being dead yet speaks.
London, Printed by H. H. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Sign of the Bible and Three
Crowns, at the lower end of Cheapside, 1681.

To the Worthily Honored, and Eminently Religious, the Lady Brook of
Cockfield-Hall in Suffolk.
MADAM,
HAving no Foundation whereon to raise an Ambition of public Notice, my Pen
was never touched with the Itch of Writing. That this once I venture abroad, is
to show another, not my self. I am under more than a common obligation to this
pious Office, to pay due Honor to the dead; to build a Prophets Tomb, or erect
a Pillar upon his Grave, that he may not be Buried in utter oblivion with men,
who has the promise of everlasting remembrance with God. When worthy and
desirable persons are removed out of oursight, it is some satisfaction to have
their Pictures before our eyes. This is the design of these sheets. And had the
Pencils Art born proportion to the Subjects worth, I had almost said, here had
been expressed as rare a piece in Grace as was Absalom in Nature. But the
defects to be complained of in the Face, and pardoned, are abundantly
recompensed with the true Portraicture of the inward Vitals, the very heart and
Soul drawn to the Life by his own hand, that only could. Wherein if some shall
say, they see nothing excellent, and shall despise, others, I doubt not, will
be able to reply, as he in a like Case; If you saw with my eyes, you would
commend. That this Dead is here proposed to public view is to gratify the
desire, and to contribute to the instruction (that I say not the reproof) of
the Living. Happy are many Souls who have enjoyed the Privilege of the lively
voice of this great Instrument of God. He is not to be numbered among those of
whom it is said, Let them be silent in the Grave. Who then knows, but that
being dead he may yet speak effectually, whose Living Tongue was as choice
Silver, and whose Lips fed many. The Spiritual workings of his heart, and
Converse of his Soul with God, was a secret between God and himself, wherewith
a stranger did not intermeddle; which he no more than others in like Case had
the freedom generally to Communicate. That God put it into his heart to Record
it, is no improbable Argument, that God, as well as himself, intended its
usefulness not only to himself, but others also, when once Death should give a
liberty to the Secrets of his heart to be made manifest.

Madam, The great Respect and Honor which your Ladyship has always Cordially
had, and freely expressed to the Faithful Ministers of Christ, has at once
both obliged and encouraged me to prefix your worthy Name to the Memorial of
this deceased Prophet. Of whom I am not at all suspicious lest your Ladyship
should be ashamed. He who has been a more than ordinary burning and shining
Light amidst his Generation, and is now a Star of the greater Magnitude amidst
the Spirits of just men made perfect, can cast no dark Reflections upon that
true Honor your Ladyship obtains with all that know you; which in your own
great Judgment is valued as it is of God, and not of men. I shall not wonder,
if those, who are strangers to the Holy Spirit, shall find no delightful
satisfaction in reading these Spiritual exercises and experiences; or who are
Enemies, shall censure them as Phanatick fancies: which indeed can never be
well understood without some measure of that Diviner Learning, whose method is
Taste and see. I have therefore chosen humbly to offer this to your Ladyship,
who is of full Age, and by reason of use, have senses exercised to discern both
Good and Evil; in whose hands it will be secure and fear no Contempt. I have
reason to believe, that in reading the practice of the Life and workings of the
heart of this now Glorified Saint, your Ladyship reflecting on your self will
find cause to say, Face answers to Face, and Heart to Heart. Which I hope may
contribute somewhat to your joy, and Confidence before him who fashioneth his
Childrens hearts alike, in stamping the same his Image upon them all.

It has pleased God in his holy and wise Providence to make your Ladyship an
instance of many, and sharp Trials, yet withal of much Grace, by the power
whereof you have endured with most Christian and Exemplary Faith and Patience.
The last Enemy is yet before you, to be expected, and Encountered, which,
considering your Ladyships years, seems to be approaching. But, behold, it is
here presented, as Disarmed, and Conquered, and so less formidable. And I doubt
not but your Ladyship lives in the Comfortable prospect of that Blessed day,
when all your Conflicts shall be Crowned with Victory, and Triumph over Death,
in Communion with the Prince of Life.

Madam, I have yet to add, that I have gladly taken this occasion to make my
public acknowledgments, of the inviolable obligations which your Ladyship has
laid upon me by your singular Bounty, exercised as well to my Honored Father
now with God, as to my self, in our state of Deprivation. And here I must join
with your Ladyship, your only surviving Daughter of the many hopeful Children,
which God had graciously given your Ladyship, Madam Mary Brook, the true
Heiress of your Ladyships great Virtue and Grace. As my Pen cannot be silent,
lest ungrateful; so it dares not be fluent, lest offensive to that Liberality
which would not have the left hand know what the right hand does. I am bound to
say, Blessed be ye of the Lord, who have not left off your kindness to the
Living and to the Dead. That this may be fruit abounding to your account, an
Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, and well pleasing to God,
recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just; That your days may yet be
multiplied, and the Consolations of God be the support and strength of your
Age; That the Blessings of the Everlasting Covenant may descend, and remain to
your Posterity from Generation to Generation is, and shall be the Prayer of,

Madam, Barking Jun. 1681. Your Ladyships most Humble and bounden Servant and
Orator, John Fairfax.

The true Dignity of St. Paul's Elder Exemplified In the Life of Mr. Owen
Stockton.
The Preface.
IT has been the vainglorious practice of some men for the perpetuating of
their memories beyond Death and Time to the farthest posterity, to engrave
their Names in Brass or Marble, or to write them upon their Houses and Lands,
which yet Death and Time have wholly obliterated. But it is the Honor of many
saints to be recorded in sacred Scripture beyond all danger of Oblivion, as
great examples of Piety and Holiness toward God, and of service to the Church
of God in their generation. And God has since by his providence in all ages
secured to his more eminent saints and servants the like Honor, stirring up
some survivors to embalm their precious Name and memory, by recording and
reporting the dead to posterity in more lasting monuments, as great Instances
of the Grace of God, special matter of his praise, and approved patterns as
well for the encouragement as the imitation of the Living. How despised soever
this excellent servant of Jesus Christ, the subject we have to write of, has
been in the eyes of some of his Generation; yet I am persuaded none of the
worthies in the Church of God, that are gone before him, will count it any
disparagement to their Honor, that he be added to their number, whose precious
Names survive their death. The Records which have been made, and published of
the Lives of many Excellent, and holy persons, consist for the most part only
of Such passages, as have fallen under the observation of those, who have more
intimately, and frequently conversed with them; and many hands have Contributed
to the collecting of some more remarkable words, and actions, which an
Ingenious pen, in just honor to the Subject, improveth as Indices of those
singular accomplishments of mind and heart, which are beyond the reach of the
most observant Eye. And were there nothing else to be recovered, Concerning the
subject before us, but what might be so collected, from the hands of those, who
had the happy advantage to know fully his Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose,
Faith, long Suffering, Charity, patience etc. I doubt not, but, if managed by a
skillful pen, it would justly amount to such a character of him, as might
worthily render him, a more than Ordinary example of Faith, and Holiness, of
Scripturall knowledge and practice, as well to the preachers, as professors of
the Gospel, of Christ, to the praise of the Glory, of the Grace of God. But
their is less need of this in reference, to our subject. Himself having not
only, in great measure prevented, and saved his friends that labor, and
service, but moreover discovered the inmost secrets of his heart, toward God,
beyond all that could be known of him, by the Strictest observation of others.
What has been the advantageous practice, sometimes (though very rare) of some
eminent Servants of God, who have made Religion their business, viz. to write,
Curriculum vita, the manner and course of their own life, appears to have been
his. He not only kept a strict Eye upon himself, and took special notice of his
own heart, and ways, and the manner of his spiritual living unto God, but lest
he should forget, and render it useless, committed the same to paper, recording
the dealings of God toward him, the workings of corruption, and grace, his
Conflicts, and Temptations the secret Intercourse, and Communion between God
and his Soul, the approaches, and withdrawings of the Holy Spirit, his liftings
up and castings down, the actings of Faith and Love, Divine assistance in Duty,
return of prayers, the clearness of his evidences, and rejoycings of his hopes
etc. Wherein the life and power of true Religion, does more consist than in all
open and visibel acts. Out of this Treasury, which is enough to Supply a far
larger volume, has been fetched the greatest part of that furniture which
fills these pages, and that mostly in his own words. You that read may
therefore imagine you hear this holy Prophet, bespeaking you in the words of
another Prophet, Come and read all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what
he has done for my soul. My own experience assures me, that to those who are
engaged in the Spiritual War, and running the Christian race, and have set
their faces toward God, It will be useful, encouraging, delightful, and
satisfactory to read so much of the sense and feeling of their own hearts, in
the experiences of this Blessed Saint. The greatest part of whom, yet I believe
will find cause to be ashamed before God, seeing themselves so far cast behind,
and may be provoked to mend their pace, in pressing forward toward the mark,
to which he has attained. As for such as rest in their negative goodness, and
commendable moralls, their form of Godliness and bodily exercise in religion,
without the life and power thereof, who knows but they may be convinced, of the
vanity of their hopes, and the sandy foundation, whereon they have built them,
and that yet they lack something, while they read the thoughts, affections, and
workings of his holy heart, his understanding improvement of the Holy
Scriptures, and his Spiritual communion, with the Holy God, to which themselves
are altogether strangers. But such is the enmity, and contradiction of the
carnal mind to the spirit, and grace of God that I cannot be without jealousy,
that much of what is true written will be matter of scorn, and derision to the
profane Generation. However as the word of God delivered in the Scriptures, and
dispensed in the Ministry thereof, has its diverse and contrary effects, upon
diverse and contrary subjects, whereon yet God knows how to raise his own
Glory, so shall the same word Exemplified in the life of this now glorified
saint, have the like effects on them that read it. To the humble and teachable
it shall be in adjutorium, but to the scorners and despisers in Testimonium.

THE RELATION.
MR. Owen Stockton was born in the City of Chichester, in the County of Sussex,
the last week of May, 1630. was the fourth Son of his Father Mr. Owen Stockton,
a worthy Prebendary of that Cathedral, who was a younger brother of that
ancient family of the Stocktons, of Kiddington Green in Cheshire. About the
seventh year of his age, his Father dyed and left the care of him, and his
other Children, to their Mother, a pious Gentlewoman of the family of the
Tilees, in Cambridgeshire. She being a Widow and stranger in Chichester; soon
after the death of her Husband, returned to her native Country, and settled her
self at Ely, where was a very good Grammar School, under the Government of Mr.
William Hitches, to whose care she committed this her Son, for his education.

From a Child he was of great hopes, while yet a little Grammar Scholar, his
inclination was such as presaged more than ordinary improvement. Looking once
accidentally into Mr. Fox his Acts, and Monuments Ecclesiastical, in one of the
parish Churches of that Town, and reading some little part thereof, he was so
affected, with the knowledge of that History, that he never ceased to
supplicate his friends, till he had obtained one part of them, for his use.
Wherein (declining the puerile recreations, to which his School-fellows
addicted themselves) for some years he spent, most of that time which he had
vacant, and could redeem from his obliged attendance upon the School.

His judicious Master discerning in him a ready natural capacity, for learning
and desire after it, with industrious diligence* in study, (for though he
spent, so great a part of his time out of School, in reading History, yet
withal he so performed his part and offices, in the School, as he never gave
occasion of correction or rebuke) and observing moreover his Constant daily
attendance on the worship of God, according to the rules of the Schools. He
earnestly Commended him to his Mother, and persuaded her to think of no other
course or trade of life for him, but that he be prepared and sent to the
University; in order to the Office, and Work of the Ministry.

Accordingly not without his own inclination and choice being sufficiently
instructed, with Grammar Learning for Academical studies, he was in the
sixteenth year of his age, viz. Jan. 2. 1645. admitted into Christ's College in
Cambridge, under the Tuition of the Learned, Dr. Henry Moore. His years were
not many, but his stature less, Insomuch that for some time he could not pass
the streets without special notice taken of him, and expressed on that account.

Nor was this only a vulgar observation, but such also as fell under the
Remark, of the late King Charles the first, who being brought to a Gentleman's
house, by the Army night to Cambridge, and many Scholars coming thither in
their habits, to see his Majesty, was pleased to order that they should be
admitted to his Royal presence, and kiss his hand. Among whom this Coming in
his order, His Majesty made special observation of of him, and gave him his
gracious benediction, saying, Here Is a little Scholar indeed, God bless him.

His residence in the College, was so constant, that during the whole time of
his Undergraduacy, he was not absent Communibus annis Conjunctim and divisim,
one month in a year. And his sobriety such that he abstained not only from
public Houses, but in other Company, and places from Wines, and and strong
Drink, as judging Nature in his age, to stand in no need of such kind of helps.

After he had taken his degree of Bachelor, of Arts he resided still in the
College, applying himself seriously to the Study of Divinity, which he always
designed.

In pursuance whereof, whether by his own or others advice, I cannot say, he
went to London, and spent some months there acquainting, himself with the
principal Booksellers, from whom he took an account, of the best writers in
Divinity, of that time, frequenting the Library of Sion College, and the
Lectures at Gresham College, applying himself to several Worthy Ministers of
the City, and attending on their exercises which were daily, that he might
observe the variety, of men's Gifts and their several methods of Preaching. By
which he made so great an Improvement of himself, that he has often said
since, that if it should please God to give him a Son of his own disposed to
the Ministry, He should give it him as his particular advice, before he entered
upon the work of preaching, to spend some months in London, in attending on
those learned Divines, which excelled in the Gift of preaching, wherewith that
City is always furnished.

Being much affected and pleased with this study, Resolving to pursue it
earnestly, and prepare himself for the Work of the Ministry, He did privately,
yet in a very solemn manner by fasting and prayer, make as it were a
dedication, of himself to God for that service.

When he was middle Bachelor, he was removed from Christ's College, and made
Junior Fellow, of Gonvile and Caius College, about the beginning of the year,
1651. where after a years continuance, and probation of of his worth, he was
translated from that to a, Senior Fellowship, which he enjoyed during the space
of six years and upward. In which time he discharged the office of Steward to
the Temporal, of Catechist and Conduct, to the Spiritual advantage of that
Society.

Here it was that the Lord Trained up this his Disciple to be a Scribe
instructed for the Kingdom of God, furnishing him so plentifully with Divine,
and Spiritual knowledge (which he gained as well by experience, and observation
of Gods dealing with him, and the operation of his Spirit upon his heart, as by
industrious Study, and Meditation) that he could readily bring forth out of his
Treasure things new and old: Was able to speak pertinently, sutably, and
seasonably to the various Capacities, Conditions, and Cases of Saints, and
Sinners, and became an happy, powerful Instrument in the hand of God for the
Conversion, Edification, Consolation, and Salvation of many Souls.

His design and desire being to serve the Lord Jesus Christ in the Office and
work of the Ministry, he directed the course of his Studies with special
respect to that Service. And though his place and exercises in the University
obliged him to the Study of Philosophy, wherein he was equal to most; yet the
Study of Divinity was his (...). Not satisfying himself with the reading of the
elaborate Writings of the most learned Divines, wherewith he furnished his
Library at the Expense of some hundreds of pounds, he especially addicted
himself to the reading, and study of the Holy Scriptures, as containing the
whole Counsel of God which, as his Minister, he was to declare to men. Which
course of his study God so succeeded with his Blessing, that it may be truly
said of him what St. Luke says of Apollos, Act. 18. 24. He was mighty in the
Scriptures, his Head, Memory, Heart, and Tongue, were full of the Scriptures,
whereof he has given abundant Evidence by his Scriptural Catechism. In the
opening, and applying whereof his Gift was excellent and peculiar. All that
knew him and were acquainted with his Discourse, Ministry, or Pen, must bear
him that Testimony, with the holy Apostle St. Paul he preferred the Learning
gotten at the feet of Christ, above all he had got at the feet of Gamaliel, and
though he had the valuable accomplishments of other learning, yet he determined
not to know any thing save Jesus Christ and him crucified. In which knowledge
he was like Saul higher than most of his Brethren from the shoulders and
upwards. I know none I can better compare him with, than that Eminent, and
Powerful servant and Instrument of Jesus Christ, Mr. Arthur Hildershaw whom I
am prone to believe he propounded to himself as a Pattern for imitation.

But knowledge alone is not sufficient instruction for a Minister of the
Gospel. It is no rare thing to find some great Scholars in the Theory of
Scripture, who yet are but very ordinary Christians, whose light like that of
the Moon has very cold influences. He is best accomplished whose knowing head
effects his heart, and governs his life; who knows revealed truth as well by
Spiritual sense and Experience, as by Speculation. The Spirit of God is a
Spirit of truth and of life too, Communicates both grace and Gifts, and
teaches as well (...) as (...). Both which consisted together in this
excellent person. The word of God dwelt both in his Head and Heart and was
effectually the Law of his Life. He was a Burning as well as Shinning Light: A
man more than ordinarily mortified to the pleasures of the Flesh and vanities
of the World; freely and resolvedly devoted to the fear of God. His
Conversation was in Heaven, his Communion with God, his Delight in the Saints,
his Business Religion, his Zeal for Holiness, his main Design the glorifying of
God, and the Salvation of his own and others Souls. Whereof the following Pages
will, I doubt not, be an abundant Evidence not only to the Charitable, but
Rational judgment of the Christian Reader.

As for his practice of Mortification, I shall not otherwise express it than in
his own words, as I read it in the records of the remarkable passages of his
life by his own hand, but after he had a family, viz.

Having been foiled by the lusts of my own Heart several times, and considering
what I should do to get rid of those lusts, which, had so often prevailed over
me, God directed me to three several means. The one was suggested to me as I
was walking in my garden and meditating on the affairs of my Soul, and that was
to be more frequent in Eyeing, applying, and meditating on the promises; and
the Scripture, which the Holy Spirit of God set before me for this end was 2
Pet. 1. 4. By the precious promises given to us, we escape the pollution that
is in the world, through lust. The other was suggested to me as I was hearing a
Sermon, and that was to be daily applying the Lord Jesus to my soul, grounded
on Romans 13. 13. 14. where the Apostle advises to put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
as an help against chambering and wantonness, strife and envying. The third was
suggested to me as I was riding abroad, and discoursing of the things of God,
which was Gal. 5. 16. Walk in the Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh.

In pursuance of these means for the mortifying of the lusts of the flesh, I
determined with my self, to Eye the promises of God, more frequently then I had
done, and to that end, I chose out some promises of daily and continual use,
and determined by the help of God, to salute and embrace them once a day, and
not only to take a view of them my self, but in my meditations, and soliloquies
to spread them before God, and to put the Lord in remembrance of them. For
supplying all the wants of the day, I chose that promise Phil. 4. 19. for
growth in grace, Hos. 14. 5. for subduing my sins. Mic. 7. 19. Romans 6. 14. for
success in my undertakings, Ps. 1. 3. for turning all the events of the day for
good to me. Romans 8. 28. for the conversion and sanctification of my children.
Isa. 44. 3. for my yoke fellow and servants, and all others in my family that
they might get good from me, and return to God, and grow in grace, Hos. 14. 7.
for sanctifying of my afflictions, Isa. 27. 9. Zech. 13. 9. for audience of my
prayers, Mic. 7. 7. Joh. 14. 13. 14. for grace and strength to manage all the
works of the day, to the glory of God. Zech. 10. 12. for protection from
dangers and casualties. Genesis 15. 1. for giving me eternal life, in case the day
should bring death to me. Luke 12. 32. Joh. 3. 16. for counsel and direction in
all cases of difficulty, and unexpected emergencies. Isa. 58. 11. Ps. 32. 8.

I judged it also very conducible, to the Glory of God and my own soul's good,
to manage all my employments, as much as may be with an eye to the promises,
and as to my calling, when I am studying to compose Sermons, Deuteronomy. 28. 8. when
I go to preach, Math. 28. 19. 20. for success in my preaching, Isa, 56. 8. --
65. 23.

I was the more confirmed in this frequent, and familiar converse with the
promises, not only as it helps on our participation of the Divine nature, and
our escaping the pollution that is in the world through lust, but because the
Lord commands us to be always mindful of his covenant, 1 Chronicles. 16. 15. and it
pleases God to see us taking hold of his Covenant. Isa. 56. 4. and it is for
the Glory of God, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

I determined also when I should feel the workings of any lust, presently to
look up to Jesus Christ. It being the remedy which the Holy Ghost, prescribes
against such sins as do most easily beset us. Heb. 12. 1. 2. I have often been
encouraged and helped in this practice, of looking unto Jesus, to subdue my
sins from Act. 3. ult. God sent his Son Jesus, to bless us in turning us every
one from his iniquities. Beza's note upon that text is very good, and has been
of use to me, viz. that the great word for inquities, signifies the roots and
habits of Sin. I saw it was my duty, and concernment every day, to be more
frequent in applying my soul to Christ, and Christ his benefits to my soul.

In pursuance of the, 3d means of mortification, viz. walking in the spirit, I
resolved to endeavor to do my works, and duties both to God and men, more
spiritually, and in order hereunto, to reduce my actings to some word, and as
often as I could, to eye some word of God, as I was entering on them; as for
instance, If I be called out by others or stirred up in my own Spirit to visit
the sick, or any afflicted person, to have my thoughts on Math. 25. 36. or Jam.
1. 27. when any poor people come to me for relief, or any object of charity is
presented to me to eye. Gal. 6. 10. or Hebr. 13. 16. or Isa. 58. 10. or Eccl.
11. 1. or prove. 19. 17. when a poor man comes to borrow, Deuteronomy. 15. 7. 8. 10.
When to write letters, take a journey, or be any ways employed for others, Gal.
5. 13. Phil. 2. 4. when to visit out of courtesy, or do any thing which
courtesy requires, 1 Pet. 3. 8. when to instruct my Servants and Children,
Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Genesis 18. 19. when to Catechize the youth that come to my family,
Joh. 21. 15. Prove. 22. 6. when invited to exercise abroad among poor or rich,
Isa. 32. ult. when to administer a reproof, Lev. 19. 17. when to confer about
Spiritual things, Mal. 3. 17.

This was the wise and holy method, which this faithful Servant and Soldier
of* Jesus Christ, prescribed to himself by Divine direction, whereby to manage
the Spiritual War, with the sin that dwelt in him, that he might not be
overcome with it. According to which he moreover charged himself with, the
practice of universal positive Holiness, which he thus records.

Being under the rebukes of Gods chastising providence, I set apart a day to
humble my Soul with fasting and prayer, that I might obtain from God, a
Sanctified use of my afflictions. I sought God to pardon my sins, which were
the causes thereof, and to make them work for my good. I spent a good part of
the day in meditating, how I should make a right improvement of these
corrections.

I Considered that one main end of all Chastisements was, that God might make
us partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12, 10. Isa. 26. 9. I resolved in the
strength, and by the help of God to follow after holiness more vigorously than
I had done, and I engaged in this resolution because I saw from, Isa. 60. 21.
that by my being holy, and righteous God should be glorified.

And seeing the nature of holiness lies in our bearing Gods image, in our
being like to God, or in our conformity to the Divine Nature, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col.
3. 10. I resolved to endeavor to imitate, and resemble God in mercifulness,
Luke 6. 36. in forgiving injuries, Ephesians. 4. ult. in doing good, Ps. 119. 68. in
justice, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. in Love, Joh. 4. 16. in humility, Ps. 113. 5, 6. in
longfuffering, Exodus 34. 6. in not retaining anger, Ps. 30. 5. in uprightness,
Isa. 26. 7. in kindness, Luke 6. 35. in helping the fatherless, widow and
stranger, Ps. 10. 14. -- 146. 9. And whereas we come to partake of Gods image.
1. by beholding the discovery which he has made of himself, and his glorious
Attributes in the gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 18. 2 by applying the promises, 2 Pet. 1.
4. 3. by walking with him, Act. 4. 13. for we grow like those with whom we
converse, Prove. 22. 24. 25. I determined to walk with God, to cleave to the
promises, and to meditate often on his glorious Attributes.

And seeing that our holiness lies in the Conformity of our life, to the will
of God revealed in his word, as well as in the resemblance of the Divine
Nature, I determined to set before me several Scriptures as my rule to walk by,
and often to ponder them, and if I cannot walk up to these rules, yet my
endeavors shall be (grace assisting) to walk after them, and that will be
accepted as a demonstration of my Love to God, 2 John v. 6.

For guiding and regulating my thoughts, I set these Scriptures before me, Jer.
14. 14. Isa. 55. 7. Mal. 3. 17. Ps. 104. 34. Phil. 4. 8. Prove. 23. 26. Deuteronomy.
15. 9. Eccl. 10. 20. Prove. 24. 9. Math. 9. 4. Zech. 8. 17.

For regulating my affections, these, Col. 3. 2, 5. Gal. 5. 24. particularly,
for my delight. Ps. 1. 2. -- 37. 5. my joy, Phil. 4. 4. Ps. 43. 4. my desire,
Isa. 26. 8, 9. my sorrow, Ezekiel. 7. 16. my Love, Math. 22. 37. Ps. 119. 97. my
hatred, Ps 97. 10. my fears, Luke 12. 4, 5. my hope, Ps. 39. 7. my trust, Ps.
62. 8. Isa. 26. 4.

For regulating my speech, these Ephesians. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Ps. 119.
46. Ps. 71. 8. 24. Prove. 31. 26. We should lay it as a law upon our selves, to
speak kindly to all sorts of persons.

For my works, these Tit. 3. 8. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 10. Tit. 2. 14.
Math. 5. 47. 1 Timothy 6. 18. Rev. 3. 2. Romans 13. 12. Act. 26. 20. Our works must
be Visibly, as well as truly good, Math. 5. 16. must be exemplary, Tit. 2. 7.
yet we must not expect Justification or Salvation by our own works, but by
grace, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Romans 3. 28.

Thus did this man of God gird himself with the Sword of the Spirit, which he
faithfully and successfully managed against his corruptions, temptations and
transgressions. Thus did he put on the breast plate of Righteousness, holding
the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, applying the word of God, as an
inviolable Law and rule to his heart, and life Sincerely aiming at the Glory of
God, and the, obtaining that Blessedness, which by the Covenant of God is
secured to the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord. How fit
was he to be the mouth of God, and Ambassador of Christ to sinners, who, when
with greatest importunity he called them to Repentance and Reformation of heart
and life, and the Mortification of the most beloved lusts; and most earnestly
pressed upon them Faith, and Holiness, and universal Conformity to the will of
God, was not reproached by his own heart, as if he laid heavy burdens upon
others, which himself would not touch with one of his fingers: But with
deliberate choice and constant resolution imposed them upon himself, and
obviated all objections, by demonstrating the strictest holiness to be
practicable, eligible, and delectable by his own example.

But though he was very liberally instructed by Nature, Art, and Grace for the
Office and work of the Ministry, yet such low and mean thoughts had he of
himself, both of his Gifts and Grace: And such deep and affecting apprehensions
of the difficulty, and weight of the Ministerial Service, which as it is in it
self, so was to him, Onus tremendum, and (...); Who is sufficient? says the
Apostle, that though it was his design and desire to serve God, and his Church
in that great work, yet he was so discouraged, that he would not as too many
do, hastily adventure and engage himself in that Office by solemn Ordination,
but would first prove himself well, ask Counsel of God and his Word, and attend
to the Call of God by his Spirit and Providence.

Accordingly being Master of Arts, he did sometimes exercise his Gifts in some
Country Villages nigh the University. Where his manner was at first privately
to enquire out what small Parishes within ten or fifteen Miles of Cambridge
were destitute of Ministers. Unto these he went and Preached, and that with
such privacy, as for some while none knew of it but himself, and the
Parishioners to whom he went; and to many of them it was a long time unknown,
either who he was, or from whence he came.

This Service he performed Gratis, neither expecting nor according any worldly
Reward, yea, it was a Charge to him. Among these Countrey-people God blessed
him, and gave him the First Fruits of his Ministry, making him instrumental and
successful to the Conversion, and Edification of many. Whereby he was so
endeared to them, and they to him, that after he was called to Preach at one
certain place in Cambridge, he would yet often go amongst them on the
Weekdays, Preaching sometimes at one place, and sometimes at another, the
people laying aside their Country-business, and readily Traveling several
Miles to attend upon his Ministry. And after his remove from Cambridge to a
considerable distance in Essex and Suffolk, his manner was for the most part so
long as he lived, once a year to visit those people, Preaching to them, and
Conversing with them.

After he had a while thus exercised his Gifts among the Country Villages. He
observed three things especially, which did much encourage him to give himself
up to the Ministry of the Word.

1. The benefiting of his own Soul in his Meditations for Preaching; for whilst
he was studying for others, the Lord made it a word of Instruction to himself:
And he found it the best means of growth to be watering others. Yet herein he
perceived (he said) great need of Watchfulness, and much care lest his heart
should put away that Word from himself which he was pressing upon others.

2. He found his heart much diverted from other studies. Philosophy seemed
tedious to him, he found not that satisfaction in studying mere human Authors
as in meditating on Divine things. Yea he thought he disrelished all other
Studies, and they were unsavory to him, and he knew not but that this might be
of the Lord, thus to turn his heart from the one, and incline it to the other
Study.

3. The Lord had been pleased to bless his labors in some measure, and ordered
so by his Providence that it came to his knowledge. As particularly at Burwell,
at Swafham, at Soham, at Land-Beech, at Chesterton in Cambridgshire, at
Debenham in Suffolk, at Wethersfield in Essex, This was an especial
encouragement to him, as it might well be, to pursue the Ministry

In the year 1654 he was chosen Catechist for that year in the College. In
which choice he observed the special Providence of God, for whereas formerly
the Masters used to nominate the fellows for such Offices as they should bear,
he this year bad the fellows agree, and choose among themselves which they did
according to Seniority. His business detained him from being present at the
meeting of the fellows, and every one having chosen what they liked best, they
cast the Catechists place upon him, judging him fittest for it, which he
accepted, and accordingly began to discharge it in Michaelmass Term. This was
the first place where he settled himself to a constant course of Preaching.
Wherein God did greatly encourage and honor him; for the very first night he
Exercised, one of the Fellows came to him, and told him he had felt the power
of God in that Ordinance upon his heart.

The Statutes of the College obliging him to these Divinity Exercises as
Catechist in the Chapel only in Term time, toward the end of the Term he began
to consider whether he should continue, and proceed in the same Exercises as
well out of Term, as in Term, his Conscience toward God as well as the local
Statute, and his zeal to improve all opportunities to do good prompting him
thereto; being doubtful what to do, he was determined to the Affirmative, by
hearing a Sermon Preached at St. Mary's by the Reverend and Learned Dr. Tuckury
then Professor of Divinity there, the scope whereof was to show what a Blessed
and desirable thing it was to have the Church of God multiplied and increased,
and in the Application he did in an especial manner direct his words to the
University, and did in the name of God earnestly beseech every one in their
places, to endeavor the increase and multiplying of the Church of God, both by
adding themselves to it, and laboring to add others to it. His Soul was much
warmed at this Sermon, and considering the seasonableness of it, he looked upon
this word as directed specially to himself, and took encouragement from it to
proceed in his Work.

This practice of his being a proof not only of his abilities, but of his
willingness also, and that laboriously to serve God in the work of the
Ministry; About Easter following, a motion was made to him by one of St.
Andrews Parish in Cambridge in the Name of the rest, to supply that place,
which he declined, promising only to give them one Sermon. Afterward the motion
being more importunately renewed to him, he advised them to seek God to direct
them in a business of that concern, commending to them others of greater
Abilities and Grace than himself to make choice of; telling them he would at
that time, neither deny nor promise any thing. About six weeks after, 8 or 9 of
the Parish came to him in the name of the whole, and signified to him that it
was their joint Request, that he would Preach with them on the Lords days in
the Forenoon.

Whereupon after a Fortnights consideration, and seeking of God, and Consulting
friends, he complied with their desire, and undertook that Service.

Here God so blessed his Ministry both to the Students in the University, and
people of the Town, that his Encouragement was very great, for which he always
blessed God. In the College he so well discharged his Office, that the year
now expiring he was again chosen into the same Office next year. And now being
satisfied that God did call him to this Work and Office, by the success which
God gave to his labors, and the acceptance he had in the Church, he resolved
thoroughly to devote, and give up himself to it by solemn Ordination. For which
end he repaired to London, and being there proved, and well approved of, was
Feb. 13. 1655, solemnly set apart to this Office, and Work, by Fasting, and
Prayer, and laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. To which God seemed to
set his Seal both during the Action, by very gracious influences of his Spirit
upon his heart beyond his preparations, for which he has Recorded thanks to
God, and on the Lords day following, viz. Feb. 17. When being desired to Preach
at the Charterhouse both parts of the day: In the Afternoon one put up a Bill
to him, wherein the person that put it up acknowledged, that he had long lain
under the guilt of a known Sin, and was convinced of it by the morning Sermon,
and desired Prayers to God for help against it. Others also in that
Congregation he observed to be affected at that his first Sermon after his
Ordination.

In his returning from London to Cambridge, upon the way he experienced a very
good Providence with which his heart was much affected, and which he thankfully
Recorded as an instance of Gods special care of him. The night overtaking him
ere he could reach to Hasting Mills, where the Waters were very high by reason
of a flood, just as he came almost to the Water, a man met him, who knowing the
danger of the Water, and the safest passage through it, offered him his
Service, and very kindly lent him his own taller and stronger Horse, and riding
back again on his Horse before him led him safely through, which else he
perceived he could not have passed without the hazard of his Life.

Being now returned to Cambridge, to the Charge he had undertaken, with what
Conscience, Faithfulness, Zeal, and Industry, he applied himself to the Work to
which he had devoted himself, and was now solemnly set apart, I leave to the
Pious Reader to judge by what follows in his own words.

July 7 th. 1656. I set apart that day for Fasting and Prayer to seek the Lord
for Counsel, whether I should Preach in the Afternoon at St. Andrews. I had
some thoughts of it, and motions thereto some time since. But now my time for
Chapel exercise being expired, I took* it into serious thoughts, and having
humbled my Soul for my sins, and begged of God that he would settle my mind in
this thing, and teach me what was his mind therein, after pains and searching
the Scripture I came to this resolution, I was fully persuaded that it was the
mind of the Lord that I should also Preach in the Afternoons, and that from
these Scriptures.

2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. I charge the before God, -- be instant in Season, and out of
Season. As we will answer it to Jesus Christ, at the day of Judgment, we are to
take all opportunities to preach his Word. I consider here is a fair
opportunity put into my hands, and therefore I am bound in Conscience not to
neglect it, 1 Pet. 5. 2. (...), as much as in you lies, feed thy flock, So
Calvin renders the word.

1 Cor. 9. 16. 17. Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me, if I preach
not the gospel. Though I preach the gospel I have nothing to glory of, If I do
this willingly I have a reward.

Eccl. 11 6. in the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy
hand: For thou know not what shall prosper this or that, this seems a clear
resolution of the question.

1 Cor. 15. 58. -- always abounding in the work of the Lord.

Gal. 6. 10. As we have opportunity let us do good, here is a fair opportunity,
and how it may be taken from me, or I from it I know not, and therefore hold it
my duty to lay hold on it.

Hereupon I resolved to preach once a fortnight, in the Afternoons also; and
considering my weakness for such a work, I was encouraged from Isa. 41. 10. and
Math. 28. ult. Go teach and lo I am with you, with you to help and assist you;
with you to bless your labors, and make your work prosperous under your hands.

Jul. 13. 1656. I began my Afternoons Exercise, and entered upon the Doctrine of
Repentance. I have found God very much with me, assisting and enlarging me, and
blessing my labors to some of my hearers. I bless his Name for putting it into
my heart.

Nov: 16 I had not so much of the enlivening presence of God in the afternoon
as I was wont to have: Yet God blessed his word. One of the Parish told Mr. J.
He thought their Minister knew their hearts, and added he was resolved to amend.

Apr. 21. 1657. I set apart this day to seek God by fasting, and prayer, to
show me my way, and to direct me in a business that had been upon my Spirit
nigh half a year, which was to preach once a fortnight, on the week day, at the
church where I am placed. I engaged the prayers of others also for me in this
particular. And when I went to the Sacrament, I laid the promise before God,
that he would guide me continually, and teach me in the way that I should
choose, as that which I desire might among others be Sealed up to me.

Whilst I was thus deliberating with my self what to do, I met with this
providence: Being at Soham to preach the Lecture there, I slept that night very
disturbedly, toward the morning me thought I saw the Lord Jesus Christ in his
glory, who spoke comfortably to me, and encouraged me in my work, but spoke
very sad words to another, Mr. of Arts that was with me, (whom I dreamed to be
a godly man, yet one who was noted for his unwillingness to preach in Town)
When I awoke I considered with my self, what this should mean. I considered it
was but a dream, and so not much to be heeded, and again I considered that
sometimes God speaks to us in dreams, and slumbering upon our beds, Job. 33.
13. 14. 15. whence I gathered it might be something of encouragement to me. In
the morning when I was up, It fell out in my ordinary course of reading, the
Scripture, to read, Act. 18. and when I had read, ver. 9. 10., and pondered
what had befell me in the night, I could not but wonder at the Providence of
God, to cause this Scripture, to fall in with my former dream, which made me
ponder the more upon it. I saw God did sometimes speak to his people in a
vision. I saw the same reason why Paul should Preach, viz. because there was
much people belonging to the Lord there, might be forcible to prevail with me,
for he enclines a great multitude of people to attend upon me. When I had
considered of it, I resolved to lay this up in my heart, and not to slight it,
though I could not build on it any ground of my undertaking my work.

Consulting the Scriptures these came into my mind Act. 6. 4. we will give our
selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the word, where I saw that
such as were called of God to preach the word, ought to make it their business,
and give up themselves to it. Romans 1. 1. 14. 15. here I saw that one separated
to the Gospel of Christ, was a debtor, bound, and should be ready as much as in
him lies, Isa. 40. 9. O thou that bring good tidings to Zion, get the up
into the high mountains, lift up thy voice with strength, lift it up, be not
afraid. Reading this Scripture in my ordinary course, I found it set home with
life, and power in reference to my present doubt, Get the up, lift up thy
voice, It removed the great obstacle of fear; What would men say and think of
my forwardness? Be not afraid; I was the more confirmed by considering this
Scripture, is mainly directed to such as God has sent to preach the gospel, by
comparing this Scripture with, Isa. 52. 7. and Romans 10. 15.

And the Scripture did the more affect me because it was in this manner set
home after prayer, when I had been seeking God in reference to this doubt. Act.
18. 5. Paul was pressed in Spirit and testified, hence I saw the Ministers of
God, may take encouragement, to preach the word from inward pressures of Spirit.

Having these inducements to preach on the week day, I set apart as before the
21th of April, to seek God by fasting and prayer, to direct me what to do.
Having put up my request to him, in the name of Jesus Christ, I shall consider
what motives I have to it, and what dissuasives from it, and judge of both
according to the Scriptures, and do therein as the Lord shall direct me, by his
word and Spirit.

'The Arguments moving to it are these,

1. I Find God much enlarging my Meditations, so as I am a long while ere I can
dispatch the Subject I enter upon, whereby I foresee I shall go over but few
heads in Divinity, while I stay unless I preach oftener. And I know not what
the meaning of God herein should be, that he waters me so much, but that I
should water others.

2. I have found God owning me when I closed with the like motions, at other
times, particularly in the Afternoon Exercise, I have found God wonderfully
gracious beyond expression, and I heartily bless God that put it into my heart
to undertake that work, and seeing when I followed God formerly he was with me,
why should I not be obedient to his call in this also.

3. It is the work I have been set apart to, and solemnly given up my self to,
in the face of the Congregation at Blackfriars, and therefore now there is a
necessity lying upon me to preach the Gospel, yea a woe if I preach not, 1 Cor.
9. 16.

4. God has made my service here accepted of the Saints, and therefore it is
likely my Ministry may be more effectual, It may be elsewhere my Ministry may
be as much despised, as here it is embraced, and therefore it is good to take the
present season, and to strike where, and when the Iron is hot.

5. The time is short that I have to live, how soon God many take me hence, I
know not. And there being no working in the grave, I am commanded to do what my
hand finds to do, with my might, Eccl. 9. 10. the night comes when no man
can work, and therefore as Christ said, Joh. 9. 4. I must work the works of him
that sent me, while it is day; So must I do, learn this wisdom of him, to do my
work as fast as I can, seeing I know not how short my day may be.

6. The times are evil, and I know not how soon we may be cut short of these
opportunities; and it is an express Command that we should be wise and redeem
time, Ephesians. 5. 15. 16. And God commands as we have opportunity, to do good to
all, Gal. 6. 10. preaching of the Gospel is doing good, and here is an
opportunity, I must not let it slip.

7. If I should preach once a fortnight on the weekday it will but be
equivalent to preaching twice every Lords day, (Seeing now I preach but once
every other Sabbath) which must be my work, when I come into the Country, and
yet my work here is far lighter than it will be there, for here I am free from
worldly cares, family distractions, and a pastoral charge.

8. One Soul is more worth than the whole world, and the preaching of the
Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, therefore we should not think any
pains too great to preach the word, seeing we may through God be a mean to
convert and save souls thereby.

9. Christ charge Peter as he loves him, to feed his sheep, and lambs, Joh.
21. 15, 16, 17. His repeating this 3 times argues, 1. that he would have him
very diligent in doing it. 2. that he takes it as a real demonstration of love
to him, to feed his sheep. Now I have wonderful cause to love Christ, and good
reason to demonstrate it that way which he would have me.

10. If I enter upon preaching on weekday too, I see it will make for the Glory
of God, Joh. 15. 8. God is glorified when we bear much fruit, and for the good,
and edification of others; for the body of Christ is Edified by the Ministry of
the Word. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. and why should I stand disputing that which may make
for the glory of God, and the good of those among whom I live.

11. God would have every man observe his proper gifts and improve them, and
attend his proper work that he is called to with diligence. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8,
11.

12. I have Naturally a slothful Spirit, and one good way to Master it, is to
take up much employment.

13. God would have us always to abound in his Work and be steadfast, and he
tells us our labor shall not be in vain. 1 Cor. 15. ult.

14. No excuse must hinder us now from doing good, but what will serve turn at
the day of judgment.

I consider further that the Word of God is to be the Rule by which we must
walk. Psalm. 119. 105. that is the light of our paths. What the Word requires of
us, God requires of us; What work the Word calls us to, that God calls us to.
Now considering with my self the aforesaid particulars according to the Word of
God, I gather, it is the mind of God I should close with this motion, and that
he calls me to further work, and so accordingly I am to obey his voice.

Now in regard that it is Gods presence with me, his owning, accepting, and
assisting me, that must bear me up against all difficulties that I shall meet
with; I consulted further with the Word to see what grounds I had to expect
that God would be with me in my undertaking, and I saw great encouragement from
these Scriptures,

Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go teach -- lo, I am with you always. Christ will not withdraw
his presence at any time when we go about to teach in obedience to his Command,
but will be always with us.

1 Chronicles. 28. 10, 20. compared. Whence I observe, when God calls a man out to
any work, he would have him be strong and do it, and not to fear or be
dismayed, for God will be with him and not fail him or forsake him, till he
has finished it.

Josh. 1. 9. Have not I Commanded thee? -- The Lord thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou go. The same presence and assistance may we expect from
God when ever he calls us out to any Service, which I gather from the Apostles
applying to all Christians what God spoke in particularto Josh. Heb. 13. 5.

Isa. 42. 6. I the Lord have called thee, I will hold thy hand. It is spoken to
Christ, and shall be made good to all Christians, when called by God to any
work, he will uphold them in it, and he whom God upholds shall not fail, or be
discouraged till his work be done. v. 1. 4

Judge. 6. 12. 14. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man. Go in this thy might,
thou shall save Israel -- Have not I sent thee? In this thy might, i. e. either
in the strength of the promise. The Lord is with thee, or in the strength of
thy Commission, I have sent thee. Do thou doubt whether I will be with thee,
seeing I have sent thee? Do thou doubt whether thou shall save Israel,
seeing I have sent thee? I see hence the Call of God to any Service is a great
encouragement to set upon it, and to expect success in it.

'Discouragements removed.

1. Reproach of men. What will men say or think that I am so forward. They will
impute it to Pride, it etc. and say I am imprudent, and will, may be, laugh and
jear at me.

Reply 1. I am not to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ. Romans 1. 16. No not in
an Adulterous generation. Mar. 8. 38. If I cannot suffer shame for Christ, how
shall I suffer greater persecutions?

2. God can if he will, hide me from the strife of Tongues, yea he promises to
do so for them that trust in him. Psalm. 31. 19, 20. he can make a man's Enemies
to be at Peace with him, and will if our ways please him. Prove. 16. 7. However
I shall not be solicitous of man's judgment in this matter, but commit my way
and Cause to the Lord, and if I be reproached he will one day clear me. Ps. 37.
5, 6.

3. If I do meet with shame and reproach for my diligence in Preaching the
Word, it is no more than the Apostles met with. 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10, 13. yea, I,
Christ suffered great contradiction in his Preaching, they said he was Mad, and
had a Devil, and I am bidden to remember it, as that which will keep me from
fainting. Heb. 12. 3.

4. If I Serve Christ, the Lord will honor me, and that is infinitely above
the honor of the world. Joh. 12. 26. I shall desire therefore to seek the
praise that is of God, and no matter what men say.

5. It will be my happyness, if I be reproached for Christ's sake. 1 Pet. 4. 14.
and I should be so far from being troubled, discouraged, and dejected at it,
that I should rejoice exceedingly that God counts me worthy to partake of the
sufferings of Christ. v. 13.

6. The thoughts of that Glory that shall be revealed hereafter. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
should cause me to despise the shame which I meet with here in the Service of
God. Heb. 12. 2.

2 d. Discouragement. It may be the people will slight the Word, I shall have
but few hearers, the Word growing common will be nauseated, etc.

Reply 1. The hearts of all men are in Gods hand, if he touch their hearts,
they shall come. 1 Samuel 10. 26. I will leave that to the Lord, whether he will
incline many, or but few to attend upon his Word.

2. The Angels those glorious Creatures did not disdain to Preach Christ to a
few poor Shepherds, and therefore I should not think much to Preach Christ,
though to never such a thin Congregation. Jesus Christ himself Preached the
Gospel to one hearer only, and that a poor sinful woman of Samaria. Joh. 4.

3. Gods presence is not tied to a multitude; if but two or three be gathered
together in his Name, he is in the midst of them, and if God will bless his
Word for the Conversion of but one Soul, it is worth all our labor and pains.
Mark. 8. 37. Jam. 5. 19, 20.

4. I shall desire to do my work to God and not to men, because God Commands
me, though men may slight my pains, and do not gather together to hear the
Word, yet my work is before the Lord, and my reward with him, and I shall be
glorious in his eyes, however I appear before men, Isa. 49. 5. However men
reckon of my labors, though the more I love them and labor for them, the less
I beloved, yet this should not be any hindrance to me in the work of God, but I
should gladly spend my self and be spent therein. 2 Cor. 12. 13.

Having Consulted God, and seeing such good ground for my undertaking, I set up
a Lecture once a Fortnight on Thursday in the Afternoon at three of the Clock.
I began it on the first Thursday in June. 1657.

With such mature Deliberation, such a resolved Conscience, such a willing
mind, such a zealous Spirit, such a laborious head and hand did this worthy
Servant of God apply himself to the great Work wherein he was engaged. Thus did
he fortify his heart with strongest Arguments against all temptations to sloth
and negligence. Thus searched he the Scriptures that he might fully know his
Lords will. Thus yielded he obedience to the Commands, and acted Faith in the
promises of God. In this his might he went forth in the Name of the Lord, to
the work of the Lord, and the pleasure of the Lord did prosper in his hand.

Though his constant weekly work at St. Andrews Church were enough to exercise
more than ordinary strength both of mind and body, yet he had many other
occasions of Service which he attended, not only in the College as his place
required, especially as a Tutor, which relation and trust he diligently and
faithfully discharged toward his Pupils, both as to Learning and Religion, but
in the Town, as Preaching frequently Funeral Sermons, and Trinity Lecture, and
in the Country also at several Lectures, both in Cambridgeshire and
Huntingdonshire. For his Abilities and willingness were so well known as
encouraged many invitations to be made to him from abroad. All which he
performed not after an extemporary rate, as the manner of some is, hastily to
utter quicquid in buccam venerit, but as a workman that needed not to be
ashamed. On which account the Ears of so many hanged upon him, and he never
wanted a full Auditory as well of Scholars, as Town-people. His Sermons were
well studied and digested, his matter Substantial and Spiritual, his Arguments
strong and convincing, his utterance full, clear, deliberate, and grave. His
words apt and natural to express the Conceptions of his mind, he neither
affected a strain of words, which man's wisdom teaches, nor allowed himself a
liberty of words which man's indiscretion pours out; but his Phrase was such
as spoke him to have an holy Reverence for the plainness, and simplicity of the
Gospel of Christ, a due care that he exposed not the Ministry of the word to
Contempt, a Religious fear of that God in whose Name he spoke, and a serious
regard to the Concernment of the Souls of men. And in all his Applications to
God by Prayer both in public and private, his behavior, words, and manner of
utterance were such as spoke his solemn, and affecting apprehensions of the
Majesty, and Holiness of God whom he Worshipped. So as considering his years,
the multiplicity of his Ministerial work, his manner of performing it, and the
holiness of his life wherewith he did adorn and commend it; it may be truly
said of him, that however he was excelled by others in other respects, yet in
this he was Nulli secundus, if not a None such in the University in his day.

But Cambridge is not a place for long continuance. The University is the
Church's Nursery from whence God is wont to remove, and transplant his trees of
Righteousness when once grown up to the Stature of Fruit-bearing, that the
various Congregations of his people may eat of the fruit thereof and live. God
having here trained up his Servant to his hand, Instructed him with excellent
Gifts, and abundant Grace, called him solemnly to the Office of the Ministry,
proved him an able and successful Instrument before many Witnesses, and
enlarged his heart not only to a willingness, but zeal to discharge his Office
with all his might, quickly showed him the place where, with this resolved
Industry, and Integrity he should improve his Talents. Scarce two Months were
expired after he had begun his Weekday Lecture, when the Mayor and one of the
Aldermen of Colchester in Essex (whither his fame reached) applied themselves
to him at Cambridge, desiring him to accept their Lecturers place then void.
With which motion he so far only then complied as to promise to come over to
them, and Preach a Sermon or two among them; which he performed about three
weeks after.

After his Preaching, the House of Aldermen and Common Council met, and
unanimously agreed to choose him to be their Town-Lecturer, to Preach on Lords
days Afternoon, and on the Wednesday every Week. Which choice had also the
general Suffrage of the Sober and Godly people in Town, and Country thereabout.

Which being signified to him by some of the Aldermen and Common Council, after
six weeks deliberation (for so long time he designed to give his Answer)
seeking God for direction, as his constant manner was, having no objections
before him as to Conscience in the case, nor any obligation to stay at
Cambridge, save only the peoples desire, which he Answered from Luke 4. 42. 43.
and Act. 18. 20. and considering the joint unanimous agreement of persons
different in Judgment (for it was a divided place) in calling him, he consented
to their Choice, and undertook that Charge.

As he had experienced Gods owning and Sealing of his Ministry in his first
Catechistical Exercise in the College, and his first Sermon after his
Ordination, with much happy success also in Cambridge; so here he had the same
encouragement, God making his first Sermon effectual upon the heart of a
Dutchman, and his second or third upon another person noted for a Sinner, who
came out of Novelty to hear him. Concerning whom he might say as St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. They show of us, what manner of entering we had to you.

But it fared with him here at Colchester, as it did at Cambridge, he thought
he did not work enough, and therefore asked leave, and freely offered himself
to preach also on the Lords day Mornings at St. James's Church, not desiring
any outward reward for it, which was granted and accepted.

He was to this place a very great Blessing, not only as to their Spiritual,
but Temporal concerns also. It was observed that during his abode, and the
liberty of his Ministry there, the Town prospered and exceedingly flourished in
Trade. For even the good things of this life does the Gospel carry with it.

Here he labored in the Word and Doctrine, till by the Act of Uniformity he
was with the rest of his Brethren debarred from the public Exercise of his
Ministry. Yet not thinking himself bound to be his own Executioner, and there
being mutual obligations by Contract between the Town and him, that the one
should not eject, nor the other desert without so long warning, he did after
the fatal Bartholomew continue his public Preaching some time till, having
occasion to take a Journey into Cambridgeshire, in his absence another was put
into his place by the B. of L.

From thenceforth with St. Paul, Act. 28. 30, 31. he dwelt three whole years in
his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him, Preaching the
Kingdom of God with all confidence; till God sent the raging Pestilence into
the Town An. 1665. at which Providence he was greatly affected, and while he
saw many, and even the Shepherds of the flock, hastening their flight from the
pestilence that walked in darkness, and the Destruction that wasted at noon
day, and others smitten with the Arrows of the Almighty, daily passing into
eternity, Such compassion he had for perishing souls, and Such Zealous desire
of their salvation, and Such hope that the word might be more effectual in
that day of Gods sore Judgment, that he sent to the Magistrates, and freely
offered, if they would indulge him the liberty of a public Church, to stay and
preach to that poor distressed people, till either God should take him away by
death, or cause the pestilence to cease. Which being denied him, he entertained
thoughts of removing out of Town. And having sought of God a right way for
himself, his little ones, and his substance. He received Satisfaction
concerning the lawfulness of removing, in time of Pestilence, from Isa. 26. 20.
Hide thy self for a little moment, until the Indignation be over past, and
encouragement to hope that the presence of God should go with him, from Genesis
28. 15. I am with thee and will keep thee in all places, whither thou go
etc. adding thereto Gal. 3. 7, 9. where he observed that all Believers have
right to the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Accordingly, Aug. 25.
1665. He removed his Family to Chattisham ^n Suffolk about 12 miles distant
from Colche^^er.

Being now come to a place, where he was a perfect stranger, having no
acquaintance with the neighborhood, and considering the evil and danger of
the times. He had many doubts and fears within himself concerning the comfort
of his abiding there; but quickly received satisfaction from the holy
Scriptures, his dailydelight and Counselors, which he thus recorded.

Aug. 27. Being the first Sabbath after I came to Chattisham. In the morning as
I was reading in my private devotions, Ezekiel. 37. which was the Chapter that
fell out in course, in my private reading, I was much affected with some
passages in the beginning of the Chapter. From whence I observed for my
instruction. 1. Not to question my call to Chattisham though it should be a dry
place, where I should want that communion of the Saints, which I had at
Colchester, and my wonted opportunities of doing and receiving Good. Ezekiel a
prophet of the Lord, fitted by his gifts, and call to do God Service, when he
was carried into a valley where there was no living creature to converse
withal, but dead men's bones, yet he was carried thither by the hand and spirit
of the Lord. ver. 1. 2. God may have Special Service for us to do, in those
places were we judging according to sense, think there can be no opportunities
of ^ervice at all. Who would have thought there had been any work for Ezekiel,
as a prophet amongst dead men's bones, yet even there he had Prophesying work,
and composed that Prophecy which raised up the dying faith, and hope of the
whole House of Israel. 3. When God commands us to Prophecy or to preach his
word, the greatest improbabilities of Success imaginable, should not discourage
us from our work. Though we should think there is no more hopes of doing good,
to them, to whom we preach, than there is by speaking to the wind, or Preaching
to dead men's bones, yet we should go on with our work. Ezekiel at Gods command
Prophesies to dry and dead bones, (concerning which when he was asked whether
they could live, he replied, that he could not tell, God only knew. v. 3.) And
they have the Spirit of life breathed into them. He Prophesies to the wind and
that obeys. v. 9. 10. This Scripture being so suited to some reasonings, and
doubts that I had upon my mind, and coming so seasonably, at my first fixing at
Chattisham I was much affected with it, and looked upon it as a token for good,
that I should have Gods presence with me, and the teachings of his Spirit, at
Chattisham, as I have had them at Colchester.

The encouragement which he thus took was not vain and empty, God remembered his
word unto his Servant, wherein he had caused him to hope. For he not only
inclined the hearts of the people among whom he lived, though strangers to him,
to pay him that Respect and Honor, which was due to him; and indulged him the
liberty of private Preaching, as he had before enjoyed, but moreover opened to
him in this place a door for the frequent public exercise of his Ministry,
which was shut against him at Colchester.

The Minister of the Parish having another cure, by reason whereof he could
attend this at Chattisham but once a fortnight, did in his absence not only
willingly but thankfully indulge to Mr. Stockton the liberty of his Pulpit. And
having a very small maintenance, and some burdens lying heavy upon him, which
after a few years, made his residence there very uneasy to him, he deserted
his charge, and left this flock to shift for themselves. Whereupon at the
request of the people Mr. Stockton frequently supplied that vacancy. And his
Zeal provoked and encouraged others also, both Ministers and People. For other
neighboring Parishes being destitute of Ministers, for want of maintenance
called in the help of Non-Conformists, who in these places, so much below
envye, have enjoyed the liberty of their public Preaching for the most part to
this day, So as not only the Parish where he lived, but the neighboring
Vllages have abundant cause to bless God for sending, to them so happy an
Instrument, so willing and Zealous, so able and industrious to serve their
Souls in the Gospel of Christ.

When it pleased his Majesty to set forth his most Gracious Declaration for
Indulgence, he was chosen both by a Congregation in Ipswhich and another in
Colchester to preach to them, And both being very desirous of him, he complied
with their desires as far as he could, and undertook half the Service of
either, and so with others divided his labors between them, during his life,
to their great Satisfaction and edification.

His labors were abundant. His Ministry was his whole business: Besides his
Lords days service, wherein he not only preached twice, but often expounded the
Scriptures, and Catechized the younger sort, and many times discoursed
particular Christians that applied, themselves to him for Counsel and
instruction about their Spiritual cases; He moreover preached a Lecture at
Ipswich on the weekday once a fort-night, and scarce a week passed but he
preached at some other Lecture or funeral besides keeping of private fasts
which he frequently practiced both at home and abroad.

The providence of God over him, while he was thus Zealously, and constantly
employed in his work, in so many places was so remarkable, that it must not be
passed over without special observation. Notwithstanding the Severity of the
Laws, the malice, watchfulness, and endeavors of Adversaries, yet God Suffered
not an hair to fall from his head, though Complaints, Informations,
Indictments, Convictions, Warrant, Presentiments, Excommunications were made
against him, yet was he never imprisoned, apprehended, distrained or brought
before any Court or Magistrate. He was much affected with this care of God over
him, and thankfully accepted, and recorded it as the instance of Gods
faithfulness, and performance of his promise, as the answer of his own faith
and Prayer, and as the reward of his love and Zeal, and courage for God and his
Church by the power whereof he lived above fears and dangers; for thus he
writes.

Apr. 16. 1655. Being Lords day, In the morning, I awaked with that Scripture
in my thoughts. 1 Timothy 1. 15. I dwelt a while upon it, and drew comfort and
relief for my faith, by the help of God. I had been before under a great sense
of the sinfulness of my heart. The comfort I had was, that Christ came to save
the chief of Sinners, that this was a faithful saying, that it was worthy all
acceptance, or to be embraced by every one, and that this Salvation was from
sin as well as from hell, Math. 1. 21. Considering whether he would save me, as
I was going to wash in the morning, I was satisfied from Joh. 6. 37. Him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out. It being then a time of danger, as to
the keeping of my Meetings, because many Soldiers were in Town, I being
dubious whether I should admit the people to come to my house, when I
considered that Christ took it as an act of Love to feed his sheep Joh. 21. 15.
and that he exposed himself to Death to save me, and bring under a sense of the
Comfort that the Lord had given me in the morning in my Meditations on the 1 Timothy 1. 15. I was willing to adventure my self on the Providence of God.

Sept. 19. As I was Expounding in my Family the 91 Psalm on a day of
Humiliation, I was much encouraged to go on in my Calling notwithstanding the
difficulties that attend the same by reason of many Adversaries, from v. 11,
12, 13. Though the Adversaries to private Meetings, and the Preaching of
Non-Conformists be of several sorts, as strong as Lions, as full of venom as
the Dragon, such as are greedy of, and roar after the prey like the young Lion,
as subtle and pertinacious, and obstinate in their way as the Adder (of which
see Ps. 58. 4, 5.) yet the Angels have a charge to keep us in all our ways, and
the promise is that we shall trample these under our feet. This promise gave me
courage whilst at Colchester, and I saw it made good; for I went on in my
Calling and had no harm from them.

I observed also in reading Dan. 6. 23. the power of Faith to deliver out of
great and imminent danger. Daniel is cast into a Den of hungry Lions, yet no
manner of hurt is found upon him, because he believed in his God.

Sept. 22. In my Family exercise as I was reading Ps. 146. 9. The Lord
preserves the Strangers, my Faith received strength. I enjoyed much peace and
security in Colchester, I had met with no molestation either from the Town or
County, but being come into a strange place where I was not known, and had no
friends to shelter or speak for me, I apprehended my self to walk in more
danger than before; this word, The Lord preserves the Strangers, did help my
dependence upon God.

Oct. 28: 1666. Being Sabbath day, I went forth to Preach at Manitree. In the
morning before I went, the Lord gave in that promise Isa. 55. 12. Ye shall be
led forth with peace. It being a time of trouble and danger for Non-conformists
to Preach publicly, the promise was the more precious, and I was encouraged to
go on with confidence. And I determined to eye this promise for the future,
when I should go forth where I might probably meet with disturbance.

Dec. 25. 65. As I was reading in my course Luke 6. I observed from v. 11, 12.
from Christ's practice who in those days when his Enemies were filled with
madness against him, and Communed one with another what they might do unto him,
went out into a Mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. I
observed, I say, hence that it was my duty to give my self much unto prayer, at
such times as I had any Enemies that laid wait for me to do me hurt.

Within a day or two after one of the Constables came to me, and told me that
his fellow Constable when he had drunk somewhat liberally, opened his heart to
him, and told him that there had been some Communication between him, and one
of the Deputy Lieutenants about presenting me at the Sessions, and about my
Meetings. I thought upon that place in Luke 6. 11, 12. after he was gone, and
went up into my Chamber to pray. And as I was meditating on this matter that
Scripture Deuteronomy. 33. 12. was brought to my remembrance. The beloved of the Lord
shall dwell in safety by him, etc. I was strengthened in my adherence to this
promise, because God had lately made out his love to my Soul, as I was pleading
this promise in prayer, that passage was set home, He shall cover thee all the
day long. Whence I did hope that the Lord who had helped me hitherto, would
still cover me under the shadow of his wings. After I had been at prayer I
considered Jacobs carriage, when he was in danger of suffering by his brother
Esau: After he had been wrestling with God in prayer, and pleading the promise,
he betook himselfto the use of the most probable means for appeasing Esau. I
also used the most probable means to prevent trouble at the ensuing Sessions,
and it pleased God so to order things at the Sessions that I met with no
trouble. Blessed be God who alone makes me to dwell in safety.

Jun. 22. As I was exercising in my Family in the Afternoon several of my
friends being with me, I had word sent me that the Mayor and Justices would
come down to my house; whereupon being near the end of my Exercise, I quickly
concluded. After I had done and dismissed the people, one of the Constables
came to me, and told me he was sent to dissolve my Meeting, but had a trembling
upon him when he spoke to me. He added, that he blessed God that had given him
an heart to come some times himself, and his Wife to my Meetings; so that
instead of doing me any hurt he gave glory to God that inclined him to come to
hear me.

In October. 1670. I was presented in the Ecclesiastical Court for Preaching. But
God stood by me, and encouraged me with that word, Ps. 103. 31. And though my
Adversaries proceeded so far as to get out an Excommunication against me, yet
the Lord raised up deliverance for me, that the Court took off my
Excommunication, without appearing before them or paying any Fees.

Yea, so far was he from declining the exercise of his Ministry for fear of
suffering, that when he had been persuaded thereto by the importunity of
friends, he was much dissatisfied, concerning which thus he records.

I promised Mr. B. to Preach at White Colne on October. 23. accordingly on
Saturday I was prepared to go. H. P. came in and told us that the Soldiers had
seized Mr. B. and imprisoned him, and that it would not be safe for me to go at
that season; all my friends and Relations dissuaded me, but notwithstanding my
mind stood to go. But being importuned to stay, and having been very lately
sought after by name by the Soldiers in those parts, and weighing the
Providence in sending H. P. to my house with this Intelligence as I was about
to take Horse, I determined to cast my self on my Brother Cole's determination,
who was then at my house, and he determining that I should not go, I stayed at
home. But that night and the next day I was under much despondency of Spirit,
for missing such an opportunity of Service; yet God was gracious to me, and
revived me. It was some stay to my mind what I read, Mat. 16. 20. Where I
observed, that the divulging of the most necessary truths was at some seasons,
and in some places prohibited by Jesus Christ. I was further satisfied from
Act. 16. 6, 7. whence I observed, that the frustrating of our Attempts and
designs to Preach the Gospel to particular places that we purposed to go to,
did sometimes arise from the Holy Ghost. And from Psalm. 52. 9. I had a damp
upon my Spirit, and was hindered from praising God for my deliverance from my
Enemies hands, because I had missed an opportunity of Service. But this
Scripture convinced me that I ought to praise God for this Providence, though
attended with some afflicting Circumstances. By these Scriptures and Prayer I
obtained satisfaction, and the Lord Answered my desire and fully quieted my
mind.

Once a very zealous and active Prosecutor of the Non-conformists, obtained a
Warrant against him upon the Oxford Act, directed to all the Chief Constables,
and petty-Constables in the County, to apprehend him. Accordingly an Officer a
stranger came to Execute it, and when he was nigh the house, he espied two
persons, whom by their habit he judged to be Ministers, walking in a field, the
one was Mr. Stockton, the other Mr. Senior of Hackney (whom God has also
lately taken away) He hasteneth to them, and told them he had a Warrant against
one of them, but he knew neither, Mr. Senior asked which of them. He Answered
Mr. Stockton. Let me see your Warrant said Mr. Senior, he showed it him, verily
concluding from thence that he was the man. Some Little Girls were there
walking with them, who did industriously cling to Mr. Senior as if he had been
their Father, which further confirmed him in his Error. While Mr. Senior read
the Warrant, and the Officer was intent upon him, Mr. Stockton walked aside,
and when Mr. Senior saw him beyond his reach, he convinced the Officer of his
Error, who thereby was disappointed of his prey.

Being thus secured by the Providence of God through Faith and Prayer from the
danger of Adversaries, he thankfully acknowledged the whole glory thereof to
God, thus,

In reading 2 Chronicles. 20. 30. The Realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet, for his God
gave him rest round about. God caused me to take notice, that my living in rest
and quietness, being free from the molestation of my Enemies was the gift of
God, and came to pass by his Providence, not from the privacy of the place
where I lived, or from the peaceable disposition of my Neighbors. I was also
instructed what I should return unto the Lord, for keeping me from the hands of
mine Enemies, and giving me rest and peace, from Psalm. 30. 1. I will extol
'thee, O Lord, for thou have lifted me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice
over me, and from Psalm. 31. 7, 8. I saw further that Gods giving me rest from
mine Enemies should put me upon doing some special eminent Service for God,
from 2 Samuel 7. 1, 2. 1 King. 5. 4, 5. 1 Chronicles. 22. 17, 18, 19.

Thus with unwearied pains and zeal, in great peace and security, with holy
rejoicing and thanksgiving did he fulfill the course of his Ministry.

Yet he satisfied not himself with his work of Preaching, but moreover applied
himself to writing for the greater Service of the present and future Generation.

In the time of the raging Pestilence he wrote a Treatise relating to that sore
judgment, but the Pestilence ceasing before he had finished it, he did not
Publish it.

Upon occasion of the destroying Fire of London, he composed and published his
Counsel to the Afflicted.

Soon after he Published his Scriptural Catechism with a Treatise of Family
Instruction. And has left behind him several other Manuscripts which he
designed for the Press. As

The Cure of the fear of Death. A Treatise of Glorifying God. The Best
Interest. A Warning to Drunkards.
Some of which at least it is hoped, may see the light.

The Holy Ghost by St. Paul to Timothy 1 Ephesians. 3. 4. among other qualifications
of a good Minister requires that he be one that rules well his own house,
having his Children in subjection with all gravity. The due Character of our
Subject. His Treatise of Family Instruction did not reproach him. He was
indeed, quantus Minister, tantus Pater Familias.

It pleased God in much mercy and faithfulness to him, to provide for him a
Meet-help, a most suitable Yoke Fellow, a very Prudent, Virtuous and Gracious
Gentlewoman, of a worthy and Religious Family in Cambridgeshire, Mrs. Elianor
Rant, Daughter of Roger Rant of Swaffham Esquire; whom he took to Wife within less
than a year after his Call to Colchester, who was a singular Blessing, Comfort,
and Honor to him all his life. Few there be to whom Solomon's commendation do
more properly belong. Prove. 31. 26. etc. From thenceforth he had incumbent upon
him the charge of a Family.

God gave him six Children, whereof he left one only Daughter surviving. Upon
the account of his own and his Wifes approved Wisdom, Grace, Gravity and
Government, many were desirous to get their Children into his Family (even
those who were of different persuasions from him, both in Conformity and
Nonconformity.) for their better Education; in compliance wherewith he
received some Youth of the Female Sex, that might more properly belong to the
care and inspection of his Wife. So as for the most part he had a full Family.

Wherein according to his place he kept up his Authority over all under his
Charge, but with so much Meekness, Prudence, and Gravity, that though all stood
in awe of him, yet he was more loved than feared.

As to his Wife, whom he worthily honored and entirely loved, there never
arising any Passion or Dispute between them. He frequently conversed with her
about the Matters of her Soul, Enquiring how the case stood between God and her
Soul, what burdens lay upon her Spirit, what grounded hope she had for eternal
life, etc. helping and encouraging her in the ways of Godliness. The 9th day of
June, being the day of their Marriage, He never past it over, if at home,
without spending some time with her in solemn prayer to God, and conference
about the several passages of his providence toward them since they came into
that Relation: In the conclusion whereof he was always more affected with, and
thankful for mercies, than dejected or cast down at afflictions, though he met
with some considerable trials, not only in his Family as the loss of so many
hopeful Children, etc. but also abroad and that from those that knew better. It
was his manner not only in his more private and secret retirements, but also in
the performance of his family duty, to commend her particularly to God at the
throne of grace.

As to his Children, very early before they were past the lap, he would himself
be instructing of them, in Gods word, ordering them to get some Scriptures by
heart, which best suited their childhood, and capacity; four of them died in
infancy and Childhood, none having reached the full age of 5 years. Concerning
whom he had much Satisfaction as to their Eternal salvation.

His first born a daughter attained to the age of 19 years and died, who had
been so instructed by her Father, that before she was 8 years old, she under
stood the method of a Sermon, and if Preached by her Father would give him an
account of the most considerable heads and passages therein, and before she was
full 9 years of age she would pen down a Sermon after him, and miss but few or
none of the heads, with some considerable enlargement also.

About this time of her age, God Suffered her corruption to exert it self, in
some open Acts to the observation of others, which exposed her to the severe
rebuke of her Parents, which God sanctified to her conviction. And as she grew
up she quickly gave evidence of the truth of Grace and power of Godliness,
making progress therein beyond her years, having a great and Zealous love to
the Ordinances, Ministers, and Servants of Christ, Dissembling the weakness and
infirmities of her body, that she might have liberty to attend the Ordinances
of God for her Soul, walking closely with God in daily secret duty, strictly
keeping the Sabbaths, taking special notice, of the workings of Grace, and
Sin, and, Gods providential dealings with her, recording them in her diary, and
under a long and mortal sickness, expressing a most christian Patience and
Submission, to the Will of God.

As to his Servants, so soon as they came into his family, he instructed them
first in their duty toward God, next in the duty of their places* giving them
the evidence and authority of Scripture for that which he instructed them in,
and expected from them, enjoining them to get those Scriptures by heart which
they were to keep in memory and repeat to him, as he called for them.

As to his family together, after his own personal secret retirement and
devotion, in reading the Holy Scriptures in course, and Prayer, which was his
first and last exercise, after his uprising, and before his downlying, His
manner was in the morning seeking God, first by a short Prayer for a blessing
to read some portion of Scripture, which he often also Expounded, and then to
proceed to Prayer; and at night after the like reading of the Scripture, he
required every Child that was capable, and Servant, to repeat one verse of that
Chapter or some other Scripture which they had a desire might be explained to
them, and of every such verse so repeated he gave the sense, and speak
something to it before Prayer, often exhorting his family to a reverend
demeanor of themselves in the worship of God, and would be much troubled when
he understood, or discerned any thing to the contrary.

Once a week for the most part he did catechize, both Children and servants
either out of the Assemblies, or his own Scriptural Catechism and explained it
to them: And once a fortnight if not diverted by urgent occasion, he went over
some principle of Religion, opening and explaining it in a Catiehistical way,
which his Children and Servants were to give him an account of the next
fortnight, and when they had so done, he proceeded to another principle, and
thus he did from time to time. What sermons the Youth of the family heard upon
the Lords day, or at any other time, they gave an account thereof to him as
they could remember. He kept private days of Humiliation with his family, as
often as he could gain opportunity for it, on which days he would if not
prevented, deal particularly with every one, or as many as he had time for,
that was under his charge, about the matters of their Souls. And took care that
all in his family should call upon God and Pray to him in secret, as well as be
present at family duty. And when any of his Brethren came to vsit him. He was
not willing to let them depart without Prayer. His Family was an house of
Prayer. These his labors in his family God blessed and succeeded to the
Spiritual good of several that came under his roof.

He was most tenderly conscientious in keeping holy the Sabbath day, whereof he
was a strict observer, and took care that all under his roof should do the
same. He kept a very severe watch not only over his words, and actions, but his
very thoughts also. Quickly reflecting thereon not only when vain and sinful,
but when impertinent to the holiness, and duty of the day, whereof he has left
the following testimonies.

April. 29. 1666. My heart was much out of frame upon the Lords day, full of
vain and Sinful thoughts. As I was going to prayer in the Afternoon alone, God
brought to remembrance, Ps. 40. 12, 17. Innumerable evils have Compassed me
about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look
up -- yet the Lord thinks upon me. This was a stay to me.

Apr. 4. I went forth on several occasions, None of them succeeded. The first
Contrivance of that journey was cast into my thoughts on the Lords day in a
time of prayer, I laid it aside till Monday, and then considered further of it,
and saw it convenient for the best ordering of my affairs. But not humbling my
soul for those contrivances so unseasonably arising in my mind, I was crossed
in them. Hereupon I determined for time to come, when any thoughts or
contrivances about ordering my affairs were cast into my mind on Lords days or
on other days in time of holy duties, to lay them aside till a more convenient
time; and if upon deliberation, that way of ordering my affairs seems best
which was cast into my mind in time of holy duties, I would not hereupon
neglect that way lest Satan should get advantage of me, but I would first
humble my Soul for its wanderings and suffering such thoughts to arise so
unseasonably, and took to Christ for pardon of the irregularities of my heart,
and then not fear to order my affairs in that way, that seems most agreeable to
reason, and nearest the rule of Gods word, though the Contrivance was first
cast into my mind, at an unseasonable time.

Having a letter of Spiritual advice and Counsel to write to a friend, and
having no spare time but on the Lords day, to do it, I was doubtful whether I
might spend some part of that day on such employment. As I was musing on my bed
what I had best do, that Scripture came to my mind, Rev. 1. 10, 11. I was in
the Spirit on the Lords day, and I heard a Voice saying, what thou see Write
in a Book, and send it to the seven Churches. Whence I Concluded it to be
Lawful to write, as well as read, hear, meditate, and discourse of spirital
matters on the Lords day.

His Charity had no less measure than the rest of his Graces, which he
accounted one of the best characters of a Christian. Lamenting sometimes the
divisions among Professors of religion, he would say, He did not value a
Christian by his great knowledge and eminent parts, but by his great Charity and
Love to his Brethren.

This he extended to various Sorts of objects* as,

Toward those who were at difference one with another. He was an industrious
peacemaker, offering himself to interpose, to make up the breach, taking
journeys when at distance in order to it.

Toward those that had difference with himself about worldly concerns, from
which he was not altogether free, though altogether innocent, when he suffered
wrong by any, his care was, that they should suffer none by him, or his, either
in word or deed, always practicing himself, and counselling others to do good,
against evil. He would make the best construction, that was possible, of the
words, and actions of his adversaries, often making mention of that Scripture,
1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity thinks no evil.

Toward his Friends, his Friendship was hearty, ingenuous, faithful and open.
He received them into his house gladly, entertained them liberally, conversed
with them cheerfully, sympathised with them in their afflictions
affectionately, and served them, as he had occasion, industriously.

Toward those that persecuted him, and others for Conscience, and Religions
sake, he observed the command of Christ Math. 5. 44. He affcctionately pitied
them, and prayed for them daily. And when he heard any passionate expressions
against them for their violence, and unrighteousness, he would be offended, and
charge people to pray more earnestly for them, and seek opportunities to do
them good.

Toward those that dissented from him in the matters of God, he had a Spirit
of meekness and forbearance, embracing all with Christian Love, whose practice
did not destroy their profession of Christianity. Colchester was a very divided
place, when he was called thither, upon the account of diverse persuasions, yet
he so behaved himself with all humility, modiration, tenderness, Brotherly
kindness, aad Charitable judgment, that they were generally united in their
respects, and esteem for him. And though he could not with Satisfaction to his
Conscience, conform to all that the Law required, yet he judged many that did,
to be very Good men, and had a real Honor for them.

Toward the poor, and such as were reduced to streights and difficulties in
this world, he was pitiful and bountiful, He devised liberal things, and drew
out his Soul to the hungry. In the exercise whereof he observed our Saviors
rule Math. 6. 1, 2, 3. This indeed was one of his secrets which he always
industriously, concealed as much as he could. Yet variety of objects bare
witness to him.

The Widow, the Fatherless, the Stranger, the Sick, the Sufferers, have all
been refreshed from his compassions. Though he offered to Preach freely at St,
James's Church in Colchester, on Lords day Mornings (as has been before
mentioned) not desiring or expecting any reward, yet the civility of the people
did gratify him for his pains. The greatest part of which (I am assured from
an hand privy to it) he distributed to charitable uses.

And this I read under his own hand.

Nov. 1. 1665. I made a Vow to God to give him the tenth of all that he should
give unto me the ensuing year. That which occasioned me to vow this Vow, was
the reading, Genesis 28. which fell out that morning in my ordinary course; where
I observed that most of those blessings, which Jacob mentions as his inducement
to his Vow, God had given me. He had vouchsafed me his presence, he had
graciously preserved and kept me from my Enemies, and the noisome pestilence,
he had given me bread and Raiment, I added Pro. 3. 9. Honor the Lord with thy
Substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase. I Considered also
that what I gave to God should be fruit abounding to my account. Phil. 4. 17.
Math. 25. 34, 35, 36.

I considered which way I should give it to God, and I saw from, Prove. 19. 17.
that what was given to the poor was given to God: Especially what was given to
the poor Saints and members of Christ, Math. 25. 35, 40. And as to the
Suffering Ministers of Christ. I determined to bestow part of what I had
dedicated to God, on them, and that though they were not brought to such
extremities, as not to know how to Subsist. I was moved thereunto by, Phil. 4.
10, 11, 14, 18. The Apostle Paul was not in such want but that he knew how to
live comfortably, and contentedly, yet he says the Philippians, did well in
Communicating with his afflictions, and tells them that their Charity toward
him was an odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to
God.

Toward the Church of God in General, his indefatigable Labors in Preaching
and Writing; his frequent Fastings and Humiliations, his fervent and wrestling
Prayers for the peace of Jerusalem; his affectionate sympathizing with her in
her Sufferings, are the undeniable Testimonies of his Love.

His own Liberality and stirring up of others thereunto, for the Education of
such poor Scholars as were hopeful for the work of the Ministry is the effect
of the same Principle.

To which must be added his Last-will and Testament, wherein out of pure zeal
and Love to the Service and Enlargement of the Church, he has bequeathed the
greatest part of his well furnished Library, even the choicest and most
valuable of his Books to Gonvile and Caius College in Cambridge; with five
Hundred pounds to be laid out by his Executrix in purchasing a Freehold
Estate, or Impropriation to be settled upon the said College, for the
maintenance of a Scholar and Fellow there successively for ever. Providing
that such only be Elected thereto, as are poor, or Orphans, or the Sons of poor
Ministers of the best and most hopeful parts, obliging them to the Study of
Divinity and the Ministerial work; taking special care that such be well
grounded and established in the Orthodox Faith, the true Reformed Protestant
Religion; and in case any such Elected shall become corrupt in Doctrine, or
Scandalous in life, then after due admonition, and Non-Reformation, his place
to be declared void, and another to be chosen in his stead, and none to enjoy
it longer than twelve years. Besides which he has also bequeathed, in Case his
only Daughter shall die before she shall accomplish the Age of one and twenty
years, Twenty pounds per Annum to be settled upon the College in New England,
for the Education of a Converted Indian, or any other that will learn the
Indian Language to be a Minister, and go to Preach the Gospel to the poor
Indians. (Nor was this the first expression of his pious regard to that remote
part of the world, for when he heard of that wasting Fire that laid so great a
part of Boston in N. E. in Ashes, he sent thither freely to be distributed
among the Sufferers, a considerable quantity of his Books, Entitled Counsel to
the Afflicted, which he had wrote upon the occasion of the Burning of London.)
Beyond which he has also given Twenty five pound to Charitable uses. Which
bequests he has made yet with all due respect to his Family, not in the least
declining from the kindness of an Husband, or the tenderness of a Father, so
ordering his Charity to others, as withal securing to his Widow and Fatherless
Child, not only a necessary and Competent, but even a liberal and plentiful
Subsistence; reserving to them the Rent of what he has bequeathed to the
College during their Natural lives.

Hitherto the Reader has had an account of this Eminent Saint given him for
the most part from those Acts and Exercises of his life, by which he was
visible to the discerning and judicious eyes of those that knew him.

We shall now proceed to give a further account of those his own observations,
and experiences of himself through which we may look into the very frame and
temper, the thoughts and affections of his heart, some of which he has thus
recorded.

His Observations and Experiences.
Jan. 10. 1653. In reading of Calvin's Institutions I met with that place in
Isa. 44. 3. Upon the reading whereof (having been the the night before under
Conviction of the emptiness and barrenness of my Soul, and some despondency of
Spirit thereupon) I conceived some hope, and found my Soul lifted up toward
God, to wait for and expect the shedding abroad of his Spirit in my Soul,
seeing he had said, he would pour it out upon the dry ground; but alas! the
lively sense of this was but momentany, it was soon gone, and my old deadness
of heart returned upon me.

Hence I observe that it is of singular use both for the Establishment of true,
and discerning of false Comforts to see upon what grounds our Souls take in,
and upon what grounds they let go their Comforts.

The letting go of our Comforts oftimes proceed from our letting go of the
promises. When Satan can prevail to beat us off from the promise, he will
quickly rob us of our Comfort.

I find that at several times I have been kept under doubts, and fears, and
jealousies, and yet have had no Scripture grounds for them, so that I perceive
they proceede^ from Satan darkning my heart, and keeping me in unbelief, and
trouble of Spirit.

Feb. 16. My Soul being dejected because after long w^iting upon God, for the
fulfilling of his Covenant in giving his Spirit, and carrying on the work of
Faith, and Sanctification with power, it had found no sensible in-comes; when I
was reading the Scripture according to my usual Custom, the Lord did rebuke the
despondency of my Spirit from those words of the Prophet Isa. 40. 27. Why
say thou O Jacob, and speak O Israel my way is hid from the Lord, and my
judgment is passed over from my God. And did encourage my Soul still to hope in
God, and wait for his strength from the following words. v. 28* 29. 31. Have
thou not known, have thou not heard? (if thou have not known it by experience
having found his everlasting Arms under thee for thy support, yet have thou not
at least heard it) that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends
of the Earth faints not, neither is weary. He gives power to the faint, etc.
Continue thou therefore O my Soul, to wait upon the Lord.

Lord! what an accursed hard heart have I! that sin which grieves thee Genesis 6.
6. thy Son. Mar. 3. 5. thy Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. should not grieve me! that sin
which wearieth thee Isa. 43. 24. should not be a burden to me! that I should
not be troubled for want of thy Presence, when as the hiding of thy face made
our Savior cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? That Eternity
and Judgment to come should make no impression upon me, that I can hear, yea
speak of thy Word, thy wrath, etc. and yet not fear thee, not tremble at thy
Word, nor at this my Condition.

Feb. 19. Being Sabbath day. Having formerly perceived a desperate hardness in
my heart, that that Word, which works upon others, should do me no good, that
no means, no mercies did melt my Soul, and almost despairing of ever having it
softened. After Prayer I was encouraged from the Lord in reading Mr. Hooker
upon Act. 2. 37. who from those words, When they heard these things they (who
had Crucified our Lord Christ) were pricked at the heart, raises this
observation, It is possible even for the most stubborn sinner to get a broken
heart. And now O my Soul, Why art thou cast down? Is not the Lord greater than
thy heart? Can Satan be more malicious to destroy thee than the Lord is
merciful to save thee? Yet the actings of my Faith hereupon are but faint.

Upon Examination of my self, I have sometimes found that to mine own sense and
feeling, I have been altogether void of any love or fear of God, and that I
have been at such a time as unable to work up my heart into the Love and fear
of God, as to say to this Mountain, Be thou removed and cast into the Sea. Such
wonderful deadness has seized upon my Soul, so greatly have I been enslaved,
and held captive by Satan that I have not been able truly to desire the Spirit
of God. O that my heart could bleed at the remembrance of this great evil, that
I should not only be cut off from Communion with God, but be contented with
this condition, that I should have no groanings in Spirit to be delivered from
this miserable bondage. Be instructed hence O my Soul to ascribe every good
motion to God, if thou feel any hungrings after Jesus Christ, or any sorrow
for want of Gods presence or the like, own it as his work, and bless him for it.

I have sometimes found my condition much like the man mentioned Joh. 5. who
lay a long time by the pool of Bethesda, but was not able to put himself in,
that he might be healed, even so it is with my Soul. Though God has opened a
Fountain for sin and for uncleanness to wash in, and I find my Soul exceedingly
polluted, yet I am not able to step into this Fountain that I may be healed. O
my Soul, the Lord sees thy weakness, and that thou have been now a long time
in this case, wait thou on God. Who can tell but that as the Bowels of Jesus
Christ did yearn toward the poor man, so may his Compassions be great toward
thee, and he may heal thee also. Cease not to importune him saying, Jesus, thou
Son of God, have mercy on me, O Lord, heal my Soul.

Having at several times found diverse workings upon my heart as Convictions,
and thereupon some pantings and breathings after God, but as yet nothing come
to perfection, I thought of and found that I had cause to take up the complaint
of Hezekiah in another case, It is a day of trouble and rebuke, the Children
are come to the Birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. Isa. 37. 3.
Some time after reading Isa. 66. it seemed to me that that word v. 9. was
suited to my Case. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth,
says the Lord? Shall I cause to bring forth and shut the Womb, says thy God?
O my Soul wait thou on God, who will perfect his own work in thee. He has
said, He will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, till he
sent forth judgment unto Victory.

I have oftimes seen a Law in my Members warring against the Law of my mind,
and leading me into Captivity to the Law of sin and death.

So powerful and mighty have been the Actings of some inward corruptions, that
I have not been able to overcome them, but have been hurried Captive by them.
Hereby I come to see that truth, the heart of man is desperately wicked, who
can know it? I cannot fathom the depth of iniquity which is in my heart.
Hereupon I am made to cry out with St. Paul, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of Death? O Lord be not thou far from me, but
make have to help me, Let the sighing of the Prisoner come before thee,
proclaim liberty to thy Captive, and the opening of the Prison door to him that
is bound with the Chain of sin. Isa. 61. 1.

Mar. 26. 1654. I find that though in my judgment and Profession I acknowledge
Christ to be my Righteousness and Peace, yet upon Examination I observe that my
heart has done quite another thing, and that secretly I have gone about to
Establish my own Righteousness; and have derived my Comfort and Peace from my
own Actings. For when I have been disquieted by the Actings of my sin, that
which has recovered me to my former Peace, has not been (that I could find)
God speaking Peace through the blood of Christ, but rather from the
intermission of temptation and the cessation of those sins; when I have been
troubled at an evil frame of heart, I do not find that the Righteousness of
Christ has been my Consolation, but that which has relieved me, as far as I
can find, was that afterward I found my self in a better temper. Having been in
trouble and perplexity I have read the Scripture, gone to Prayer, and in doing
these I have been relieved, yet I do not find that at such times I had real,
true, living Communion with God in such duties, or that the Spirit of God did
in those duties reveal to me my interest in Christ, and so quiet my Conscience.
Hence I come to see what great need I have, and that it is of singular use to
watch over my Soul in all its ways, both in reference to sin, that I fall not
into it, and when fallen, what the Carriage and Actings of my Soul are at such
a time; Whether I flee for relief to God in Christ, or to my own works: And in
reference to my duties, to take heed lest those means which God has appointed
to be the conveyances of himself, his Son and Spirit, and all Spiritual
blessings, should prove to me a mean of Death and Separation from God, by my
formal use of them and resting in them. For as Satan keeps some alienated from
God by the gross pollutions of the world; So others from Christ by their
Establishing a Righteousness of their own. O Lord, break thou this snare for
me, and let my Soul escape as a bird from the Net, that I may flee to thee, and
be at rest.

I have observed in my self, that when God at any time is pleased to work any
thing in my Soul, I soon lose it; if he quicken me, I soon grow dead hearted
again; if he enliven my affections, they soon grow cold and flat, and my old
hardness returns upon me. Hence I come to see that it is infinite Wisdom, and
Goodness in God, that he has not put the stock of grace into our own hands,
but has treasured it up in Christ, that our life is now hid with Christ in
God, for so it becomes sure. Romans 4. 16. hereby also I come to see that I have
need of continual recourse to Jesus Christ, for new supplies of grace and
strength.

The Lord God in his wisdom, was pleased when he delivered his people out of
Egypt, before he brought them to Canaan, to lead them 40 years in the
wilderness, when as he could have led them a nearer way to Canaan, Exodus 13.
17. He chose rather to lead them through the great and terrible Wilderness,
Jer. 2. 6. where were fiery Serpents and Scorpions, and drought, where there
was no water, where he brought them forth water out of the Rock of Flint, and
fed them with Manna, for this end that he might humble them, prove them, and do
them good in the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 15, 16. Do thou find it so, O my Soul,
in thy travail toward the Heavenly Canaan: Do thou walk through much
Spiritual drought, a land of deserts, and of the shadow of death: Do meet
with a flinty heart, and fiery temptations? Know that the Lord does this to
humble thee. (which through his grace thou have sometimes found,) and to prove
thee, i. e, to discover thee to thy self (for he himself knows thy thoughts
afar off) and this way of God through grace has been a means of discovering
much of thy corrupt heart to thee) and that he may do thee good in the latter
end. Therefore take heed O my Soul of Israel's sins, of murmuring against God,
under thy wants, of unbeleif, and tempting God, etc. Read often and weight well
the 78th Psalm.

May 6. being Sabbath day. The Lord was pleased in the hearing of his word to
convince me of my sin and lost condition. But Lord? How unfaithful was I then,
and have I been since to the Convictions of thy Spirit! How soon have I healed
up the wound that was given by the word? How soon has an hard heart, a secure,
careless Spirit taken possession of me! Lord, If ever thy word be effectual in
me, thou must not only speak it to my heart, but write and engraff it there
also. Henceforth I desire to wait on thee, as for the teachings of thy Spirit,
so for the writing of thy Law in my heart by thy Spirit. I found a lothness in
my Spirit, to go to here this Sermon, whereby I perceive Satan would have
hindered me. Be encouraged hence, O my Soul, to break through all difficulties
thou meetest with in doing thy duty. When thou find any secret unwillingness
to ordinances or duties, then stir up thy self to wait upon God, expecting that
he has some special mercy for thee, which Satan would hinder thee off.

Jun. 1. This day the Lord did, in the hearing of his word, revive some
convictions which have formerly been upon my Spirit, though in a very languid
manner. I stood convinced before the Lord of unbelief, and that I was a lost
creature because thereof, from the words of our Savior, Joh. 3. 18. He that
believes not is Condemned already. Conscience tells me that I am yet in
unbelief, that I want that faith which is accompanied with the new birth Joh.
1. 12, 13. that faith which should purge me from Atheism, formality, and
resting in duties, from hypocrisy and deadness, from unclean affections, and
inordinate Love of the world, from a vain mind, and a light Spirit; that faith
which should purify my heart, from these and the like evils, Act. 15. 9. that
faith which should make Christ a greater Reality, and more precious to me than
any thing in the world, 1 Pet. 2. 7. that faith which brings peace with God,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, unspeakable and full of Glory, Romans 5. 1. 1 Pet. 1.
8. I find I have had a dead faith. Jam. 2. 17, 20. and presumed upon Gods Mercy
in Christ, although I have been estranged from God in my heart and Nature, my
Resting in duties, and trusting in my own Righteousness as far as I can see,
has been the deceit of my heart.

Lord lay this conviction upon my Conscience, for I find my heart would put it
off, yea it has already desperately hardened it self against thee. I fear I
shall out-grow this Conviction of thy word, as at other times, I feel a
careless Spirit, that would make light of Eternity, and of Jesus Christ. Lord,
break my heart under thy word for my unbelief, and neglect of Christ. Let me
not heal my self, but wait till thou shall heal me.

Thou did help the unbelief of thy Servant Thomas, Oh that thou would help
mine also.

The Lord has shown me that I am dead in sin not only from the testimony of
his word, Ephesians. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13. but by inward experience. For I feel my self
alienated from the life of God, cut off from communion with the Lord Jesus,
separate from God and his blessed Spirit. My deceitful heart has often gone
about to repel this conviction, and has caused me sometimes to mistake, a life
of morality for Spiritual life, and at other times a life of formality. But now
I find the Scripture speaks of dead works, and calls for repentance from them.
Heb. 6. 1. and purging our consciences from them, Heb. 9. 14. By dead works I
understand, not only the gross pollutions of the World, but all works whatever,
that are done by a man, void of the quickening Spirit of God. Without Union to
Christ there is no Spiritual life, for as the natural life results from the
Union of the Soul with the body, and the State of death, is nothing but the
disunion and Separation of the Soul from the body; so our spiritual life
results from the Souls Union with Christ, and spiritual death is our separation
from him. Now I feel my self as a poor withered branch cut off from this Vine,
unacquainted with the actings of this Spiritual life, as living by faith,
Serving God in Spirit, Mortifying Sin by the Spirit, walking in the Spirit,
loving God above all things, and seeking his Glory in all things. I have
sometimes Prayed against sin, resolving against it, striven with it, avoided
occasions thereto (all which a natural man may do) but sin has returned upon
me, and overcome me. How to fetch power from Christ's death to mortify sin, how
to believe in God for subduing it, how to do it by the Spirit, these have been
mysteries to me. Lord, When shall the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in my
heart? When shall the Dayspring from on high, visit my Soul, to give light to
him that sits in darkness, and in the shadow of death? Come Lord Jesus thou
light of life, Come quickly.

That which kept me a long time from resolving to give up my whole heart to God
in Covenant, was a fear that I should break my Covenant and so double my sin.
But I perceive since that this was but Satan's policy to keep my heart from God,
and the true ground of my not doing this was not conscienciousness of sin, as
Satan once made me believe, but a loathness to part with all sin, and to serve
God with all my heart.

A Strong encouragement thou have O my Soul, to enter Covenant with God, to
serve him with thy whole heart, from that portion of his Word, which thou did
read this morning, May. 11. 1654. in Jer. 30. 21, 22. Who is this that engaged
his heart to approach unto me says the Lord? Ye shall be my people and I will
be your God.

Since my Covenanting with God I come to see more fully the truth of that
place, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be. For I find a Loathness to walk closely with
God, yea under a profession of Religion, my carnal heart has been at enmity to
the power and life of it, and this enmity has lain hid under, and been covered
with a performance of some duties, which have not been destructive to that evil
principle that has lived in me. Yea, I find my carnal heart is hungring after
the fleshpots of Egypt, after its old delights and sinful pleasures, is ready
to murmur against God in the wilderness and speaks of returning into Egypt, and
being impatient of the cross it revolts from God many a time, and seeks relief
and contentment from the creature.

Since my Covenanting with God I see more of thee treachery and hypocrisy of
my heart, I found my Soul for a while more tender of Sin, and my heart
seemingly engaged to serve the Lord. but I soon forgot the covenant that I had
made, and in a short space I did not find that my Covenanting had any influence
on my heart or life. So that I see I did but flatter the Lord with my mouth,
and lied unto him with my tongue, for my heart was not right with him, neither
was I steadfast in his Covenant, Ps. 78. 36, 37. My unstedfastness in my
Covenant with the Lord, did arise as far as I perceive from these two grounds,
1. My heart was not right with God when I made it, there was not that inward,
cordial, full resolution to part with all Sin, and that for ever, from an
antipathy to it, and dislike of it, neither that inward resolution of cleaving
to God, to have him my All in All, to take all my contentment and joy in him,
and to seek it in nothing else, which should have been. 2. I neglected my
watch, and did not (as I should) renew my Covenant often, and engage my heart
to walk with God, and while I was slothful, and negligent, my heart was stolen
away by the Devil, and the World, and is now in league again with Sin. Lord,
make me upright, and clear up to me my Sincerity, Search me and try me, and let
me know the bottom of my heart. Keep me upon my watch and guard, that I may
keep my Covenant.

Jul. 23. The Lord did awaken my Consience to such a sense of my sin, and lost
estate in the reading and hearing of his Word, that when I went to Prayer, I
was before him as a lost creature, being under wrath and the sentence of death,
lying in my blood and pollution. Now whereas before I found my heart carried
out in begging Sanctification, I did now cry to God for the blood of Christ to
wash away the guilt of my sin, I did not before prize Justifying Grace so as
now in some weak measure I was made to do. But I soon found an accursed hard
heart, in a little time I did not tremble at the wrath of God. I have labored
to work these convictions upon my heart, but I found such a roving heart, such
a slighty heart so possessed with vanity that nothing would abide with it. Lord,
unless thou savest me for thy mercies sake, I perish.

Aug. 6. being Sabbath day. In meditation on 1 John 3. 23. This is his
commandment that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ.
Considering with my self what this did imply, viz. not only a relying upon God
in Christ, for the remission of Sin, but for the pouring out of the Spirit,
Joh. 7. 38, 39. which Spirit when it is given will shed abroad the love of God
in our hearts, Romans 5. 5. and seal up the assurance of the remission of our
sins, and witness our addoption, Romans 8, 16. will mortify sin in us v. 13. and
work all the works of God in us, and for us, all which I want, and to which I
haven been a long time convinced that I am unable. And Considering further that
this Spirit is the free gift of God, Ps. 51. 12. given not according to our
works but of free mercy for the sake of Christ, Tit. 3. 4. 5, 6. And
considering further that Jesus Christ had received Gifts (of which the Gift of
the Spirit is intended) even for the rebellious, that God might dwell among
them Ps. 68. 18. I found my heart encouraged to wait upon the Lord for the
pouring forth of his Spirit upon me, that I might have my heart renewed and
sanctified, and the remission of my sins sealed up to my Soul.

Afterward considering further that the way whereby a poor soul that has lost
Gods image comes to be renewed in heart and mind and made partaker of the
divine nature, is by faith in the promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and observing how
Isaac who inherits the blessing was not born by the strength of Nature but by
promise, and as Isaac was born through the promise, so are all believers, Gal.
4. 28. not of the will of man but of God, Joh. 1. 13. and that God gives power
to the faint, and strength to them that have no might in a way of waiting Isa.
40. 29, 31. I saw from these considerations further ground of hope and waiting
upon God, notwithstanding I find my strength perished from me.

Neither shall the guilt of my Sin discourage me from waiting on God, from
expecting of his Holy Spirit, from going to Christ. The whole need not a
Physician, Christ deals with Sinners, Mar. 2. 17. He has said, he will in no
wise cast out them that come, to him Joh. 6. 37. why did he shed his blood to
wash away our sins. How is he the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world, if he should cast off guilty Souls when they come unto him? Is there not
a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness to wash in? Zach. 13. 1. What
though I be in my blood, yet if I go to Christ, he will not loath me, Ezekiel. 16.
6, 8. but will sprinkle clean water upon me and wash me from my filthyness,
Ezekiel. 36. 25. When therefore I find guilt upon me, I will look to Jesus Christ
in such promises as these, Isa. 1. 18. -- 43. 25, 26. -- 44. 21, 22. I will cry
unto him that I may have the pardon of my sin Sealed up to my Soul in these
promises by his Holy Spirit.

Neither shall my rebellious heart, the perverseness, and corruption of my
Nature discourage me, but I will with David beg a new heart and a right Spirit,
Ps. 51. 10. I will say as Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me and I shall be
turned. God has sent Christ to bless us in turning us from our iniquities Act.
3. 26. and to destroy what Satan has wrought in us. 1. Joh. 3. 8. therefore
when I feel sin prevail and lead me captive, I will with Paul cry out of this
body of death, Romans 7. 24. and go to God in Jesus Christ, through such promises
as these, Mic. 7. 18, 19. Romans 6. 14. Math. 11. 28. Isa. 45. 22. Jer. 31. 33.
Ezekiel. 36. 26.

When I feel my self graceless, I will look to him who is full of grace, Joh.
1. 14. 16. and has promised to give grace, Ps. 84. 11 even an heart to love
him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and to put his fear into us, Jer. 32. 40. and to withhold no
good thing, if we endeavor to walk uprightly before him, Ps. 84. 11.

When I find the plague of an hard dead heart upon me, I will look unto the
Lord, who quickens the dead, Romans 4. 17. and can raise Children to Abraham out
of Stones, Math. 3. 9. I will look unto him in his Covenant, promising to take
away the heart of Stone, and to give an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 26.

In time of desertion, when God withdraws the comfortable influences of his
presence, I will not be discouraged, but I will search my heart, and try my
ways, and see what cause I have given the Lord to depart from me, Lam. 3. 40.
Josh. 7. 11. 12, 13. Isa. 59. 2. I will earnestly seek the Lord that he would
return, and shine upon me, and lift up the light of his countenance upon my
Soul, Ps. 80. 3. -- 89. 46. Hos. 5. 15. I will not only pray, but wait for his
return, Ps. 130. 5, 6. Isa. 8. 17. Lam. 3. 2, 3. etc. with 26. and in waiting I
will look unto the Lord in these, or like promises. Ps. 103. 8, 9. Isa. 54. 6,
7, 8. -- 57. 16, 17, 18. Lam. 3. 31, 32. Hos. 6. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 14. 18.

When I have neglected my watch, and fallen, and been unstedfast in Covenant
with God I will not despair but look to God in Christ, that he would pardon my
sin, grant me repentance, and restore me. The Covenant of grace admits of
repentance after sin, Levit. 26. 21. 40. 41, 42. Yea God has exalted Christ to
give repentance, Act. 5. 31. has promised to heal backslidings, Hos. 14. 4.
invites backsliders to return, Jer. 3. 1, 12, 13, 14.

How did David behave himself when Iniquities prevailed over him? He goes to
God, to purge away his transgression, Ps. 65. 3. he makes Supplication to God
that he would not cast him out of his presence, Ps. 51. 11. he confesses his
sin, and God pardons him, Ps. 32. 5. which should encourage, all the Godly when
they have fallen, to return to the Lord ver. 6. St. John lays strict charge
upon Believers, that they sin not, but in case of Sin he would not have them
despair, 1 John 2. 1, 2. Solomon prayed to this purpose, 1 Kings. 8. and God
accepted. chapter 9, 3. When therefore thou have fallen, O my Soul, by thine
iniquity, and God hid his face, and withdraws his gracious presence, let thy
uncircumcised heart be humbled, accept of the punishment of thy sin. Turn unto
the Lord and and say, Take away all iniquity and receive me graciously, So will
I praise thee, Lev. 26. 41. Hos. 14. 2. Let not thy falls cause thee to depart
from the Living God. Though thou have played the harlot with many Lovers yet
the Lord calls thee to return, Jer. 3. 1. God commands us to forgive our
Brother, seven times a day, if he return and repent, Luke 17. 4. yea not only
seven times, but seventy times seven, Math. 18. 21, 22. And will not God much
more forgive us though we fall often, if we return and seek his face, Seeing his
ways are far above our ways? Isa. 55. 7, 9.

Dec. 9. 1655. Having found much formality in my duties on the Sabbath, and
seeing my self lost in them, I put the question to my Soul, what if thou die
this night? What is thy hope? How will thou appear before God? Righteousness of
thine own thou have none to trust to, thou see how thou sinnest every day,
and how full of sin thy best duties are. Upon this enquiry the good Spirit of
God brought to my remembrance, 1 Cor. 1. 30. God has made Christ Righteousness
to us, and Jer. 23. 6. This is the Name by which he shall be called. The Lord
our Righteousness, which was comfort to me, and enquiring what warrant I had to
believe my self to be a sharer in this Righteousness, and that I stand accepted
of God, by virtue of this Righteousness, I saw from, Romans 3. 21, 22. that this
Righteousness is upon all that believe. Now through the Lords goodness, and to
his Praise be it spoken, I have oftimes found my heart not only to long after
pardon, and renovation, but to trust in Christ and in God through him, for
pardoning mercy and renewing grace, and all other good things.

Dec. 16. I found the Lord graciously present with me in my morning meditation
on my Bed. And my Soul was much refreshed with Mr. Simond's Sermon. God spoke a
suitable word by him to my Soul from Mat. 15. 23. But he answered her not a
word. God may sometimes defer to give an Answer to a gracious and well
qualified Prayer. 1. To correct our deafness to his voice. 2. To put us upon
more earnest seeking of him. 3. To exercise and try our graces. God proportions
mercies according to his delays, they are the greater when given in. Sarah
tarried long for a Son, and then had an Isaac. So did Hanna, but then had a
Samuel. So Elizabeth but then had a John, my heart rejoiced at this, hoping
that God would give an high degree of brokenness of heart in his own due time,
though at present my heart were hard. And I remembered how hard Mr. Bradfords
heart was once as to his own sense, and how eminent he was afterward for
tenderness, as M. Fox Relates. God was very good this day. But Oh! how vile and
sinful was I! I felt a very proud vainglorious heart both in hearing, and
after Sermon was done. But the Lord chastised me for it. For at night when I
Preached in the Chapel the Lord forsook me, I found no assistance of his
Spirit, either in Prayer or Preaching, but was much confounded in both, having
little or no sense of the things I spoke of, or prayed for.

We read of Naaman 2 King. 5. 11. that he expected a Miraculous way of cure. I
thought said he, he will surely come out and stand and call on the Name of the
Lord his God, and strike his hand over the place, and recover the Leper. So
have I found my self apt to expect that the Spirit of God should mortify and
subdue sin in me without my striving against it. But I have learned it is the
will of God, that I should strive against sin as well as pray and wait for his
Spirit. Gods working in us to will and to do, excludes not our endeavoring.
Phil. 2. 12, 13. Having promises let us cleanse our selves. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

October. 17. I was immoderate in the use of the Creatures, and though checked
and reproved from within, yet I persisted. At night when I walked in my
Chamber, considering what I had done, I was sad, and said to God, Lord I have
Rebelled against thee. I had no sooner said it in my heart, but immediately
that word was brought to me. Dan. 9. 9. To the Lord our God belong mercies and
forgivenesses (he will forgive again and again) though we have Rebelled against
him. O the wonderful goodness of God! be amazed, O my Soul, at this Love. Now I
saw the promise (Isa. 65. 24. before they call I will answer, and whilst they
are yet speaking I will hear) made good to me. In the evening on my Bed
considering on this Love of God, whence it should come to pass that the Lord
should deal thus graciously with me, it was answered me from Mic. 7. 18. He
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage because he
delights in mercy. Next morning at my first awaking the Spirit of God brought
that Scripture into my thoughts. Ps. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against me, as
for our trangressions thou shall purge them away. It came to me with some life
and power, and was very suitable to my Condition. Oh the Goodness of God! the
Riches of his Grace! that he should so soon come into my relief, and raise my
Soul by his promise; this is mercy never to be forgotten.

Sept. 28. In meditation I found the Lord drawing forth my heart to close with
Christ. I was convinced that God was willing to bestow his Son upon me, because
he did not only invite me Isa. 55. 1. and Command me 1 John 3. 23. but even
beseech and entreat me to receive Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 20. I was further convinced
of Gods real intention, and willingness to give me his Son from his patient
waiting and long-suffering in expecting my return, even after much deafness to
the voice of his Spirit, and dallying with his Grace, he still offers his Son
to me, yea he presses in upon me with the renewing of good motions and
affections which I have quenched. Now whence is all this but from the Love and
mercy of God that he should be thus willing to have me take his Son? Now who am
I that I should withstand God? Why should I forsake my own Mercies? Lord thou
have shown me that my former revoltings shall not hinder this thy mercy, if I
will acknowledge my sin, renounce my self, return unto thee and embrace thy
Son. Jer. 3. 12, 13. O Lord, I thankfully accept thy offer of Grace, I come
unto thee, Oh give me thy Son; behold, I give thee my self. Let me be Espoused
to the Lord Jesus, I am willing through grace to take up my Cross, to deny my
self, and to follow thee.

Nov. 1. Having set apart that day to seek the Lord, and to humble my Soul
before him, I could not get my heart to be afflicted and mourn under sin, but
found much lightness in Prayer, the Lord hid his face, and did not come in to
my poor Soul with his quickening presence. So that I lay in a poor desolate,
forsaken condition under much confusion, yet in the evening a little before
going to bed, seeking the Lord again I was revived in reading Psalm. 40.
especially v. 17. I am poor and needy yet the Lord thinks upon me, etc. and
next morning in reading Psalm. 9. 10. 18. Thou Lord have not forsaken them that
seek thee; The needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation of the poor
shall not perish for ever. I was thereby encouraged still to wait and hope. O
Lord, I have sought thee, withhold not thou thy tender Mercies from me. How
long will thou hide thy face from me! O when will thou come unto me! Make have
to help me O my God. I am poor and needy, O let me not be forgotten for ever,
let not my expectation perish for ever, and now O Lord, what is my expectation?
It is even this, the giving in of mercy and grace through the Lord Jesus,
pardoning mercy and renewing grace. It is the pouring out of thy Spirit, the
taking away the heart of Stone, and giving an heart of flesh, it is an heart to
know thee, to fear thee, to love thee, and obey thee, etc.

Dec. 6. Being in trouble and distress of Spirit, because the Lord hid his
face, and withdrew himself from me, I went in the poverty of my Spirit to
Trinity Lecture, and with some expectation to meet with God in his own
Ordinance. The Lord was gracious to me, and spoke Comfort to me from his Word.
I see it is good to wait upon God, though he send the Rich empty away, yet he
fills the hungry with good things. My Soul was glad and rejoiced for a
season. But going into the Country the same day, among friends and variety of
worldly Affairs, I lost something of the savor and relish which the good Word
of God left upon me. And I found palpably my Soul resting in those Comforts
which I had received, and growing secure and careless; from whence the Lord
gave me this Instruction, That I am a poor silly wretch, knowing neither how to
want nor how to abound, apt to murmur and repine in Straits, and to be lifted
up and grow secure in Enlargements. O Lord! in every Condition I need thy grace
to teach me how to behave my self. O show me thy way, and lead me therein for
thy Namesake. Also the Lord taught me hence, that I ought to be patient under
his hand when he hides his Face, and to resign up my will to his Will,
inasmuch as I do not know what is good for my self. The Lord sees I should be
worse it may be, if I enjoyed more than I do, and therefore in wisdom and mercy
he keeps me in a low Condition.

My confusion sometimes has been so great, that I have been so unsettled, and
at such a loss in my Soul that I knew not what to do; all former workings have
been questioned and judged as nothing. In the hour of such temptation the Lord
taught me, besides Prayer and searching into my Soul, to have recourse to
former experiences. Psalm. 77. 10, 11. and Psalm. 85.

October. 11. In the morning I bewailed it before God, that I was still at a loss
to know whether I loved him; and after Prayer I read 1 John 2 chapter and I was
made in a more special manner to take notice of v. 5. Whosoever keeps his word,
in him verily is the love of God perfected. Me-thought I saw God Answering my
Prayer, and telling me out of this word, that I loved him. In him verily,
(...), it is a sure sign of Love to God, we need not doubt of it, if we keep
his Word. Now if I know my own heart I desire to do so. if the Love of God be
perfected in him that keeps his Word, then surely it is begun in him that
desires and endeavors to keep his Word.

Jan. 25. The Lord helped me with Tears to bewall mine abominations, even my
Original and actual sins, my formality, Earthliness, alienation from him, etc.
therein he did remember and fulfill that gracious promise Ezekiel. 36. 31. I found
Godly sorrow sweet, not only in the root and fountain thereof (it being a
Covenant blessing) but in the very Actings of it.

Feb. 2. In the Evening upon my Bed the Lord did graciously melt my heart in
the sight of sin under this Consideration, that it was against infinite Love. I
was ashamed, confounded and abashed, because I had so long slighted, neglected,
Rebelled against a God of Love. My Soul even trembled at it.

Jan. 15. 1655. Having been the day before with one under great Temptations,
and hearing of another under a wounded Spirit, my heart was melted in Prayer,
whilst I was praising God for his long patience in the days of my sinning, and
his tenderness and gentleness toward me in my Conversion.

Jan. 16. I found my heart drawn out to a recumbence on Jesus Christ. The
Spirit says Come. Rev. 22. 17. Christ says, Come. Joh. 7. 37. And the Father
says, Come. Mat. 22. 4. And who am I, O Lord, that I should gainsay such
Invitations. Behold, O Lord, I come, and put my trust in thee.

Jan. 26. I Preached twice, and had very gracious assistance, much beyond
expectation, in the week before I was much indisposed, and could not get my
heart to a settled meditation of what I was to speak. I was under a great sense
of my impotency, and labored in the fire, till Saturday Afternoon; when I
cried to the Lord he was gracious to me, and Answered me. After my work was
over I was much assaulted with Spiritual Pride. I saw plainly, the reason of
Gods delaying his Assistance, and giving me such sense of my weakness, was to
keep me humble. Every way O Lord! I see my own vileness, when thou withdrawest
from me then my heart dies, and my strength fails, and I am ready to be
froward. When thou enlargest me, then I am ready to be puffed up. Oh pardon and
purge away all my sin for thy Names sake.

Mar. 23. In Singing the 15 th. Psalm I found Comfort, my Conscience bearing me
witness that I labored after those things, which are set down as Characters of
a Citizen of the New Jerusalem.

Sept. 28. I had sweet Meditations upon my Bed, I found God in my morning
Prayer also in private, and assistance in Preaching, but not such an influence
of the Spirit in public Prayer, as I have sometimes found. Yet I had begged of
God, that he would give me his presence in public, as a token that he accepted
of me and my work; but he withdrew. I feared hereupon, that I had tempted God,
and sinned in begging new signs of his favor, when I had had such great
experience of his goodness many times before. Lord, forgive the sin of thy
Servant.

Nov. 23. Examining my self about a work of Grace, I had some Comfort from Ps.
40. 8. Delight in doing the will of God is an Argument of the Law written in
the heart. Now I found that I had a delight especially in some duties, as
visiting the Sick, comforting of distressed Consciences, etc.

I was somewhat terrified from that word in Job. chapter 42. 7. I was afraid least
in my Preaching I should sometimes speak those things of God that were not
right, and soon after going to Prayer, I was in time of Prayer comforted from
Joh. 16. 13. The Spirit shall guide you into all truth.

Dec. 7. I found the Lord very much Answering my Prayer in giving very
gracious, and powerful Assistance both in Prayer and Preaching at Trinity
Lecture on Sabbath day. I may say as Jaber. 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. who said, Oh that
thou would bless me indeed, and be with me! And God granted my request. The
next morning there came a woman to me, and said she was troubled at the Sermon
that she could scarce sleep all night; for she bad not gone so far as the
Scribes and Pharisees, and that which added to the mercy was, God kept me
humble after this enlargement.

Mar. 31. 1657. I had a very evident Answer of Prayer. I was at a pinch for
some money, I begged of God that I might be supplied, and that Afternoon one to
whom I had lent a little money brought it me, which was enough for my present
necessities, the Circumstances were very remarkable.

I sought the Lord also to be with the Parish in the choice of their
Churchwardens, and there were those two chosen, whom if I had had the
Nomination, I should have chosen my self.

Apr. 21. I kept a day of Fast to the Lord. I found God graciously with me in
Prayer, the chief thing that I propounded was to seek direction as to my
Preaching on Weekdays. Among other things I begged of God a supply of my
wants, being in some straits for want of money. That very night one brought me
10 s. for Preaching a Funeral Sermon, which I expected not; and the next
morning the Churchwardens of St. Andrews Parish brought me 7 l. and upwards,
whereby I was sufficiently supplied. I could not but take notice of an evident
Answer of Prayer, and a fulfilling of that promise, Prove. 28. 27. He that
gives unto the poor shall not lack.

April. 24. Being desired to go to a poor Christian, I promised to go; there
being only two Maids in the house, I considered whether it might not prove some
scandal to go; but considering also she was a Member of Christ, and therefore I
ought to Administer to her Soul, I resolved to commit the taking care of my
Name to the Lord, and to do my duty. I begged of him that he would secure me
from reproach, and as I went an honest poor man met me, to whom I told whither
I was going, and asked him to go along with me; he was willing, and did so. I
looked upon him as sent by the Providence of God in Answer to my Prayer.

These were some of those observations and experiences which he recorded during
his continuance at Cambridge. Upon his removal from thence he intermitted this
practice for some years, but resumed it again.

October. 1662. God put it into my heart, as at other times so especially on
Wednesdays (the day on which I was wont to Preach my Lecture) when I was not
diverted by some unexpected Providence, to lament after the Lord who had cast
me out of my employment in his Vineyard, and to seek to him for a discovery of
the cause for which he contends with me, and that he would show me for what sin
or sins he has sent this sad affliction, and that he would give me a
sanctified use thereof, by purging out my sins and making me more holy, and
that he would restore me again to some employment in his Vineyard, when and
where it shall seem good in his sight.

Being sad and dejected because I had sinned now I was under the afflicting
hand of God, I was very much revived by Isa. 57. 17, 18. I smote him -- he went
on in the way of his own heart, I have seen his ways and will heal him. Having
afterward sinned again, and been over-powred by a corruption which had often
prevailed over me, I was caused to observe from that Scripture further, that it
was not only a single Act of sin which was committed, but he went on in the way
of his heart; and God says, I have seen his ways and will heal him. It was a
stay to my Faith. Here I observe what I have often found, viz. 1. Dejection is
a forerunner of Consolation. Seldom have I had trouble upon my Spirit, but if
I have eyed and followed after God, he has took it off by some word of
promise. 2. The observing and pondering of every word and Circumstance in a
promise is of great use, as it has been to me. 3. God opens his promises
gradually sometimes hinting and discovering one thing, and then another in the
promise.

Being foiled by sin I was raised to my former hope and affiance in God by
Phil* Children of God till the coming of Christ.

Being another time foiled with the same corruption, and my heart sinking in a
despondent frame, I was much revived from Jam. 4. 5. 6. He gives more grace.
Where I saw that even our strongest sins, such as our corrupt natures are most
prone to, and are deeply rooted in our hearts and Spirits, are conquerable by
Gods grace.

Being troubled that I had sinned against God under his Correcting hand, and
having thereby lost my former Comfort which God had spoken to my Soul after my
former backslidings, I sighed over the great Treachery and unstedfastness of my
heart, and casting about in my thoughts where I should find a suitable word to
fix on, God brought to my remembrance. Isa. 48. 8, 9. I knew that thou would
deal very Treacherously -- for my Names sake will I defer my Anger. While I was
musing and pondering hereon and had new hope put into me, the Lord let in
further Comfort and encouragement from. verse. 10, 11. which is rendered by
Piscat. Behold I will refine thee, and I will make thee a choice one in the
furnace of affliction: for mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it.
Which gave me abundant refreshment, and did marvellously strengthen my hope in
God. This was given me in when I had set apart some time to humble my Soul.

Apr. 5. 1665. I set apart that day for Fasting and Prayer on behalf of my
Daughter Elianor, that had been so long sick, and in the Evening had my Faith
revived from Isa. 44. 3* I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed.

Apr. 7. I began the day with discourse with some Friends, before I had been at
my private Communion with God, I met with a gentle Rebuke from the Providence
of God in my Family Affairs, and my heart was flat in Family duty, and
straightened in private. I took this as an Item to begin with God, before I
converse with men. In the Evening God came in graciously to me in my Family
Exercise.

Apr. 9. Lords day, I was much discomposed in my Spirit in the Morning, by
reason of a foil sin had given me the Evening before. Satan would have boat me
off from Preaching in my Family, but I performed my Morning exercise, and
continued dejected till the Evening, and then in Family Prayer God graciously
revived me with that promise. Hos. 11. 10. They shall walk after the Lord, in
Connection with verse. 7. my people are bent to backsliding, though they called
them to the most high, none at all would exalt him. Where two things were a
great relief to my Faith. 1. God promises they should walk after him,
notwithstanding their habitual proness to backslide from God. 2.
Notwithstanding their refusing to exalt the Lord, though called to it. Yet
within a little time I was again foiled by my corruption, which made me see
what a poor creature I was, it left of God to my self.

May. 8. At eleven of the Clock at night my daughter Elianor died after a long
Sickness. God gave me several opportunities of recommending her Soul to him in
prayer, at some whereof my heart was much affected and my faith, and hope acted
on God, for the eternal welfare of her Soul, which made her departure easy to
me. My grounds were, Genesis 17. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and
thy seed after thee. I considered that this Covenant is to give life, Mal. 2.
5. And whereas the thoughts of the Child's Original, and actual Sins, as
frowardness, etc. might make me fearful of its estate. It was brought to my
mind, that the Covenant is to give pardon of sin, Heb. 8. 10, 12. And whereas
faith and regeneration are necessary to Salvation, I considered further that
the Covenant is to give all things necessary, to Salvation, 2 Samuel 23. 5. this
is all my Salvation. Besides the Consideration of the Covenant, God gave me
other encouragements, to hope in reference to my Child, as from Math. 19. 14.
Suffer little Children to come unto me, and from observing how prevalent, faith
and Prayer is with God for the remission of sins, and salvation of others as
well as our own souls, Math. 9. 2. Jesus seeing their faith, said Son be of
good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. So 1 John 5. 16. If a man see his
Brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask of God, and he shall
give him life. Now I Considered that though my child had sins incident to
Childhood, yet it had not sinned the sin unto death, and therefore I concluded
that if I asked of God he would give it life, Jam. 5. 15. The Prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and if he has committed sins they shall be forgiven him.
Math. 15. 22, 28. The woman of Canaan's faith and Prayer availed with Christ
for the Casting the Devil out of her daughter: Now God helping me to act faith,
for my child upon the account of his covenant, and stiring me by his Spirit
often to pray for my Child, I was thereby encouraged to hope for its Salvation.

When my Child died, the same day the small Pox began to appear upon my Sister,
I knew not what breaches God might be about to make in my family; but as I was
hearing the word, the Ministers, treating on Gods intention to glorify himself
by all afflictions that he laid upon his people, from that Scripture, Isa. 5.
15, 16. this word Satisfied me, that whatever judgments, God should bring upon
me or my family, he would exalt and glorify his own Name by them; hereupon I
submitted and resigned up my self to God, to do with me and mine what he
pleased.

Yet I was then under the sense of sin, which weakened my faith and made me
fearful, I should not bear up cheerfully if I should be visited, while under
the sense of guilt. But I was much encouraged in meditation from Mic. 7. 8, 9.
When I sit in darkness the Lord will be a light unto me. This faith they held,
when their affliction was attended with the sense of sin, for it follows. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. I was
also much encouraged by viewing the promises that I had collected to comfort my
self with, when I was in danger of contagious diseases. Especially those two*
viz, Ps. 41. 12. As for me, thou set me before thy face for ever, and this
was when under an evil disease, v. 8, which was the fruit of his sin. ver. 4.
and Ps. 38. 5, 7. My wounds stink and are corrupt -- my loins are filled with a
loathsome disease, etc. though in this visitation he was afflicted with the
sense of sin, and of Gods displeasure, v. 1, 2, 3, 4* and was deprived of the
Comfortable Society of his relations, and friends, v. 11. yet he kept up his
hope in God, v. 15. In a little time after I had the sense of guilt taken off,
while I was studying my Sermon, to remove the fears of Death.

Jun. 12. As I was reading, Act. 6. in my Evening course by my self, I observed
by comparing* ver. 4. 7. that upon the Apostles giving themselves Continually
to prayer, and to the ministry of the word, the number of the disciples,
increased greatly in Jerusalem, and a great company of the Priests were
obedient to the faith. I was instructed and affected with it, and saw it was
necessary, I should pray much as well as Preach much, if I would convert many
Souls, and that upon giving my self to prayer, and to the ministry of the word,
I was in the most likely way, to convert many Souls to Christ. The Priests were
the chiefest opposers of the Gospel. Act. 4. 1, 2. the chiefest persecuters of
Christ, Math. 16. 21. and 20, 18. the most active in putting Christ to death,
Mar. 15. 10, 11. Luke 19. 47. the multitude that came to apprehend Christ, were
sent by the Priests, Joh. 18. 3. the false witnesses were suborned by the
Priests Math 26. 59. yet by the power of prayer, and the word these Priests
were brought in, by great numbers to the faith of Christ, and the obedience of
the Gosple.

Jun. 25. about three of the Clock in the morning being Lords day my Wife was
delivered of a Daughter, and that morning the Lord sent a very plentiful rain.
The Tuesday before, we kept a day of humiliation for my Wifes safe delivery,
and to seek the Lord for rain, and the Lord gave a gracious answer to the
prayers of that day, both at one time.

Jul. 31. I saw the plague of my heart breaking out. I argued against my
corruption, yet it overcame me, and led me captive, it wounded me that I should
still sin against God, even while under his Correcting hand. My faith was
revived by that Scripture, Isa. 57. 17, 18. I Smote him, he went on frowardly
in the way of his own heart, I have seen his ways, and will heal him. I was
much encouraged from that word, I will heal him, which imports the Subduing, as
well as the pardoning of sin.

Aug. 2. I was encouraged to write something that might be useful for my
generation, from, Jer. 36. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Two things especially from that
Scripture, did put me forward to this. 1. writing of the word of God, is a
means to Convert souls, and to lead them to repentance. 2. this Command for
writing was given when Jeremiah was shut up, and could not preach as usually,
and such was my case, viz, I was debarred from public preaching, hereupon I
apprehended; God called me to write.

Sept. 6. Being fast day, As I came from Church I received a letter from, Mr.
J. which acquainted me that my Son Samuel was very ill. that day I spent
somewhat unprofitably, I was not affected as I ought with public judgments,
and the misery of others, and therefore it was just with God to bring
affliction into my family, the next day my Wife and, I went over to see our
Child, and after we had been with it about five or six hours it died very
suddenly. I was troubled that I did not pray with it before it died, which was
occasioned by being in another family, and my not apprehending death to be
near.

This stroke coming soon after my removal from Colchester, I communed with my
heart, whether I had sinned in removing from that place, and my conscience did
not at that time charge me with sin, in removing my habitation: I was Comforted
in calling to mind Gods dealing with Jacob, who met with many afflictions in
those removes, which he made at the command of God, He was pursued by his
Uncle, put into great fear by his Brother, loses Deborah his Mothers nurse,
and Rachel his beloved Wife, His Sons Reuben, Simeon and Levi, fell into foul
sins, etc. Hence I saw that God tries his dear Servants with sudden and sore
afflictions in those places to which they have removed at the call of God.

Sept. 24. I enjoyed the opportunity of the Lords Supper, I found God gracious
to me in preparation: In the morning when I awaked, God brought to my
remembrance, Jer. 2. 32. Can a maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her
attire? I considered I was to meet and Sup with my Bridegroom the Lord Jesus,
and then considered what Ornaments and attire would best please him, that I
might put them on, and these were presented to my thoughts, some as I lay in
bed, and some afterward, as lovely and desirable in the sight of Christ which
I determined to put on 1 st, A meek and quiet Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4. 2 ly, Faith,
Cant. 4. 9. Thou hash ravished my heart my Sister, my spouse, with one of thine
Eyes Faith has the office of an Eye in the Soul Joh. 6. 40. Every one that
sees and believes Looking unto Jesus, Heb 12. 2. 3 ly Love, Cant. 4. 10. How
fair is thy Love, my Sister, etc. 4 ly Humility, Math. 11. 29. Learn of me for
I am lowly in heart. 5 ly, Selfdenial and forsaking of every thing, that comes
in Competition with Christ. Ps. 45 10, 11. Hearken O Daughter, and consider --
forget thine own people, and thy Fathers House; So shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty. 6 ly, An obediential frame of heart, Math. 10. 20, 21. All
these have I observed from my youth: Jesus beholding him Loved him. 7 ly, An
heart resolved to hold and maintain frequent converse and communion with him.
Cant. 2. 14* Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is
thy voice, and thy Countenance is Comely. 8 ly, Uprightness, Prove. 11. 20. 9
ly, An holy fear of God and hope in his mercy. Ps. 147. 11. 10 ly,
fruitfulness. Cant. 4. 16 -- 5. 1.

But though God graciously assisted me in preparation, yet in the time of
receiving, my heart was flat and dead. As soon as the Sacrament was ended, I
retired to my Chamber to to pray, and as I was praying, that Scripture was
brought to my remembrance, Romans 3. 3, 4. shall their unbelief make the Faith of
God of none effect? God forbid. I argued thence that the sins of my
holy*things, my deadness and want of holy and due affections, in time of
receiving should not make void what God had promised, in and by this ordinance,
but that the Cup was to me the Communion of the blood of Christ, and the New
Testament in his blood; and the Bred the Communion of the body of Christ* This
did strengthen my faith, to depend upon God for the benefits signified, and
sealed by that Ordinance, notwithstanding the indisposition of my heart in the
time of receiving*

Sept. 29. As I was musing on that rich promise made to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward. Which is
sufficient to bear up the Soul under the fear and danger of any Evil, and
against the loss and want of any good things* I considered what warrant I had
to apply that promise, and presently that Scripture was hinted to me, Gal. 3.
9. They which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. I was
strengthened, and Comforted by it.

Twice in this weak I observed that Setting upon worldly business, (which
called hastily upon me) before I had been at closet prayer, and performed my
usual meditations on the Covenant and promises of God, my heart grew out of
frame, and unsavory, and I was Successless on both days.

Oct. 1. Sabbath day, At my Entrance on my morning meditation on Gods Covenant,
I had a great combat in my Spirit, about my laying claim to God as my God,
having been lately foiled by my sins, but God helped me, and showed me out of
his word that, I might and ought to keep my hold of God as my God,
Notwithstanding my often backslidings from him, Jer. 3. 1, 5, 7, 8. yet v. 19.
says God, Thou shall call me, my Father Hos. 2. 5. with 16.

The same evening considering how often and greatly I had sinned, and yet had
been forgiven, I pondered on that Scripture. Luke 7, 47. and saw that I had
cause to love the Lord much because I had much forgiven, and Considering how I
should show my Love to God, and that much, these Scriptures were hinted to me,
Ps. 40. 16. Let such as love thy name say Continually, let the Lord be
Magnified, Ps. 97. 10. Ye that Love the Lord hate evil. Joh. 14. 10. If ye Love
me keep my Commandments, Joh. 21. 15. Simon love thou me? feed my sheep, feed
my Lambs, Lord help me thus to show much love to thee.

Oct. 8. Having been overtaken with the sin which easily besets me, and has
often foiled me, My Spirit fell, and my faith flagg'd, and I could not look
upon God with any boldness, was indisposed to prayer. Yet in time of prayer God
magnified his free grace to me, and revived my Souls with that word, 1 John 2.
1, 2. If any man sin we have an Advocate etc. After I had ended my
Supplications I pondered on that Scripture, and was comforted against the sense
of my sin, by the Advocateship of Jesus Christ, who pleads his propitiatory
Sacrifice, as a Satisfaction to his Fathers justice for the sins of believers,
as often as they fall into them, and querying with my self whether he would be an
Advocate to me to plead for me: I was satisfied from that word, Joh. 6. 37. him
that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. I was also further encouraged
from, Heb. 7. 25. I considered that the Intercession of Christ, answered all
charges and accusations that could be brought against those for whom he
interceded, Romans 8. 33. 34. and that the Intercession of Christ kept us ^o
firmly in the love of God, that nothing could be able to separate us from it,
Romans 8. 34. 35, 38, 39. I considered further that the persons for whom he
interceded were such as came to God by him, and that he interceded for them at
all times, when they are fallen as well as when they stand, when they are dead,
as well as when in a lively frame, for He ever lives to make intercession.
After these meditations* my Spirit revived and notwithstanding I was before
bowed down under the sense of guilt, I went with boldness to God, leaning upon
the merits and Intercession of Jesus Christ.

Oct. 13. My Spirit being bowed down with the sense of guilt, because I was
foiled by a Sin against which I had prayed many years, I was revived in reading
in my course 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. Whence I observed, 1 st. God sees it needful
for some of his Servants, to meet with buffeting. 2 ly. When God lets loose any
corruption, a thorn in the flesh, or a temptation, a messenger of Satan to
buffet us, It is to keep us humble, and from being exalted. 3 ly. God suffers
his faithful Servants sometimes to pray long against corruption or temptation,
and yet cannot get it removed. 4 ly. Though my strength was not sufficient to
resist and overcome my sins, yet Gods grace was sufficient: Paul was
insufficient to any good of himself as I am 2 Cor. 3. 5. He had a body of sin
and death as well as I, Romans 7. 23. 24. and Satan assaulted him here as well as
me, and therefore if Gods grace was sufficient for Paul, why not for me also?
what God spoke to Paul, I applied as spoken to me, according to, Math. 22. 31,
32. Christ says, what was spoken by God to Moses was spoken to them, though
many hundred years after Moses.

Dec. 10. I had about a month before made, though not a formal explicit vow,
yet a kind of mental implicit vow, which I broke, and being under the sense of
guilt, was revived by reading a passage concerning David in Mr. Harris his
works. p. 490.

Who would ever have thought, that so many afflictions as David had Suffered,
so many mercies as he had received, so many vows as he had made, so many pieces
of Holy Scripture as he had proved, etc. should not have made him an whole man?
Who would have dreamed that after all this so many dregs of adultery, of
treachery, of murder, should have been left remaining in him, Yet when David
remitted his watch over his own heart, how foully did he fall?

I was also much comforted against the sense of my sin from, Isa. 54. 9. This
is as the waters of Noah unto me; for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the earth, So have I sworn that I would not be wroth
with thee, nor rebuke thee. I looked upon my self as entitled to this promise
by virtue of what is said v. 17. This is the heritage of the Servants of the
Lord. I considered further that the Covenant which God made with Noah, and was
confirmed with an Oath, was made with a Non obstante multiplici peccato
hominis, with a promise it should stand valid notwithstanding the imaginations
of the heart of man are evil from his youth, Genesis 8. 21. I considered further
that notwithstanding the Covenant with Noah, there might be immoderate rains
which might prove a great affliction, though there should not be a Universal
deluge. So notwithstanding this Oath of God, and his Covenant with me I might
meet with temporary afflictions, but I should by virtue of the Covenant be
delivered from eternal wrath. Blessed be God, This Scripture did much revive
and comfort my Soul.

Notwithstanding all this goodness of God I found my heart still manifesting
its inbred corruption, and I was foiled again by my sin, which did much cast
me down, and being to draw nigh to God at the Lords Table, I was much
discouraged; but before the Sabbath came I was in Prayer revived with Isa. 53.
5, 6. and in conference by Mat. 11. 28. I found I was in a laboring condition,
and such Christ invited, and also from Psalm. 65. 3, 4. David when he found
iniquity prevailing, did yet conclude that upon his approaching to God in his
Ordinances, he should be satisfied.

In reading Luke 8. 27. 30. I was encouraged to hope that the Lord Jesus would
disposses, and cast out my sins out of my Soul, though they were many and had
possessed me a long time. For it is as easy for Christ to cast a sin, as to
cast a Devil out.

Mar. 25. 1666. Being Lords day, and the first day the Oxford Act for removing
of Non-Conformists from the places where they had been Ministers, and from
Corporations, took place. In the morning as I lay in my Bed, pondering on this
Providence, these Scriptures came to mind. Heb. 13. 14. Here have we no
continuing City, but we seek one to come. Whence I was instructed that the mind
of God in this unsetling Providence as to my abode here, was to stir me up to
seek more industriously after the Kingdom of Heaven. Jer. 48. 11. Moab has
been a ease, and he has settled on his lees, and has not been emptied from
vessel to vessel, neither has gone into Captivity, therefore his taste remained
in him, and his scent is not changed. I learned hence that the design of God in
this Providence was to take me off from Carnal ease and security, and settling
upon the lees of any sinful course, and to purge away that tang, and scent of
sin which yet remains in me. Psalm. 55. 19. Because they have no changes
therefore they fear not God. Whence I saw that this change was to promote a
greater awe, and dread of God upon my Soul. The Lord great that this Providence
may have these effects upon me.

Apr. 8. The Lord warned me to take heed how I presumed to sin against him upon
the account of any mercies and favors he had bestowed upon me, or upon the
account of any gifts or graces given me from 2 Pet. 2. 4. If God spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell -- The Angels had been partakers
of great goodness, God had done great things for them, placed them in Heaven,
yet when they sinned he did not spare them, but cast them down to Hell. O my
Soul, be not high minded, do not presume to sin against God, but fear to offend
him.

Apr. 15. Corruption having prevailed I was indisposed to pray, and could not
meditate. After I had been praying a second time though with much flatness and
distraction, God graciously revived my Soul with Romans 7. 23. 25. and 8. 1.

Apr. 21. In the like case God revived me with Isa. 43. 24, 25.

May. 2. In the like case I was encouraged from 1 Samuel 12. 20. 22. and from
Jer. 31. 37.

Soon after I renewed my Covenant with God; yet quickly found my Treacherous
heart departing from God, and revolting and relapsing to sin. Yet still God
Comforted me with his Word. Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. and Romans 14. 4. He shall
be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. It is spoken of him that is
weak in the Faith. v. 1. and encouraged me to hope for the acceptance of my
Person and Services from Isa. 56. 6, 7.

Nov. 23. Being a day of private humiliation for my unprofitableness under my
afflictions, sighing under my incorrigibleness, God minded me of Jer. 31. 18.
20. which much refreshed me and strengthened my Faith. Blessed be God.

Jan. 1. Having some days before felt much of the sinfulness, and filthiness of
my own heart, sin not only arising but leading me Captive, I was afraid that
because of my sinfulness, God being most holy would cast me out of his favor.
But the Lord instructed me from Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. that his
holiness should not deter me from expecting the accomplishment of his promises,
but rather encourage me to hope. For God has sworn by his Holiness, that he
would not take away his Loving Kindness, nor break his Covenant, etc.
notwithstanding he found sin.

Jan. 7. It was a suitable word to my state, and that which afforded me some
support, which I met with in my course of private reading. Ps. 19. 13. Keep
back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me.
Where I considered. 1. That David found in his heart a proness to presumptuous
sins, which made him cry out, Keep back thy servant, etc. 2. He was not without
fear or danger, lest presumptuous sins should get the dominion over him, for he
Prays, Let them not have dominion. 3. When he found it thus with himself, he
calls himself Gods Servant. Keep back thy servant -- This word coming when my
heart had been upon the borders of a presumptuous sin, did much affect me.

Febr. 6. Being a day of Humiliation, I was much indisposed to the duties of
the day, I found my heart unfit to Pray in private, and to perform Family
exercise. The sense of guilt had clouded and bowed down my Soul. In the Evening
God revived my Soul with Isa. 64. 6, 7, 8. They complained they were all as an
unclean thing, their righteousness as filthy rags, there was a flagging of the
Spirit of prayer, and this in a time of great Judgments, as v. 10, 11. Yet they
say, But now thou O Lord art our Father. This suited my condition, and
encouraged me to believe my relation to God, and his to me as my Father, though
I found my self under the foresaid Distempers.

I was also supported against my sins with 1 John 2. 24. Let that abide in you
which you have heard from the beginning; if that which you have heard from the
beginning shall remain in you, ye shall continue in the Father and the Son. By
which I was encouraged to hold fast what Instructions, Comforts and Supports I
had formerly received from God. That which ye have heard, viz. from the
teachings of the Spirit. Joh. 6. 45. from the beginning, viz. from the time
they began to believe in Christ, Heb. 3. 14.

Nov. 28. 1669. Being Saturday, I was visited with a Fever. When I was under
the Visitation I looked over my Evidences for Heaven, and had comfortable hopes
of my Salvation from several promises, whereby the fear of Death was removed.
My Life was in hazard, many Prayers were put up for me: God directed to the
timely use of proper means, and gave his blessing, and restored me to my work
on the fourth Lords day, as a return to Prayers. In my sickness before the
danger was probably past, in the night season I had very clear and awful
apprehensions of the Majesty of God, as though I had heard God speaking to me
out of Isa. 57. 15. I who am the high and lofty one that inhabit Eternity, etc.
and then methought it was said to me, Surgite Ministri and servi, praedicate
Evangelium ad Conversionem peccatorum. Arise ye Ministers and Servants of God,
and Preach the Gospel for the Conversion of sinners. And afterward it was said
to me, You shall not die, but live and declare the works of the Lord. Fear thou
not, thou have born witness to my Name in this place; thou shall bear witness
also to my Name, where I shall call thee. To which my Soul bowed down, and I
replied, Lord, I am willing to follow thee, if thou shall satisfy me that thou
call me. I could not certainly tell, whether I was awake or sleeping, or
slumbring; but the matter being so affecting, coherent, and coming with some
power, I laid it up in my heart, not knowing but it might be useful to me.

Jan. 30. 1671. My Treatise of Family Instruction being finished and Published,
I resolved after several times seeking God, and Consulting with my own Soul, to
set upon composing a Treatise of glorifying God. The grounds or reasons
inducing me hereunto were,

1. The Command given to all persons in all Nations to declare the glory of
God, 1 Chronicles. 16. 23, 24. I saw here I might lawfully, yea it was my duty, to
do what I could to set forth the glory of God: And seeing I was taken off from
my public Preaching, I might do it more beneficially by Writing and Printing.

2. My Spirit has been for several years put upon, and stirred up to write on
this Subject. I made a little beginning in the year 1664. but laid it aside,
and in times of sickness I have found a lothness to die till that work were
done, and have met with many cross Providence as if sent with a tacit reproof
for neglecting this work. Now the stirring up the Spirit to a good work is of
God, and part of Gods call to the work. Exodus 36. 2. Ezr. 1. 5. Hagg. 1. 14.

3. I was under many Engagements to glorify God, as 1 st. The many and great
mercies I have received for my Soul, by the Teachings and Consolations of his
Spirit, and many outward mercies above my other Relations, which are
engagements to glorify God. Ps. 86. 12, 13. 2 ly, The eminent deliverances I
have had from sickness, the Pestilence and other troubles. Psalm. 50. 15. 3 ly,
The wonderful preservation I have had from mine Enemies, notwithstanding all
the hazards I have run of falling into their hands, by Preaching the Gospel at
home and abroad, which should engage me to extol and glorify God. Psalm. 30. 1.

4. I did hope for benefit to my own Soul, both by being further enlightened
into the knowledge, and excited to the practice of glorifying God, while I was
studying to instruct and excite others thereto.

July 17. 1672. God having opened a door for the free exercise of my Ministry
by his Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, I was desired both at Ipswich and
Colchester to Minister to them. I had discouragements as from the uncertainty
of the times, not knowing whether this liberty would continue, or a time of
trouble and persecution arise, the differences and animosities that are among
Professors, and the enmity that is on the part of the Adversaries. I considered
of it and had encouragement from the Word thereto, as 1 Pet. 5. 2. 4. with
verse. 7. as also from Josh. 1. 9. Joshua had difficult work before him, potent
Enemies that dwelt in fenced Cities, the people with whom he had to do, had so
exasperated Moses his Spirit by their frequent murmurings, that once he cried
out to God to be killed out of hand, that he might not see his own
wretchedness, Numb. 11. 15. another time he spoke so unadvisedly with his lips
that he angered God, and was shut out of Canaan. Joshua might well fear when he
was to enter on this work. Therefore God speaks four times to him to encourage
him. Be strong; be of good courage, etc. and gives him two Arguments to
encourage him. 1 st. His Call, Have not I Commanded thee? 2 ly. A promise of
his Presence, as his God. Whence I Obs. 1. God will be with his people in all
places whithersoever they go. 2. The promise of Gods presence may take off all
fears, arising either from the temper of the people with whom we shall have to
do, or the difficulty of our work, or strength of Adversaries.

Jan. 1. 1673. I awaked about four of the Clock in the morning, and had many
sweet meditations in my Bed for the space of about two hours. I then resolved
with my self to engage my heart afresh, and to renew my Covenant with the Lord
the beginning of this New year, to be the Lords Servant, to serve the Lord and
his Son Jesus Christ all the remainder of the days I have to live in this
world, in such service as he should see meet to employ me.

The encouragements and inducements that were brought to my mind, and drew out
my heart willingly and cheerfully to give up my self to the Lord, to serve him
and his Son Jesus Christ were these,

1. His promise of affording his Presence, and Assistance to such as are his
Servants, and to be their God. Isa. 41. 8, 9, 10.

2. The great and precious promises made to his Servants. Isa. 54. per totum.
Which concludes thus v. 17. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord.

3. We glorify God when we serve him. Isa. 49. 3. Thou art my Servant O Israel
in whom I will be glorified.

4. God has done great things for me, both for my outward and inward man, and
the only thing that he requires of me is to serve him in truth and sincerity. 1 Samuel 12. 24.

5. All Christ's Servants shall assuredly be with him where he is, and shall be
honored of the Father. Joh. 12. 26. and shall enter into the joy of their
Lord. Mat. 25. 21.

May 19. 1676. Reading Levit. 22. 3. Whosoever of the Priests in their
generations, went unto the holy things, which the Children of Israel did hallow
unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him, that Soul should be cut off
from the presence of the Lord, And the ensuing Sabbath being Sacrament day, I
considered with my self, 1 st. That greater Reverence is due to the Lords
Supper, than to the holy things under the Law. 2 ly. Moral uncleanness is
greater than Ceremonial. 3 ly. Therefore I considered how I might go to this
Ordinance, and Administer it to others without having my uncleanness upon me,
that is, how I might be purged from my uncleanness. To that end I determined,

1. Humbly to acknowledge, confess, and bewail the uncleanness of my heart,
lips, and life before the Lord. Isa. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. When the Prophet
bemoaned his uncleanness, the Lord purged it away, and sent him to do his
Office.

2. To go to the fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness. Zech. 13. 1.
that is, to act my faith on the blood of Christ which cleanses from all sin. 1 John 1. 7.

3. To rest upon God by faith for fulfilling his Covenant, wherein he has
promised to cleanse me from all my filthiness, and to save me from all my
uncleanness, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 29. Act. 15. 9.

4. To plead earnestly with God to take away all iniquities, Hos. 14. 2. and to
create in me a clean heart, Ps. 51. 10. and to succeed my prayers with
endeavors to put away evil and uncleanness out of my heart and life, Isa. 1.
16. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

These are many of those judicious observations, which this holy person made,
and those spiritual experiences he found and recorded for his own use; that he
might always have at hand before him the manner and method of Gods dealing with
his Soul, the workings of Corruption and grace, his lapses and recoveries, his
combats and victories over world, sin and Satan, his perseverance and progress
in holiness, the secret intercourse between God and his soul, the withdrawings
and Returns of the Holy Spirit, the faithfulness of Gods Covenant the truth of
his word sensibly felt in his heart, food for his faith, encouragement to walk
with God, with experimental instruction, how to comfort troubled Consciences.
(In which part of the ministry he had a peculiar excellency beyond most part of
his Brethren. for partly by his diligent searching of the Holy Scripture,
partly by observing and recording the method of the Holy Ghost toward himself,
and partly by discoursing with troubled Consciences, (wherein as he was much
exercised, so he took much delight) he was so acquainted with the various cases
of Conscience, and so well understood both Case and cure, that it may be truly
said of him, The Lord God had given him the tongue of the learned, that he
might know how to speak a word in season to the weary. On which account he
might be surnamed Barnabas a Son of Consolation. It was his usual manner in
preaching to foresee and raise such objections as troubled Souls are prone to
make against themselves, and to solve them with much clearness and
satisfaction. And many applications of such Souls were made to to him in
private as to a Skillful, Experienced, Spiritual Physician, whose advice God
succeeded with his blessing to the encouragement of the faith and hope of many
doubting Christians that walked in darkness.) which are here published not only
as Instances and demonstrations of that Spirit of Light and grace, that power
of Godliness which possessed and governed his heart and life, and fitted him to
be such a useful instrument for the Service of Christ and his Church, on which
account his memory is worthily honorable, and precious to all good men: But
especially for the Instruction, direction, relief, support, and encouragement
of others who are following him, though at a great distance, in that narrow way
which leads to that life to which he is arrived.

They who labor and are heavy laden, who are bowed down under the power and
weight of their sin, wrestling with Corruption and temptation, exercised with
darkness and doubtings, with fears and faintings; They who are called to
difficult service which require much labor and diligence and self-denial, and
may expose them to the hazard and danger of this evil world, may hence take
Counsel and encouragement while they read the sense, and workings of their own
hearts in the experiences, the method and practicablenesse of their duty in the
example of this Eminent Saint.

We have hitherto seen somethings of his Conscience of Sin and duty, his
industry and zeal for the Service and glory of God, his combats with the flesh
and Satan, his Love to Christ and his Church, his Spirituality in Religion, His
longings and breathings after God, His remembering God upon his bed, and
meditating on him in the night watches, his wise improvement of the Holy
Scriptures, his due fulfilling of all Relations, his Holy manner of Living to
God: From whence we may rationally conclude that surely he gave this diligence
unto the full assurance of hope; that he tasted the Consolation of God, and
received the earnest of Glory; that he walked upon the top of Pisgah in the
light of Gods countenance, and in the sight of the Heavenly Canaan. Which
privilege indeed the God of peace and comfort did not deny him. He was a man
as of much grace, so of much peace; an instance of that word, Ps. 119. 165.
Great peace have they that love thy Law. He received the spirit which is of
God, and knew the things that were freely given to him of God and rejoiced
therein, 1 Cor. 2. 12.

As to his Conversion (which to some that have lived long in ignorance,
security, sensuality, profaneness, and forgetfulness of God, is very Sensible)
He being from tender years restrained and well inclined, It was not so
remarkable to him. The most discernible part thereof was when he was a young
Scollar in Cambridge. Nor did he then experience very notable workings of the
Spirit of bondage. Which occasioned some trouble to his mind, and he feared his
humiliation was not deep enough; but he received full satisfaction from a
passage in a sermon which he heard preached by that Worthy and Excellent
Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. Richard Vines, then Master of Pembrooke Hall.

He has sometimes said to his Friend that he was not much acquainted with
those ravishing joys which some have felt, but yet had that comfort and joy in
the Holy Ghost, which gave him satisfaction.

His method and manner was to derive his assurance and comfort from the written
word. Of the truth whereof he would say he had such a full persuasion, as being
the sure word of God, that he did more firmly believe it, than if an Angel
should speak to him from Heaven, according to, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. He
could not satisfy himself with the expectation, or apprehension of the
immediate, sole testimony of the Spirit, without the word. But would compare
himself with the word, frequently practicing the duty of self examination,
Searching for those graces, dispositions and operations in his heart, which are
promised in the word, and to which the promises are made. Which the Spirit of
God enlightened him to discern, and enabled him in a way of argumentation to
infer thence his interest in Christ, and the Covenant of God for his
satisfaction and Spiritual Consolation. And the Assurance which he attained in
this method, and by these means he thus Records.

His Evidences.
1. Evidences of true and Saving Faith.
After my recovery from a Sickness, I set my self to examine and prove my faith,
to see if it were true and saving: Because pardon of sin, freedom from
Condemnation eternal life with other great blessings, are promised to
Believers: And much of our comfort in Sickness, and health, in life, and death
depends on the knowledge and proof of our faith; and that I did believe in
Christ with a true and Saving faith, I was satisfied thus:

1. From those expressions of Scripture wherein the nature and essential acts
of faith are set forth, as 1. Coming to Christ, Joh. 6. 35. He that comes --
he that believes on me. Coming is believing. My Conscience bears me Witness
that I am coming to Christ, for Christ himself and all his benefits, I sind my
Soul drawn to Christ, and upon all occasions looking and going to him. 2.
Receiving, Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him -- even as many as believed on
his Name. Receiving is believing. Now through grace I find my heart willingly
receiving, and thankfully accepting Jesus Christ as God offers him in the
Gospel, even an whole Christ, Christ in all his offices to be to me, Prophet,
Priest, and King. 3, Trusting, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye trusted -- ye believed.
Trusting is believing. This also I find, that God has given me an heart to
rely on Christ, for Righteousness, grace, and life.

2, From the ground of my faith, which is the word of God. It is through my
knowledge and acquaintance with the word that I have been brought to believe in
Christ, and through Christ in the Father that sent him. And I read, such as
believe through the word are true believers, for whom Christ makes
intercession Joh. 17. 20. and who have everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, Joh. 5. 24.

3, From this property and effect of faith, viz. Prizing Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
Unto you that believe Christ it is precious. The Apostle speaks of the faith of
Gods elect, chapter 1. 2. and of saving faith, chapter 1. 9. Now I find Christ is
precious to me, so precious to my Soul, that I value and prefer him above the
whole world. I account his blood precious, which cleanses me from all sin. The
promises exceeding great and precious which in him are yea and Amen. Christ is
so precious to me that I am willing to suffer for him. Phil. 1. 29. yea I
choose a suffering condition for Christ, before the honors, Riches, and
pleasures of the world, when they cannot be enjoyed without sinning against
Him. Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. I am willing to take up the Cross, and forsake all
things for him.

Evidences that I was one of Gods Servants.
Sept. 30. 1666. I considered with my self what evidence I had that I was one
of Gods Servants, and was satisfied from these Scriptures, Romans 6. 16. Know ye
not that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to
whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto Righteousness. I
find God has given me an heart to yield my self to Him. Nehem. 1. 11. O Lord I
beseech thee, Let now thine ears be attentive to the prayer of thy Servant, and
to the prayer of thy Servants that desire to fear thy Name. Here I saw that
such as desire to fear God, are accounted Gods servants. Which through grace I
do.

Some doubtings arose in my heart, whether I was one of Gods Servants, because
it is said, Joh. 8. 34. Verily, Verily I say unto you, that whosoever
Commits sin is the Servant of sin.

For removing this doubt I considered,
1. That the meaning of this Scripture is not that no man that has sin in his
heart, or does sin in his life can be Gods Servant, but is a Servant of sin,
for then God should have no Servants upon the face of the Earth, Eccl. 7. 20.
There is not a just man upon Earth that does good and sins not, Joh. 1. 8.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us.

2. It is said that the Servants of Sin are free from righteousness, Romans 6.
20. Now through mercy I follow after righteousness, and find something of it,
whence I concluded, I was not the servant of Sin.

3. I saw that David held this conclusion that he was one of Gods Servants
though he was compassed about with infirmities, yea, even at such time as he
was under a sense of his sinful infirmities. Ps. 116. 11, 16. O Lord truly I am
thy Servant, I am thy Servant, yet he had said in his haste (unbelievingly) All
men are liars, David after he had committed the great sin of Numbering the
people, against the Counsel and Advice of his friends, Confessed that he had
sinned greatly and done very foolishly, yet calls himself a Servant of the
Lord, 2 Samuel 24. 10.

4. As I was Considering this thing the Lord brought to my remembrance, Romans 7.
ult. With my mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of
sin. This Scripture was a great stay and satisfaction to me, and took off that
which was my chief fear. There is no doubt but Paul was the Servant of Christ,
yet he says, I my self with the flesh serve the Law of Sin.

Evidences of the pardon of my sin.
Aug. 12. 1666. being under the sense of many sins, I considered with my self
what grounds and evidences I had for the pardon of my sins. And was satisfied
from these Scriptures:

Acts. 10. 43. To him give all the prophets Witness that through his name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. I found that
through grace I did believe in Christ, 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. I saw here that Gods justice and faithfulness, stand engaged
to forgive their Sins, who make confession of them, which God had given me an
heart to do.

Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19. These persons to whom this promise was made, had
sinned against great mercies. ver. 2. and great judgments, v. 5. and other
circumstances did aggravate their sins, yet God promises to forgive their
Scarlet, and Crimson-sins, if they were willing to repent and obey the Lord. If
ye be willing and obedient. And through grace I found I was willing to obey
Gods voice, to cease to do evil, and to learn to do well.

Hebr. 8. 10. 12. The promise of remission of sins is part of the new Covenant,
and I find that God has made this Covenant with me. from Isa. 55. 3. where the
condition of the Covenant is coming unto Christ, to which God has enabled me.

Dec. 30. Having left the prevalency of sin, and found sin not only Warring
against but leading me Captive, which made me question my pardon, I was enabled
to rest upon God for forgiveness of my sin from,

Ps. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against me, As for our transgressions thou shall
purge them away. By purging is meant. 1. pardoning, Heb. 1. 3. Ps. 51. 7. 2.
Subduing and Destroying sin, Isa. 27. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 21. So that David when he
felt sin prevailing and not only one sin but several -- Iniquities, in the
plural number, prevail, did yet rest upon God both for the pardon and the
Subduing of his sins, and what David did I may and ought to do.

Romans 7. 23, 24, 25. when the Apostle found sin working, and warring and
leading him captive, yet he hangs upon Christ, and blesses God for Christ, and
believes he should be delivered from the guilt and power of his sins by Jesus
Christ.

When the filthiness of my sins made me afraid that God would not pardon,
because I had such vile affections, and such filthy motions in my heart, God
comforted me with that word, Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, and I will cleanse you,
and v. 29. I will save you from all your uncleanness. And from Act. 13. 38,
39. the promise is to all that believe, and here is promised Justification from
all things -- So as no sin, no circumstance in any sin shall be charged upon
any believer to his condemnation.

Jul. 14. 1667. Having found my heart departing from God in a very treacherous
manner, this did cloud my Evidence of pardon, but after prayer I was confirmed
in the belief of the forgiveness of my sin, from Jer. 3. 2, 20, 22. Here I saw
that though the Jews had voluntarily without any enticing Temptation
prostituted themselves to sin, v. 2. and though they had in a Treacherous
manner departed from God after he had taken them into a Conjugal Relation with
himself v. 20. Yet he promises upon their return to heal their backslidings.
My Faith was further established by considering that remission of sin was
promised to me in the Covenant, which Covenant should never be removed from me.
Isa. 54. 9, 10. Also Dan. 9. 9.

When God had once and again cleared up to my Soul the Pardon of my sins, I
considered with my self what duties this mercy called for: And I saw,

1. This should make me thankful. Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3.

2. It should make me admire God. Mic. 7. 18, 19.

3. It should make me more fearful of offending God. Ps. 130. 4. -- 85. 8.

4. It should make me Love God much. Luke 7. 42, 43, 47.

5. It should make me glorify God, and let him have the Dominion over my Soul.
Rev. 1. 5, 6.

6. It should make me cheerful and encourage me in all the troubles of this
present life. Mat. 9. 2. Isa. 33. ult.

7. It should oblige me to forgive others. Ephesians. 4* 32. Col. 3. 13.

8. It should make me willing to be employed in any Service for God. Isa. 6. 7,
8.

Evidences of my Interest in, and Union with Jesus Christ.
1. Faith in Christ Joh. 17. 20, 21. Christ prays that all that believe in
him through the Word may be one in him, and the Father always hears him. Joh.
11. 42. Now I find (blessed be God) that through the Word I do believe in
Christ.

2. Effectual Calling. 1 Cor. 1. 9. 26. 30. God is faithful by whom ye were
called -- Ye see your calling -- Ye are in Christ Jesus. Now through mercy I
find God has called me out of darkness into his mavelous light, he has
called me to the knowledge and Faith of Christ.

3. Walking after the Spirit and not after the Flesh. Romans 8. 1. It is not
said, they that are in Christ have no flesh in them, but they walk not after
the flesh.

4. Christ's giving us his Spirit is an evidence that he abides in us. 1 John
3. 24. Now I find by the fruits of the Spirit mentioned, Gal. 5. 22, 23. that
God has given me his Spirit, and also by my being able to cry Abba Father.
Gal. 4. 6.

5. Crucifying the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. Gal. 5. 24.
that is, our corrupt nature, with the works thereof mentioned v. 19, 20, 21.
The flesh and lusts thereof is Crucified, when so subdued that it does not
reign. Romans 6. 6. which I find, blessed be God.

6. Keeping Christ's word. 1 John 2. 5. which I desire and endeavor.

The Comfort and Privilege flowing from hence is, that I am,
1. Free from Condemnation. Romans 8. 1.

2. Assured of Glory. Col. 1. 27. 1 John 5. 12.

3. Interessed in Christ's Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption. 1. Cor. 1. 30.

4. Interessed in all Spiritual and Heavenly blessings. Ephesians. 1. 3.

5. Complete in him, though imperfect in my self. Col. 2. 10.

Evidences that God is my God.
1. My being in Covenant with God. Wherein the great blessing promised is, that
God will be our God. Heb. 8. 10. and my being in Covenant is evidenced to my
Soul by my coming to, and closing with Christ the Mediator of the Covenant; for
he promises to make an Everlasting Covenant with such as come to him. Isa. 55.
3.

2. My engaging my heart to approach to God. Jer. 30. 21, 22.

3. My being one of Gods Servants, as before. Isa. 41. 9, 10: Thou art my
Servant -- I am thy God.

4. The Law of God in my heart, and my delight to do the will of God. Jer. 31.
33. Ps. 40. 8.

5. My fear of God. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. which fear is discerned by eschewing
and departing from evil. Job. 1. 1. Prove. 16. 6.

6. My choosing the Lord for my God. Ps. 16. 2. and voluntary giving up my self
to him, to obey his voice and keep his ways. Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18, 19. Jer. 7. 23.

7. My willingness to leave earthly Enjoyments at the call of God, setting
loose to the world, looking upon my self as a Stranger and Pilgrim on the
Earth, and preferring and seeking Heavenly things above Earthly. For God is not
ashamed to be called their God that are, and do thus. 11. 13, 14, 15. 16.

Hence I infer for my Comfort.
1. Gods Audience of my Prayers. Mic. 7. 7.

2. Gods presence with me in all Conditions. Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3.

3. A supply of all my wants. Ps. 23. 1.

4. Strength and Assistance to all Services or Sufferings. Isa. 41. 10.

5. He will be my God and Guide for ever. Ps. 48. 14.

6. He will Pardon my sins, and not forsake and cast me off. Mic. 7. 17, 18,
19. 1 Samuel 12. 20 22. Jer. 51. 5.

And I Charge it on my self, as my Duty,

1. To walk humbly with God. Mic. 6. 8.

2. To seek him early. Ps. 63. 1.

3. To praise and exalt him. Ps. 116. 28.

4. To Love him above all with all my heart. Deuteronomy. 6. 5.

5. To turn to him when ever I shall depart from him. Hos. 12. 6.

6. To trust in him continually for all things. Psalm. 18. 2 -- 91. 2. Yea in
times of greatest danger, distress, and fear. Psalm. 31. 13, 14. Ps. 42. 11. 1 Samuel 30. 4. 6.

Evidences of Gods Love to my Soul.
1. His drawing of me to Christ. Jer 31. 3. Whom God draws he Loves with an
everlasting Love. Now I find that God has drawn me, because my Soul is come to
Christ, and goes daily to him, and no man can come to Christ except the Father
draw him. Joh. 6. 44.

2. His giving me Faith. He loves those that through the Word believe in his
Son, even as he loves his own Son. Joh. 17. 20. 23.

3. God Loves those that Love him, and that Love his Son Jesus Christ. Prove.
8. 17. 1 John 4. 19. Joh. 14. 21. -- 16. 27. I find that God has given me an
heart to Love him, and his Son Jesus Christ.

4. A Principle of Spiritual life infused into my Soul, whereby I live to God
is an Evidence of Gods Love to me. Ezekiel. 16. 6. 8 Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

5. God Loves not only the Righteous. Ps. 146. 8. but such also as follow
after Righteousness. Prove. 15. 9. which through grace I find he has caused me
to do.

My Comfort in this is, that this is an everlasting Love. Jer. 31. 3. Joh. 13.
1. Nothing shall separate me from it. Romans 8. 38, 39. No not my Sins. Ps. 89.
30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Though the Mountains and hills depart, his loving kindness
shall not depart. Isa. 54. 10. Admire and Adore this Love Oh my Soul. 1 John 3,
1.

Evidences of Gods accepting my Person, and Services.
This enquiry is necessary. 1 st. Because both work and Person must come to
judgment. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10. 2 ly. Though it be a mercy to have our Service
accepted of the Saints, Romans 15. 30, 31. Yet the main thing we should labor
for, is to be approved of God; 2 Timothy 2. 15. For the approbation of men without
the acceptance of God is little worth. 2 Cor. 10. ult.

Evidence. 1. Isa. 56. 6, 7. There the Lord promises to accept their
Burnt-Offerings, and Sacrifices upon his Altar (that is, all their Services
which they perform in Christ's Name, who is called an Altar Heb. 13. 10. and who
was Typified by the Altar under the Mosaical Law) who join themselves to the
Lord, to Love and serve him, and keep his Sabbath, and take hold of his
Covenant: Even to every such Person he promises acceptance of their Services
signified by Burnt-Offerings, and Sacrifices. Now blessed be God, he has
enabled me by grace in some measure thus to do.

2. Romans 14. 18. He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God.
In these things, i. e. in Righteousness, Peace, and joy mentioned v. 17. Here I
see that when in obedience to Christ's Command, and in discharge of the work,
and Calling I have been called to by Christ, I endeavor by Preaching, Writing,
Conference, private Instruction, to beget or promote Righteousness, Peace or
joy in the Holy Ghost, I am accepted of God.

3. Act. 10. 35. In every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness
is accepted of him. We then work righteousness when we work that which God
commands us. Ps. 119. 172. All thy Commandments are righteousness. This I
endeavor.

4. Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Then we do well
when we serve the Lord faithfully. Mat. 25. 23. and when we show Love to our
Neighbor. Jam. 2. 8. whereof I have the Testimony of my Conscience.

Evidences of Eternal Life.
God has out of his free grace (blessed be his Name) given me good hope of
Eternal Life from these Scriptures:

1. Joh. 3. 16. Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. This promise has often refreshed and satisfied my Soul, when I
have been Communing with my own heart about the grounds of my hope of Eternal
Life. For I find that God has given me an heart to believe in Christ; and the
promise is, Whosoever believes, without any exception of the greatness,
frequency, or long continuance of our sins; when I have been unable to work the
works of God, I have found an heart to believe.

2. 2* Sam. 23. 5. Although my house be not so with God, yet God has made with
me an everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my desire although he make it not to grow. Here I observed,
1 st. That being in Covenant with God is a sufficient ground to hope for
Salvation. This is all my Salvation, he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant. 2 ly. The sinful infirmities and miscarriages of the Servants of God,
should not discourage them from hoping in God for Eternal Salvation by virtue
of his Covenant. David had been guilty of several miscarriages, besides his
great failing in the matter of Uriah, as unbelief. 1 Samuel 27. 1. dissimulation
and lying to Achish. v. 10. Unkind if not unjust dealing with Mephihosheth, in
giving away half his Estate upon a false Accusation of Ziba. 2 Samuel 19. 27, 28,
29. etc. Yet in a dying hour he relieth on God for Salvation, notwithstanding
his miscarriages, by virtue of the Covenant. Although my house be not so with
God (he includes himself as the chief part of his house, although he had not
so walked in his house with God as God required) yet this is my Salvation God
has made with me an everlasting Covenant. 3 ly. Though he did not see the
growth or accomplishment of several promises, in the Covenant, yet he is not
dismayed or beaten off from hoping for Salvation, but says, this is all my
Salvation, although he make it not to grow. Enquiring with my self what ground
I had to hope that this Covenant was made with me, I was satisfied from Isa.
55. 3. Where I find those that come unto Christ are taken into Covenant, and
enjoy the same promises and mercies that God gave to David.

3. Joh. 17. 2. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal Life to as many as thou have given him. Enquiring what ground I had to
believe that I was given to Christ, I was satisfied from Joh. 6. 37. All that
the Father gives me shall come to me. Our coming to Christ is an Argument that
we are given to Christ by the Father, because all such, and none but such come
to Christ. v. 37. 44. 65. I was further Confirmed from Joh. 17. 9, 10. Where
Christ gives this Character of such as are given to him, that he is glorified
in them, and I find through mercy that the Lord has inclined my heart to
glorify him.

4. Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give to them eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me
is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.
Here I observed, 1 st. That the Lord Jesus has promised to give unto his sheep
Eternal life* 2 ly. He undertaketh for them for the time to come, that they
shall never perish. They shall not perish by their own sins (as unbelievers and
unregenerate men do Joh. 8. 24. 2 Pet. 2. 12.) neither shall any person or
temptation from without draw them off from Christ. 3 ly. The Lord Jesus gives
his sheep a twofold Argument to assure them that they shall not perish, either
by their own corruption, or by any force or allurement from without. 1 st. He
holds them in his hand, i. e, he keeps and preserves them by his power. 2 ly.
His Father who is greater than all keeps them by his power also. The Comfort of
this depending on the qualification of the persons to whom this promise is
made, namely the sheep of Christ, I considered what evidence I had that I was
one of Christ's sheep. And I saw 1 st. That Christ's sheep are such as hear his
voice, and follow him. Now I found that my heart had Answered the Call of
Christ in the Gospel, when he has called, Look unto me, and be ye Saved; Come
unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden; and moreover that I do
endeavor to follow his example, and to walk as he walked when he was in this
world. 2 ly. I saw that by his sheep he means such as do believe on him,
because he proves the Jews were not his sheep, because they did not believe on
him. ver. 26. 3 ly. I found those evidences of the Lords being my Shepherd
which David mentions, Ps. 23. viz. his often restoring my Soul when I have
fallen. His leading me in paths of Righteousness for his Names sake. If the
Lord be my sheepherd then I am one of his sheep. 4 ly. my returning to Christ
through grace is an argument that he is the sheepherd of my Soul. 1 Pet. 2. 25.
5 ly. Visiting the sick and feeding the hungry, are the marks of Christ's sheep.
Math. 25. 33, 35, 36.

5. Ps. 84. 11. God promises glory to them that walk uprightly, and I find God
has given me an heart to walk uprightly. In a sickness not knowing but death
might be approaching, I considered what promises I could rest on for salvation,
and among others God enabled me to stay, on, Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into
Peace, they shall rest in their beds, Each one walking in his uprightness.
These are my Evidences of etarnal life.

God having given me good hope, through grace, of eternal life, I set my self
to consider what duties this called for, and God put into my mind, which I
resolve by the help of his grace to practice.

1. To bless and praise God for this mercy. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Col. 1. 12, 13.

2. To mortify daily uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil Concupisence,
Covetousness, and all other sins, Col. 3. 4, 5.

3. To carry my self toward all men especially toward my near relations as an
Heir of eternal life and glory. 1 Pet. 3. 7.

4. To walk worthy of the Lord. 1 These. 2. 12. How that is to be done is
expressed Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3. Col. 1. 10.

5. To purify my self as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3. which implies purity of
heart, Math. 5. 8. purity of words in discourse; for every word of God is pure,
Prove. 30. 5. and so must ours be also, Ephesians. 4. 29. Zeph. 3. 9. purity of life,
1 Pet. 2. 22.

6. To Serve God and to serve him in a gracious and Godly manner, Heb. 12. 28.

7. Not to fear them that can kill the body, Luke 12. 4, 32. Nor fear the want
of outward things, ver. 31, 32.

8. To rejoice in hope of this Glory in the midst of worldly troubles, Romans 5.
2, 3. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 6.

9. To keep the full assurance of hope to the end of my days by Continuing
diligent in Ministering to the Saints, Heb. 6. 10. 11.

Thus have we given the Reader some account of this Eminent Saint and Servant
of Jesus Christ, such was his holy and heavenly life; Thus walked he both in
the fear of God, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost: Thus labored he to
approve himself to God, to others and to his own Conscience: Thus answered he
his profession, ran his race, and pressed forward to the mark. Upon the equal
and impartial view whereof, though the design of these pages be only Ostendere,
and not Ostentare virum, yet I can scarce forbear to say, He has left such a
Name and character behind him as may worthily commend him, both as a Christian
and a Minister to the observation, Honor and Imitation of most, if not All
that read him.

What remains is only to apply him to the following funeral Text as a more than
ordinary Instance of the truth thereof. And whosoever considers the manner of his
life may with little doubt conclude his Victory over death, It was before
mentioned that he has left behind him some Manuscripts worthy of the press:
some of which he entitles, The best Interest; A Treatise of Glorifying God: The
cure of the fear of Death. All which he well understood, not only by
Speculation but by Experience. He who had gained the best Interest, and could
upon good ground say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his; He who aimed at the
best End and industriously pursued it, viz. the Glory of God, was doubtless so
fortified with the grace, Consolation and Covenant of God, as to triumph over
the King of Terrors. Having the testimony of his Conscience that in Integrity
and Sincerity of heart he had fulfilled his general and particular calling, and
served his generation by the will of God, and having the assurance of Gods Holy
Word, for his reward in a better World, It was no difficulty to him to die. He
was so far above the fear of Death, that he seemed altogether unconcerned at
it, as to the terror of it or danger after it, both in sickness and in health.
In his perfect health, Considering the evil of the day he lived in, he would
often say, It is a good time to die. I am content to live, and willing to die.
To me to live is Christ; I have no other design of life then to serve Christ.
He breathed out with Greg: Turon. Domine, siad huc Populo tuo sim necessarius,
fiat Voluntas tua. Desidero quietem, non recuso laborem. If God has further
Service for me to do. I am content to live, else I rather choose to die. Such
clear apprehensions he had of the Glory of Heaven, and such full assurance of
hope thereof, that, as he expressed himself to his Friend, he looked upon all
that this world can afford as dross and dung compared with it.

As death was not terrible so neither was it unexpected to him. He presaged it
long before it came. He told his Friend, conversing with him more than a year
before he died, that he had apprehensions that he should not long live; and
that for some time past, God had inclined his heart to study how a Christian
might get above the fear of death: And what he found to be his strength and
Consolation against that last enemy, he had digested into method, and for his
own and others use Committed it to writing, and had almost finished it, and did
then lay an obligation upon his friend in case he did Survive him to perform
the last office for him, and commended to him for his Subject 1 Cor. 15. 57. as
the testimony of his affectionate and hearty thanksgiving unto God who gave him
the Victory over the fear of Death, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This was no vain presage; though yet he had a Strong constitution of body,
which he had used with all temporance and Sobriety, and was then in his full
strength, and the maturity of his age, Scarce declining from his state of
Consistency. His natural temper did somewhat incline him to feverish diseases.
A fever having Commission from God seized on him, Aug. 31. This Visitation of
God (as all former) he accepted with all Patience and Submission, Casting
himself on the care, and resigning himself up to the will of his Heavenly
Father. His disease increasing and strength declining, he told some about him,
that he had some apprehensions he should, and desires also if God pleased, to
have died a Martyr, but now he thought he should not. Adding withal, God is
wiser than I, and knows my weakness.

Discharging his dying office by grave exhortations and encouragement to
Serious Religion and Suffering for it, which he especially applied to his only
Child; Owning and professing his Nonconformity to the last, as judging himself
obliged thereto in Conscience toward God; Blessing God for his invaluable Gift
of Jesus Christ to the children of men; Blessing God who had called him to the
honorable employment of the Ministry of the Gospel, and had enabled him to be
faithful therein, and encouraged him with his presence and blessing under all
the difficulties thereof; Blessing God who had lifted him up above the fear of
Death; Rejoicing in the peace and testimony of a good Conscience and hope of
the Glory of God, after 10 or 11 days conflict with his disease (which after
some hope of recovery very suddenly and unexpectedly seized his head,) He
quietly slept in the Lord, Sept. 10. 1680. in the one and fiftieth year of his
age.

This being the blessed exit of this Eminent Saint, methinks I hear him say to
those he left behind, as his dying Savior to the daughters of Jerusalem: Weep
not for me, I have died in peace, am entered into peace, am at rest in my bed,
have passed through Jordan and am come to Canaan. I am beyond sin, and sorrow,
and trouble and labor, am come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable
company of Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant, to that Eternal Sabbath that remains the people
of God. Weep not for me.

And does he not also add, weep for your selves? You shall see my face no more,
you shall enjoy communion with me no more, you shall hear my voice no more, I
shall despense the Gospel to you no more. Ye shall come to me but I shall
return to you no more. O what is the meaning of this dark providence, that in
such a day as this, God should call from his work one so fully instructed, so
willingly zealous to serve him and his Church in the Gospel of his Son. Whether
God has done this in his just displeasure for the unprofitableness,
unthankfulness, and itching ears of those that enjoyed so precious a blessing:
Or whether to warn us of some approaching dreadful judgment from which he has
hid this and other his holy Servants in their graves: or whether both; it
concerns us seriously to consider, and upon either account he may say to us,
Weep for your selves.

We read, 2 King. 13. 20, 21. Elisha died and they buried him, and the bands of
the Moabites invaded the land at the Coming in of the year. And it came to pass
as they were burying a man, that behold they Spied a band of men, and they cast
the man into the Sepulcher of Elisha; and when the man was let down and touched
the bones of Elisha, he revived and stood upon his feet, and Judge. 16. 30. The
dead which Sampson slew at his death were more than them which he slew in his
life. In allusion to which I conclude with this wish, God avert the bands of
the Moabites; but would to God the dead in sin would apply their dead hearts to
the Sepulcher of this dead Prophet, that at the touching of his bones they
might live, and that the providence of his death may be more effectual to the
mortifying of sin, in Survivers than all the labors of his life.

Mors Triumphata; OR THE SAINTS VICTORY OVER DEATH; Opened in a FUNERAL SERMON
Preached upon the occasion of the Death of that Eminent Servant and Minister of
Jesus Christ Mr. Owen Stockton, M. A. Sometimes Fellow of G. and C. College in
Cambridge; afterward Preacher of Gods Word at Colchester in Essex.

By John Fairfax M. A.

Hos. 13. 14. I will ransom them from the power of the Grave: I will redeem
them from death: O Death, I will be thy Plagues; O Grave I will be thy
Destruction.

London, Printed for T. P. 1681.

THE SAINTS VICTORY OVER DEATH, Opened in a FUNERAL SERMON Upon the occasion of
the Death of Mr. OWEN STOCKTON.
1 Cor. 15. 57. But thanks be to God who gives us the Victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.


SO soon as Sin entered into the world, Death the King of terrors, being
therewith Armed, began its Reign; and has Reigned not only from Adam to Moses
over the race of Mankind, but even to this day. And as a Merciless, Cruel,
insatiable Tyrant affrights the world, making horrible Slaughters, not at the
rate of Saul and David who slew their Thousands and their ten Thousands; but
Death slays Universally beyond number, from the Infant to the Aged, from the
dunghill to the Throne; sparing neither Age nor Sex, neither base nor
Honorable, neither great nor small, neither Sacred nor Profane.

The Cry of this misery of man being very loud reached up to Heaven, and entered
into the Ears of God that made him: who heard, regarded and pitied; and in
infinite mercy Ordained and Commissioned his own, and Only Son the Lord Jesus
Christ to be a Prince of Life, and Captain of Salvation to miserable men, to
Redeem a remnant from the Terror, Power, and Tyranny of this All-devouring,
All-destroying Enemy. The Son of God readily accepts this honorable Office,
and accordingly comes down from Heaven, and becomes Incarnate among the Sons
of men to discharge it. And girding his Sword upon his thigh in his Majesty he
rode prosperously, and his right hand taught him terrible things. Having first
trampled under his feet the forlorn hope of the Enemy, Poverty, Hunger, Thirst,
Labor, Weariness, Griefs, Persecutions, Mockings, Buffetings, Scourging, and
acutest Pains; he forthwith enters into the very Region of Death, the Land of
Darkness Encounters, Disarmeth, Overcomes, and Destroys the King of Terrors
in his own Territory, the Grave; leading Captivity Captive; and Triumphing in a
powerful and glorious Resurrection. The virtue and benefit of which Victory he
Communicates to all his followers, the noble Army of Conflicting Saints listed
under his exalted Banner. In token whereof the Graves were opened, and many
bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of their Graves after his
Resurrection. Mat. 27. 52, 53.

This glorious Conquest is the Apostles comfortable Argument throughout this
Chapter. Where he first Asserts and proves the Resurrection of Christ, to verse.
20. Concluding, Now is Christ risen from the dead. From whence he infers,
proves, and illustrates the Resurrection of the Saints, with the order and
manner thereof, from verse. 20 -- to 55. In the Faith and Contemplation whereof
he cannot contain himself, but breaks forth into this triumphant (...).
boldly challenging, daring, defying, and out-braving Death. verse. 55. 56, 57. O
death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy Victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the Law.

But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

In which last words (the Subject to be discoursed on) there are four things
observable; The Enemy, The Victory, The Victors, and the Triumph.

1. First, The Enemy, which is supposed in the Text, but expressed in the
Context, ver. 55, 56. viz. Death Armed by sin, strengthened by the Law.

2. Secondly, The Victory over this Enemy, that is, The destruction of Death as
to its terror and power.

3. Thirdly, The Victors, who are Christ first, and with him all that are
Christ's. ver. 23. Every of whom shall be made alive in his own order, Christ
first, afterward they that are Christ's. All that Harvest whereof Christ is the
First Fruits. verse. 20.

4. Fourthly, The Triumph; Thanks be to God.

The three former we will sum up in this Doctrinal Proposition.

Doctr. Believers are victorious over Death through Jesus Christ.
From whence the fourth will be inferred by most just and due Consequence,
Thanks be to God.

In speaking to which, that we may the more commend and magnify the Victory,
we will,

First, Represent to you the Enemy over which the Victory is gotten, viz.
Death. Corporal death, for as is the Resurrection such must be the Death. The
Resurrection which the Apostle here argues is of the body. verse. 35. How are
the dead raised up? And with what body do they come? verse. 44. It is sown a
Natural body, it is raised a Spiritual body. And verse. 53. This corruptible
must put on Incorruption, and this mortal must put on Immortality. Such
therefore must be the Death: Concerning which as an Enemy take this account.

1. It is a spoiling Enemy. That devests a man of all his wordly Enjoyments,
Houses and Lands, Gold and Silver, the fruits of the Earth, the increase of
Corn and Wine, the pleasures of the flesh, sensual delights, the light of the
Sun, Society with men, Conversation with friends, the Comfort of Relations,
Husband, Wife, Father, Mother, Sons and Daughters, Brethren and Sisters, How
sweet, near and dear are these to the Living? But when Death comes it spoils
him of all, and puts an utter, and everlasting end to his use and enjoyment of
them, and turns him naked out of the world. Psalm. 49. 16, 17. Be not thou
afraid when one is made rich, when the Glory of his house is increased. For
when he dies he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after
him, and verse. 19. They shall never see light. Which our Savior exemplifieth
in a Parable Luke 12. 16. to verse. 20. The rich man's ground brought forth
plentifully, till he said to his Soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But the sad tidings of
Death are next brought him, This night shall thy Soul be required. And what is
the Consequence? Whose shall those things be which thou have provided? Not
thine, be sure. All thy interest in them is lost for ever. It was Hezekia's
Lamentation when it was told him. that he should die, Isa. 38. 11. I shall
behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world. And as Death spoils a man
of all his possessions, so also of his projects before him, Ps. 146. 4. His
breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth; in that very day his thoughts
perish: And of all his hopes too. Job. 27. 8. What is the hope of the
hyprocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? Death is a
spoiling Enemy.

2. It is a Surprising enemy. It comes upon a man as a thief in the night, 1
These. 5. 2. when he little dreameth of it, and takes him as a snare, Eccl. 9.
12. Man knows not his time -- As the birds are caught in the snare; so are
the Sons of men snared by death in an evil time when it falls suddenly upon
them. Every one may say as Isaac, Genesis 27. 2. I know not the day of my death.
At an hour when ye think not, says Christ the Son of man comes, Luke 12. 40.
The man we mentioned even now, was confident of many years before him, and
promised himself a merry long life, Luke 12. 19. yet ver. 20. He that knew said
to him, Hac Nocte: This night thou must die. Who knows what shall be on the
morrow? or what a day may bring forth? Nemo tam Divos habuit faventes,
Crastinum ut posset sibi polliceri.
Was not Nabal in his plenty Jobs Children in their feasting, Nadab and Abihu
in their offering Herod in his pride, Belshazzar in his cups, Zimri and Cozbi
(...) etc. surprised by this Enemy?

3. It is a destructive Enemy. Destruction and Death are joined together, Job.
28 22. yea this is the very name of Death, Ps. 88. 11. shall thy loving
kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in Destruction? Ps. 103.
4. who redeemeth thy life from Destruction, i. e. death. A dead man is reduced
to his first principle, the Earth, The body returns to the dust from whence it
came, and this is turning man to Destruction. Ps. 90. 3. If a man were
Surprised and spoiled of all that he had without him, and should yet escape
with his life, though naked, it were a sore evil, yet such as might be endured;
a great loss, but such as might be repaired. But Death spoils a man of himself;
takes down the goodly frame and Constitution of; Nature Cuts a man asunder,
and divides Soul from body. God takes away his Soul, Job. 27. 8. Her Soul was
in departing, for she died, Genesis 35. 18. Thy Soul shall be required, Luke 12.
20. So as no ground of hope is left to a dying man. Life is a fundamental
Being, Take away that and ye take away all. The dead are not, Joseph is not,
Genesis 42. Lo, he was not, Ps. 37. 36. Job. 14. 7, 8, 9, 10. There is hope of a
tree, if it be cut down that it will Sprout again, and that the tender branch
thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the Earth, and the
Stock thereof die in the ground, Yet through the sent of water it will bud, and
bring forth boughs like a plant. But man dies and wastes away; Yea man gives
up the Ghost, and where is he? and ver. 14. If a man die shall he live again?

4. It is a certain, unavoidable Enemy. There is no defense to be made against
it, no humane power can withstand it, no fortification of the body by utmost
art can prevent its entrance; either by some violent storming, or Successive
batteries, or longer seige it will prevail against the Stoutest defendants.
Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? shall he
deliver his Soul from the hand of the grave? The young, the strong, the
healthful, the wise, the rich, the honorable; All have fallen, and shall fall
under the power of this irresistible enemy. The experience of five thousand
years and upwards, which the world has had, is enough to Convince all the
Living that they shall as certainly die as that they have been born.

5. It is an abhorred Enemy. Against which Nature relucts with the greatest
passion, and from which it flees with greatest aversation It will never be
reconciled to that which dissolveth the nearest and most intimate union between
Soul and body; which takes in pieces the curious Workmanship, defiles the
Glory, and stains the beauty of the goodliest body, which turns the lovely body
into a loathsome Carcass, resolves it into corruption and putrefaction, and
gives it to the worms for meat. No Antipathy greater than between Nature and
Death. Skin for Skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. Job.
2. 4.

6. It is a formidable enemy, that affects a man with fear and terror. We read,
Ps. 91. 5. -- the terror by night, that is Death. Job. 24. 17. -- the terrors
of the shadow of Death. Psalm. 55. 4. -- the terrors of Death, and Job. 18. 14.
It is called the King of Terrors. i. e. The chief of Terrors. (...), Says the
Judgment of Nature, of all terribles the most terrible. This is Consequent upon
the former. It being a Spoiling, surprising, destroying, irresistible, abhorred
enemy, It must needs be very terrible. What a terror possesseds the Egyptians,
when Death entered in at their doors, and slew their first born. Exodus 12. 30,
33. They were so affrighted that even Pharaoh rose up in the night, he and all
his Servants, and all the Egyptians, and there was a great cry in Egypt; for
there was not an house where there was not one dead. -- They said, we be all
dead men. It is a threatening denounced by God, Deuteronomy. 28. 65, 66, 67. The Lord
shall give thee a trembling heart. Why? Thy life shall hang in doubt before
thee. And thou shall fear day and night, and shall have no assurance of thy
life. In the morning thou shall say, Would God it were Even; and at even thou
shall say, Would God it were morning, for the fear of thine heart wherewith
thou shall fear. The apprehension of this affrighted Gideon a mighty man of
valor, till the Lord encouraged him and said to him, Fear not, thou shall not
die, Judge. 6. 23. At this the King (Belshazzars) Countenance was changed and
his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another, Dan. 5. 6. And who that is but a natural man,
does not experience trembling and astonishment at the approach and sight of
Death? yea many times at the very thoughts. of it? The world of men does
generally bear witness to that which is written, Heb. 2. 15. that through fear
of Death, they are all their life time Subject to bondage.

There are two things, (both in the context) which make Death so terrible. 1
st. Sin, which the Apostle calls the Sting of Death. It was by sin that death
entered in the world, and it is by Sin that death reigns in the world. The
poison of the Serpent is in his sting, and the power of the Serpent is in his
sting. So the poison of Death is in sin, and the power of Death lies in sin;
without which though it kills it cannot hurt. This is the only weapon
wherewith Death is Armed against the Children of men, but it is a deadly one.
That is a dreadful threatening indeed which our Savior denounces against the
Jews, Joh. 8. 21. Ye shall die in your sins. According to what the Lord had
before spoken by his Prophet, Ezekiel. 18. 24. In his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in the sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die. It is our
sad case that we are born in sin, and worse that we live in sin, but Oh! how
dreadful and miserable to die in sin, in a state of sin, in the guilt of sin,
under the reign and power of sin, in the arms and embraces of sin.

Sin being the transgression of a righteous Law, the violation of infinite
Holiness and Justice, and rebellion against Divine Majesty and Authority, it
always has demerit and guilt consequent upon it, which obliges and binds
the sinner to undergo that punishment which is naturally due to it. Which
punishment is Death, Rom 1. 32. -- they which Commit such things are worthy of
death. Thus sin becomes the weapon or sting of Death, by which it has power to
destroy. Death comes upon the Sinner as a bailiff or Sergeant from the Judge
with warrant to apprehend and bring the Sinner to give account; or as an
executioner to take vengeance, to pay the Sinner the just wages of his sin, for
the reparation of a broken Law, for the satisfaction of offended Justice, for
the Declaration of Divine hatred, and displeasure against sin, and for the
manifestation of Gods Glorious power and wrath against the guilty. And what a
terror must Death needs be when it appears in this shape, and armed with this
sting! Know O presumptuous and secure Sinner; Though wickedness be now sweet in
thy mouth and thou hidest it under thy tongue: Though thou swallowest down
deliciously thy forbidden morsells of sensual pleasure and worldly gain, yet
this meat will soon be turned in thy bowels, and become the gall of asps within
thee. At last, at death, it will bite as a serpent, and sting like an adder.
What horror will fill thy soul when approaching Death shall awaken thy sleepy
Conscience, as often times it does, and thy awakened Conscience shall charge thee
with thy inexcusable transgression of a Righteous Law, thy gross neglect of
Commanded duty, thy industerious provision to satisfy the flesh, thy ready
compliance with the call of temptations, thy irreparable loss of precious time.
Thy hypocritical dealing with God in Covenant, the Stopping of thine ears at
the voice of Conscience, the shutting of thine eyes against the light of
Scripture, the hardening of thy heart against the motions of the Spirit, thy
unbelieving refusals of an offered Savior, thy unprofitable misimprovement of
means of Grace, thy unthankful abuse of the mercies of God, and obstinate
incorrigibleness under his Judgments, with many other instances of multiplied
and aggravated sins through a long life. Whence will arise dismal apprehensions
of the wrath of an offended God, a certain fearful expectation of Judgment to
come, and a pre-occupation of eternal torments and everlasting burnings. This
is that sting of Death, the weapon wherewith it is armed against thee, wherein
Consists its power, and by which it is so terrible.

2. Add to this the strength which this sting has from the Law. For says the
Apostle. The strength of sin is the Law, and that two ways. 1 st. As the Law
discovers and convinces of sin. Romans 5. 13. Sin is not imputed where there is
no Law. Men are not prone to charge themselves with sin, where there is no Law,
therefore, Gal. 3. 19. the Law was added because of transgressions, that is, to
make transgressions appear. Hence we read, Romans 3. 20. By the Law is the
knowledge of sin, and Romans 7. 9, 13. I was alive without the Law once, in my
own opinion, but when the Commandment came, Sin revived and I died I was
convinced I was in a state of Sin and death. and v. 13. Sin by the Commandment
becomes exceeding sinful. Thus sin as the sting of Death is strengthened by the
Law, while men thereby are more clearly and fully convinced of it, and the
greater the conviction is, the sharper is the sting. 2 ly. As the Law Curses
and condemns the sinner. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things, which are written in the book of the Law to do them. hence as
before, Romans 7. 9. When the Commandment Came. I died. and 2 Cor. 3. 7. The Law
is called the Ministration of death. The Law binds the sinner over to the
Judgment of the great day. It holds him fast under his guilt without hope of
pardon, passes sentence of Condemnation upon him, and begins the execution by
wounding the Spirit, terrifying the Soul with pre-apprehensions and foretasts
of the wrath to come.

The sum of the terror of Death, is this. Approaching death awakeneth the
secure Conscience; Awakened Conscience charged with the guilt of sin; This sin
is strengthened with a Convincing cursing Law; The dying wretch sees his day
of sensual delights and pleasures, his day of worldly gains and purchases, his
day of Carnal fellowship with men, and especially his day of Grace and mercy
with God, passing away; finds his Spirit fainting, his heart and flesh failing,
anguish and pangs taking hold of him, and his soul forthwith to be Required,
Apprehended, Arrested, Summoned and haled out of his body, from all friends,
means helps and hopes, to appear naked before God the Judge of all men, to give
an account of a sinful life, and to receive a righteous doom, viz. Depart from
me ye Cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels and;
then to go away into everlasting punishment. At this what heart of man can
contain and possess himself without fear? Who but must be appalled, confounded,
amazed, terrified? Knowing the terror, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Speaking of
this appearance and account. Felix trembled, says St. Luke, Act. 24. 25. When
he heard of Judgment to come. It is a fearful looking for of Judgment and
fiery indignation, says the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 10. 27. and a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God. ver. 31. Thus have we
represented the Enemy Death, in its power and pomp as it reigns over the
fallen Sons and Daughters of Adam, which appears so terrible, that woe be to
those that fall under the power of it.

2. We will now show you this Enemy fallen and overcome before Believers.

Believers are Victorious over Death.
Object. But says Natural Carnal reason, Is not this a great Paradox? who will
believe it? One Enoch indeed was translated that he should not see Death; and
Elijah went up to Heaven in a fiery Chariot. But else the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, and Apostles, and all the Saints in their Successive generations have
yielded up to Death. And does not every day bear witness? Are we not all here
this day lamenting a very holy and Eminent Saint, and Servant of Jesus Christ
fallen by the stroke of Death? Where then is the Victory? And How is Death
overcome?

Answ. Notwithstanding all this, yet Verily Death is overcome. Not ut ne sit,
but ut ne obsit. Not that it should not be, but that it should not be hurtful
to believers, and this Victory consists in four things.

1. Death is disarmed to believers, that it cannot sting them. When death
comes it finds no sin in them unpardoned, no guilt remaining as an obligation
unto punishment. He is overcome whose armor is taken from him wherein he
trusted, Luke 11. 22. Thus it is with Death. Where Sin has no dominion, Death
has none; for Death reigns by Sin. Now as for the sins of believers, God (to
whom belongs the forgiveness of sins) says, Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out
as a thick cloud, thy transgresons, and as a cloud, thy sins. Jer. 31. 34. I
will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Numb. 23.
21. He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in
Israel. Mic. 7. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee? that pardons iniquity,
and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? Thou will Cast
all their sins into the depths of the Sea. Act. 10. 43. whosoever believes in
him shall receive remission of Sins. What God said to repenting and believing
David, that he says to all believers. 2 Samuel 12. 13. The Lord has put away
your sin ye shall not die. Ye shall not die by the venomous sting of Death.
This indeed is in effect the whole victory over death. This is the fatal mortal
wound given to Death, and will in time be the very Death of Death; and
therefore the Apostle triumphs over it on that account verse. 55. O Death,
where is thy sting? What Luther sometimes said to God, that may every Believer
say to Death, Feri Domine, said he; Strike Lord. Feri, mors, feri, may they
say, Nam a peccatis absolutus sum. Strike, Death, strike, for my sins are
pardoned. Thou may kill me, but thou can not hurt me.

2. Death is overcome to Believers in that it cannot amaze them with despairing
terrors. However it be to others, it is not to them the King of Terrors.
Believers are freed from the bondage of the tormenting fear of Death. Heb. ^.
15. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death (says David) Psalm.
23. 4. I will fear no evil. Elijah makes request for himself that he might die.
1 King. 19. 4. The three Children valiantly yielded their bodies to the fiery
furnace Dan. 3. 16. 28. Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace,
says good old Simeon. Luke 2. 29. Paul and Barnabas willingly hazarded their
lives. Act. 15. 16. Paul had a desire to be dissolved. Phil. 1. 23. Those
worthies Heb. 11. 35. would not accept deliverance. The Primitive Martyrs would
hasten to the stake. Such Victory had they gotten of the fear of Death. The
grant of their Pardon, and their discharge from Condemnation which God has
Sealed to them; The peace of a good Conscience which they carry about with
them; Their apprehensions that their bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
which he will never desert or neglect; Their assurance of the faithfulness and
power of God, into whose hands they commend their Spirit; The fore-tasts of the
sweetness of Communion with God, and Jesus Christ to be fully enjoyed in the
other world; Their faith, and hope of a blessed Resurrection to Immortality;
Their Evidences for Heaven: These are powerful Arguments which they improve
against the fear of Death, and by the strength whereof they Triumph over it.

Object. But for all this. Are not Believers afraid to die? Was not Abraham
afraid when he thought he should be slain? Genesis 20. 11. Did not David complain,
The terrors of death are fallen from me. Ps. 55. 4. Did not Hezekiah weep sore
when it was said to him, Thou shall die. Isa. 38. 1. And who almost is not
afraid?

Answ. 1. There is a Natural fear of death, as it is the dissolution of the
Compositum, a separation of Soul and Body which are so intimately united, which
is not sinful. Believers are not free from this. Grace does not destroy Nature.
Nature will be Nature, and act its part even in the best of Saints. They who
have the surest hope of Eternal life, and clearest Evidences of their
Salvation, yea, and have an unfeigned longing and desire after the Heavenly
state, have yet a natural aversness unto Death, and do rather endure than
desire it. St. Paul says for himself and other Believers, that though they
knew, that if their Earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, they had a
building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens; and
groaned earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with their house which is from
Heaven; yet they had a natural Love of life, and abhorrence of death, and their
groaning was not that they would be unclothed. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 4. yea, our Lord
Jesus Christ himself in whom was no sin, being found in fashion as a man, when
he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, experienced this fear as the
proper expression of his humane Nature. When his hour was come Mar. 14. 33, 34.
He takes with him Peter, and James, and John, and began to be sore amazed, and
to be very heavy, and says, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death.

2. There is a slavish, inordinate, sinful fear of death, which Believers
overcome, and from which they are freed. It was one end of Christ's death, that
he might deliver his redeemed from fear of death, to which they were holden in
bondage. Heb. 2. 15. To which yet some Believers are subject, yea, it may be
All at sometimes, more or less. This arises from weakness of Faith, from want
of assurance, from Conscience of lapses and contracted guilt, from neglecting
to search their own hearts, from misapprehending and mis-judging their
Spiritual state, from inordinate love to this life, and world, etc. for which
they must blame themselves. Believers as such, so far as they are Believers,
are victorious. Did they walk close with God, improve grace received, examine
their own state wisely, and judge thereof rightly; Did they take hold of the
Covenant of God, live by Faith, meditate on the Promises, and apply them as
their Portion, (which becomes Believers) they might and would get above the
slavish fears of Death. In this method they might be ready to die, and fear no
evil. When the Christian can say with David, Psalm. 23. The Lord is my Shepherd;
he makes me to lie down in green pastures; he leads me besides the still
waters, he restores my Soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness; He
will then add also, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I
will fear no evil.

3. There is a despairing fear; The presumptions of Hell, the pre-occupation of
Torment, the fore-tasts of the wrath of the Almighty, the scorchings of the
Lake that burns with fire and Brimstone, that drives the sinner past all
hope, and overwhelms the Soul in hideous darkness, and horrible Confusions.
Have there not been instances of some wretched guilty Souls going out of the
body as the Devil out of the Demoniack Mar. 9. renting, and taring, and
wallowing, and foming, and raging, and roaring again. And were it not for the
Atheism, ignorance, infidelity, blindness, hardness, searedness, flattery, and
delusions that are in the hearts of sinners, such instances would not be rare;
but it would be a wonder how any sinner could die in his sin, and in his wits
too, from such a fear as this Believers are delivered. Though they may and do
experience some measure of fears, yet God does always support with some degree
of hope, that they let not go all their hold of the Covenant of God. In a word,
Believers are so far victorious over the fear of death, that if they understand
their case aright they have no cause to be afraid of death, and when they are,
they are more afraid than hurt. The Hornet having lost its sting, may threaten
with its humming noise, but cannot prick the flesh: so death, where sin is
pardoned, which is itssting, may afright with its horrid aspect, but cannot
hurt.

3. Death is overcome to Believers in that it cannot hold them by its power. It
is indeed the unalterable Law of Heaven that all must die: And accordingly
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Patriarchs; Moses and Samuel, and
Isaiah, and all the Prophets; Peter, and James, and John, and all the Apostles;
yea, all the Saints from Adam to this generation are fallen asleep, and shut up
in their Graves. But shall the Grave always contain them? Are they there kept
in an everlasting Prison under locks, and bars that cannot be opened? Did
making the Sepulcher sure, Sealing the stone, and setting a Watch forbid
Christ's Resurrection? No, surely. I went down (says Jonah, a Type of the
Resurrection.) to the bottoms of the Mountains the Earth with her bars was
about me for ever; yet have thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my
God. Jon. 2. 6. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me, says Job. chapter
19. 26, 27. Though the Saints be descended to the depths of the sea, and hid in
the bowels of the Earth, and their bodies resolved into the farthest dust, and
that dust dispersed to the four Winds, yet shall they be recovered and rise
again. The Sea shall not contain the dead that are in it, nor the Graves the
dead that are in them. Their scattered atoms shall be recollected and reared up
again to a goodly body. Behold, there shall be a shaking, and their dry bones
shall come together, bone to his bone, and lo, the sinews and the flesh shall
come up upon them, and the skin shall cover them above; And thus shall the Lord
God say, Come from the four Winds, O breath, and breath upon these slain that
they may live; and the breath shall come into them, and they shall live, and
stand up upon their feet. Ezekiel. 37. 7, 8, 10. This is it which the Apostle
asserts here throughout the Chapter, concluding that then shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.

Object. But what more victory is this, than what unbelievers shall have, for
they also shall rise again?

Answ. Yes, it is more beyond all comparison. Joh. 5. 28, 29. All that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good
unto the Resurrection of life; and they that have done evil to the Resurrection
of damnation. The wicked shall rise, but from death Temporal to death Eternal,
to die the second death. This is Death's Victory over them. The Godly shall
rise from Death temporal to Life eternal, to die no more. This is the Saints
Victory over Death.

4. Death is so overcome to Believers as to be made serviceable, and
advantageous to them. And this is the fullness, and perfection of Victory, when
the Enemy is brought in Subjection to serve the Conqueror. The Apostle in this
Epistle reckons Death to be part of the Saints Inventory. chapter 3. 21, 22. All
things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos -- or Life, or Death. And elsewhere
he calls it gain, Phil. 1. 21. to die is gain. What gain? Answ. 1. In
reference to the present state. Death is, 1 st. The end of Sin. With the body
of Flesh the body of Sin is also put off, from which St. Paul longed to be
delivered. Romans 7. 24. Here the best of Saints have their corruptions,
infirmities, imperfections; but at Death the Spirits of just men are made
perfect. Heb. 12. 23. 2 ly. The end of all Sorrows. There are no Pains, or
Diseases, or Griefs, or Losses, or Crosses, or Persecutions in the Grave. Job.
3. 17, 18, 19. There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at
rest. There the Prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor. The small and great are there, and the Servant is free from his
Master. 3. Rest from Labors. It is no light burden of works that is upon a
Christians hand; no small labor to discharge the duties of his general and
particular Calling. What says the Scripture? Labor, work, watch, run, strive,
wrestle, fight, give diligence, endure hardness, press forward, etc. But
blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors.
Rev. 14. 13. The day of the Saints Death is his happy Jubilee, when he is set
at liberty and goes out free from his Service. Thus is Death gain in reference
to the presence state. 2. In reference to the future state. for, 1 st. As for
the Soul, it being released from the body is admitted into the Heavenly
Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels, to the Spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant. Heb. 12. This day,
says Christ, to a dying Saint, shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 23. 43.
St. Paul desires to depart that he might be with Christ which is far better.
Phil. 1. 23. 2 ly. As for the body, Death serves to refine it, for 1 Cor. 15.
50. This I say, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: neither
does corruption inherit incorruption. These bodies which we now carry are so
gross and corruptible, they are not meet for an heavenly state. They die that
they may be changed. Phil. 3. 21. They are sown in corruption to be raised in
incorruption; sown in dishonor to be raised in Glory; sown in weakness, to be
raised in power; sown Natural bodies, to be raised Spiritual. The old decayed
house is taken down to be built anew; and these weak crasie bodies are laid in
the Earth to rise afresh. This corruptible is corrupted, that it may put on
incorruption, and this Mortal dies that it may put on Immortality. Thus is
this Enemy overcome, and made to serve as a mean and advantage to the Believers
happiness.

This indeed is a glorious Victory over a very mighty, and formidable Enemy: So
great and wonderful, that it far exceeds the hope of Nature; Flesh and Blood
cannot believe the report thereof. Paul's discourse of the Resurrection from
the dead seemed no other than babbling to the Learned Philosophers at Athens.
Act. 17. 18. And was thought incredible by Festus, and Agrippa, and the
Captains, and Principal men of Caesarea. Act. 26. 8. Yea, the Resurrection
seemed as an idle Tale at first to the very Apostles. Luke 24. 11. and they
believed it not. So great is the Glory of this victory over Death, that even
Angels come down from Heaven to make report of it, and to Celebrate the
Triumph. Mar. 16. Luke 24. Tell no more then of the mighty Acts of Nimrod, or
Chedorlaomer, of Sennacherib, or Nebuchadnezzar, of Cyrus, or Alexander, or of
all the Caesar's, or the rest of those great Names that have filled the world
with their Fame, who have subdued Kingdoms, and led Nations Captive, and made
many glorious Triumphs. Yea, let no mention be made of the Victories of Joshua,
or Baruk, or Gideon, or Jephtha, or Samson, or Saul, or Jonathan, or David, or
of all his worthies, who have Victoriously fought the Battles of the Lord
against the Arms of flesh, and whose Sword returned not empty from the blood of
the slain. Behold, the greater Glory of this Victory in the Text, which
darkneth the luster of all their Triumphs. Their Acts were mira, but this
miraculum. Their Victories were wonders, but this a Miracle. The Gates of Hell,
the power of Darkness, the King of Terrors (before whom all these Triumphing
Victors at last fell) fallen at the feet of the Saints.

Quest. But if Believers be thus victorious, and their Victory be so great and
Glorious which you tell us, as indeed it is, How do they obtain it? Where lies
the great strength of these Samsons? Are they not all Clay of the same lump
with other men? Are they not the Sons of men? Do we not know their generation?
Their Parents, Brethren, and Sisters, are they not with us? Whence then have
these men these mighty Works?

Answ. Truly they are so. They are of the same Nature with other men; promise
no more than other; nay less as to sense and reason, for they are not many wise
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble. 1 Cor. 1. 26. and therefore
we may well ask the question, How they overcome? The remaining Text will
resolve this. They get not the Victory by their own Sword, neither do their own
Arm save them: But,

3. The Victory is given them by God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

We will express this in three particulars.

1. Jesus Christ disarmeth Death by his satisfaction.

2. He destroys Death by his Resurrection.

3. This Victory becomes the Believers by participation and communion with him.

1. Jesus Christ disarms Death by his Satisfaction. The sting of Death is sin,
says the context, and the strength of sin is the Law, Sin being the
Transgression of a Righteous Law has in it a fundamental demerit and natural
obligation to punishment, which is moreover Confirmed by the Laws threatening,
Thou shall die the Death. This is the sting of Death wherewith it is armed;
from the poison, power, and pain whereof none can be delivered, unless the
obligation be voided by making satisfaction. This being impossible to mere man,
Jesus Christ undertook it. To which purpose our sins were translated on him by
imputation Isa. 53. 6. All we like Sheep have gone astray, we have turned every
on to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was
made a Priest that he might offer Sacrifice to expiate this guilt and to
Satisfy the Law. Heb. 5. 4, 5, 6. And no man takes this honor unto himself,
but he that is called of God as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself
to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, and again. Thou art a Priest for ever, etc. The Sacrifice
to be offered up by this Priest for this purpose must be an humane Soul and
body; for the Subjection of man's Soul and body, to the curse of the Law was the
punishment which the Law exacted for man's sin, and wherewith only it would be
satisfied. This Soul and body did Christ assume. Jo^. 1. 14. The word was made
flesh. Hebs. 10. 5. When he comes into the World he says. Sacrifice and
offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me. For the
Sanctification of this Sacrifice to be offered up to God, there must be an
Altar. Math. 23. 19. The Altar Sanctifies the gift which Altar was his divine
nature. Heb. 9. 14. Througth the eternal Spirit he offered himself. And Joh.
17. 19. I sanctify my self. I, as God, sanctify my self as man. And being
thus instructed he actually offered up himself to God Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ has
given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God. He humbled himself and
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the cross. Phil. 2. 8. and so was
made a Curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree. Gal. 3. 13. By this did Christ satisfy the Law, expiate guilt, cancelled
the hand writing, the obligation to punishment, appeased the wrath of God and
obtained remission of sins. Ephesians. 1. 7. Thus did he finish transgression, and
make an end of sins, thus he made reconciliation for iniquity, and brought in
Everlasting Righteousness. Thus he disarmed death by making satisfaction.

2. He destroys Death by his resurrection. By his satisfaction he took away
the power and efficacy of Death, but by his resurrection he destroyed the very
Being of death, actually as to himself, virtually as to believers. Romans 6. 9.
Christ being raised from the dead dies no more, Death has no more dominion
over him, and v. 10. For in that he died, he died unto sin once. Ad delendum
peccatum, ut semel in nihilum redigat peccatum in nobis, says Beza, he died
once for all utterly to blot out sin in us but in that he lives, he lives
unto God, Apud Deum or secundum Deum, vita caelesti et immortali, a life worthy
of God, an heavenly and immortal life. We read Joh. 11. 44. concerning Lazarus,
that he that was dead came forth. There the power of Death was suspended at
present that it could not hold him, but the Being of Death remained, for he
rose to die again, and therefore he came forth bound hand and foot, with
Grave-Clothes, and his face was bound about with a Napkin. But when Christ
rose, both the Power and the Being of Death ceased as to him, and therefore he
left his Grave-Clothes behind him, and carried nothing belonging to Death with
him. Joh. 20. 6. 7. The rising body of Christ was not only not dead, but not
mortal. His body rose a glorious body, a spiritual body, an heavenly body. Not
only Death but mortality is swallowed up by the resurrection of Christ. And as
by the resurrection of Christ the Being of Death was destroyed actually as to
himself; so vertually to believers, for even as to them he has abolished
Death, and brought life and immortality to light. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Says Christ,
Rev. 1. 18. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold, I am alive for
evermore, Amen, and have the keys of Hell and Death. The keys are the Ensign
of power. Christ by his resurrection has obtained authority over Death, to
quicken whom he pleases, to shut and open the grave. And his promise is to
exercise this power for his people. Joh. 6. 44. I will raise him up at the last
day. Hos. 13. 14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will
redeem them from death. Notwithstanding all the improbabilities, yea
impossibilities in Nature, yet he says to them as to Cyrus, Isa. 54. 2. I will
go before thee and break in pieces the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the
bars of Iron. On which account St. Peter begins his Epistle, v. 3. with
thanksgiving. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, (i.
e. hope of eternal life, as v. 4.) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
Dead. It is observable what the Apostle says here, he has begotten us by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The Resurrection of Jesus Christ, has a secret
generating influence upon the Resurrection of the Saints, who are therefore
called by our Savior. Luke. 20. 36. The Children of the Resurrection, which
leads to,

3. This Victory becomes the believers by participation, and Communion with
Him. They communicate with him in the value of his satisfaction, and they
communicate with him in the virtue of his Resurrection.

1. They communicate with him in the value of his Satisfaction, whereby the
sting of Death is taken out as to them, to wit, the guilt of sin done away. By
the Covenant of Redemption between the Father and Christ, it was eternally
agreed that Christ should be their Surrogate, Substitute and Surety to
undertake for them in their nature Joh. 10. 18. No man takes my life from me,
but I lay it down of my self; there is Christ's Consent. This Commandment have I
received of my Father; there is the Fathers Consent. So Hebr. 10. 7. Then said
I, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. Accordingly he became man and our surety,
and thereby one with us in the Sense of the Law, as the principal debtor and
Surety are looked upon as one person in Law. Thus our debt became his debt, he
was bound for us, and says to his Father on our behalf as Judah to Joseph on
the behalf of Benjamin. Genesis 44. 32. 33. Thy Servant became Surety for the lad
unto my Father -- Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy Servant abide in stead of
the lad a bondsman to my Lord, And the punishment due to us became his. Isa. 53.
4, 5. Surely he has born our greifs. and carried our Sorrows -- He was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, etc. And thus by
virtue of the same Suretyship, when he had undergone the punishment and
Satisfied the Law, and taken his discharge which was testified by his
Resurrection, His Satisfaction becomes our Satisfaction and his discharge, our
discharge. Jer. 23. 6. He is the Lord our Righteousness. Gal. 3. 13. Christ
has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law being made a Curse for us. Romans 8.
33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Who is he that
Condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again. No Law does
demand both of the principal and the Surety too. They are bound to pay
disjunctively one or the other. Therefore when Christ was apprehended he said
to the Officers that took him, Joh. 18. 8. If ye seek me, let these (my
disciples) go their way.

2. They communicate with him in the virtue of his Resurrection. Christ rose
from the dead not only as a surety discharged from prison when he had paid the
debt and thereby cancelling the obligation of the principal; but also as a
vital head to quicken and raise all his body, the Church. For the same Spirit
of life which is in Christ and quickened his dead body, is also in the church
and in every particular member thereof, and will certainly quicken their dead
bodies. Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead
dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by, or because of his Spirit that dwells in you. He says not
your dead bodies, but your mortal bodies, to denote this quickening to be not
only from death to life but from mortality to immortality, as was the
resurrection of Christ. He that eats me, says Christ, Joh. 6. 5, 7. that is,
by faith, there is union with Christ, even he shall live by me, there is
communion with Christ as necessarily consequent. And what that life is, he
expresses four times in that chap. ver. 39, 40, 44, 54. I will raise him up at
the last day. Hence Christ is said to be our life. Col. 3. 4. and we are said
to be quickened with Christ. Col. 2. 13. and risen with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 6. It
is from the virtue of Christ's Resurrection that Job argues to his own, Job.
19. 25, 26. I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. And though after my skin worms
destroy this body yet in my flesh shall I see God. And this is the argument
which the Apostles so industriously improves throughout this Chapter, assuring
the Resurrection of believers by the Resurrection of Christ. Christ rose as the
first fruits of them that sleep, which sanctifies and assures the whole
harvest. ver. 20. If the first Adam dying derived Death to all his natural
seed, much more shall the second Adam rising communicate life to all his
Spiritual seed* ver. 22. yea such intimate and necessary connection is there
between the Resurrection of Christ and the Resurrection of believers, that the
Apostle argues both forward and backward from the one to the other. ver. 12,
13, 16. The Saints then shall one day feel the quickening influences of their
vital head upon their dead bodies, and experimentally know the power of his
Resurrection Recovering them from the power of the grave to rise and live with
him for ever. Which is so certain that the Apostle speaks of it as already
done. Ephesians. 2* 6. He has raised us up.

Applicat. 1. How sad and woeful is the Case of unbelievers! who have no share
in this Glorious and Blessed Victory, no interest in the satisfaction and
Resurrection of this Prince of life; but are left to shift for themselves
alone, all forlornly exposed to the invincible Assaults of the King of Terrors.
Do they not tremble at a distance, at the forethoughts* of that dark and dismal
hour, when this spoiling, destroying, abhorred and dreadful Enemy shall
surprise them, and peremptorily require their precious life beyond all denial,
or resistance? But how much greater will their horror and amazement be at the
near approach, and present appearance of this deadly Foe; when their eyes shall
be awakened, and enlightened more clearly, and convincingly to see its power and
Terror, and their heart more tender and sensible to feel the pain, and poison
of its Mortal Sting! Can thine heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the
day when thy Flesh shall wast, thy Spirits faint, thy Strength fail, the
Sorrows of Death compass thee about, the pains of Hell take hold on thee, and
Almighty wrath be renting thee in pieces like a Lion, and there is none to
deliver thee? Surely, a guilty Conscience, a cursing Law, an avenging Justice,
and present Death are a weight more insupportable than Talents of Lead, than
Rocks and Mountains, enough to break the stoutest heart, and will certainly
damp the Courage of the most daring Sinner. Where ever dwelt the man, and what
was his Name, who was so hardy and confident as not to be moved, yea, not to be
struck to the very heart at the sight of the Pale Horse coming amain upon him,
the Name of whose Rider is Death, with Hell at his heels? What think thou? O
guilty Sinner! Is thy state of sin so little dangerous, that thou may
securely rest in it? Is Death so weakly Armed, and art thou so strongly
fortified, that thou may bid defiance to its Assaults? Will thou sin, and
laugh, and sleep, and drive away the Melancholy thoughts of thy approaching
Terror by diverting to the Mirth, and Follies, and Vanities, and Pleasures of a
present Transitory and helpless World? Reflect upon thy heart and ways, review
the number and Nature of thy multiplied and aggravated Transgressions
throughout a long life, have patience to hear the Charge of thy veracious and
faithful Conscience, and seriously consider with what a sharp and poisonous
sting thou have Armed Death against thine own Soul. Run not the desperate
hazard of being killed with Death. Who ever hardened himself against this
Terror of the Lord, and fell not under it? The stoutest hearted are spoiled,
they have slept their sleep, and none of the men of Might have found their
hands. Were thou Behemoth or Leviathan for strength and Courage, were thy bones
as strong pieces of Brass, or like Bars of Iron, were thy heart as firm as a
stone, yea, as heart as a piece of the nether Millstone, and thou a King among
all the Children of pride, yet shall this sword of the Lord approach thee and
break thy bones; and this arrow of the Almighty, pierce thy heart, and the
poison thereof shall Drink up thy spirit. Flatter not thy self with vain hopes
founded upon presumption or infidelity. Think not the Lion to be painted
fiercer then he is. When thou hear the menaces of Death, the words of the
Curse, bless not thy self saying, I shall have peace.

Make no Covenant with Death, nor be at agreement with Hell: Lest thou make
lies thy refuge, and under falsehood hide thy self; for thy Covenant with Death
shall be disannulled, and thy agreement with Hell shall not stand. Thou have
but one method of safety, one course to take. Venture not alone in thy own
strength to meet and encounter with thy mortal foe. But Turn thee, Turn thee to
the tents of the Conqueror, make have to list thy self under the standard, of
the Prince of life. Thou have been told what is the sting of Death, and where
its strength lies. Do to it as the Philistines did to Sampson. Cut off its
locks, Pluck out its sting. Break off thy sins by repentance, and work away thy
guilt by faith in the blood of the Lamb, that God may give thee Victory through
Jesus Christ.

2. How blessed and comfortable is the case of all true believers. There are
but two evils can make a man miserable, Sin and Death. The believer is freed
from the Law of both. It is indeed the irreversible Law and ordination of God,
that Believers die as well as others, but withal It is their unspeakable
distinguishing privilege, that their Death has no sting, no Curse, no Victory
over them. Their Lord Jesus, the Captain of their Salvation who died for them,
has overcome Death, disarmed Death, Sanctified Death, Sweetened Death,
Subjected Death to them, and turned it to their advantage. Death indeed comes
after the same visible manner upon the body of the Saint and of the sinner, by
Sword, or Famine, or Pestilence, Consumption and burning Fever, with aches and
pains, whereby the earthly house of their tabernacle is dissolved -- Saul and
Jonathan were not divided in their Death. Ahab and Josiah fall alike in the
battle by the hand of the Archers. Stephen and Achan are both stoned. The good
and bad thief give up the Ghost together upon their Cross. But as to their
Souls how vastly different are their Deaths in the dispensation of God! The one
is Cursed, the other blessed in his Death: On dies in his Sin, the other in
the Lord: One departs under wrath, the other in peace: The Spirit of one is
delivered to Satan, the Spirit of the other committed into the hands of God:
The Soul of one carried by Devils into the place of torment, The Soul of the
other carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom: The one passes from death to
death; The other passes though death to Life. This is the blessedness of the
dead which die in the Lord. This is the happy Victory of the Saint over Death,
even in dying. Of which difference of the death of Saint and sinner, the sinner
is sometimes so convinced, that he cannot but wish with Balaam, Let me die the
Death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his. It is the Saints
happiness here, both living and dying, to have the Victory over death by faith,
which is to them the evidence and presenting of the future Resurrection, not
yet seen. But it will be much more their happiness to have this Victory by
sense, as they shall in their glorious Resurrection. Two things commend it.

1. It is the Victory over the last enemy. ver. 26. and so implies Victory
over all enemies: For if any remained, this were not the last. Sin, and world,
and Devil, are all conquered when Death is conquered. Hold out then, O
believing Soul, in thy Spiritual conflict. Be thou faithful unto Death,
maintain thy Christian Courage against Death, take hold of the strength of
Christ and overcome it, Thou shall fight no mor, but there remains thee
Everlasting rest.

2. It is the Victory of Christ, which the Saints have in communion with him,
and so it is a Sure Victory. He that got it by his Almighty power will by the
same power keep it, that it shall never be lost, Christ being raised from the
dead, dies no more, and till Death can prevail over Christ it shall not
prevail over the Christian. Joh. 14. 19. Because I live, says Christ, ye shall
live also.

3. Let Believers live and die as becomes those that have the Victory, even
above and beyond the fears of Death. If we have the same precious faith which
this Apostle had, let us put on also the same confidence and courage, and in
assurance of the Victory that Christ has gotten for us, bid an holy defiance
to this enemy. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? Was it
not the end of Christ's conquest to deliver his Saints, not only from the hurt,
but from the fear of Death? Would it not then be either a denial or a
disparagement of Christ's Victory, for a Saint to live in bondage to the fear of
Death? That Soldier must either be very ignorant, or very much a Coward who is
afraid to meet his disarmed, and conquered Enemy. Such is the weakness and
Cowardice, and ought to be the shame of too many professing Christians. How far
do we desire to remove death from us? How sad and damping are the very thoughts
thereof to us? What reluctance have we against the very Name of Death? What
trembling at the approach thereof! How do we say as they, Jer. 41. 8. Slay us
not; for we have treasures in the field, of wheat and of barley, and of Oil and
of Honey. And with Hezekiah turn to the wall and weep sore. But whence is all
this? Is it not because we look upon death only with an eye of nature, and not
with the eye of faith? and that we look at our dissolution more than at our
resurrection? Is it not because of the darkness of our Evidence, and
carelessness of gaining better assurance of life eternal? Is it not from our
inordinate affection to our worldly interest, our Carnal enjoyments and
relations? Or is it not from the Conscience of some indulged sin, which we have
not effectually mortified? Surely our Consciences will tell the guilty, that
some or all of these, are the cause of our averseness, lothness and fears to
die. But are these becoming professing Christians, and worthy of the faith of
the Resurrection? Oh for the honor of Christ's Victory, for the commendation of
Religion, for the Conviction of Sinners, for the comfort of our own souls, let
us shake of these clogs, lay aside these weights, and get above these slavish
fears! Improve and encourage faith against sense and carnal reason. Mortify
thy inordinate affections, hold a good Conscience, Clear up thy interest in
Christ, and in the Covenant of God, Have thy conversation in Heaven, and from
thence look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change thy vile
body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and fear not. Art
thou to encounter death, have thou apprehensions of its approaches toward
thee? And does thy heart fail for fear hereof? Hear Christ rebuking thee as
sometimes he rebuked his disciples, Why art thou fearful, thou of little faith?
Let me say to thee for thy encouragement, if thou be a Christian indeed, as
Deborah to Barak when he was to Encounter Sisera. Judge. 4. 14. Up, Is not the
Lord gone out before thee? Has not Christ disarmed thy Enemy? and taken out
its sting? Has not he overcome death, and opened the doors of the grave, and
given thee the Victory? yea Does not the Lord go out with thee, and stand by
thee in this thy last conflict? And is not the presence and assistance of
Christ enough to encourage thee against fear? Isa. 43. 1. 2. says God to
Jacob, Fear not, when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
v. 5. Fear not, for I am with thee. In the strength of which promise, say with
David, Ds. 23. 4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I
will fear none evil, for thou art with me. Verily there is a power in faith.
It is a Victorious grace. It engaged the strength of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead. Live then by faith, and thou shall die by faith, and overcome
death by faith. Many witnesses can set their seal to this as a certain truth,
that a Christian by the improvement of grace may, if not triumphanter yet, at
least patienter mori, may be content, if not rejoice to die.

4. Add for a conclusion the Apostles application in the text, Thanks be to
God. The Victory being gotten, being given, the triumph is to be made. We read
(whether they be the words of God to the Church, or of the Church to God, the
sense is the same) Isa. 26. 19. Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead
body shall they arise: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs; which revives them
in the spring, after a Killing winter, and the Earth shall cast out the Dead,
There Is the Victory. What then? awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust,
There is the triumph. Thus, Ps. 30. 3. O Lord, thou have brought up my Soul
from the grave. then, ver. 12. To the end that my glory may sing prise to thee
and not be silent: O Lord my God I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Thus
again the Psalmists sings. Ps. 118. 14, 15, 17. The The Lord is my strength and
Song: And is become my Salvation. The voice of rejoicing and Salvation is in
the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the Lord does valiantly
etc. Why? I shall not die but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Victory
is always matter of rejoicing, and should reflect honor upon the Conqueror.
We read, 1 Samuel 17. Goliath of Gath, that monstrous and terrible Giant, comes
forth before his camp of Philistines and defieth the armies of Israel, who fled
from him and were sore afraid, when behold, David goes out to meet him, and
encounters him all alone, and with the Giants own sword cuts off his head and
discomfits all his host. Did they not then come out of all cities of Israel.
Chap. 18. 6, 7. singing and dancing with, Tabrets and joy and instruments of
music, answering one another as they played, and saying, Saul has slain his
thousands, and David his ten thousands? What is it that we see? Is it the
Vision, Rev. 6. 8. Behold, a pale horse, and the Name of him that sits on him
is Death, and Hell follows with him, and power is given unto him to kill. And
at this are we sore afraid? Why? Look again, Rev. 19. 11. etc. I saw Heaven
opened and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him does judge and make
war in righteousness, and he is clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood, and his
Name is called The Word of God, He goes forth Conquering and to Conquer. He
takes Death and Hell and casts them into the lake of fire. Come then, let us
Sing the Song of Moses, Exodus 15. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is my strength and Song; He
is my God I will exalt him. The Lord is a man of war; The Lord is his Name I
will sing unto the Lord; for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and his
Rider has he cast into the fire. This Victory was won by Christ it is worn by
us; It was dear to Christ, it is cheap to us; It cost him labor. and pain, and
sorrow, and sweat, and blood, but it is given to us; we overcome not by expense
of our own blood, but by the blood of the Lamb. What then shall we render to
the Lord? Shall we give him less than a Song, a Song of thanksgiving?
especially when we can give no more. O ye that are the redeemed of the Lord,
whom he has ransomed from the power of the grave, send out your thoughts a
while into the Land of Darkness, and take a more exact view of the triumphs and
trophies of Death, which it has erected over the Vanquished Sons and Daughters
of men, that have fallen under its power: Look into the prison of the Grave
where the bodies of the slain are holden under Chains of Darkness, reserved to
the execution of the Great day. Consider the poison, venom, sharpness and power
of the deadly sting that is entered into their Souls, strengthened with all the
plagues and Curses that are writtten in the book of the Law of a righteous,
avenging, and Almighty Judge; the worm of Conscience gnawing the Soul as well
as the worm of Corruption feeding on the body. Hark, what are the hideous
Cries, and woes, and wailings, the roarings and yellings, the gnashing of
teeth, and bitter lamentations of the wretched prisoners captivated under the
insulting Enemy; and then recall your thoughts to the solemn meditation of this
happy word, the glad tidings of the Glorious conquest and Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, in fellowship with whom you are rescued from the cursed power of this
Death and Hell, and made heirs of the grace of life, of life eternal. And if
you have any sense of the Infinite love of God, and his compassions toward
you; of the incomparable labors, and sufferings of Jesus Christ for you; of
the unspeakable misery from whence you are redeemed, and the glorious
Immortality to which you are entitled, and whereof you shall be possessed.
Your meditations (methinks) cannot but issue with the Apostle's in this
greatful, pathetick, and triumphant doxologie. Thanks be to God, who gives us
the Victory through our Lord Jesu Christ.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Pref. read. Curriculum vitae page. 7. l. 9. r. affect. and. l. 19. r. shining.
p. 18. l. 28. r. Dr. Tuckney. p. 27. l. 18. r. may. p. 28. l. 18. r. means. and
l. 2. r. on the week day. p. 32. l. 3. r. Jesus Christ. p. 34. l. 9. r. the
strongest. p. 44. l. 21. r. worthy of. p. 45. l. 4. r. being. p. 57. l. 19. r.
visit. p. 59. l. 1. r. look to Christ. p. 61. l. 5. r. moderation. p. 69. l.
27. r. send. p. 73. l. 24. r. hear. p. 75. l. 15. r. separated. p. 63. l. 20.
r. hides. p. 99. l. 2. r. if.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and
three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside.
1. A Word to Sinners, and A word to Saints, the former to awaken, the latter
to direct and persuade. 2. Christian directions to walk with God all the day
long. 3. Principles of Christian Religion Explained, to the Capacity of the
meanest, with Practical Applications to each Head, whereby family Catechizing
may be with much ease performed. 4. The young man's Guide through the Wilderness
of this World to the Heavenly Canaan. 5. The surest and safest way of Thriving,
which is in being Charitable to the Poor; all five Written by Tho. Gouge.
Minister of the Gospel. Ars Sciendi. sive Logica nova methodo disposita and,
novis preceptis aucta. Self Employment in secret containing Evidences upon self
examination. Thoughts upon painful afflictions. Memorials, for practice.
Parents Groans, for their wicked Children by Edward, Lawrence. M. A. Troughtons
apology for the, Nonconformists preaching. Of thoughtfulness for the future by
J. How. M. A. Barretts reply to the, Dean St. Paul's late Book. No Evidence for
Diocesan Bishops by Mr. Clarkson. The Life of that reverend Divine Mr. Owen
Stockton late of Colchester. There is now a Printing an Exposition on the
Prophecy of Isaia by that reverend divine Mr. Arthur-Jackson. The Little Book
for little Children is lately Reprinted. -- Corbetts self Employment in secret.

