A Short and Impartial VIEW OF The MANNER and OCCASION OF THE Scots Colony's
Coming away from DARIEN IN A Letter to a Person of Quality.

Quia Veritas, propter Taciturnitatem, non lucet, Mendacio se ingerendi, locus
est. Tacit. Printed in the Year, M. DC. XC. IX.

My Lord,
I Am so far from wondering at the extraordinary Concern which you are pleased
to express for the late bad News of our Colony's having come away from so
Valuable and Impregnable a Settlement, as that of which they were Possessed, in
the very Navel of the Trading World (if I may properly so call it) that I
should much more Wonder, if any Man who carries Scots*Blood in his Veins, and
pretends to have any regard either for the Honor, Interest, or Reputation of
his Country, should not, upon so provoking an Occasion, contribute as much as
in him lies, to retrieve so great a Loss at any Rate, and have a just
Resentment against the Authors of so Surprising and Unaccountable an Emergency.

You tell me (which is true) that several People, according to their different
Interests and Affections, as well as different Capacities to Penetrate into,
and judge of, the true Grounds of so unexpected an Emergency, do vent their
Opinions and Reflections variously concerning it: Some attributing it to the
want of due Care in the Directors at home, to send Intelligence, as well as the
needful Supplies of Men and Provisions to the Colony, in due time; some to the
Temerity, Imprudence and Incapacity, of those who were entrusted abroad, with
the Management and Government of the Colony; some (who you say are the far
greater Number) to the effect of His Majesty's Proclamations issued forth in
all the English Plantations of America, declaring the said Settlement illegal,
and strictly intercomuning all Persons thereunto belonging; And you are pleased
to desire my Sentiments of the whole Matter.

It may possibly be reckoned no small piece of Presumption in one of my weak
Talent, to venture upon setting Pen to Paper, upon so Critical an Occasion as
this is; and how willing soever I might have been at any other time to gratify
your Request that way, I must Confess, I am in so Splenetick a Mood, at this
Juncture, that my Inclinations prompt me but very little to bestow my Time upon
Scribbling: Yet your Commands being always Indisputeable with me, I shall
supercede my own Inclinations at this time, and freely give you my Thoughts of
the Matter, with all imaginable Candor, as succinctly as I can, and commit the
whole to your own Discretion, being well assured that you will Advise nothing
thereupon, but what you are fully convinced will be most Suitable to the
Honor, Interest, and Reputation of the Nation, which (by the by) was, in my
humble Opinion, never at a lower Ebb than at present.

That the Directors of our Indian and African Company at home, are no manner of
way Chargeable with any Omission or want of due Care in making early Provisions
for Supplies to the Colony, or with any Mis-managements in taking wrong
Measures, upon some Occasion or other, or with too much Easiness and Credulity
(as some do allege) in suffering themselves to be Over-perswaded, or any
otherways imposed upon by mercenary Pretenders, who at the same time might
possibly have been the Tools for driving on a Foreign Interest, for selfish
Ends, is more than I shall take upon me to maintain too positively in their
behalf: But sure I am, the many Dis-appointments, Difficulties and wicked
Contrivances, which they were all along obliged to grapple with, both Abroad
and at Home, made their Part very uneasy, and were enough to daunt the
Resolutions of any private Society whatsoever; especially finding themselves so
openly discountenanced by Authority, that the Adventurers were thereby
discouraged from paying in their Shares; yea in so much that the Directors were
not only sheckled from pursuing many reasonable and convenient Measures that
they had in View, but were also often obliged to pawn their own private Credit
for carrying on, and doing those things that were indispensibly necessary for
supporting the common Interest, and wait for their Relief till a better
Opportunity should offer.

But whatever Escapes they may be chargeable with, I dare confidently averr in
their behalf, that they have Directed to the best of their Knowledge; and I
doubt very much, whether the most part of all those, who ever yet took the
Liberty of Censuring their Actions, would have taken half so Rational Measures,
had they had the same Game to play, and the same Difficulties to encounter
with: For, as the Directors were Chosen by the Solemn Election and Suffrage of
all the Adventurers in the Joint Stock of the Company, (wherein the most
considerable of the Nobility, Gentry, and whole Body of the Royal Burrows are
concerned) so it must be allowed, that the Generality of those in the
Direction, are Persons of as much known Honor, Probity and Integrity, and of
as much Knowledge too, as can be found of any other Set of Men in the Nation:
But the continued Thwartings that they met with from time to time, did not only
necessarly retard many of their Measures, but made also some of those Measures
prove altogether Abortive, though, never so rationally projected: And it is very
observable, that none have been more busy and meddling in Censuring their
Conduct all along, and even at this time, than some who had little or no
Concern in the Stock, and others who were ready upon all Occasions to throw
Stumbling Blocks in their Way. But it is very easy, and no new Thing, to either
Credulous Fools, or Designing Knaves, (who, alas! are by far, the greatest part
of Mankind) to Censure the best of Men's Actions, without ever considering the
Reasonableness of the Measures they take, or the Crossness of any Accidents
they may meet with. And this brings into my Remembrance a Saying of the
Renowned Sir Walter Raleigh, in his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana: As good
Success admits no Examination, so the contrary allows of no Excuse, how
reasonable or just soever. And indeed the Poet is very just upon that Head: --
Careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat. Ovid. Epist. 3.


It is very evident by the Strain of the Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent,
establishing the said Company, that these who projected that Scheme had in
View, sooner or later, no less Des^gn than a Trade to both the Indies and to
Africa, and that by a more immediate and much quicker Communication than was
ever before practiced by any Society whatsoever.

In order whereunto, those in the Management thought it was not only necessary,
to establish a Free and Staple-Port in some convenient Place or Places on that
Isthmus or Nick of Land, situated on the Height of the World, between the North
and South Seas, formerly called Darien, or in some such convenient Place, but
also to raise a Joynt-Stock suitable to the Greatness of such an Undertaking.

And not imagining that private Hands in this Kingdom could of themselves be
able to raise a sufficient Stock for that Purpose, the first Offer thereof was
made to our Friends at London, who in nine days time concluded a Subscription
there, of 300000 Pounds Sterling, and paid in the first fourth Part thereof
either in Money, Bank-Bills, or Notes payable on Demand, and further declared
their Willingness to Subscribe for as much more, if allowed: But you know how
that Subscription was quickly rendered void by the Measures taken in the
Parliament of England.

The next Attempt (you know) that the Directors made for strengthening their
Stock and Interest, was to endeavor the procuring of Foreign Subscriptions
for some considerable Sum; And in Order thereunto, upon repeated encouraging
Advices from several Parts beyond Sea, but more especially from Hamburgh, they
sent some of their own Number, as Commissioners or Deputees thither, with whom
soon after their Arrival, the Merchants of the said City of Hamburgh, entered
into Contract to join at least 200000 Pounds Sterling with the Company's Stock:
But you know likewise, how the English Ministers there, did, under Pretense of
a special Warrant from His Majesty, put a Stop thereunto, by giving in a
Memorial to the Senate of that City, Not only, disowning the Authority of the
said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent, but also threatening both Senate and
Inhabitants with the Kings outmost Displeasure, if they should countenance or
join with the Company's said Deputees, in any Treaty of Trade or Commerce.

Notwithstanding whereof, though the Council-General and Court of Directors of
the said Company have, not only often Addressed and Petitioned the King and
Privy Council of this Kingdom, but also His Majesty's High Commissioner, and
the Right Honorable Estates of Parliament at their last Session; And likewise,
that the said Estates were thereupon pleased, by their Unanimous Address of the
5th. of August School to His Majesty, To manifest not only their own, and the
whole Nation's Concern in that Matter, earnestly entreating, and most assuredly
expecting, that His Majesty would, in His Royal Wisdom, take such Measures as
might effectually vindicat the Undoubted Rights and Privileges of the said
Company, and support the Credit and Interest thereof; But were also pleased in
the same Address, To recommend the Concerns of the said Company to some special
Marks of His Majesty's Royal Favor, as being that Branch of the Trade of this
Kingdom, in which They and the Nation they represent, have a more peculiar
Interest. Yet (it seems) His Majesty has been all along so taken up with the
far greater and more general Concerns of Europe, that, to this Hour, I have not
heard of any manner of Redress that has been given in that Matter.

There were likewise considerable Steps and Advances made by several Merchants
in Holland, particularly at Amsterdam and Rotterdam, toward a Subscription
there; But upon notice had of their Meetings with the Company's Deputees
abovementioned, and of the Success their Negotiations were like to have had,
the most considerable and Leading Men of those Merchants, who had showed most
Forwardness in that Matter, were sent for by some of the States, and threatened
that Measures would be taken, to make them repent their Doings, if they
persisted any further in Treating with the said Deputees, or if they would join
with the Scots Company.

This, I remember, happened some Months before the Hamburgh-Memorial
abovementioned was presented, which I confess makes it seem a Problem to me,
as well as to many others that have heard of it, Whether the English were
influenced by the Dutch, or the Dutch by the English, to deal so unkindly by
us: But in short I think we may truly say with the Prophet, The Syrians before,
and the Philistines behind, etc. Isaiah, 9. 12.

But to pass over all these previous Discouragements and Disappointments, and
to come closely to the Point in Hand, The Colony that was first sent away in
July School, for settling a Plantation in America, pursuant to the Instructions
then given, carried along with them not only abundance of all Necessaries for
such an Undertaking* but also such a Quantity of Provisions, as was calculated
for a whole Year, and of some Particulars (namely Stock Fish) what was computed
might have served for near 18 Months: And for their further Security, in case
those Provisions should happen to fall short, before Advice could be had of
their Settlement, and the fresh Supplies of Provisions sent after them, there
was likewise a Cargo of Sortable Goods, to the Value of about 16000 Pounds
Sterling prime Cost here, sent along with them, at the absolute Disposal of the
Council, for the Colony's Use; which Goods were either to be Traded with upon
the Coast and American Islands, or Bartered for Provisions and other
Necessaries at the Council's Discretion, as should best suit with their
Circumstances for the time. Yet such was the Directors Care of their Welfare
and Safety, That, immediately after their Departure from Scotland, the Directors
did, upon the Encouragement of the Parliaments Address above-recited, apply
themselves in a dutiful manner to His Majesty, by their humble Petition of the
16th. of August School, To bestow upon them, as a Gracious Mark of His Royal
Favor, the Use of the two small Friggots. then (and to this Hour) lying
useless in Burnti^land Harbor; with Design to ^it them out, as soon as
possible, with Provisions and other Necessaries for the Colony; and appointed a
particular Committee to wait upon the Chief-Men in the Government, to desire
their Assistance in Seconding the said Petition: But in a short time
thereafter, they found it necessary to call a Council-General of the Company,
which accordingly met on the 5th. day of September following: And the Directors
laying before them a Representation in Writing (which contained an Abstract of
the then State of the Company's Affairs, together also with their own Opinion,
what they thought necessary to be done by the Company at that Juncture, with
relation to a Supply of Provisions and other Necessaries to be sent to the
Company's Colony) they thereupon ordered a further Proportion of the Company's
Joint Stock to be called in, from the respective Proprietors for that Purpose.

And upon the 9 th day of November, The Court of Directors did, upon the
Prospect of the Martinmass Payments, come to a Resolution, that a Ship of near
about 200 Tuns burden, should be bought forthwith for the Company's Use, and
that the buying and fitting thereof, as also the buying of the needful
Provisions for a Supply to the Colony, should be referred to a Committee which
was appointed for that End; but after enquiry made in several Places about such
a Vessel, they could find none reported to be so fit for their Purpose, as one
that lay then in Leith-Harbour, exposed to Sale; which one of their Number
bought, with a special Condition to be free, if upon Survey she should not be
sound fit for the Company's Use: And upon the 14 th day of December (which was
near about four Months before any Word came from the Colony) the Court of
Directors gave Orders to conclude the Bargain for the said Ship, according to
former Agreement, and to fit her out with Provisions for the Colony, with all
possible Expedition: But the Ship when bought (though a known prime Sailer, and
after all the necessary Precaution had in buying of her) happening not to be so
Sound as was expected, took a much longer time to be Repaired, than could well
have been imagined, and could not therefore Sail as soon as was intended.

But in the mean time, the Directors being loath (it seems) to Trust to the
said Ship only, in case of Accidents, made it their Business to find out, and
purchase a good Sailing Ship, English-qualified, to be dispatched from Clyde
with Provisions, and the needful Advices for the said Colony: And upon finding
a Ship so qualified, she was dispatched from Clyde upon the 24 of February
last; but to the Company's and Colony's inestimable Loss, the said Vessel was
cast away on one of the West Islands of Scotland: Of which Accident the Court
of Directors had no Advice before the 11th. Day of April: And the Loss was
still the greater in this, that she was bought so qualified, with a View to be
serviceable to the Colony, not only in Trading upon the Coast, but also in
running backward and forward, to and from any of the English Plantations, with
Goods, Provisions, and Intelligence; she being qualified to touch there in the
strictest sense of the English Act of Navigation.

You may remember likewise, that the other Ship abovementioned was just ready
to Sail about the latter-end of March last, being the time that the first
Advices arrived here of the Colony's Settlement and good Condition: But the
Directors having Intelligence of Three Spanish Ships of Force, that were to
Sail about that time from Cadiz to the West Indies, with a Re-inforcement of
Men, Arms and Ammunition, for Carthagena, under the Command of Don Piementel,
the present Governor of that City, and that he had particular Instructions,
with relation to our Settlement; they thought it not safe to let the Company's
said Ship sail alone; and therefore stopped her, till another Ship of Force might
be got ready with Men and Provisions; which accordingly being got, both the
said Ships set sail from Leith-Road, on the 12th. of May last, with a Recruit
of 300 Men, about 900 Bolls of Wheat made into Biscuit and Flower, as also a
considerable Quantity of Pease, Pork, Oil, Brandy, some Beef, Arms, Ammunition,
and other Necessaries; carrying likewise along with them Advices, that a much
more considerable Recruit of Ships, Men, Provisions, Arms, Ammunition and other
Necessaries, were to follow with all convenient Dispatch, under Convoy of the
Rising-Sun.

And the Directors did accordingly dispatch the Rising-Sun, and three other
Ships of considerable Force and Burden, from Greenock, the 18 th. Day of
August last; though by contrary Winds they were stopped, so as that they could not
sail further than the Isle of Bute, till the 24 th of September following: They
had 1300 Men on board, with as many Ingineers, Fire-Workers, Bombardeers,
Battering Guns, Mortars, Bombs, and other Warlike Provisions, as (if safely
arrived at the Colony in due time, and considering the Situation and natural
Strength of the Place) might reasonably be presumed to have made it impregnable.

Nor was this all, for immediately after the first Advice that the Directors had
of the Colony's Settlement, they wrote back to the Colony, by the several Ways
of New England, Jamaica, Barbados, Antegoa, and the other Leeward Islands, that
these Recruits abovementioned were coming to them; and in the mean time, sent
them an Illimited and Discretionary Credit, for buying of Provisions from any
of the English Plantations, if they should happen to stand in need thereof;
Which Credit the Directors were induced to give, from an Assurance that they
had given them, by several Persons at London, and in the West Indies, of their
good Inclinations to Supply the Colony with Provisions, if such a Credit were
given; and for that end, Printed Copies of the said Credit were sent by the Way
of London, to be dispersed over all the English Plantations in America. And
upon the Faith thereof, several Sloops and Brigantins, freighted full of
Provisions, were dispatched from the English Plantations to our Colony;
particularly from New England, New York, Road-Island, and Philadelphia; though,
alas! they happened to be too late, those of the Colony being unluckily come
away from Darien, some Weeks, before these Sloops could well be arrived there:
So that this was no such Imaginary Credit, as some People would have us believe
it to have been. Yea further, even before the said Credit was known in America,
not only several Sloops went with Provisions from Jamaica to the Colony, and
Bartered their Provisions for other Goods: But also, a New England Brigantin,
freighted full of Provisions, sold her Cargo to the Council of the Colony, for
Bills drawn by them upon the Company's Cashier here; Which Bills amounted to
about 700 Pounds Sterling, and were punctually paid accordingly. By which it
may evidently appear, that if no extraordinary Methods had been used to put a
Bar to their begun Correspondence, there had been little or no Occasion for
any special Credit on particular Persons.

And upon the Directors having received the said surprising and unexpected News
of their Colony's coming away from Darien, they immediately came to Resolutions
of dispatching a particular Credit, with proper Advices, per Express to
New York, by a Vessel then bound thither, where they understood most of their
Men were, and to send other Expresses, by several Ways, in quest of both the
first and last Recruits sent to the Colony; with Orders to repossess themselves
of their former Settlement, and to fend Supplies of Provisions and other
Necessaries after them, as soon as possible; and to have from hence forward
some small Vessels or Advice-Boats, running continually, backward and forward,
with certain Intelligence, between this and the Colony, their former way of
Corresponding having (it seems) failed by reason of the Proclamations
abovementioned; as shall appear, more particularly, by and by.

And because the Expediting of those several Expresses, and sending a Credit
for Provisions, and other Necessaries, could not admit of any Delay, at so
Critical a Juncture, they frankly engaged their own private Credits, for those
several Purposes, until the Company's own Money should come in to Answer the
same; and in the mean time, they called a Meeting of the Council-General, who
approved of those Resolutions: And several of the Councillors did likewise
freely and generously join their own private Credits with that of the Directors,
for the Purposes aforesaid.

In Pursuance of which Resolutions, the Directors sent a Credit of 2000 Pounds
Sterling to New York by a Gentleman, whom they sent Express from hence thither,
in the beginning of October last, with proper Instructions suitable to the
Occasion.

They sent likewise at the same time, by a Ship then bound from the Downs to
the Leeward Islands, and Jamaica, a ^ew Counselor for the Colony, fully
instructed in relation to this Emergency, with Orders to go with all possible
Dispatch, in quest of the Recruits lately sent to the Colony: And the better to
enable him to execute effectually what was then given him in Commission, he
carried a Credit of 1000 Pounds Sterling along with him. Since which, they
have, in the Month of November last, dispatched one of the Company's own Ships,
full of Provisions and other Necessaries for the Colony, from Clyde; and sent
another Counselor on board thereof, with a Credit of 500 Pounds Sterling
more: And about the same time, they freighted another Ship, which sailed from
Forth sometime ago, to carry Provisions to the Colony: And (as I Am informed)
are now upon dispatching forthwith two other Ships with more Provisions after
them; the one from Forth and the other from Clyde; That from Forth being
already agreed for, and bound by Charter-Party to sail (God willing) on the 20
th. of January next.

Now this, being a short Abridgment of what I understand, may be offered in
Justification of the Directors Care and Conduct: I shall now proceed to give
you a short View of what occurs to me at present, with relation to the Conduct
of those, who were entrusted Abroad with the Management and Government of the
Colony, under the Name of Councillors.

That the Equippage sent by the Company on their first Expedition, for settling
a Colony in America, was, in all Respects, superior to any that was ever before
sent on the like Account, by any private Society in Europe, is what I never
heard in the least contraverted: And as the Generality of the Men who went on
that Expedition, gave former Proofs to the World, in their respective Stations,
during the last War, of their Fitness for such an Undertaking; so it has been
agreed upon, by all that ever saw them, not only when they went away, but also
after their Arrival and Settlement in America, that they were, seemingly, as
hopeful and promising a Set of Men, as ever were seen (to the Memory of Man) in
those Parts; had they been under the Government and Care of such Heads as were
to be wished: But many People do say, that the Council appointed for the
Government of the Colony, was composed of an odd kind of Mixture of Persons, of
Heterogeneous Humors and Principles, and that few of them were fit for that
Station.

The Truth is, whatever may be in this, I Am certain that the Directors were at
no small Pains to invite such as they thought most capable for that Station;
but it not being publicly known, where they were designed to settle, there
were but very few Candidates; and there is nothing I know better, than that
those of them who were most strongly recommended as Persons of Capacity, Honor
and Honesty, proved to be the least deserving of that Character, of all that
went under the Denomination of Councillors.

I was told, indeed, that there was too much Emulation, Jealousy, private
Animosities, and Pique among themselves; and that the bad Example thereof gave
too much ground to believe, that the like Animosities were diffused among the
inferior Officers and others, as they stood severally affected or engaged, more
or less, to this or that Counselor: Yet, by the Influence of some few of the
discreetest of their number, for above Eight Months time together, they had so
much Prudence, as to stiffle those Divisions (as much as possible) in all
public Concerns, for carrying on the common Interest; as may evidently appear
by the Unanimity and Discretion of all their Advices and Letters to the
Directors at Home, as well as by their public Transactions with such as had to
do with them in America; particularly in all their Transactions with the
Indians, the President of Panama, the Governors of Carthagena and Sancta
Maria, and the Commander of a French Vessel, which happened to be Shipwrack'd
near their Settlement; and their Diligence and Care in building of Houses,
clearing of the Ground, and fortifying of their Settlement, in such manner,
that it was looked upon, by all that saw it, or had account of it, to be almost
Impregnable; till that about the latter-end of March last, by reason of the
Absence of some, and Indisposition of others, so few remained, that for some
Weeks together, their Votes run generally split, being only two of a side, and
consequently all Business almost at a stand.

Yet such was the Excellence of the Constitutions by which they were to Govern,
that by means thereof, and by the Providential Recovery of one of their Number
out of a desperate Sickness, to cast the Balance, they quickly wrought their
own Cure: For by the assumption of Three or Four New Councillors, and the
humorous withdrawing of two of the Old, whose Places were thereupon deservedly
declared Vacant; the Council wrought it self so into one piece, that their
Actings looked then, like that of one Man: And tho the Season had, all of a
sudden, (as is said) sowred some of their Provisions (which continued very Good
till the Rains came on in April) and tho their Men turned afterward very
Sickly upon their Hands; yet they were firmly resolved to maintain that Place
and Interest to the last, as appears by the Letters which they dispatched Home
upon that Occasion, pressing that Supplies might be sent to them with all
Expedition.

And in the mean time, they not only engaged one Captain Ephraim Pilkington of
Port Royal (who had been, it seems, sometime in their Service, and was resolved
to bring his whole Family to live in Caledonia) to return with his Shallop full
of fresh Provisions and strong Liquors from Jamaica; but sent also a Sloop of
their own thither, with Money and Goods to purchase Provisions; yet neither the
one, nor the other, could have any, by Reason of the Proclamation that was
published there sometime before: And it is very observable, that the said
Proclamation, was, for haste's sake, published at Port Royal in Jamaica, upon a
Sunday, being the 9 th day of April, to stop two other Sloops that were ready
to sail from thence next Morning, with Provisions and strong Liquors for
Caledonia.

And the unhappy News thereof arriving at Caledonia, the 18 th, day of May,
together with a Copy of the said Proclamation, as also a wicked contrived
Story, That the Company at home had, upon some Occasion or other, Petitioned or
Addressed the Parliament of Scotland, and that their Petition was unanimously
rejected, and thrown with Disdain over the Bar; the Council and Colony were, as
it were, Thunderstruck all at once, with those Accounts, especially when they
considered the Treatment which they knew the Company had met with at London,
Hamburgh, and other Places, and the malicious Rumors that were industriously
spread here, before they went away, of what the Parliament might possibly be
induced to do; since it was whispered as if the Commissioner had had
Instructions to lay an Embargo on the Company's Ships; and not having received
one single Line from Scotland since their Departure hence, they were easily
confirmed in the belief thereof, and concluded, That certainly the Company was
quite defeat and crushed at home, and had not the liberty of sending so much as
any Advice to them to shift for themselves. All which Suggestions were so
successfully improved by the Person, whom I have heard, most blamed upon that
Occasion, that he found, at last, the said Proclamations gave him a Handle to
say or propose any thing whatsoever, tho never so villainous; and particularly,
That as, by the said Proclamations, they were positively declared to have
broken the Peace, by settling at Darien; so of consequence they were declared
Pirates; and that, as they could not think of staying there, abandoned by all
the World, so it would be dangerous for them to go to any of the British
Dominions, for fear of Hanging: And therefore proposed, that they should sail
directly to Hamburgh, or some other Foreign Port, and dispose of the Ships and
Effects; or at least to take up Money upon them, to pay the Seamen their Wages.
Which Pretense, he thought, might sufficiently bait many (at least the Seamen)
to close with his Proposal: But the Proposal was so self-evidently Wicked,
Unnatural, and Inconsistent with the Trust reposed in them by the Company, that
it was exploded with Reproach, by all those who had any Honor or Honesty in
them, and so fell to the Ground; Though the (...) away was what few or none (it
seems) said any thing material against, after having got those Accounts: Nor
indeed can I see what could well be retorted to Captain P -- k, when he urged
that all the Arguments made use of for staying, were grounded at best but upon
Suppositions; whereas their Reasons for coming away, were grounded upon real
Things, viz. the Proclamations, want of Intelligence, and scarcity of
Provisions. And indeed it must be allowed, that if no such Proclamation had
been published, he durst never have had the Impudence to have made such a
wicked Proposal, at least so openly, as is above narrated.

Now to recapitulate the whole Matter, you see the sum of what those in the
Colony do offer in justification of their coming away, is their being in such
desperate Circumstances, that in a crowd of confused and perplexed Thoughts,
they believed the longer they would stay there, the worse it would be for them:
Because several Species's of those few Provisions which they had left, were
rotting (as they say) upon their hands; most of their Men fell sick and weakly,
with but slender Hopes of their Recovery, for want of fresh Provisions, strong
Liquors, and good Looking after; and were out of all manner of Hopes of getting
any Supplies, by reason of the Proclamations, and the Story above-narrated,
especially having had no Word from Scotland all the time; which fully
determined them in that Fatal Resolution of coming away, (Bag and Baggage)
Steering their Course to New York, in Hopes to get some Provisions there, in
Barter for Goods, which might carry them to Scotland: But how Inhumanely they
were Treated by the Government there (though the Generality of the People were
inclined to be kind to them) in their distressed Condition, is too well known;
as is also the Barbarous Treatment, which those on board the Saint-Andrew met
with, from the Government of Jamaica, upon her being (it seems) forced in there
by Stress of Weather, and to shun the Barlavento-Fleet, which gave her Chase
for some days.

By all which, (if true, as is, indeed, generally said and believed) it seems
to me naturally conclusive, that, though I Am far from setting up to justify any
Escapes or Omissions, that the Directors at Home may be truly chargeable with,
or to lessen any Imprudence, Rashness or Divisions, that I have heard the
Council of the Colony blamed for; yet the Burden of the Song still rests on the
Effects of those Proclamations; because that, if those Proclamations had not
been published, I am morally assured, that even the grossest Mistakes in the
Management, either at Home or in the Colony, would have been soon mended of
Course, from the Experience that must have been had of the Consequences of
their own Omissions and Mistakes.

And whoever would be at the pains, but to examine the first Conduct and
Management of the most Flourishing Trading-Companies this day in Europe, might
easily find, that they have, not only in their Infancy, but even after a much
longer standing, been guilty of, at least, as gross Mistakes and Omissions, as
any that I ever, as yet, heard the Directors of our Company justly charged
with, and that there is no such thing to be precedented, or, indeed, reasonably
expected, as Infallibility in any Humane Conduct; especially in a Matter,
whereof the good, as well as the bad, Success must necessarly depend on a great
many unforeseen Accidents.

And yet the Truth is, after all, The most Plausible and Material Objections,
which I have heard suggested against the Foresight and Care of the Directors at
Home, are, 1 st, That they employed Persons in Fitting out the Ships, Goods,
Provisions, and other Necessaries for their first Expedition, as made no
Conscience of the Trust reposed in them; for that the Numbers, Quantities and
Qualities of those Goods and Provisions, were far short of what they were given
out for, and some of them rotten, even before they went from hence. And, 2 ly,
That they should Trust to the Uncertainty of a Correspondence, by the Way of
England, and the English Plantations, and not be at the Charges of sending
Letters and Advices frequently by some Packet-Boats of their own, directly from
hence to the Colony; which would undoubtedly have prevented their coming away
in such Despair of being relieved from hence, as they say they did.

This seems indeed, at first View, to be a heavy Charge, though it may be justly
Answered for the Court of Directors, First, That those employed by them, for
the Purposes aforesaid, were not only of their own Number, and chosen by the
general Suffrage of the Adventurers in the Joint Stock; but were also reputed
Merchants of considerable Substance and Dealing, and might therefore be
reasonably presumed, not only to have understood that Matter of buying and
providing Goods, Provisions and other Necessaries for a Sea-Voyage, better than
those Noblemen and other Gentlemen in the Direction, who never had Occasion
formerly to be concerned in a Matter of that Nature; but also, that they
themselves being considerably interested in the Joint Stock, and entrusted with
the particular Stock, of many of their own Friends, Relations and
Acquaintances, and indeed with that which they must needs have known, was of
Universal Concern to the whole Nation; That they would act at least as tenderly
and conscientiously therein, as any other Persons whatsoever, who were not so
immediately concerned.

And for these few Directors, who were employed for buying those Goods and
Provisions, I dare confidently affirm, in favor of some of them, that they not
only understood, and were pretty much accustomed with Dispatches of that kind,
(though differing perhaps in the Degree) but that they acted also with as much
Care, Diligence, Integrity, and real Zeal for the Company's Interest, as any in
the Kingdom could have done; so that I reckon, whenever that Matter is fully
inquired into, and all Circumstances considered, it will be found, that there
was no such great Abuse, in either the Quantities or Qualities of those Goods
and Provisions, as some would have us believe there was: Though at the same time,
(I must confess) I have, from the beginning, heard one or two of those
Directors extremely blamed, for making some Bargains for the Company, with an
alleged visible Advantage to themselves: And though it must be granted, that it
were much better for the Company's Interest, they had never acted with any such
Selfish View; yet, granting they did so, (which I do not believe) it is very
possible, they might have contrived Matters so, as to have some Advantage by
those Bargains to themselves, and yet the Company be no great Losers thereby.

Just as I had done writing of the foregoing Paragraph, I came to the Knowledge
of a Declaration made by Captain Robert Drummond* Commander of the Company's
Ship, the Caledonia, now lying in Clyde, with relation to the Premises; And
because of the extraordinary Patness thereof, I procured an exact Copy of it,
which I send you hereunto subjoyned.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHereas I understand, that some People take the Liberty to say and give out,
that our Provisions, which we carried along with us from Scotland, were, for
the most part, rotten and damnified, before we scarce got to our Voyage's end,
and that some of them were quite spoiled, even before we went from hence: I
think my self, in Duty and Honor, bound to declare, That on board your Ship
the Caledonia, which I have the Honor to Command, all the Flower and Oat-Meal
kept good till the Month of April, yea some part thereof until the latter-end
of June, as did also the Gray Pease, till we had little or nothing of them
left, in the latter-end of April: And as for the Bread, Beef and Pork, they
continued sound and good, till the very last Pound Weight of them. It is true,
the Irish Beef (though very sound) was nothing near so good as the Scots Beef;
for which Cause we expended it first. And as a Proof of the Scots Beef's being
extraordinary, when I came from on board on Friday the 15th. instant, I left
four Barrels of it on board as sound as ever it was, and Dined on a piece of it
very comfortably that same day, as did also the whole Ships Crew, and I doubt
much, whether it may not be all eaten up by the Seamen before now, though they
have other Provisions on board.

I have sailed for the space of eight Years together in America, and I must
needs say, I never in all that time had Provisions which held out so well,
which I have often signified to several Persons in our passage.

All this is true, as I shall answer to my Maker, and (if required) shall be
owned by the whole Crew. Witness my Hand at Edinburgh the day of December 1699.
I am*

My Lords and Gentlemen, To the Right Honorable, The Court of Directors of the
Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies. Your Lordships most
Humble and most Obedient Servant, ROBERT DRUMMOND.


Nor is this all; for the said Captain Robert Drummond declared further to my
own hearing at one time (several other Gentlemen being then present) and at an
other time (as I am positively informed) before Mr. Mackenzie the Company's
Secretary, and Mr. Hamilton Clerk of the Canongate, at the Ship Tavern* That he
the said Captain Robert Drummond caused Over-haul all the Goods and Cargo that
were on board the said Ship under his Command, when they lay in
Caledonia-Harbour, and that, upon his Conscience, there was not one Cask, Pack,
Bundle, or Bale, in the whole, when he compared the Contents with the Invoyce,
but what contained full as much as was charged in the said Invoyce; excepting
only one Bundle of Twine, which he said did not contain much above half of what
it was charged for; and some Hundreds of Sail-Needles too, which he said was
wanting out of a Bundle that was charged in the said Invoyce.

He declared likewise at the same time, That all the time he was in Caledonia
he never saw one Piece of Beef or Pork, but what he himself, or any other
Seafaring Man, might make a hearty Dinner on; but that possibly such as were
all their Days accustomed to nothing else but fresh Provisions, could not think
so well of it.

Now, after so positive and solemn Declarations made by the Person who, of all
Men living, should (and I believe does) know best what was under his own
immediate Care, I must beg leave to say, that it cannot but grate upon the
Spirit of any good Man, to find with what an intolerable Liberty Malice, Envy
and Ignorance have, as it were, combined together to derogat from the just
Merit of those Noble and Worthy Persons, who are concerned in the Management of
the Company, by endeavoring to asperse their Conduct, as if (forsooth) they
had acted like so many Fools or Knaves, or both; when, indeed, by what is
already said, it may evidently appear to any Unprejudiced and Impartial Judge:
That (considering the Novelty of the Undertaking, the many unexpected
Difficulties they met with, the Odness of the Tools they were obliged to make
use of, the Slowness of Payments from the Subscribers, and the Faintness of any
Countenance they had from Authority) they have acquitted themselves of their
Trust, far beyond what could be reasonably expected from (perhaps) any Set of
Men in the Nation: And I dare confidently averr, That some of them have often
neglected their own private Affairs and Interest by their close Attendance and
unwearied Endeavors to promote that of the Company; without the least Prospect
of having any Immediate or Particular Advantage thereby, other than the Glory of
being the Chief Instruments for laying the Foundation of, and Carrying on, so
Great and Good a Work, for the General advantage and Credit of the Nation, as
well as for the Particular Benefit of the Adventurers. And the Matter being so;
I hope, no Good Man will think it Presumptuous in me to say, that it may,
perhaps, be thought some kind of Reflection on the Justice of a Nation, that
the unbridled Licentiousness of some Peoples Tongues and Pens against them,
should pass so long unpunished; when there is nothing more certain, than that
Impunity hardens and confirms Men in their Wickedness: For Proof whereof, we
see that some of those Persons who first begun to vent their Malice against the
Company, only by Whispers and slye Insinuations, stick not now to break out
into open Exclamations; Magnifying their own Prophetic Spirits (forsooth) as
if they had foreseen all the Misfortunes that must necessarly have attended the
Affairs of a Company, that was under such Management; making even the very
Wisest, and most Considerat Actions of the Directors Conduct, the Subject of
their Buffoonry and Ridicule; And that they may the better, not only impose on
the credulous and ignorant Multitude; but also distract and confound the
Judgment of even Discreet and Unbiased Persons, they make it their daily
Divertisement, first to hatch, and then give Wing, to an indefinit Number of
detracting and slanderous Stories, that have as little of Truth in them, as the
Authors have of either Probity, Honor or Honesty: And knowing that these
spurious Brats of their own Invention, cannot possibly be long Lif'd, because a
very short Period of Time must, of Course, necessarly demonstrat their
Falsehood, they providently take care to have whole Troops of them ready at
Command, to succeed one to another, thereby to amuse the Brainsick Multitude,
with continued false Alarms; and having already, by such Means, declared
themselves so openly Enemies, not only to the Directors, but to the Undertaking
in General, they think (it seems) that since they cannot Reasonably expect to
regain their lost Credit with the Company, they had best (according to the
common Course of the most Wicked of all Sinners) endeavor to justify always
one Crime by another greater than it self: And Juvenal aludes very concisely to
such sort of Men, in his 6 th Satyr. Fortem animum proestant rebus quas
turpiter audent.


But how agreeable soever the Poisonous Wit of such Envious and Designing
Slanderers, may possibly seem to many of the Heedless, Unwary, and Giddy-headed
People of this Age, yet what mean Opinion the Generous and Wise Romans
entertained not only of them, but also of such as gave them any Countenance,
may be seen in the few following Lines of Horace.

-- Absentem qui rodit Amicum,
Qui non defendit alio culpante solutos
Qui captat risus Hominum, famamque Dicacis,
Fingere qui non visa potest, Commissa tacere
Qui nequit; hic Niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto.
But above all, The grossness of these Men's Folly does manifestly appear by
these Words of Solomon: He that hides Hatred with Lying Lips, and he that
utters a Slander, is a Fool, Prove. 10. 18. Andho w secure soever these Fools,
Scoffers and Slanderers may imagine themselves to be at present, we have
Assurance from the Words of the Wisest of Men, that they shall not always
escape unpunished: Judgments are prepared for Scorners, and Stripes for the
Backs of Fools. Prove. 19. 29.

As to the second Objection, concerning Advice-Boats not being sent directly
from hence to the Colony; It is an easy Matter, after an Accident is over, to
propose such a Remedy, as might have prevented that Accident: But who could
have dreamed of such Proclamations, unless we had been at open and declared War
with England? And in the Name of Wonder! who could ever have imagined, that
such Rigorous Proclamations, or indeed any at all, should be issued forth
against us, in the Name of our own Sovereign, who gave our Company first a
Being, and of whose Protection, we had all possible Assurance, not only, in
common, with the rest of the Nation, as we are his Subjects, but in a very
special manner, by the Concessions of his Royal Grant, by Letters Patent under
the Great Seal of this Kingdom, as well as by three several Acts of Parliament
in favors of our Company.

By the first of which, namely the 32 d. Act of the 4 th. Session of this
current Parliament: It is specially provided for the Encouragement of such, as
should become Adventurers by Joint Stock in carrying on of Trade to the East or
West Indies, or to the Coast of Africa, That if, in their Endeavors for the
Advancing and Promoting of Trade to any of the said Parts, they should happen
to be attacked, violently seized, or otherways disturbed by Persons not in open
War with Their Majesty's; That then, and in that Case, Their Majesty's would be
pleased to order, that the Recovery of the Ships and Goods so seized, or
otherways molested and hindered, be carried on and prosecuted by public Means,
and at public Expense.

By the 32 d. Act of the 4 th. Session of this current Parliament, The said
Company is not only Empowered to Equip, Fit, Set out, Freight and Navigat their
own, or hired Ships, in Warlike or other manner, as they shall think fit, to
any Lands, Islands, Countries or Places in Asia, Africa or America: and there
to plant Colonies, build Cities, Towns, or Forts in, or upon, any Place or
Places not Inhabited, or in, or upon, any other Place, by Consent of the
Natives and Inhabitants thereof, the same not being possessed by any European
Sovereign, Potentat, Prince or State; and by Force of Arms to defend their
Trade and Navigation: As also to make Reprisals, and to seek and take
Reparation of Damages done by Sea or by Land, and to make and conclude
Treaties of Peace and Commerce, with the Sovereigns, Princes, States, Rulers,
Governors or Proprietors of the aforesaid Lands, Islands, Countries or Places,
in Asia, Africa or America; But also, His Majesty, amongst several other
considerable Concessions, is graciously pleased to promise, that if contrary to
the Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Exemptions or Agreements mentioned in the
said Act, or contrary to the general Treaties of Peace and Commerce between His
Majesty and any Potentat, Prince or State, in Amity with His Majesty, the
Ships, Goods, Merchandise, Persons or other Effects whatsoever belonging to the
said Company, should happen to be stopped, detained, embezel'd or away taken, or
in any sort prejudged or damnified, that His Majesty would interpose his Royal
Authority to have Restitution, Reparation, and Satisfaction made, for the
Damage done, and that upon the public Charge.

And by the 3 d. Act in favors of the Company, namely the 42 d. Act of the 5
th. Session of this current Parliament, It is specially statute and declared,
that, for the Encouragement of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and
the Indies, it should be lawful to the Magistrates and others, the
Administrators of the common Good of Burrows; as also, to the Deacon, Masters,
and other Administrators whatsoever of any Incorporation, or Body, or Company
incorporat or Collegiat within this Kingdom, to adventure, and put in, Money
belonging to their respective Administrations, in the Stock of the said
Company: Which they could not warrantably do without some such Act.

And seeing the whole Body of the Royal-Burrows, and the most considerable other
Incorporations and Bodies Collegiat in this Kingdom, as well as many Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and particular Burgesses did, upon the Faith of those Acts, become
Adventurers in the Joint Stock of this Company, it were almost an absurd thing
in the Directors, (especially when perhaps all the Money they were then Masters
of, was not sufficient to answer the Company's pressing Occasions) to have been
at the trouble and expense of setting up Packet-Boats, as a Remedy against the
Effects of Proclamations, which, I may say, would have been undutiful in them
to have dreaded.

But yet, to let you see the Effects of those Proclamations, even in point of
bare Correspondence; I do assure you, that several of the Company's Packets
directed to the Council of their Colony, under cover to particular Friends in
the English Plantations of America, are to this Hour lying in the Hands of
those Friends; who wrote back hither, That by Reason of the Strictness and
Severity of those Proclamations, they durst not venture to foreward the said
Packets to the Colony; because, if they should happen to be discovered in
holding any such Correspondence (as Ten to One but they would) the least that
they could expect, was Confinement, and to be afterward sined at the next
Grand Session, by the Discretion of a Jury, and that the Discretion of that
Jury would be directed by the degree of Love they bear our Country, and the
Wishes they have to the Prosperity of an Undertaking of this Nature. By which
it is plain, That the Proclamations have put a stop to the Colony's getting
Intelligence from hence, and that if no such Proclamations had been issued
forth, there had been no such indispensible Necessity for Packet-Boats, to have
been sent directly from hence to the Colony, at least before the Directors had
an account of their Settlement, as some mighty Pretenders will tell us now
there was.

And yet nevertheless, it is evident by what has been already said, that the
Directors did positively intend to have dispatched a Vessel with Advice and
Provisions to the Colony very soon after their Departure from Leith; and for
that end, used all other endeavors by Petition, and otherwise, to have
procured one or two of the small Friggots, which are still lying useless in
Bruntisland-Harbour, as being the fittest they could think of, for that
Purpose; and in regard that the Parliament was pleased to order the building of
those Friggots for the Security and Advantage of the Trade of the Kingdom, and
that the Conclusion of the General Peace, took away all manner of Occasion for
them in the narrow Seas, it was thought they could not be otherwise so well
employed, as in carrying on and supporting the Designs and Interest of this
Company, especially since the Estates of Parliament, by their Address, formerly
recited, were pleased to express a singular Concern for it is Prosperity and
Welfare. And if the Directors said Petition had been seconded, as well as was
expected, and that they had got the Use of all or any of the said Friggots,
there had been, in all probability, no such occasion of Clamor against them,
as now there is, for not having sent any Ships directly from hence to the
Colony, soon enough, with Provisions and Intelligence.

But nevertheless, it is likewise evident, by what has been already narrated,
that upon the Directors losing Hopes of procuring any of the said Friggots,
they came to a positive Resolution of dispatching a small Vessel, directly from
hence to the Colony, with Advice and Provisions, in the Month of January at
furthest; though, as cross Fate would have it, she happened to be such a Ship, as
could not well be fitted out for such a Voyage, in some Months time thereafter:
Upon discovery whereof, they fitted another small Vessel, which sailed from
Clyde in the Month of February, but was unluckily Shipwrack'd by a violent
Storm on the West-Coast of Scotland, as I have formerly narrated.

Yet still there are some, who (right or wrong) will have the Management bear
the sole Blame of all the Misfortunes that have happened to the Company and
Colony, and stick not to say too, that the Colony's coming away, in the manner
they did, was not occasioned so much by the Effects of those Proclamations, as
by the Treachery and Villainy of some of their own Number.

Well, let us for once suppose there was Treachery in the Case; does that
lessen the Effects of those Proclamations? No certainly, but rather aggravates:
For if there was any Treachery in the case, these Proclamations gave the
Traitors a better Handle to work by, than any other Pretense they could have
made use of.

I would gladly know further, whether we can suppose there could be Treachery,
without supposing at the same time, that some Person or other must have bribed
the Traitor? And if so, it seems natural to believe, that none would be so
ready to do that, as some of those who were concerned in issuing forth those
Proclamations: So that still we are cloven to pieces with a Wedge of the same
Timber.

Nay further, what if (notwithstanding of those Proclamations) the Colony had
never budged, but remained still in their Settlement, in a flourishing
Condition; and that they had been in such Circumstances, that the Proclamations
could have done them no Harm? Shall any Man therefore mantain, that the issuing
forth of those Proclamations was a good and harmless Thing? Sure no Man has
Face enough to say so: For, their having, or not having, the designed Effect,
could not at all alter the Nature or Intention of them.

But really, for my part, I cannot conceive how it could be possible, for a
Colony, consisting of the King of Britain's Subjects, to have been in any such
good circumstances, but that those Proclamations must necessarly have done them
a vast prejudice, if not ruined them: For, suppose that in the Month of May
last, when they got the first Copy of the Jamaica-Proclamation, they had been
all in perfect Health and Vigor, and had had plenty of fresh Provisions,
strong Liquors, and all other Necessaries whatsoever, lying by them in store;
What then? Must they not have seen at first view, and considered, that by the
said Proclamation they were declared to have actually broken the Peace entered
into with his Majesty's Allies, by settling at Darien; and that therefore they
must expect to have been treated as Pirates? Must they not have considered,
that though the said Proclamation was emitted against them in the King of
England's Name only, that yet the same person was King of Scotland also; and
that the Matter being so, they could have but small Hopes of being vigorously
protected by the King of Scotland against the King of England's Proclamations?
Must they not have considered, that their then declared Enemies, the Spaniards,
would undoubtedly be thereby encouraged to pursue their Ends against them with
greater Assurance and much more Vigor, than perhaps otherways they durst have
done? Must they not have considered, that upon every the least Discontent or
capricious Humor of any of their own People, this Proclamation would be made
use of as a Handle to be very troublesome and uneasy to the rest of the Colony?
(as indeed it has been to their sad Experience) Must they not think, that since
the said Proclamation was published in his Majesty's Name, that undoubtedly it
must needs have been legally founded upon some positive Law, though they knew
nothing of it? And must not the Consideration of all these together, have
distracted and confounded the Thoughts, Resolutions, and Measures of any Set
of Men that could have been in the Colony? unless they had unanimously resolved
to have turned Pirates indeed; and to have cast off all manner of Loyalty and
Obedience to his Majesty; And in that same case, they must have resolved to
have been dis-own'd by Scotland, as well as by England: And if so, pray from
whom then must they have expected Protection?

And here I cannot suffer my self to pass by, without taking notice of some
Persons, who would pretend to palliat or skin over any thing that may relate to
those Proclamations, upon a Suggestion, as if they had been (forsooth)
necessarly emitted in compliance with, and in prosecution of, an alleged
English Act of Parliament; and that therefore any particular Person or Persons,
cannot well be quarrelled for the same: Which being a Suggestion that cannot
well be obviated, without having recourse to the English Acts of Parliament;
and but few People here having occasion to be acquainted with them, I reckon it
may not be thought much amiss to touch such of them, as can any ways relate to
the Matter in hand, and shall therefore do it as succinctly as I can.

Every Body knows, that by the English Act of Navigation, 12. Car. 2. Cap. 18.
It is Enacted, that no Goods shall be imported into, or exported out of, any of
the English Plantations in America, in other Vessels than such as belong only
to the People of England, or Ireland, or Wales, or Town of Berwick, or any of
the said Plantations; and whereof the Master and three Fourths of the Mariners
shall be English, under the Pains and Penalties mentioned in the said Act.
Since which time, neither we, nor the People of any other Nation, can pretend
to any Right, or Freedom of Trade and Commerce, with the said Plantations,
except in Ships qualified as above: So that the having of any such Freedom, is
what the Company never contended for.

By the very same Act, It is likewise specially Enacted, that no Sugars,
Tobacco, Cotton-Wool, Indicoes, Ginger, Fustick, or any other Dying Wood, of
the Growth of any English Plantations in America, shall be transported to any
Place, other than to some English Plantation, or to England, Ireland, Wales, or
Town of Berwick, on pain to forfeit both Ship and Cargo. And this being a
particular Enumeration of the several Commodities, which are prohibited by the
said Act to be transported into any Place or Plantation belonging to
Foreigners; it follows of Consequence, That all manner of Provisions, and
other Necessaries whatsoever, which were not prohibited by the said Act, might
be transported from the English Plantations, in Ships qualified as aforesaid,
whethersoever the Master should think fit.

And that it has been, all along, the constant Practice of such Masters, as
Sail commonly from New England, New York, and the other Northernmost
Plantations of America, to do so, is what, I suppose, none that knows any thing
of that Trade will deny: And though, upon Complaints made, in the Year 1695, to
the Parliament of England, of some Frauds and Abuses committed in the
Plantation-Trade, contrary to the Act above-recited, they thought fit to
superinduce some new Act, with very strict Clauses, to enforce, and put in
Practice, the true Intent and Meaning of the said first Act; yet I dare
adventure to say, that no Man can let me see an Act of the Parliament of
England, laying any such Restraint on the Inhabitants of the English
Plantations in America, as that they cannot carry or sell Provisions to any
Foreign Place or Plantation whatsoever: Which makes the Hardships of these
Proclamations still the greater in this, that we, who are His Majesty's own
Subjects, should be denied the common Benefit of having our Colony supplied
with Provisions, from the English Plantations, by English Vessels, in the
ordinary way of Commerce; while, at the same time, it is most certain, that
neither the Dutch at Curacao, the Danes at St. Thomas, the French at St.
Christophers, Martinico, Petitguavis, or Hispaniola, nor the Portuguise at the
Maderas, or Tessera-Islands, were, ever to this Hour, denied the Benefit
thereof, except in the Case of declared War: And even then too, the selling
them Provisions, and perhaps some other Merchandise likewise, is often wink't
at; as is at this time, the carrying of Provisions, Negro's and other
Commodities, from the English Plantations, to several parts of the Spanish
Dominions in the West Indies: So that, to our Comfort, we are the only Nation
under Heaven, (that I could ever yet hear of) against whom any such
Proclamations have been published by the English, in their American Plantations.

Nor was it thought enough, that, upon the first Orders sent from England,
dated, as I am informed, the second Day of January School/9, the said
Proclamations, against our Colony, were published in Barbados and Jamaica in
the Month of April, and in all the other English Plantations, in some short
time thereafter; But that, upon second Orders, a second Fleece of Proclamations
should be likewise published by the same Persons, and in the same Places, to
let the World see that the first were not grounded upon Mistake, but that they
were resolved to make their Putt good: For upon the 5th day of September last,
a second Proclamation, pretty near in Substance with the former, was published
in Barbados; and some of those lately come from New York, in the Company's Ship
the Caledonia, do Report, That three or four Days before they set sail from
thence, there were fresh Orders arrived at New England, for emitting and
publishing second Proclamations in those parts, against our Colony; which gives
us sufficient ground to believe that like Orders were sent to all the other
Plantations.

Yet such as have a Mind to be Talking, will always find something to Amuse the
Multitude withal, be it never so little to the purpose: And thus we find some
People still urging, that notwithstanding of those Proclamations, some
Inhabitants in the English Plantations, who are Zealous Well-Wishers to this
Undertaking, have, since the Publication of those Proclamations, sent some
Sloops and Brigantines to the Colony; and that therefore the Proclamations were
not the Occasion of the Colony's coming away from Darien, but that the same
proceeded from other Causes; and that if the Colony had staid still, and
maintained their Settlement, more Sloops and Brigantines would, beyond all
peradventure, be sent to them from time to time, till the Company's own Ships
should arrive there.

Well! All this is very plausible; and I think our Nation, as well as the
Company, is very much beholden to the Generous and Kind Inclinations of those
Gentlemen, who ventured any part of their own Interest so frankly, to support
that of the Company or Colony: But, as it happened, Pray what was the Colony
the better for it? Did any of those Sloops or Brigantins arrive at Darien,
before the Colony's Departure thence? Or had the Colony so much as the least
Advice, that any such Vessels were a-coming to them? No certainly, I suppose no
Man can or will say so; And without that, they say nothing at all: For, how
mean soever my Opin on may perhaps be of the Colony's Conduct and Resolution,
not only upon that unlucky Occasion, but in other Respects too: Yet I have so
much Charity, as to believe sincerely, that if they had expected any such
Vessels to have come to them with Provisions, in any reasonable time, or if
they had known, that they had any such real Friends and Well-Wishers in the
English Plantations, as it seems they had, or that Supplies and Recruits were
so near them coming from Scotland, that they would not have come away from
Darien, at least, before they had had some certain and positive Orders from the
Company, how to behave with relation to those Proclamations: But so it is, to
their own and the Company's Sorrow, as well as the Nations Disgrace, whatever
may be the Occasion of it, away, you see, they are come, as ill Luck would have
it: Quae volunt Fata, non tollunt Vota.


Upon the Directors having received certain Intelligence of this Tragical and
Unexpected Emergency, they laid the whole Matter in Writing before the
Council-General of the Company; who thereupon thought fit, in most Dutiful and
Humble Manner, to represent the same to His Majesty, by their Petition of the
29 th. of October last, wherein they seem to intimat, that without some special
Testimonies and Evidence of His Majesty's Gracious Favor, and Royal
Protection, as well as the Assistance of a Parliament, they could not well
expect, but that the best of their Endeavors, for carrying on and supporting
an Undertaking of this Nature, must prove altogether vain: And therefore, their
Petition consisted briefly of two Articles, 1st. That His Majesty would be
graciously pleased to take off the Force and Effects of these Proclamations;
And, 2dly, That His Majesty would allow the Parliament to meet in November
last, it being adjourned till that time.

They at the same time Addressed His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
with relation to the Contents of their said Petition to His Majesty; But what
the Privy Council did therein, I know not: And as for His Majesty's Answer to
the said Petition, you have already seen it, so I shall not presume to make any
Comments upon it.

However the Council-General of the Company having, it seems, about the
beginning of this Month, resolved to Address His Majesty, in a most Dutiful
Manner, upon an other Head; And considering, that none of their former
Addresses or Petitions had such Success, as they could have wished for, and
that they were all transmitted, in the ordinary way, to the Secretary of State,
in waiting for the time; they resolved to send this Address by one of their own
Number, who should, at the same time, have particular Instructions with
relation to the Contents of their former Petitions, and should carry along with
him Letters to the Secretaries of State, intimating his Business and entreating
their Concurrence.

Whether this Method may produce better Effects than their former, I know not;
but some People are pleased to prognosticat, that if in this as well as in
former Ages, there should happen to be any such Favorites or Courtiers near
his Majesty's Person, as may perhaps endeavor to make a Monopoly of the King's
Ear, that it will never be pleasing to such to see any Corn pass by their own
Mills; and that therefore they may readily endeavor to give it a State-Turn:
But until I see it, I shall never suffer my self to believe any such thing; for
as the King is a Gracious Prince, so his Ears will be equally open to all his
People.

I am informed, That the West India Merchants, or at least their Agents at
London, are now preparing a Representation to be made (if not already done)
complaining that the Proclamations which were published in the Plantations,
strictly forbidding them to carry or sell Provisions or other Necessaries to
the Scots Colony, are contrary to their Rights and Liberties, and prejudicial
to their Interests; and that the Friends of the several Governors, who
published those Proclamations happening to hear thereof, are endeavoring to
stiffle these Complaints as much as they can: But what Truth there may be in
this, a little time must show.

I am likewise just now told, that his Majesty has been graciously pleased to
declare that he knew nothing of those West India Proclamations, till he had
seen Copies of them come from thence: And if indeed it be true, that his
Majesty has said so (as I hope it is) I reckon it would be no very hard Matter
to name some few Persons who have a great deal to answer for.

I remember the judicious Montaigne, in his political Essays, observes it, as a
Misfortune commonly incident to a Nation that is under the Government of a
Prince living in another Country, That any Nation so stated, is seldom or never
Governed according to the real Inclination of the Prince, or the true Interest
of the People; so much as according to the Humors, Affections, and Designs of
his Ministers: For that he seeing only with their Eyes, and hearing but
withtheir Ears, cannot possibly know the true State, Condition and Interest of
a Distant Nation, nor the Humors and Inclinations of its Inhabitants, any thing
near so well as if he lived amongst them.

Seneca in his Treatise of Benefits, puts the Question, Quid omnia
possidentibus deest? What can a Man want that has every thing? And he answers
himself, Ille qui verum dicat. One that will tell him the Truth. And really of
all Men living, I think Kings and Princes stand most in need of having such Men
near their Persons.

And I wish, from my Heart, That all those who, at any time, have occasion to
be at the Helm of public Affairs in any Kingdom or State whatsoever, would
seriously consider what the Learned and wise Statesman; Sir Francis Bacon
observes by way of Precaution, in his Judicious and Celebrated Essays. As for
Discontentments (says he) they are in the politic Body like to Humors in the
Natural, which are apt to gather preter-natural Heat, and to inflame. And let
no Prince measure the Danger of them by this, whether they be Just or Unjust:
For that were to imagine People to be too Reasonable, who do often Spurn at
their own Good: Nor yet by this, whether the Griefs whereupon they rise, be in
Fact great or small; for they are the most dangerous Discontentments, where the
Fear is greater than the Feeling. Dolendi modus, Timendi non item. Besides, in
great Oppressions, the same things that provoke the Patience, do withal mate
the Courage; but in Fears it is not so. Neither let any Prince or State be
secure concerning Discontentments, because they have been often, or have been
long; and yet no Peril has ensued: For as it is true, that every Vapor or
Fume does not turn into a Storm; so it is nevertheless true, that Storms, though
they blow over diverse times, yet may fall at last: And as the Spanish Proverb
notes well, The Cord breaks at the last, by the weakest Pull.

One Material Passage I had almost forgot: Upon the first Advice that the
Council-General of the Company had of the Colony's safe Arrival and Settlement
in Darien, they gave His Majesty an Account thereof, by a very Dutiful Letter,
bearing Date at Edinburgh, the 31 st. Day of March last, wherein they
particularly condescended upon its being a Place Uninhabited, and never before
possessed by any European Prince or State whatsoever, and that upon the
Request, and with the Consent of the Neighboring Natives, they Landed and
Settled there, (which consequently made it a Place precisely in the Terms of
His Majesty's Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent) And withal, that they were
positively informed, that the French had a Design upon all that Coast, or at
least to make a Settlement some where thereabouts; And therefore humbly offered
to His Majesty's Consideration, how that the firm Settlement of the Scots
Colony there, might be a Means of preventing, or at least, lessening the evil
Consequences that might arise to His Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions every
where, by the Settlement of any powerful Foreign Neighbor in, upon, or near
any part of that Coast; And therefore confidently expected His Majesty's Royal
Favor and Protection, in the Maintainanee of such an Important Settlement, as
having, in all the Steps of their Conduct, through the whole Course of this
Affair, strictly observed the Conditions required by the said Acts of
Parliament, and Letters Patent.

And in another Letter, at the same time, to both the Secretaries of State,
they have, amongst several other Particulars, the following Paragraph: As to
the French Designs of settling thereabouts, (meaning on the Coast of Darien)
"it is a Point not to be doubted of; for, in order thereunto, they have already
been Tampering with several of the Natives, some of whom they have endeavored
to have carried into France; and we have very good reason to believe, that a
further Progress had been made in that Matter before now, were it not the daily
Expectations which that Court had of the King of Spain's Death. Which, we
humbly conceive, is a Matter worthy of His Majesty's Consideration, and of no
small Concern to the Interest of his whole Dominions, though this Nation, and our
Company, may seem to be more immediately interested at present.

And to certify further, That the French designs upon that Coast did not
consist in Imagination only; Mr. Paterson, one of the Councillors of the
Colony, and Captain Robert Drummond, Commander of one of the Company's Ships
the Caledonia, have, by Declaration under their Hands, signified to the
Directors, the Contents of a Letter written in March last, by the Governor of
Portobell to the Commander of a French Sloop, which was employed by the
Spaniards to persuade the Indians of the Samballo's to join against the Scots
Colony at Caledonia. The Letter was written in Spanish, and found in a Bottle
by some of our Colony on board of the said Sloop, near the Samballos, where she
was left deserted and owned by no Body; and the Contents of the said Letter is
in Substance as follows. Sir, I have received Advice from Monsieur Du Cass,
Governor of Petitguavis, wherein he assures me, that rather than fail, he will
come himself in Person; but however, he will send four Friggots to assist us in
rioting the Scots out of Darien. You may assure Ambrosio, Corbet, Pedro, and
the rest of the Indians of the Samballos, That if they continue to help, and
keep Correspondence with the Scots, that not only the Spaniards, but likewise
the French, will revenge it upon them: But if on the contrary, they will join
with us to destroy and root out these Scots, they shall be well rewarded and
gratified for their Pains.

I shall make no Reflections on this Matter, nor shall I pretend to Prophesy;
but any one of but an ordinary reach in Speculation, may easily see, that it is
very possible there may be such a Juncture of time, that the English Nation may
come to wish, that this Company had never met with such unreasonable
Obstructions in the prosecution of their Designs, as they have done: Nor am I
out of Hopes of seeing, perhaps, some of the wisest Men of our Neighboring
Nation, become so sensible of the Folly, as well as the Injustice of the
unaccountable Treatment which the Company met with, that they may think it
their Interest, even to contribute to the Mantenance of such an important
Settlement on that Isthmus, which now affords so much Matter of Speculation to
the most considerable Courts in Europe. Proestat sero sapere, quam nunquam.


My Lord, I need not tell you the Ferment that the Body of the Nation seems to
be in, upon Account of the Disasters and Misfortunes, that have attended the
Undertakings of this Company; and really, since the Affections, as well as the
Interests of many People seem to be wrapped up in its Fate; I wish, with all my
Heart, that those at the Helm would think of falling upon some agreeable
Expedient, for quieting the Minds of People upon this Head, by doing something
or other, that may let the World see, that the Company is not so destitute of
Protection, in the Prosecution of its Honest and Lawful Undertakings, as now
(alas!) it seems to be.

Now if it should so happen, that through the Stupid Ignorance of some, the
Supine Neglect and Indifference of others, the Industrious Suggestions and
Malicious Detractions of a Third, the Dreaming Delusions and Imaginary Fears of
a Fourth, the Servile and Mercenary Backwardness of a Fifth, or the Humorsom
Factions and Divisions of a Sixth Sort of People, the Body of the Nation should
be discouraged from concurring unanimously, in representing the whole Nations
Concern in this Matter to His Majesty, and in endeavoring to procure some
Gracious Marks of His Majesty's Royal Favor and Protection to the Company; Or
if that, through the want thereof, together with the Company's other
Misfortunes, the Designs of so Noble, Great and Generous an Undertaking should
happen to be frustrated, and that so many brave Men as are lately sent to
maintain the Company's Settlement in Darien, should perish in the Design (which
God forbid) as most of those that went on the first Expedition did; then may we
justly expostulat with Heaven in the Words of the Royal Psalmist upon an other
Occasion, Thou make us a Reproach to our Neighbors, a Scorn and a Derision
to them that are round about us. Thou make us a Byword among the Heathen,
and a Shaking of the Head among the People, Psalm 44. 13. 14.

But I am still in Hopes of better Things, and that all those, in whose Power
it is, in their several Capacities, to contribute any thing toward the aiding,
assisting, carrying on, supporting or protecting this Noble and Just
Undertaking, will, sooner or later, be of Sir Francis Bacon's Opinion, in his
Excellent Essay upon Plantations, where he has the following Words; The
Principal Thing that has been the Destruction of most Plantations, has been
the Base and Hasty Drawing of Profit in the first Years: It is true, speedy
Profit is not to be neglected, as far as may stand with the Good of the
Plantation, but no further. Then, after having given his full Advice and
Opinion, in many Useful Particulars, in the Way and Manner of Settling and
Carrying on a Plantation, he concludes expressly thus: It is the Sinfullest
Thing in the World, to forsake or destitute a Plantation once in Forwardness;
for besides the Dishonor, it is Guiltiuess of Blood of many Commiserable
Persons: Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito


My Lord, I am not ignorant of my own Incapacity, for Discussing Judiciously
such Intricat Points, as are interwoven throughout this Letter: But according
to the Information that I have had, (which I dare say is pretty good) I have
endeavored, as no^ as I could, to place every particular Matter of Fact in its
due plac^ according to Order of Time, and to assert nothing as such, but what I
have unquestionable ground to believe is Truth.

I have studied throughout the whole to shun Personal Reflections as much as
possible, but if any particular Person fancy to himself, that he is
comprehended under this or that general head, let him blame his own Actions for
bringing him under any disagreeable Predicament: If I seem to show any more
than ordinary Zeal in the just Vindication of the Management, it is because I
have seen it so very lately attacked in such a public manner as was not
expected. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant. P. C.


