THE Truth and Certainty of the PROTESTANT FAITH, With a short and plain
account of the Doctrine of the ROMISH CHURCH In its visible Opposition to
Scripture, and the very being of Christianity.

To which is adjoined some serious Considerations anent Popery, and the state
of that Controversy.

I. PET. III: Ver. 15. And be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you. REVEL. XIV. Ver. 9. If any man
worship the Beast, or his Image, and re^eive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand.

Ver. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powered
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels and in the presence
of the Lamb.

Ver. 11. And the smoke of their torment shall ascend up for ever and ever.

squirrel eating

Printed in the Year 1678.

EPISTLE To the CHRISTIAN READER.
READER,
THese few sheets adjoined here against Popery, was in part formerly published,
but being with some further enlargement now reprinted; I hope, it may not be
found unsuteable to set them down here in the close, when so convincing and
necessar a rise from the foregoing subject is clear; though such as desire may
have it by it self also, without the preceding treatise. These grounds did in
some measure press me now to the present publishing thereof. 1. That the
import of this controversy betwixt the Romish and Reformed Church, concerns
the meanest this day no less than the more knowing and learned; and that to be
a Protestant in earnest must necessarily require a seeing the truth with their
own eyes, yea such a faith, as is the result of a judgment upon diligent
search convinced by the Scripture. 2. That it is an hour of great trial, and of
the power of darkness; when the Popish Adversary is visibly at work almost
every where to sow tares, whilst so fevv even of those who seem serious in
professing the truth, can give a clear account of the grosness of Popery, and
solid grounds of the Protestant Doctrine, when thus assaulted, but ly^ naked
thereto* as without defense, though abounding and clearest light has been held
forth for that end; and at a sad disavantage to hold fast their Profession by
suffering, if they should be called thereto, as in former times. 3. The visible
hazard of many young ones in this generation to be made a prey of, and easily
poisoned with Popery, who but seldom work out in their age and riper years,
what they thus drink in in their youth. 4. That such an essay seemed
convincingly needful for these, whose age, want of time, indisposition to
read, or loathness too be at expense in buying books, is too visible a let,
for their improving what has been more largely written by others. 5. That (as
I hope it shall be found) what is of greatest weight or necessary use to be
known in these Controversies, is ^ere comprised, though in small bounds, yet
with such plainless, that the meanest Reader may understand and know the
Doctrine and principles of Popery, and what Arguments they pretend to be most
strong, held forth in the Questions here proposed; with a clear view of their
direct opposition to the Scripture by the Answers thereto; so as in a very few
hours, these for whom this is most designed, may by reading it but some times
over, have it so far impressed on them, as to know how to answer, and give a
so^ide account of the Protestant Doctrine, and grosness of Popery, when
assaulted by any Seducers. If to any such this small essay might be of use, I
may then say, the Author has not lost his desire and aim, what ever
entertainment it should otherwise meet with. The time hasteneth, when that
only, which tends to a solid peace with Jesus Christ will abide, and ^y
near to the soul when the Testimony of men will be of small value.

I shall but add, that nothing is here charged on the Romish Adversary, as
their principles. Which their own greatest Writers, of the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent do not clearly attest. The Reader would consider, that these
Sections into which this is divided, is with respect to the particular Heads
of the Romish Doctrine, which are there handled.

There are several Mistakes in words from the press, which I hope, the
judicious Reader will discern, without having the sense darkened thereby, and
pardon, with some visible Mistakes also in the pointing.

SECT. 1.
Qu. Seeing our greatest interest, is to know the truth and certainty of that
Religion we profess, What is to be understood by the Protestant Reformed
Religion, as under such a designation it is now held forth? Ans. The Scripture,
unto whose trial this offers it self, clearly shows, that it is no new
Doctrine brought in on the World, but the truth of Christianity, by the good
hand of the Lord on the Reformed Church, confessed, asserted, and purged from
the corruptions of Popery; and has the very same grounds to prove it, which
the Christian Religion has. Qu. Is it not of late, the Name of Protestant,
much less as a Church, was known, and from visible appearances but little, to
evidence its being and succession in the World, when Popery for many Ages had a
conspicuous and flourishing State? Ans. We deny not the Reformation to be late,
and that name of Protestant, which has its rise from a solemn Protestation,
of several Princes and Cities against Popery: But these also are demonstrably
clear. 1. How it is the same truth, and Religion of the Apostles and Primitive*
Church, wherein they walked, though in a great measure after darkened, as
Antichristianisme grew up; which has been unanswerably, proved to the World.
2. That in the Scripture no ground can be showed, for a continual visibility of
the Church, as an unite body; and in a flourishing outward state; but the
contrary is foretold, how obscure, and low her condition should be during
Antichrist's reign: So as a place of hiding was then prepared for her, Rev. 12:
6. 3. Yet even in the darkest times, there did not want some visibility of the
true Church, by a continued succession of witnesses to appear for the Truth and
against the Romish Apostacy, which, as a fresh River, made its way through
that horride Lake, without mixing with it. Qu. What peculiar grounds are to
prove this, or enforce a conviction on others. That the Protestant Religion,
this day, is the pure, and ancient Christian Religion? Ans. If men shut not
their eyes, none can deny these grounds, as a test of the certainty thereof. 1.
Its exact conformity to the Scripture, and to the genuine and perspicuous sense
thereof, than which nothing is more clear, if we will, but compare these
together. 2. That the Protestant Religion, in all the essentials thereof, is
the very same, and exactly agrees with the Faith of the Christian Church, in
the first three centuries; and for this we appeal our adversaries to produce
one essential difference, betwixt the one and the other from the Records of
these times, or any Writings of the Fathers. 3. That no evidence can be given,
in contending for the Christian Faith against Heathens, and to hold forth the
certainty thereof, which does not undeniably answer to confirm the Protestant
Religion. 4. That in the writings of the greatest Adversaries, and their bitter
invectives against Christianity, who in the first times did oppose themselves
to the same Doctrine the Protestant Church now owns, and professes; such as
C^^sus, Tryphon, Porphyrie, Lucian, etc. There is not the least mention of
Popery, in any of these Articles, against which the Protestant Church contends,
nor of the Romish Supremacy and Infallibility, where they could have had so
great advantage to object against the Christian Cause, and call its Truth in
question: Nor did the Jews who objected all they could against the Christian
Faith, in the least once mention any such points as are now controverted
betwixt them and us. 5. It is clear from unquestionable History, and
confession of our Adversaries, that a continued succession of Orthodox Doctors,
who did confess and teach the same Doctrine, for the substance, that we own,
have in no times been wanting to the Church, nor some visible party to
withstand Popery, and keep up a witness to the Truth, even in the greatest
darkness; as the Romish Writers are forced to confess, That the Protestants
now are the same which the Waldenses were of old, and the Berengarians before
them. Qu. Does not the Popish Religion found on such grounds and Principles, as
can bring a sufficient certainty therewith of its Truth, when it has the
Decr^es, Canons, and infallible Decisions of their Church, to warrant the same,
and of the Pope as Supreme Head? Ans. According to their Doctrine and
Principles, they can have no possible certainty of their Religion nor of that
they pretend to found on: When, 1. They are not agreed, nor ever like to be,
who that infallible Judge is; or in whom such an Infallibility as they claim
is seated, whether in a General Council, or the Pope alone: So as they are in
greatest contradiction to other, about the very foundation of their Faith; nor
is this a controversy amongst a few, but one part of their Church, with
greatest heat, is opposing the other therein. 2. They can have no assurance if
they have any Church at all, and whether most of their Popes, Bishops and
Priests, be not without Baptism, and still laics without Ordination, when
their Doctrine, and the Council of Trent so expreslie hold the efficacy of all
Sacraments (of which they reckon Ordination as well as Baptism to be one) to
depend on the Intention of the Priest who officiates, of which none possibly
can be sure. 3. Such have no rational certainty of what they profess to
believe, who are with their own consent shut out from all proper knowledge of
the Scripture, and on the testimony of men must resolve their Faith. 4. Is it
not on a matter of fact, and most doubtful Relation, they ground their Faith,
and adventure their immortal soul, where scarce a Shadow, or School-problem is
to bear up the whole Fabric of Popery; which is an alleged Presidence of
Peter amongst the Apostles, while no demonstration can ever be given, that
Peter was at Rome, or that he was Bishop there, or if the same privileges be
intailed to his Successors, and how these should be chosen in aftertimes? 5.
According to their Principles, they have no Bible, nor any such Authentic
Record, to prove Religion, but what is a Mas^e of dead unsensed Characters,
that has no articulate voice or intelligible sound, until the Romish Clergy
put a sense thereon: So that the very Letter of the Scripture is most
evidentlie past from: For my self, I dare say, before him who knows all
things, that I would tremble and stand in a we of any deceit or mistake, in the
matter of Religion, and have in greatest earnest sought to be persuaded of the
Truth, without respect to interest, party, or education, as that wherein I know
an eternal salvation is concerned; but can see no way to embrace Popery,
except men turn Atheists, yea, quit all Religion and Reason at once. Qu, Is not
Rome the Catholic and Apostolic Church, out of which there is no Salvation?
Ans. We know there is a Catholic Church under the Gospel, that consists of all
who embrace the Christian Faith, whether bond or free, Jews or Gentiles, and
is to no particular Nation, People, or language, restricted, as under the Law:
But that the Romish Church can have no possible claim here, is unanswerable.
(...). Because no Institution is in the Scripture of such a Church, as
consists of all Christians subjected to one humane Head, and Supreme
Governor under Jesus Christ, on the Earth; or where subjection to the Pope is
made a condition to Salvation. 2. It is clear that in the Apostles time, and
for many Ages after, the Christian Catholic Church had a being, when it had
no* dependence on the Sea of Rome, nor was known by any such Test, as to own
the Pope and his Supreme Jurisdiction; except it be averred, that there was one
Catholic Church, before the setting up of Papacy, and the other since,
essentially different from the former. 3. There is no access to deny, that
they are more, and of greater extent in the world, who embrace the Christian
Faith, and have no communion with the Sea of Rome, or their Doctrine, than such
who are subjected thereto. 4. As there is on Faith, and one Lord Jesus Christ;
so is there but one body, which is his Church, united to him as her Head, Ephesians.
4: 3. 4. Which is the prorogative of the Son of God alone, and incommunicable
to any, to be the Head thereof, but he who for this end died and rose, that he
might be the Lord of the dead and of the living, Romans 14: 9. Qu. Yet is not
still the same Christian Religion, at least for substance, held forth in the
Popis^ Doctrine, which the Protestant Church owns? Ans. Whatever in words such
pretend, their Principles, and the known Doctrine of the Council of Trent can
too visibly resolve this, that these do not retain the Christian Faith, in the
essentials thereof, but have razed the very foudation, who resolve not their
Faith on the Scripture and its Divine Authority, but on a humane testimony; and
deny religious worship to be due to the true God alone, but give it unto Angels
and Men also; who lay another foundation to build on than Jesus Christ, another
Purgatory than his blood, to purify us from all sin, another Propitiatory
Sacrifice to expiate sin, than his Death, who was once offered to bear the sins
of many. Heb. 9: 28: another merit than his obedience, by which we are made
righteous; and thus make void the great intent of the Gospel laying down a way
of Life and Salvation on the same terms that it stood in the Covenant of works;
certainly we must either quite the Scriptures, or acknowledge that nothing can
be more destructive to the Christian Faith revealed there, than such Doctrine.
Qu. Is there no infallible Rule and Judge, to determine herein, on whose
decisive sentence we may securely rest in the greatest controversies? Ans. If
we own ourselves Christians, this can be no debate, that the Scriptures
contained in the Old and Newtestament are the supreme Judge, The Oracles of God
committed to the Church, Romans 3: 2. to give Answers in every dark case; The
Type and form of sound Doctrine, Romans 6: 17. Unto whose sentence we are, in
all matters both of Faith and Practice, expressly referred by the Lord Isaiah 8:
20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them.

SECT. II.
Qu. SInce the Rule of Faith must be plain and intelligible, can the Scripture
be such, which, according to the Popish Doctrine, is a Mass of dead and dark
Characters, until their Church put a sense thereon? Ans. Its own witness, is
clear, 1. That it Is such as makes the simple wise, Psalm. 19: 7. And a Light
shining in a dark place, to which we are called to take heed, 2 Pet, 1: v. 19.
A Lamp to our feet, Psalm. 119: 105. 2. We see, what is written there was for
our learning, Romans 15: 4. and given us for that end, that it might be
understood. 3. It is clear, the promise of the Spirit to lead us into all
Truth, Joh. 16: 13. does belong to every Believer, as well as to the greatest
Doctors of the Church, who can pretend no extraordinary Revelation for leading
of them. 4. We know, the Fathers and Ancient Church did still prove their
Doctrine from the Scripture, as not only of more authority, but more clear than
their Comments. 5. Though some Scriptures be not so plain as others, and
several Prophecies sealed up, until their taking place in the event; yet,
nothing can be more plain than the fundamentals of Christianity, and those
Scripture Truths necessary to Salvation: But the World may see it is not
obscurity, against which their true quarrel is, but a too clear evidence,
before which their interest cannot stand. Qu. Yet, is this a sufficient ground,
for the Scriptures being translated into our own Language, so as every Man may
read, and have access thereto, which the Romish Church so expressly forbids, as
the cause of Error and Heresy? Ans. We know 1. The command is express for all
to read, and teach their children, Deuteronomy. 6: 11. 2. That under the Law, the
Jewish Church had no restraint; and should the Church now be in a worse case,
and live in more darkness? 3. Upon this account, were the Bereans so highly
commended for examining the Apostles Doctrine, by the written Word, which they
could never have done, if any such restraint to read the same had been upon
them. 4. It is a strange cure, to keep from the Light for fear of going wrong;
and when Christ says, You err not knowing the Scriptures, Ma^t 22: 22. That
ignorance thereof should be the way to keep us right. Qu. Is it not evident, 2
Pet. 3* v: 16. How there are things hard to be understood in Paul's Epistles,
which the unlearned and unstable wrest to their own destruction? Ans. It is
there showed: 1. Some things are more dark in the Scripture, which none do
deny. 2. We see, those who thus stumble, are such as wrest the Word, and not of
a humble, sober, and serious Spirit, by whom none will judge the Apostle here
means the whole of Believers within the Church, except the Doctors thereof: Nor
has it more weight to forbid Christians use of the Scriptures, and to read the
same; than the necessary use of meat, because some unsober abuse the same to
their hurt. Qu. Wh^t inducement should the Romish Church have to restrain
Christians in this, if it be so visibly cross to the Rule? Ans. They have (I
confess) this plea, for necessity; since their case so stands, they must either
ruin their interest, and be discovered in the greatest imposture that ever was
known in the World; or have the Bible shut up, though to ruin the Souls of
many Millions of the poor People; nor is it strange such hate the light, whose
deeds are evil, lest they be reproved.

SECT. III.
Qu. IS it not to the Church, and to no private person, That the supreme
Authority, and power of interpreting the Scripture, and to be judge of the true
sense thereof, does belong? Ans. The Scriptures is the alone infallible Rule
for interpreting it self: And to none but to the Holy Ghost speaking to us
there, can such Authority be ascribed. 1. Because Scripture is the supreme
standard, by which we are called to prove all things, 1 These. 5: 21. and to
know the Spirits, whether they be of God or not, 1 John 4: 1. Yea, thus must
the Doctrine of the Church be known. 2. The sense of the Scripture is the
Scripture it self, which thence only can be sought, and understood by the same
Spirit, that indicted it. 3. We see by* innumerable instances, that where in one
place it speaks more darkly, it does explain it self in another, and thus
refers us to its own interpretation; yea, how with a greater light and
plainness Truths are opened up in the New Testament, which more darkly, and as
under a Vail, were held forth in the Old. Qu. But the Scripture is of no
private interpretation, therefore to the Church only it must belong? Ans. This
only shows the Scriptures Interpretation can be subjected to no humane
Comments, nor has its Authority of men, and from their private judgments,
whatever place they bear in the Church; but must be sought from the Scripture
it self, and according to the Analogy of Faith, but no ground in the least to
deny access to private persons, to know and seek after the true sense of the
Scripture. Qu. What assurance can any have, that such is the true sense of the
Scripture, without some authoritative decision of the Church? Ans. We know, 1.
That the promise, Joh. 7: 17. stands good to every one of the Saints, If any
man do my will, he shall know my Doctrine, whether it be of God or not: And
such who object this, dare not (I am sure) restrict the giving of the Spirit
for that end to their Church-Doctors only. 2. If the sense of any thing
written can be understood, then it is sure the most weighty and necessary
truths of the Scripture are so obviouslie plain, as they can bear no other
sense and meaning, except men quit the very use of Reason and Judgment. 3.
Where the Scripture is more dark, there want not peculiar helps and means for a
Christians attaining the true sense thereof, such as serious prayer; the
knowledge of the original languages, and repairing to these fountains
themselves; advertency to the scope, and intent of the Scripture; yea, a
dexterous comparing of one place with another; with a prudent use of the
judgment, and commentaries of such, as have written thereon, though not
implicitly to rest upon them. Qu. Bu^ has not the Scripture so various
senses, as necessarily requires a living and visible Judge, to decide when to
take it in a literal, or in a figurative sense? Ans. It concerns the Romish
Church to impose diverse senses on the Scripture, that it may have none at all:
though we deny not some figurative expressions, the true sense whereof must be
understood from what is the obvious intent as the scope of such a Scripture,
and not the very words themselves. Such as Mat. 5: 29. If thine eye offend thee
pluck it out. Psalm. 91: 13. Thou shall tread upon the lion, and the dragon: But
it is most clear. 1. That one true and genuine sense the Scripture only has,
from the words rightly understood, which is the literal sense, and thence only
Arguments can be taken to prove any truth. 2. That in truths necessary to
Salvation is no thing figuratively expressed, but what is with greatest
plainness, to the discerning of all, held forth, 3. What the Romish Church
pleads for, of an Allegorick, Moral and Typical sense, they are no different
senses of the Scripture, but a different application and accommodation of one
and the same Scripture diverse ways, in the use whereof much caution and
sobriety is needful: and though a necessary respect is to be had always to the
Type, and the thing Typified; yet, even there, is the sense still one and the
same.

SECT. IV.
Qu. HOw know you the Scripture is of God, or can be infallibly sure of its
Divinity. but by the Church and its Testimony? Ans. We deny not this to be a
peculiar motive and inducement, for a high and reverent esteem thereof, and a
ministerial help to our Faith, though with no authoritative Dominion over the
same. But 1. The Scripture is known by its own light, and these express
Characters and marks of Divinity it bears, which convincingly show whose it is;
so as the meanest Christian may know this, without any humane Testimony. 2.
There needs also the inward work of the Spirit, to beget a firm and through
persuasion thereof upon the Soul. Qu. But how do you know, you perceive such a
light in the Scriptures, as you speak of? Or can make it appear to others, that
you are not deceived therein? Ans. None will distrust their own eves, though by
no Arguments they can persuade those, who are blind, that they really behold so
excellent a light as the Sun: But it is strange and absurd, to demand a reason
of Sense; or for a blind man, to require him who sees, to prove unto him by
Argument, that he certainly sees and beholds such things. Qu. Is not this torun
in a round and circle, from the Scripture to the Spirit, and from the Spirit
again to the Scripture, when th^s you know by the Spirits revealing the
Scripture to be the Word of GOD, and that revelation to be true by the
Scripture? Ans. No ground is here for any such challenge. 1. Because we admit
no private or particular Revelation of the Spirit, to assure us of the Truth,
different from what is revealed in the Scripture it self. 2. It can be no
circle, when it is so clear, the Scripture and Spirit mutually prove one
another, by different ways, and not in the same manner; for it is by way of
Argument, that the Scripture proves the certainty of the Spirit, holding out
such truths, whence we know how to discern the Spirit; but effectively, and as
an instrument does the Spirit prove the Scripture, by enabling us to see that
marvelous light, which is therein. 3. As has been already cleared, there are
Arguments of another nature, and independent on the Testimony of the Spirit, by
which the Divinity of the Scripture can be solidly known and demonstrated. Qu.
Can you know the Scripture is Canonical, or that these Apocrypha Books, which
Protestants reject, are no part thereof, without the Churches decision? Ans. We
know, 1. That these were never acknowledged in the Canon of the Scripture, by
the Jewish Church before Christ, to which the Oracles of God were committed;
nor read and expounded in their Synagogues, as their most Ancient Writers and
of the greatest credit amongst them witness. 2. They were not written in
Hebrew, the language of the Church, before the coming of Christ, in which all
the Books of the Old Testament were generally written. 3. Though with that
severe caution, was the Ancient Church careful to keep the Scripture, so as the
number of the verses and letters thereof was most exactly re^koned, and looked
to; yet none of these Apocryphal Books was ever received, or admitted by them.
4. By the Primitive Church, after the Apostles, such were not owned in the
Canon of the Scripture, though by some allowed to be read for instruction of
manners. 5. They are convict of notorious falsehood in many places, both of
Doctrine and History, which all may see repugnant to Truth, and the Analogy of
Faith. Qu. Bus what certainty can be, on the credit of a Translation, that all
know to be fallible? Ans. Nothing can be more, for moral assurance, when it is
so clear. 1. That the truth of our translations, though in diverse times and
different Languages, yet all agree in the maine and substance. 2. That solid
relief is at hand, to go unto the fountains themselves, the original Languages,
and see with their own eyes, if the Translations thereof be not faithful and
true; which by a little pains, and diligent use of helps for such an end, is in
our power to attain. 3. It is not on naked words, but on the clear and genuine
sense thereof, in whatever Language held forth, that we found our Faith; nor
can any deny the Scripture truly rendered in English to be the Word of God,
though not in the very same Characters, in which the Prophets wrote the same.
4. These evidences of the Scriptures Divinity, that it enlighteneth the eyes,
and converts the Soul, with its Authority over the Conscience, we know to be no
less discernably, and convincingly witnessed in men's vulgar Language, through
all ages, than in the Greek, and Hebrew.

SECT. V.
Qu. IS the Scripture of a sufficient foundation of Faith, for a private
Christian, which according to the Romish Doctrine must have its A^thority from
the Church without which it can be no Scripture, nor Canonical? Ans. They are
indeed concerned to put down all Divine Record, that they may be alone Judges
in their own cause: But we know, 1. That the Apostolic Church had no such
claim. 2 Cor. 1: 24. Not that we have dominion over your Faith. 2. That they
did bound their Authority within the limits of the Scripture; Gal. 1: 8. Though
we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach another Doctrine than that we have preached
to you, let him be accursed. 3. Thus should the Churches witness be of greater
credit and weight, then the Word of God. 4: There is no Authority, even the
Romish Church can pretend to, but what they plead from the Scripture; therefore
it cannot be dependent upon the Church. 5. Should this be admitted, the
Christian cause were lost, in contending against Atheists and Infidels; nor any
possible access to convince these: for what could that Argument of the Church's
Authority be to them, who own no such thing* 6. If on this the Scripture be
admitted, our Faith should then resolve on the Testimony of men, and be but a
human Faith. Qu. But must every private Man be his own Judge, and not the
Church, to put what sense he pleases on the Scripture? Ans. It is clear, 1.
That there is a private judgment of discretion the meanest Christian has, to
know and discern the Truth, that his service may be Reasonable service, Romans
12: 1. And his Faith a rational act, For every man must prove his own work,
Gal. 6: 4. 2. We deny not a public and ministerial judgment to the Church,
which in greater and lesset Synods may be passed, where Pastors and Elders are
assembled by the ordinance of Christ, though here no blind obedience is
imposed; since this only can be according to the Law, and in pursuance of it,
not above it. But to the Holy Ghost alone, can a Supremacy, and a Sovereignty
of judgment, in matters of Faih, belong; Since. There is but one Lawgiver, who
is able to save and destroy, Jam. 4: 12. And no power against the truth, but
for it, 2 Cor. 13: 8. Qu. Are we not called to hear the Church, Mat. 18: 17.
and implicitly rely on its sentence? Ans. That command has respect to
Church-censure, and against contumacie; but to impose no implicit obedience,
or subject the Scripture Authority to Men: When it is so clear, 1. That the
furthest observance of the Apostle was to be such, as might not go without
these bounds, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. 2. This were to divide
Faith and Knowledge from one another, and an express contradicting of that, 1
Pet. 3: 15. To be ready to give a reason of faith within us, to every who
demands. 3. Thus Men might be saved without believing there is a Christ and the
Gospel. 4. Thus many were under a necessity to live and die Infidels, if they
must only hear what the Romish Church says, and not read the Scripture
themselves, who in some remote parts of earth, or by a close imprisonment may
be shut up, so as they can have no possible converse with that Church.

SECT. VI.
Qu. IS there no Supreme, Visible, and Infallible Judge, placed in the Church,
upon whose decision we may securely rest, in all matters of Faith and
Conscience? Ans. This Article is indeed of great weight to the Romish Church*
so as their whole interest seems to stand or fall accordingly: But it is clear,
1. They must bring another Bible than the Old and New Testament to prove this,
or let us see the least Commission and Warrant, for any such Judge there, as
they plead for. 2. It is contrary to the command, 1 These. 5: 21. Prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good. 3. None can deny the Apostles were
fallible, though not in their Doctrine, (being therein immediately inspired by
the holy Ghost) when so ignorant of the Death, Sufferings, and Resurrection of
Christ; and it is sure, Peter was far from this Infallibility, when he denied
his Master; and after he was confirmed, and had that assurance given, that his
Faith should not fail, (which is one great foundation of the pretended Romish
Infallibility) when Paul withstood him to the face, Gal. 2: 11. 4. This power
does the Pope challeng over the Gentiles, as being Peter's successor; when it
is clear, that Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, by the appointment of the
Holy Ghost, and Peter's own consent, Romans 11: 17. Acts 13: 2. Gal. 2: 9. 5. And
do not all know, what decrees of Councils have been against Councils and Popes
against Popes? Qu. Is not Peter that Rock, on which Christ promised to build
the Church? Mat. 16: 18. Ans. It is manifest, that by this was expressly meant
the Doctrine, and Profession then made of Christ's being the Son of God; yea,
that the same power given to Peter was, in as express terms, given to the
rest of the Apostles, Mat. 18: 18. Ioh. 20: 22. And where it is said, Ye are
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2: 20. no
difference is in the least put betwixt Peter and the rest: yet here is the
great foundation of their Church. Qu. Does not this prove such an
Infallibility, that the Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3: 1^^
Ans. This was not said of the Church of Rome, or evince her peculiar claim
thereto beyond other Churches; But here clearlie is showed the stability and
fixednesse of the Christian Church, unto which the Oracles of God were
committed; and no possible reasoning thence, for an Infallibility to any Church
on Earth. Qu. Is there nothing from the Scripture, to show a difference betwixt
Peter and the rest of the Apostles, as to his Presidence, and that the
Monarchy of the Church was established in his person? Ans. We find this was
expressly prohibited by Jesus Christ to the whole Apostles, without exception,
that no such absolute Authority should be by any of them claimed? Mat. 23: 10:
Be ye not called masters, for one is your master even Christ: But if any shadow
were for this, It might seem more applicable to Paul, when he says, Besides
these, the care of all the Churches came upon me, 2 Cor. 11: v. 28. If this had
been said of Peter, the Romish writers would have made a strange noise; as if
they had found one demonstration for all, to secure that interest,

SECT. VII.
Qu. CAn the Scripture be a sufficient Rule of Faith, and sufficient to decide
controversies in the Church, without the help of unwritten Traditions? Ans. It
is; 1. Because the alone way for being saved is in following what is written
there, Ioh. 20: 31. These things are written, that you may believe that Jesus
is the Christ, and that believing you might have life through his name. 2. It
is a full and sufficient Rule, containing all things necessary, both to believe
and do; 2 Timothy 3. 15. From a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus: Yea, it is there showed to be Profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 3. It is expressly against the
Scriptures, to impose any humane Traditions on the Church, for subjecting our
Faith thereto. Deuteronomy, 4: 2. Thou shall not add to the words, which I command
thee. Qu. But does not the Apostle command to hold fast the Traditions, whether
by Word or Epistle delivered to us? 2. These. 2: 15? Ans. It is there showed. 1.
That the Apostolic Authority, whether in speaking, or writing, was the same;
and that to both the Church was to give the same credit. 2. That what was
taught from the Apostle by word, was the very same delivered by Epistle: but
thence can be no ground for receiving of Traditions of the Church of Rome,
which are not only different from the Scripture, but visibly contrary thereto,
when neither Scripture, Reason, nor Antiquity, discover their being delivered
by the Apostles. Qu. Is not Oral Tradition such as cannot possibly deceive,
whereby the Christian Faith, and true sense of the Scripture has been
delivered down from hand to hand, and from one age to another? Ans. To this of
late does a part of this of late does a part of the Romish Church fly, though
nothing more visibly repugnant to Scripture and Reason, if men but open their
eyes, to see, 1. That no more sure, and plain delivery of the Truth can be to
us by speaking, than by writing; nor can it be possibly judged, how a certainty
of the sense of their traditional Doctrine should be more than that of the
Scripture. 2. This were to resolve our Faith; not on the Testimony of God in
his Word, but on what the Father and Forefathers have told to the Children; and
in effect to pass from all certainty of the Christian Faith, and to deny that
Doctrine of Christ, and, way of being eternally saved, which, with most
convincing evidence, is delivered to us in the Scripture. 3. We see, how far
Tradition in a few Ages differs from it self, and has been the rise of such
fabulous Romances the World is full of about matters of fact, from former
times; yea, how often the Church has been almost swallowed up of ignorance and
error: so that if one would trace back the Divinity of Christ by Tradition,
they should go near to lose the scent, when it came to Athanasi^s's time,
whilst the whole Christian world seemed to be Arrian. Qu. Is there no necessity
of Tradition, when the Scripture is not sufficient to refute all Heresies in
the Church? Ans. Can it be possible to understand Heresies, but as they are
against the Scripture, or how to have another conception thereof, and yet that
not sufficient for their refutation? this is, I confess, a Doctrine meet for
such, who can make contradictions meet and agree at their pleasure.

SECT. VIII.
Qu. HAve we not safe and unanswerable ground, from the Antiquity of the Romish
Doctrine, and its long continued succession, to found an infallible assurance
of its Truth? Ans. None can deny these, 1. That the Scripture is the truest
Antiquity, and what is not according to this, is a novelty brought in on the
Church. 2. That the rise and pedigree of the Man of Sin must be traced back to
the very times of the Apostles, in his beginning to work, whose gradual
breaking-up did then hasten to a more full appearance. 3. But it is most clear
also, that the Primitive Church, for some Ages, knew no such thing as Popery,
in so horrid a corrup^ing of the Christian Doctrine, that after followed; nor
what an Universal Bishop, and his Infallibility meaned. Qu. But can any
evidence be found from these first times of the Christian Church, that will
import a contradicting of the Popish Doctrine, as it is now professed. Ans.
There are no accidents where the thing it self has no being, nor could these
possibly write against Popery, in such heads, as the Romish Infallibility, the
worship of Images and Saints, etc. before they were once brought to light: but
by undeniable consequence it is clear, they held the Scripture to be the alone
Rule, and foundation of the Christian Faith; therefore not the Romish Church:
and that the Counsel of God was clearly revealed in the same; therefore not to
be shut up as the fountain of error: Yea, that there are but two places after
death, without the least touch, or mentioning such a thing as Purgatory. This
also was the known Doctrine of the first times, that Faith in Christ was the
alone way of Salvation; therefore not by o^r own merit.

SECT. IX.
Qu. IS not the Doctrine of Merit, for which the Romish Church so much contend,
agreeable to the Scripture, and such as we may securely rest upon; That men by
their own Righteousness, and the merit of works may be saved? Ans. It is clear,
we must go to Heaven by Merit, though not our own; yea, upon the exactest terms
of Justice, it is due to him, who has paid the price to the utmost value, that
none of his purchase be lost; but to us it is only of Grace: Nor can such Works
be meritorious, where, 1. We owe all, and do nothing which is not a debt upon
us, being Not our own, but bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6: 17. 2. Where no
equality, proportion, or suitableness can be betwixt the Work and the Reward;
as is clear, 2 Cor. 4: 17. Romans 3: 28. 3. Which at the best have some spot, and
stain cleaving thereto, and come so short to answer what the Law requires, Isa.
64: 4. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
rags. 4. It is most directly contrary to the Scripture, Romans 11: 6. If by
grace, it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace, Romans 4: 4. N^w
to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt; but to
him who works not, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness; and chap. 3: 28. Wherefore we conclude, that we
are justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law. Qu. Yet, may not some in
an unconverted state deserve a conferring of Grace upon them, by putting
themselves forth to the utmost for their own conversion, which the Romish
Church calls the Merit of congruity? Ans. From the Scripture it is clear,
that before renewing Grace, all are the Children of wrath, who of themselves,
cannot frame their thoughts to that which is good, nor have an active
concurrence for such a change, 2 Cor. 3: 5. And that the alone cause, which
makes one to differ from another, is that, Romans 9: verse. 15. I will have
mercy, on whom I will have mercy. Therefore no plea for Merit, by any
improvement of men's natural abilities. Qu. But do not the works of the
Regenerate, which follow Justification, deserve eternal life, not from the
Imputation of Christ's righteousness, but from their own intrinsic worth, and
proportionableness to the Reward, which is called the Merit of condignity? Ans.
This were to subvert the whole contrivance of the Gospel, which is a judicial
transferring our sin, as a debt on Christ the Surety; and of his Righteousness
and Merit, to be imputed to us, for our Justification, without any respect to
works, and lays down the very same way of life, which was in the Covenant of
Works; as is clear, 2 Cor. 5: 21. Qu. Is not Heaven held forth is a Reward; so
as our works do merit by bargain; and covenant? Mat. 20: 12. Ans. No reward of
debt can be found there, as that which is in strick Justice due, but to show,
it is only of Grace, and no proportion betwixt that which is given, and their
working, We see these who came in at the last hour, had the same measure with
them who had wro^ght all the day, Math. 20: 9. Nor can any Merit be in that
claim, and reckoning: the greatest labourer must still say, when he has done
all that he can, That he is but an unprofitable servant, Luke 17: 10. Qu. Is it
not promised, Rev. 3: 4. That some shall walk with Chrest in white, because
they are worthy? Ans. There it is clear, the Lord does account them so, whom he
has accepted in his Son, and for whose sake alone it is, 1 Cor. 4: 7. For who
makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou, which thou have not
received? then if tho^ did receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had
not received? Qu. Is there no necessity of works here, even in order to
salvation? Ans. We know, 1. This is the way, in which God has commanded us to
walk, for our attaining Salvation. 2. Though they be not causes of our
Justification, yet they are necessarily required in the subject, and person
justified, as the inseparable fruits of justifying Faith, by which, it is made
evident to others, Jam. 2: 16. 3. They are of singular use, for a Christians
comfort and assurance. 4. They bring much honor to God, Joh. 15: 8. But it is
sure, nothing can be more clear, than the Doctrine of the reformed Church is,
in asserting this.

SECT. X.
Qu. IF there be no humane Satisfaction and Merit, what safe adventuring can be
on the overmeriting of some for others; and that Treasure, in the Church of
Romes hand, from the works of Superrogation, whereon their Absolutions and
Indulgences depend? Ans. So horrid an Imposture may let us see, what it is to
be given up unto strong delusion: When it is so clear, 1. That the wise Virgins
could spare no oil out of their lamps to others, Matt. 25: 9. 2. That Every one
must prove his own work, and bear his own burden, Gal. 6: 6. 3. If we credit
the fullness of Christ's Satisfaction, and its Infinite value, as the Scripture
holds it forth, Heb. 10: 14. Who by one offering has perfected for ever, those
who are sanctified; and Heb. 7: 25. That he is able to save to the utmost; then
no use can be alleged, for this supply of humane Satisfaction. 4. Let men but
exercise Reason, and consider, how this possibly can be known, that such an
overplus of Merit is sure, or more than they need themselves; and where any
Rule can be found, which the Scripture never showed, how to apply the same, or
in whose hand this trust is to be put. Qu. Is not the Satisfaction of Christ
only for the guilt of mortal sins, and to free us from eternal punishment, but
not of temporal? therefore we see a filling up of what is behind of the
Sufferings of Christ for his body, which is the Church, Col. 1: 24. Ans. 1. It
is clear, that Jesus Christ made a perfect reconciliation for sin, Dan. 9: 24.
John. 1: 29. And no mite left for us to pay, by him, who answered the full
price. 2. What the Apostle there shows, none can aver, was of Christ's expiatory
sufferings; but to show that as his sufferings were the price of our
Redemption; so were they a seal and witness to the truth, Joh. 18: 37: In which
respect the Saints also have their share, in all following ages, to fill up the
sufferings of Christ, in his body which is the Church, as a testimony to the
Truth, which the great Witness himself did seal, and confirm with his Blood,
who before Pontius Pilate gave a good Confession. Qu. Yet may not this warrant
such plenary Indulgences, and Absolutions of the Romish Church, and a power to
apply the Merit of others, which is so express? Joh. 20: 23. Whose soever sins
ye remit, shall be remitted? Ans. It is a sad commentary, destroying the Text,
which here has respect to Church Censures, and is to show what Authority, the
Ministers of Christ are clothed with, and empowered by their Masters
commission, to declare sinners bound, or loosed from their sins, according to
the validity of that declarative sentence, thus ensured, as they follow that
rule for the same, in the exercise of Church Discipline; but not the least
ground is here, for such plenary Indulgences they pretend, or to absolve and
relieve Souls out of Purgatory.

SECT. XI.
Qu. IS there not clear ground for the Doctrine of Purgatory, whereon a great
stress of many of the Romish principles visibly lies, that though there be an
acquittance from eternal death, for the truly penitent, yet is there a place
after this life, where they must for a time be tormented, and suffer these
pains of Purgatory, to expiate venial sins, which their Prayers and Pennances
here could not do? Ans. The Scripture has revealed no such thing: but thence
it is clear; 1. That sin, by the Blood of Christ only can be expiated, and is
his alone work, who has purged our sin himself, Heb. 1: 3. 2. That forgiveness
from the Lord to those who repent, is with no reserve of venial sins, or a
temporal punishment for such to satisfy justice, Ezeck. 18: 22. All his
transgressions, which has committed, shall not be mentioned, Heb. 8: 12. I
will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and iniquities, I
will remember no more. 3. From the Scripture, we can know only a two fold state
of men, after this life, Joh. 3: 36. And two ways that accordingly lead
thereto, Matthew. 7: 14. Strait is the way that leads unto life, and the way to
destruction broad. The Apostle shows that no middle place is betwixt the
Saints being unclothed, and clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5: 1, 2. 5. The unconverted
Theif found no Purgatory by the way, who had no Pennances, nor Church
Indulgences, to lead him by the same, if the Infinite Merits of Christ were not
sufficient for all: In a word, this does manifestly charge God with Injustice,
as exacting double satisfaction for sin, one from Christ, the other from the
sinner. Qu. But does not the Apostle show, there is a being saved, yet so as by
fire? 1 Cor. 3: 15. Ans. Nothing can be more plain, if any read that Scripture,
than that there is a figurative expression, and the same with, verse 13. The
fire shall try every man's work; Which none can expound to be Purgatory: but
that not without temporal loss, so as to have their work burned, these shall
escape. Qu. Are not some venial sins, which a temporal punishment may be
sufficient to expiat, and therefore such pains do follow sin here, as might
evince a Purgatory after this? Ans. It is sure, 1. That the wages of sin is
death, Rom: 6: 23. And no difference there is showed betwixt venial and mortal.
2. If a full acquittance from the guilt, and punishment of sin be by Jesus
Christ, and that he has paid the whole price, no Satisfaction to Justice can
be of use for temporal punishment. 3. It is clear, the most sharp chastisements
of the Saints in this life are for healing, and no effect of Vindictive
Justice, nor can give the last ground to plead for humane Satisfaction, or such
a thing as Purgatory after this life.

SECT. XII.
Qu. BUt is there no Scripture warrant, for the Romish Mass, as a real,
external, Sacrifice propitiatory, for the living and the dead; and that wherein
the body of Christ is really offered up? Ans. It is clear, 1. That not the
least footstep of a Sacrifice, or of Christ's offering his Body and Blood, was
in the first institution of the Eucharist: nor in these Offices given to the
Church, of Apostles, Pastors, Teachers, etc. Romans 12: 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12: 28.
is there mention of any such, as a sacrificer of Christ's Body. 2. No external
Sacrifice can be now under the New Testament, these under the Law being only
typical of that, which was accomplished in Jesus Christ, who offered himself
but once, Heb. 7: 27. And by this one offering has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10: 18. So as this denies the perfection of Christ's
Offering, and his everlasting Priesthood. 3. No sacrifice can be propitiatory,
which is without blood; since without that There is no remission, Heb 9: 22. 4.
It is clear, in a true Sacrifice, the thing sacrificed must be destroyed in the
act of sacrificing, which none dare say of the blessed Body of Christ; nor can
it be conceived, how a repetition of the Offering up of Christ should really
be, and not of his Sufferings also. Qu. Can it be denied, but some Offerings
are even under the New Testament unto God? Ans. We know, in the Lords Supper
there are Offerings of praise and love, with a solemn commemoration of Christ
death, but no external Sacrifice there, or the least shadow of ground from the
Scripture for it. Qu. Did not Mel^hizedeck offer Bread and Wine, who was the
Priest of the most High God? Genesis 14: 18. Ans. His bringing it forth to Abraham
is there showed, but nothing to show his Offering of it, or what could give
ground for the Idolatrous service of the Mass, though on this they lay its
greatest weight. Qu. Are there not Priests now in times of the Gospel, as under
the Law? Ans. We know One only eternal High Priest, who is such as can have no
successor: and it is clear, Heb. 7: 26. that the Priest, and Offerer, under
the New Testament, should be holy, undefiled, and separate from sinners, which
I judge they dare not own: But what do they mean thereby, since it must either
be to repeat over again Christ's Sacrifice, which is impossible, and
blasphemous, or to present what was then done by him, which is a Sacrament and
no Sacrifice? yea even in this, are they manifestly divided, to give an
account, wherein the action of sacrificing consists, whether in the words of
consecration, This is my Body; or in putting it on the altar. Qu. Yet may not
some be present there with a safe Conscience, when no evil is intended? Ans. We
ought not, from these grounds: 1. The scandal, and offend^ng of our Brother,
which is not to be judged from our intention, but from what is manifest to
others, in our doing such a thing. 2. The hardening of Papists in their way,
this being a special symbol of their profession, whereby they are discerned. 3.
It were an obvious dissimulation before God, and with the adversary, in that
professed communicating with them in an external part of worship.

SECT. XIII.
Qu. IS it not an essential of the Christian Religion, that such a precise
number of Sacramen^s is, and neither more nor fewer than Seven, as is the
Doctrine of the Romish Church? Ans. It is indeed an essential of their
Religion, but such as could never show its warrant from the Bible, where two
Sacraments only can be found of Christ's appointment, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, as having these requisites to a Sacrament of the New Testament: 1. An
external visible element. 2. That it be of express Divine institution. 3. To
have a promise of Grace and Pardon annexed thereto, which is not only
signified, but offered and sealed to all, who rightly partake thereof. 4. That
it be perpetual unto the Worlds end. Qu. Are these other five Sacraments of the
Romish Church but of humane invention, to wit, Confirmation, Penance, Extreme
unction, Orders, and Marriage? Ans. Since Divine Worship must be according to
the Rule given us by the Lawgiver, it is clear, these have not the least
impress of a Divine appointment thereon. Qu. Is not Confirmation an ancient
practice of the Church? Ans. It was a custom in the Primitive times, to bring
Children Baptized, and after they came to some years, before the Church, to put
them in mind of their Baptism, and engagements they were under, which they now
turn into a Sacrament, and therewith use Chrism, which is Oil mixed with Balm,
putting it on the forehead, in the form of a Cross, with these words; I sign
and confirm thee with the Chrism of Salvation, giving them a blow on the face,
with other foolish rites, by which they say the fullness of the Holy Ghost is
given: But how this is a Sacrament, or by what Institution ordained, or what
promise of Grace and Pardon is annexed hereto, must be sought elsewhere, than
from the Bible. Qu. But is not Penances a part of Repentance, and a visible
sign thereof? Ans. The public profession of Repentance, for public scandalous
sins, is a duty; but no such outward sign was ever instituted in the Word, as
Whipping, Pilgrimage, etc. Yea, nothing more contrary thereto, than their
declared meaning of this to be a Satisfaction to justice, and Compensation of
the wrong done unto God thereby; nor can they agree among themselves about the
Sacramentality thereof, if the form be in the act of the Priests Absolution, or
not. Qu. Are not Marriage and Orders unquestionably of Divine appointment. Ans.
None will deny that Marriage, and these Offices appointed by Christ in his
house, have their Warrant in the Scripture; but not as Sacraments; yea is it
not amazing, how the Romish Church should assert this, who maintain the use of
these Sacraments to be necessary to Salvation, when all of their Church are by
their own Doctrine excluded from one of them, the whole Laity from Orders, and
the Clergy from Marriage. Qu. Is there not yet ground for extreme Unction, Jam.
4: 14. In which with the Oil of Olive they anoint diverse parts of the bodies of
those; who are in death bed, with such words; I anoint such a place, that
wherein thou have sinned, thou may be forgiven? Ans. For what the Apostle
there mentions: 1. The recovery of the sick person, is evidently intended; but
this extreme Unction in not used, until the recovery of the party be past hope.
2. The health there promised was miraculous, answering to that time, when the
Faith of Miracles was in the Church; and temporary, for such as had the
extraordinary gift of healing: but for the Elders of the Church praying over
the Sick, though not having such a gift now, we deny not its prepetual use.

SECT. XIV.
Qu. Has not that Article of the Romish Doctrine, Transubstantiation, clear
warrant in the Scripture, that Christ's bodily presence in the Sacrament, is
such, as the whole substance of the Bread and Wine there, in the act of
Consecration, is turned into the substance of his Body and Blood? Ans. It is
manifest, 1. That it could be no more a Sacrament, if the sign should be turned
into the thing signified. 2. It is expressly to deny the real Body of Christ,
and that he did visibly and locally leave this World; Whom the Heavens must
contain, until the time of the restitution of all things, Acts 3: 11. 3. It is
most directly contrary to the Scripture, where it is so evident, that the
Bread and Wine remain still the same, after the Consecration, 1 Cor. 11: verse.
26. So often you eat of (...) this Bread: And let a Man examine himself, and so
let him eat of this Bread, 1 Cor. 10: 16. The Bread which we break, is it not
the Communion of the Christ? Yea, Acts 2: 46. Where the partaking of the
Sacrament is called the Breaking of Bread, in all which it is most expressly
showed to be still Bread. 4. It is clear, that Jesus Christ as Man, cannot be
in diverse places at once; nor his Body at the same time in Heaven, and upon
Earth in the Host, being made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted,
Heb. 2: 17. 5. This is to subject the blessed Body of Christ, now in a
glorified state, to the greatest ignominies, such as to go into the belly, to
be eaten by his enemies; to be destroyed by rats and other beasts, the very
conceiving of which should cause horror. Qu. Are not these the very words of
Institution, when Jesus Christ took the Bread, This is my Body? Ans. They are,
but nothing more usual in Scripture, than such figurative expressions as this
is, to show the sacramental Union betwixt the Bread and Christ's Body, as 1 Cor.
10: 1. The Rock was Christ. Joh. 15: 1. I am the true vine; which I am sure
none can take in the literal sense: But I confess, such need not fear to lose
their cause, who from the Church's Authority can make void Scripture, Sense,
and Reason at once. Qu. Wherein does this contradict Sense, or Reason. Ans. It
expressly shows, 1. That we must not credit our own eyes, and that all who were
witnesses of the Miracles of Christ, could have no certainty thereof by their
sight; though these were given to confirm the Truth unto men's senses. 2. That
the accidents of Bread and Wine, such as color, taste, etc. can remain without
their Subject. 3. That the same numerical Body should be in so many places at
once, which is in effect, to deny the Body of Christ to be humane and finite.
Qu. Yet is it not agreeable to take away the Cup from the People, in the
Eucharist? Ans. If the written Word have any weight, it is then sure, how
contrary this is, 1. To the Institution, and Command of Jesus Christ, Mat. 26:
27. Which in these words is express, Drink ye all of it. 2. To the Command,
and Rule given us by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11: 23. Let a man examine himself, and
so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, which has there a respect
to all, who have cause for self examination. 3. Does so far frustrate that end
of the appointment of the Lords Supper, for commemorating his death and
sufferings, So often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye show
forth the Lords death, till he come again: since it is clear, they cannot
aright celebrate the memory thereof, who partake not of that part of the
Sacrament, whereby we commemorate the effusion of Christ's blood. 4. Though in
the first administration, by Jesus Christ himself, the receivers then were
Apostles; ^et is it manifest, he did then enter the whole Christian Church in
possession of such a privilege, in that very man^er he gave it, and not the
least shadow for this restriction to be found.

SECT. XV.
Qu. IS there not safe Worshipping God, under a visible representation, and in
an Image, according to the practice of the Romish Church? Ans. It is not their
practice only; but professed Doctrine and Principle, that the Images of the
Trinity are not for a show set up, but for Religious adoration; which, 1. Is a
most direct violation of the moral Law: Deuteronomy. 5: 8. Thou shall not make unto
thy self any graven Image, or the similitude of any thing, to bow down to it.
2. It is to change the glory of the invisible God, into the likeness of a
sinful creature, Romans 1: 23. Which none can deny to be the grossest Idolatry.
3. It is a most express breach of the Command, which forbids all serving the
true God, after the manner which the Heathens used in serving their Idols,
Deuteronomy. 12: 30, 31. Take heed to thy self, that thou be not snared, by asking how
these Nations did serve their Gods, thou shall not do so to the Lord thy God;
which is not, thou shall not do so to these Idols, but not in that manner to
the true God, as they did to their Idols. 4. There can be no possible
representing the Invisible God, by any outward resemblance: To whom will ye
liken me? Isa. 46: 5. And therefore, when the Law was given, Deuteronomy. 4: 12. The
People Heard a voice, but saw no shape, lest thereby they should take occasion
to represent him by an external image. 5. How great a sin it is to conceive, or
imagine in our hearts, that the glorious God is like any thing, how excellent
soever, We think, it is clear, Acts 17: 29. Qu. But can this charge the Romish
Church with Idolatry. since they do not fix or terminate their Worship on the
Image, but on what is thus represented? Ans. No subtle distinction will acquit
before the Lord, and at the bar of his Word, what he has so expressly
condemned; when it is clear, 1. That not only worshipping with our mind the
Image, but all corporal adoration thereof is forbidden, as Idolatrous worship,
Thou shall not bow down thereto. 2. None will deny but Aarons calf, and those
of Jeroboams, were intended for the true God; yet their worship was most gross
Idolatry. 3. We find the brazen Serpent, though an instituted type, under the
Old Testament, taken down and destroyed, when once the People begun in an
Idolatrous way, to look after it. Qu. Is it not lawful to make an Image of
Christ, who is truly Man, for keeping up the remembrance of him in our Worship?
Ans. We may not, 1. Because it is expreslie forbidden to frame unto ourselves
the likeness of any thing in Heaven, where the blessed body of Christ now is.
2. Since both natures in him are inseparable, this were to fix a representation
in our mind of his manhood only. dividing it from his Divinity; and thus give a
manifest advantage to Arrianism. 3. Nothing from the Scripture gives the least
show of any shape, or lineament of his Body, to let us see, that under no
visible Image, we should seek to represent him. 4. The true portraicture of
Christ crucified, we have set before our eyes in the Gospel, and administration
of the Sacraments, as is clear, Gal. 3: verse. 1. Qu. Yet is there not safe
ground, for the worship of Angels, of the Virgin Mary, and of the Saints; since
this is not directed unto them, as unto God, but in a lower degree? Ans. God
alone is. and ought to be the object of Religious Worship, which in no degree
can be given unto any creature whatsoever, as is express from the Command,
Matthew. 4: 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. 2. All worshipping of Angels is forbidden; Col. 2: 18. Rev. 10: 10. 3.
Since Religious Worship is due to God alone, we may in no degree give it to the
Virgin Mary, or the Saints, since there is but one Mediator Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2: 5. Yea this were, so far, to put them in the place of God, to provoke
his jealousy, Exo. 24: 14. Thou shall worship no other God, for the Lord,
whose Name is Jealous, is a Jealous God: And of this is he in a special way
Jealous, that none be copartners with him in his Worship. Qu. Is there no
warrantable use of Images? Ans. The use of Images is not simply condemned, for
we find some in the Temple by express Command, though they were only Typical,
to shadow out things to be fulfilled under the New Testament: there is a
Political use of Images also lawful for ornament, and to keep up the
remembrance of friends; some historical and for doctrinal use: but none should
be set up in Churches, or in the least set apart for Religious Worship.

SECT. XVI.
Qu. MAy not the Worship of God, in the public Prayers of the Church be in an
unknown tongue, according to the Popish Doctrine? Ans. You have the Apostles
answer to this, 1 Cor. 14: 2. He that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks
not unto men, but unto God; for who understands him? In which he shows, there
can be no visible communion, in such an act of worship: and lets us see, how it
contradicts one great end of public worship, that such can have no real and
heart consenting therein, which is indispensiby called for in that duty of
public Prayer; as we see, verse. 16. For how shall be that occupies the room
of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, since he understands not
what thou say? Qu. Is it not enough to entrust Church-guides with this, to
whom the People makes their Confession? Ans. We know no such implicit relyance
taught by the Scripture; but there is no cure, where men will entrust both
Religion, and Reason at once, to the disposal of others. Qu. Yet is there not a
necessity of some Implicit relyance on these, since according to the Romish
Doctrine, none can be assured of his own Salvation, but what he has on the
assurance of his Priest and Confessor. Ans. Nothing is more clear, than a
Christians access to be assured of his being in the state of Grace, and that
he has passed from death to life, 1 Ioh. 3: 14. Upon these grounds, 1. Because
a rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God, is attainable here, as the Apostle
shows, Romans 5: verse. 2. 2. That by the works and evidences of Sanctification,
a most firm and infallible assurance, is in this life given to the Saints, 1
Ioh, 3: 18, 19. Let us not love in tongue neither in word, but in deed and
truth; and hereby do we know, that we are in the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. 3. By the testimony of the Spirit, witnessing with our
Spirits, That we are the children of God, Rom 8: 16. 4. By that earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts, whereby we are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 1:
13, 14. and 4: 30. Qu. Is there no ground for that Article of the Romish
Doctrine, that under pain of damnation, there be a Confession of the most
secret sins of men, yea, their very thoughts, so far as they can remember, unto
the Priest, according to that, James 5: 16. Confess your faults one to
another? Ans. We see as much ground from this, to confess to the people, as to
the Priest; nor does the Scripture warrant any such thing; but this assurance
have we, that He who confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy, Prove.
28: 13. Which none will deny is there meant unto God: nor did the Saints in
Scripture know Auricular Confession. I said, I will confess my transgressions
unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Psalm. 32: 5. Though
we deny not the duty of public Confession, in the case of public and
scandalous sins; but if men shut not their eyes; nothing but a politic
interest is here, to be thus on the most hid, and close counsels of men, by
such a pretext to keep the Conscience under awe.

SECT. XVII.
Qu. BUt how should that plea be answered, which the Romish Church has to
prove their Religion, from its unity, universality, and an uninterrupted
succession? Ans. It is I confess strange and astonishing; when so clear, 1.
For her Unity, That besides what known differences they are at amongst
themselves, in many Doctrines, they are visibly divided about the very
foundation of their Faith, and Infallibility of their Church, whether it
resolve on the Pope alone, or on the Pope and a Council, or that late found-out
Rule of Oral Tradition. 2. For an Universality, it is easy to know, how much
more than the one half, where the Christian Faith is embraced through the
World, does not at all own the Sea of Rome, And 3. For that Succession of their
Church, and uninterrupted line of Popes, they will not themselves debate, how
there have been ^hree Popes at one time, yea by what horrid means some of them
got up to that throne, as their greatest Writers are forced to confess. Qu.
But is the Apostasy of that Church such, as there is no safe union with it, nor
hope of being saved in their Religion? Ans. If Rome be that spiritual Babylon,
Rev. 18: 4. as is there most evident, then is the command peremptory, to come
out of her, le^t being partakers of her sins, they be partakers of her plagues:
yea such a threatening we may read, Rev. 14: 9, 10. as should cause men to
tremble, who are not under a strange height of induration; and now since the
breaking up of so great a light, and these clear discoveries of the truth, are
the Waters become bloody, Revel. 16: 3. Qu. Yet can all this make out the
charge of Antichristianism, or that the Pope is the Antichrist, who is so
expressly foretold, 2 These. 2: 3, 4? Ans. To resolve such a thing, these are
undeniably clear, 1. That the Holy Ghost, in the Scripture, has been in a more
than ordinary way, particular, in pointing Antichrist out, by such notorious
marks and characters, that after ages might know him, if they will not shut
their eyes; and that a most exact portraicture is there drawn of such an
adversary, what should be his form and shape, with the manner of his
appearance. 2. Except we deny our Senses, it is certain, that we see with our
eyes such an one, as is there showed forth; so as none ever knew the face of a
Man, by his Picture drawn to the life in a frame, better then the Church this
day may know Antichrist, and that this is he, who so clearlie answers all these
marks, which in the Scripture are given of him; even he, Whose coming shall be
after the working of Satan, with all power, signs, and lying wonders,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
appointed to be used with thanksgiving; who sits in the Temple of God and
exalts himself above all that is called God, bewitcheth the Kings of the
earth with his enchantments, and is drunk with the blood of the martyrs of
Christ Jesus; yea, whose Traffic, and Merchandice, is not only Gold and
Silver, but The souls of men, Rev. 18: 13. And can we be in the dark, to know
or discover who this Antichrist is, whose Doctrine is stated in so direct an
opposition to Jesus Christ, and the great design of the Gospel. 3. Antichrist
must be already come, and revealed, else according to the Scripture, that
Prophecy can never have its accomplishment, since even in the Apostles times,
this Mystery began to work, and he who for a time did withhold his coming, the
Heathen Empire of Rome, has been long since taken out of the way; and as the
Scripture points his first coming, and appearance in the first times of the
Church; so his last close, and final ruin to be near the second coming of the
Lord 4. It is thus undeniable, that this adversary can be no single person, or
of a short continuance, but is a politic Body and Kingdom, centred, and
united in one supreme Head, and with a succession for many ages. 5. It is
clear, that these express Marks and Characters given by the Scripture, for the
Churches knowing of Antichrist, could answer to no Adversary else, which Jesus
Christ ever had under the New Testament, either Pagan or Mahumetan. Qu. Since
Antichrists fall must be by the Word, as is clear, 2 These. 2: 4. whom the Lord
shall consume by the breath of his mouth, can it be now applicable to the
Romish Church, whilst Popery is so spreading, even in those Parts, where the
Word is most powerfully preached? Ans. This needs not be strange, if we
consider, 1. That Antichrists fall, according to the Scripture, must be by
degrees, as his rise was. 2. That where the truth is not received in love, 2
These. 2: 18. it cannot long want judicial effects, to be given up to strong
delusions. 3. It is easy to see, how such as at this day have fallen off to
Popery, are not upon debate, or by arguments to their judgment engaged, but
it is the visible product of a licentious time, and from an unusual growth of
Atheism and Ignorance; yea those only are found to change their Religion, who
never in earnest embraced any. 4. Yet can none deny those great and
extraordinary effects, the preached word has had to recover the Church from
Antichristian darkness, in these last ages, to which those famous Plantations
of the Gospel, in Britain, Ireland, France, Germany, the Low countries, etc.
are to this day a witness, where the greatest Atheists may see an immediate
appearance of God, and something above nature, with that convincing increase of
light, as enforces such even to gnaw their tongue with pain, who do nor cease
to oppose the truth.

Some serious Considerations further anent Popery, and the import of that great
controversy betwixt the Romish, and reformed Churches at this day.
THough there seems small grounds of hope, to convince such, who in the holy
judgment of God, are given up to that strong delusion of Popery, and cease
not to oppose themselves to the clearest discoveries of the truth: yet this
being so sad and deplorable a sight, to see how much of the Christian World
thus Perish, who will not once open their eyes, and is so clear, that under the
greatest of judgments, this way must involve them, (if the Scripture of God
have any weight or credit with such:) yea since this is so grave and concerning
a duty, now in these last times, to bea^ witness against Antichrist, and pursue
without ceasing that call, whatever success it should have, that men would come
out of Babylon, and hasten from under approaching wrath and judgment: I shall
here add, to what is premitted before upon this subject, some serious
Considerations concerning Popery, with an appeal to the Conscience of the
Adversary, yea to their reason and judgment, if they will allow its free
exercise herein, anent the truth thereof.

CONSID. 1.
FIrst, At what a rate by clear and undeniable consequence, from the Romish
Doctrine and principles, one can be Popish, conform to their way; and what is
necessarily imported in being a Roman Catholic, as they thus term themselves,
which is not more strange, and astonishing in it self, than may be clear in
these particulars.

1. That it is to deliver up their reason and judgment to the conduct of such,
of whom they must see true cause to fear, adventuring upon in the smallest of
their outward interests: And where it is so visible, its money for merit, and
that all can be sold at this market upon such a price; yea where the poor only
must be left hopeless, who thus has not to expiate their guilt, and purchass a
plenary indulgence: as Petrarch of old was enforced to say, that if Judas could
come with the price of his Masters blood to the Romish market, he might be
welcome to buy an absolution; where, no sin needs want a dispensation to allow
it, or a pardon for its commitment, if their purse can possibly answer thereto.

2. This is to quite that judgment of discerning given them of God, and be shut
out of all Proper knowledge of the Scripture with their own consent (except
these of the Clergy) so as they must not trust their own eyes, but others in
the great interest of their eternal state, and thus take the Romish Authority
for their Bible; yea such, whom they cannot but see, what Palpable ignorance in
some, and deceit and falsehood is in others of those they thus implicitly
credit, and that the concerns of this earth, and their private interest does
for the most of such more sway, than any thing of Religion.

3. It is by clearest consequence manifest, that this is a visible betaking of
themselves to a Covenant of Works, and to stand thereby, in the most express
opposition to the great intent of the Gospel; since according to their
Principles, it is merit, yea their own Proper merit must be the way for their
obtaining of heaven; and all they ascribe to Jesus Christ herein is this, only
to give life and Salvation to their merits, which yet are in themselves, and
from their own intrinsic worth, without the imputation of Christ's merit
thereto, thus meritorious; as they term it, ex ^ondigno: And thus only do they
admit, a restoring again by him of a Covenant of Works on the same terms with
the first; Do this and live.

4. It must be at that rate, one can be this day Popish, of the grossest
Idolatry, and a turning the glory of the invisible God, into the similitude of
a corruptible man, Romans 1: verse. 23. with a most express counteracting of that
great precept of the Moral Law against bowing down and Worshipping of any
graven Image, they being no less thus guilty of an Idolatrous Worship, than
either the Church of Israel of Old, or the Pagan world could be charged with;
since both had a respect further than the Image it self, the one to the true
God, and the other to their feigned Deity.

5. What ever liberty this way gives to sin, and to lay the stress of their
inward peace on the Priests absolution; yet it is clear, that at that rate on
these terms can one be Popish this day, to subject themselves to a yoke and
bondage from men, that without a judicial stroke on their Conscience might
seem intolerable; such as Auricular Confession to a Priest, of their most
secret sins, and this under the pain of damnation; their Pennan^es, with that
blind and unlimited obedience therein to their Church Guids without access to
consult the Scripture; as if this way of expiating sin could be a Satisfaction
before the holy God, such as their whipping of themselves, and going in
Pilgrimage to some Superstitious place, yea thus meritorious, because they be
grievous to the flesh; but why not rather, an offering up of the fruit of their
body for the sin of their soul, as those of old unto Molech, which might
witness a further degree of doing violence to their own flesh. If men might
thus think by a sacrifice of their devising to appease the Justice of God.

6. This necessarily also must follow an embracement of Popery, and subjecting
to that way; to be put beyond a possibility of any inward peace here, or quiet
as to their future state in another world, since it is undeniable. 1. They must
have some merit of their own, and an humane Satisfaction to confide in, and on
that foundation of good works, lay the weight of obtaining life, whilst ye^
according to their own Principles they see, there is no possible being sure, if
these shall be found equivalent in value to answer this end. 2. That no
assurance of Salvation is so much as attaineable, according to their Doctrine.
3. How sad a cure, as have no suteableness therewith to ease a disquiet and
awakened Conscience, does their Principles bring, such as Pennances, their own
Satisfaction, the Pop's Pardon, or absolution of the Priest, invocation of
Saints and Images, whence it was in the darkness of Popery, most found
themselves under that inforcement for so many dotations, and to stretch their
state to the furthest for soul-masses, since they could find no ground for
their souls quiet here. 4. And does not this way and Doctrine most visibly
pursue men, not unto death only, but beyond it, through these tormenting
thoughts and fear of a Purgatory to come, and that uncertainty as to the time
or term of release, so as at the best, death must have a terrible and
affrighting look.

7. If men would bring this near their thoughts, no less can serve to be a
Popish proselyte than a manifest involvement in the blood of all the Saints,
which has been shed, and serving themselves Heir to both the guilt and
judgment of such horrid and unexpressible cruelty exerced by the Romish Church
on those for so many ages past, who through grace did resist unto the death,
striving for the truth against Antichristianisme: for it is clear, how such
comes on the same score by their virtual consent, and justifying the same with
as real accession before the Lord thereunto, as though they had actually
concurred. Oh what a reckoning will this once be found, to enter into eternity
with, before the judgment seat of Christ?

8, And is it now possible for any to be Popish, but at that rate of resisting
the clearest discoveries of the truth, and an express doing despite to the
Spirit of Grace, a refusing to be cured, and to come to the light, now when
Antichristianisme is by such undeniable evidences revealed to the world, as men
cannot be in the dark, who this great Adversary is, that does not shut their
own eyes from it. Oh! what a revenge does hatred and malice at the truth,
cause, that can turn men cruel against themselves; nor is that stroke of
judicial blindness more strange and amazeing this day on the Jews, when
surrounded with so clear discoveries of the truth, than this now may be, which
is upon the Romish Church, tha^ cannot see that desperate state they are in,
when such undeniable light is held out from the Scriptures there anent, nay, it
must be said, who will not see this?

9. I must here further add, how evident also this is to be Popish, and
enrolled with such a party, that it is no less, than to stand under that most
dreadful peremptory threatening, as is in the whole of the Bible denounced
against such, as i^ these times of light shall engage with that way, Rev. 14:
9. If any man Worship the beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his fore
head, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is powered out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation, and he
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up for
ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and
his imag^, and who so receives the mark of his name. Oh! If men would be so
far awakned with the dread of this threatening, as once to come and see but with
their own eyes, to what party this is applicable, and expressly pointed at by
the Spirit of God there: and it is sure they could not then be in the dark, how
deep it draws, under what pretext so ever, for any to be Popish. Nor is it
strange, that after such abused light, hell becomes now more hot and more
inevitable than before, whilst so much of the Christian World (who own that
name and Profession) do shut their eyes and ears at so clear and distinct a
sound from the Scripture, seems to roll over all certainty hereof, to the
decision and irrevocable Sentence of the Great Judge.

CONSID. II.
SEcondly, Can it be in the dark this day, if this be not upon Choice, that the
great interest of the Reformed Church in contending against Popery, is a most
express appearance, and contending for the Truth of Christianity, and Doctrine
of the Scripture delivered to us in the Old and New Testament, And is so
discernable upon these great Heads. 1. That there is but one Mediator betwixt
God and Sinners, against such direct opposition thereto in the Doctrine of the
Romish Church, that brings in a plurality of Mediators, and the Worshipping of
Angels and Saints departed, for that end. 2. In behalf of the reality of
Christ's humane nature, which by the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is
subjected to have a new created being in their consecrated Hostia, at each
time, and every where, at the pleasure of a wretched man; which is in effect a
most express denying of his blessed body to be humane and finite. 3. It is
clear, how expressly concerned the Protestant Church is, in opposition to
Popery, to contend for the reality of Christ's death and suffering for his
Elect. And that this time is come and past, no more possibly to be repeated
again, wherein he once appeared in the end of the world to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9: 26. And by one offering has for ever perfected
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10: 14. Against that horrid blasphemy of the
Mass, which they own as a repeated offering of the blessed body of the
Redeemer, by the hands of the Priest unto God, as a Propitiatory sacrifice for
the living and the dead, which is so evident a subverting the foundations of
Christianity, and to make void the infinite value and efficacy of the death and
suffering of Christ once offered, and for ever in behalf of his Elect, whilst
they thus own a continued offering of his body, which as the Apostle shows,
Heb. 9: 25. that if Christ had offered himself often, he behoved to have
fuffered often. 4. And is it not clear, that great interest of truth, the
Reformed Church is now pressed to appear upon, against Popery, is the Doctrine
of Christ delivered to us in the Scripture, as that whereon we must found and
resolve our faith, and not the Authority of men, which they so expressly oppose
and deny; so as it is no less than the Christian cause and quarrel, for which
all who loves the truth, are called to contend, and that we should not be
berest of that blessed infallible rule and standart of truth, by those, whose
great aim is, to have it denuded of all Authority, but what is precarious and
dependent on them: nor to be so much as intelligible, and to have an articular
voice, until they cause it speak, and put what sense thereon they please.

CONSID. III.
THirdly, It may be astonishing (and is surely one of the greatest depths of
the Judgment of God this day) to see what of the world, with their own consent,
is subjected to so visible, and notour an imposture, as Popery is, whilst such,
as it would seem not conceiveable, how men can exerce reason, and not as in a
deep sleep, and have this hid from their eyes, the obvious deceit and imposture
of such a way, where no Religion but a compound of humane Policy, with their
own private interest and gain, is wholly intended. About which, I shall offer,
(I hope I may with some confidence say, it is for the truths sake) a short touch
here at, in some undeniable justances.

1. None will debate how this way is framed for such an interest, that there
may be a g^aunt and allowance from the Pope for any sin, and to transgress the
express Laws of the great Lawgiver, yea this put to sale; Oh what a strange
device, that for money men may have a liberty to destroy themselves: Whilst on
the other hand, nothing is followed with more severe threatenings, then an
absolute subjecting ^o their arbitrary Commands, so that one may safely disobey
the holy God, and this with a warrant; but not the Pope, and his Clergy under
the hazard of condemuation.

2. That such a stock and treasure of merits should be in keeping by the
Romish Church, and under their trust to dispose of, as a thing deposited into
their hand by such, who had more than enough for themselves to serve for the
use of others? And thus at their disposal to give out thereof to satisfy divine
Justice for those, who have not sufficient merit of their own; this only being
necessarily provided, that these who get a share of such a treasure, compense
it by somewhat equiv^lent, and buy it ere they have it: but herein could they
never resolve the world how to be sure, if these merits were truly more than
such, whose they were, needed themselves, or how they came into their hand, or
was entrusted by them to apply; or if their strength be not long since spent
and exhausted by so long continued application in such innumerable indulgences
given out of that treasury: Oh! what a deplorable contrivance is here, which I
confess, should be owned as one of the greatest Master pieces of cheatry, as
ever the world knew; if it were only to cheat men of their purse, but this goes
further, to those great interests, of the immortal soul; and yet so many will
not see the visible intent of this trade and merchandice, that it is indeed the
merchandice of the souls of men, so expressly foretold by the holy Ghost, Rev.
18: 13.

3. Their taking on them to change the condition of the dead, and ensure to
their friends the happy estate of their soul upon some large offerings to the
Church for this. As likewise that respect and veneration they require from men
to the relics of the Saints deceased, whereto they ascribe such power both
against fin, and for healing diseases of the body: yea most of these pretended
relics, such as must necessarily plead some extraordinary miracle to be
wrought for their continued preservation, that thus they may with confidence
persuade the world, their having some bone or scull of the Apostles and
Primitive Saints to be still seen, if any have a heart to give a price for it.

4. That the Romish Pope is the true Successor of Peter, and thus Christ's Vicar
as they term him, upon the earth which men must needs take upon trust, with
an implicit, faith from such, whose preferment, and gain in the World should
be other wise ruined, if this be not taken off their hand, whilst yet it is so
undeniable, at what a strait they are, to put a handsome shape on this device,
or how the World can know upon any sure gronud. 1. How Peter was at Rome, or
that he was settled in a peculiar manner Bishop in that See, which neither
Scripture, nor the most ancient records of the Church gives the least shadow of
ground for. 2, How the Pope becomes his Successor, or upon what warrant, yea,
that this should be an Article of men's faith, where the Scripture is wholly
silent. 3. How that pretended succession to Peter in that particular Diocese of
Rome, should have a Catholic Power and Headship over the whole Church annexed
thereto, so as all who succeed in in the one, must also in the other. 4. How a
warrantable Succession of each particular Pope; can be made sure to the
Apostle, upon this pretended right, and that he has lawfully succeeded; since
if this be null, and the election be unlawful, they have then with their own
consent no promise of Assistance, nor obedience in this case due. 5. When it is
so clear, that the Power of the Keys were given no less to the rest of the
Apostles, then to Peter, as is express Matthew. 18: 18, 19. yea, that Peter
claimed no such presidence amongst the rest of the Apostles, as may be seen
Act. 15. upon what ground can they thus refound so great a claim as this? Oh
what an amazing infatuation are those in, who should take this upon trust, the
very recital whereof is so obvious a refutation of it self: And that on such a
pretended Power and Supremacy of Peter, the whole weight and superstructure of
the Romish Hierarchy must lean, yea which is of a higher concern, that on
this, by undeniable consequence, must be rolled over a weight no less, than the
eternal interest, and perishing of many millions of souls. who upon this
Plenary Power and Infallibility of the Pope, thus founded upon such a ground,
do adventure with such an Acquittance and Absolution, as their security into
another World.

5. That notable device of Purgatory may be a convincing witness to the horrid
imposture of Popery, than which nothing could have been more subservient to
that great design of a lucrative interest, and to keep the people under a
continued aw and terror; yea what improvement for so many ages they have made
of this for their own private gain, that it may be seen, the Romish Church
should lose one of the greatest revenues it has, if purgatory were not kept up
amongst them, and is beyond reckoning by themselves what continued income this
has had, and quantum haec fabula profuit Romanae Ecclesiae. But Oh! such as
will thus adventure hereon, may have saddest cause to fear, that this
Purgatory, on their immediate parting with time, be found a real hell, whence no
release, or Possibility thereof can be, though all the treasures of the earth
could be given for the same; and then shall know this sad verification of this
truth 2 These. 2: 11, 12. Which so expressly points at Antichristian Popery, for
this cause God shall send them strong delusion, to believe a lie, because they
received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved; that they all may
be damned, who believe not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

6. What strange account do their legends give of their pretended Miracles, as
the most effectual way to gain c^edit to these Doctrines, which they see can
have no possible founding (...) the Scripture; such as that we may judge those,
who are but in the least knowing amongst them, wonder, how Credit could be
expected from any thereto, such as they tell us of S. Francis, how he was
greater then John the Baptist, and better then all the Apostles, who in Vision
received the Wounds of Christ, suffered the same griefs, in whom all virtues of
the Saints, as well under the Old, as under the New Testament, ar put unitive
and conjunctive, and after, most blasphemously puts him in the same room with
our most blessed Lord, by reason of a scedule which they say Leo the Friar saw
descend from Heaven, and fell on the Head of Francis, whereon was write, this
man is the grace of God, and example of all perfection, etc. This Book, wherein
these; yea where more horride blasphemies are written, called liber
conformitatum impressis Bononiae Fol. 3, and 250. is called by them their
golden book, with this express clause underneath by a general consent of the
Chapter of that Order, ^ye have searched* this book, and found nothing worthy
of correction. Such an instance also is he, whom they call St Dominick, of whom
they show that Christ raised three only from the dead, but S. Dominick, three
in one City that he had the Angels at his Service, (but it may be easy to judge
what Angels they were) how the Elements did obey him, and the Devils trembled
at him: how he had a star in his forehead, when he was Baptized, and restored
forty strangers to life that where over whelmed in a ship, and long under the
water, with much more of this kind; published to the World by Anthony an
Archbishop of his Order. Anthon. Arch. Page 3, 23. but with these famous
instances may be sitly joined two Nunes, no less known and public, who if they
had lived in one time, and their order could have allowed it, might have been
suteably matched with other, the one is Magdalena de Cruce, Abbess of a
Monastery of Franciscan Nuns, who by the Power of the Devil appeared to
Mariners in a storm at sea, when invocate, and the storm calmed, was
sometimes lift up into the air, and the Sacrament went up visibly out of the
Priests hand that said Mass, through the air before all that look on, unto her:
was of such repute, that not only many ladies in Spain but the Queen also when
she was near to be brought to bed, sent the mantles wherein the Child was to be
wrapped, for her to bless: yet at length upon clearest discovery, and her own
confession, found to be a witch, in express compact with the Devil since she
was nine Years old, so as the Spanish Inquisitors could not get shifted some
form of Sentence against her Anno 1540. A passage, the truth whereof the
Romish Church will not offer to disown, the relation being so public and known
by their own writers: And indeed she was well suited to be an Abbess of S,
Francis Order. The other Instance is that relation set forth by one Stephen de
Lusignan dedicated to the French Queen of the great Miracles in the Year 1586,
which happened to the Prioress de le Annonciado of Lisbon in Portugal, approved
by the greatest Church men there, whose names are set down, how usually Christ
appeared to her, and talked with her, and had the impress of his five wounds
put upon her, with many such strange things, so as severals were incited
through the fame of her, to become Nuns, yet at last was by a mervellous
providence from the Lord, discovered, and all to be an imposture, confessing
the same her self, with the whole manner of it, so as the evidence thereof did
enforce the Archbishop of Lisbon, with the Inquisition to make some show of
condemning her, as is printed at Seville 1589. but the discovery came too late
of this, or rather too soon for their interest; after the relation of her
Miracles had gone a broad. These instances I only here touch, of which so many
else are known to the world, that it may be seen, on what signs and lying
wonders, this party leanes for the support of their Doctrine, which may not
abide the light of the Scripture. But oh! It may be sad, and amazing in this
day, when the truth is so clearly showed forth, how so much the World seems to
have lost all sight and impressions thereof, yea, turned at that rate
Atheistical, to be thus imposed upon, for subjecting to that way, where the
bait cannot be more discernable then the hook, and where men must quite both
Religion and Reason at once, in getting such a style as this of a Roman
Catholic.

CONSID. IV.
FOurthly, Whilst this strange sight we have this day before us of the Romish
state and Hierarchy, with that peculiar frame and mould it is cast in, so
different from other Kingdoms of the world, of such numerous orders and
degrees, resolving in one Monarch and head the man of sin; after whom the world
so long has wondered. Let us but seriously also consider what true account
antiquity, on which they so much lean, gives of this way.

1. How clear and noture, even to admiration is that discovery so many ages
past, of this Adversary, his shape, the way and manner of his appearance, and
so expressly foretold by the holy Ghost, as we now see with our eyes in the
event, when upon no principles of Reason, or the least of visible appearances
such future emergencies could ever been foreseen, or have entered into men's
thoughts, that it may be demonstrably evident to all, this only could have been
revealed by him, to whom all his works are known from the beginning.

2. As the Scripture shows that early rise this mystery of iniquity had, and
its beginning to work with the first dawnings of Christianity, though then more
undiscernably, and under ground: This we may know also, under whose hand this
monstrous birth was most ripened, and brought forth, to a more Public View of
the World: to wit that horrid and vile wretch Phocas, who then usurped the
Empire, and conspired against his Master Mauritius, and as all Histories of
that time shows, what a plague and judgment from the Lord he was to the
world, so as, its related of a holy man, who then lived, after much wrestlings
in prayer with God with some serious enquiry, why such a vilewretch had been
set up over the Empire, got in a strange m^nner this answer, quia non inveni
pejorem. Yet this cruel and brutish man Phocas, as the Popish writers
themselves are forced to confess, was he, for whom Gregory the great by his
legate, does so congratulate his advancement, as he summonds the Angels and all
the Saints in heaven to rejoice therein. After whose death, the succeeding Pope
Boniface did so far insinuate on this Emperiour, as to divide him from the
Greek Patriarch, and obtained the granting of that Chartour, upon which their
pretended right stands, to be universal head and Bishop of the Christian
Church; a very obvious suteableness being here, for one bloody usurper, as this
was, who rose upon the assasination of that good Emperor and his Children, to
make thus way for another; nor a fitter mean could have been found to help the
man of sin to his throne, than this Phocas, for which see Baron. 81. an 603.
art. 3.

3. It should be remarkable, that concurrance of things was then for the more
full discovery of this Adversary, and of his being revealed to be that man of
sin showed by the holy Ghost, 2 These. 2: 3. when their own greatest writers are
enforced to tell, since this could not possibly be hid, how from the eighth
Century, and several ages after, such as exerced the papal power, were for the
most part, so many prodigies of wickedness in their time, that those Histories
seems to want words to express the horror and abomination of such as were
Popes, for which let any but read Platina himself lih. 5. upon Benedict the 4.
and many others, of their lives, where he shows, how they were become such, as
laying aside all divine Worship, like cruel tyrrants did exerce their malice in
the world; but that some of them lived not long, God taking them away as so
many Monsters of men: but more fully does Cardinal Benno speak to this, yea
Baronius also in his Annals Tom. 10. how it was then known their ordinary use
of Magic, consulting with the Devil, and giving themselves over to these
horrid Villainies, as no heathen records almost give such an account. And, which
are Baronius his own words, though one of the greatest friends to the Popish
interest, that such was the face of the Romish Church, as Sees were changed,
Bishoprics and Church offices given at the pleasure of the vilest Strumpets
that then bare rule at Rome. Now this is that true antiquity they have to boast
of to the world, and of those Popes, whose infallibility in all matters of
faith they would persuade men to rely on.

4. How undeniable is it from those times, when the Romish Hierarchy once began
to ripen to its height, what sorest plagues did thus follow and break in on the
Christian world, yea, what an inlet of grossest ignorance was therewith, not
only of divine things, but of all humane literature, and morality; as from the
concurrance of histories then is clear; that with the several steps of the
advance of the Popish grandour and power, the world did gradually turn worse,
yea, and in a strange manner became barbarous, rude and savage, so as both
Baronius and others of their writers, (who, they know intended no reflection
upon their way, further then necessity enforced them to speak) shows, such was
the face of those times, as it was a matter of suspicion to know the Greek
language, but to have any knowledge of the Hebrew, was no less than heresy;
yea calls them infaelicissima and luctuosissima Romanae Ecclesiae tempora,
and that these and following ages were such, wherein all things both humane and
divine, were in visible confusion.

5. And is it not noture to all, who consults the Church records what a flood
not only in dissolutness of practice, but Atheism in Principles did
remarkeably then break forth on the Christian world, with that advance of the
Romish interest toward its height; so as those, who were serious in the
matters of truth, were almost brought to a questioning of the whole of the
Gospel, and any sound founding of their faith in the matters of God, whilst
Religion seemed to be almost lost in fabulous traditions, and humane
inventions, thus Fredrick the third King of Suily, a religious Prince in such
dark times, was staggered about the Christian faith, and made to question if
the Gospel was not some humane device, as is published at length in his
conference with Arnoldus de Villanova a learned man, upon these grounds. 1.
That the whole Clergy great and small conformed their lives no wise to the
Scripture, had no regard to the souls of the people, and discharged sacred
offices, for a form only, or else in scorn and mockery, which then was so
noture, as it could not be hid. 2. That those of the more severe order of Monks
did obviously evidence hypocrisy, impiety, wantonness, rapine, yea incredulity
about the Gospel it self. 3. That in a Doctrine so weighty, and of such
consequence, as the Christian faith, the Romish Church seemed so little
concerned, were entangled in worldly affairs, and no course set on foot for
propagation of the Gospel, to satisfy whom Arnoldus showed, how expressly such
defection, and these corruptions were foretold under the New Testament, as that
conference published by him self shows. And besides, it is known what
advantage the visible grosness of Popery gave to Mahumidanisme, and for many's
falling off from the visible Profession of Christianity; which caused Averroes
the Philosopher to cry out, Cum Christiani Deum suum manducent, sit anima mea
cum Philosophis. Yea enforced such, who gave any serious look to the Scripture,
to say, that either the Scripture was not the Word of God, or such as professed
the same, were not Christians. And when thus Atheism may be seen to follow
Popery as its native effect, and mutually concur together. Oh! what might be
feared from such an obvious conjunction of both in this time, if the truth and
faithfulness of God were not his Churches security.

CONSID. V.
FIfthly, Sold it not seem strange, and such, as no reason can truly
answer, why in these times Kings and great men of the earth has given their
power to support the Romish interest, when this so visibly is destructive to
the just right, and interest of all Magistrates; but that we see it is of God,
in giving than so far up in his secret judgment, until the Scripture be
fulfilled, as is clear, Rev. 17: 17. for Its sure, otherwise these things can
not be hid from their eyes.

1. That as the grandour of the Romish Church grew up, how the Kings of the
earth by giving their power thereto, lost their own, and by their concurrace in
this design were no less evidently depressed, than the other raised; so as
all, who look in on the history of such times, may clearly see the several
steps of the Popes advance, in coming to his height, and of the Empir's
declining and fall, both in the Eastern and western parts, most visibly meet
in one and the same history: yea thus, how quickly Magistracy, and the power
thereof was turned to an Image and shadow, that it could not further live and
act, but as it was enlivened with the Romish breath, yea, how quickly in a few
ages after Phocas; the greatest of the western Emperors were forced to bow at
the Popes feet, so as Henry the fourth was put to stand three days in the cold
winter barefooted at the Pop's gates, ere he could be reconciled, upon some
pretended quarrel he had against him; yea the Popish writers accounts it their
honor to tell the world how Fredrick Barbarossa, the first Emperor of that
name, was made to lay his neck under Pope Alexanders feet, until he trampled
thereon, blasphemously making use of that Scripture, Ps. 91. that thus he would
tread upon the Lion and the Dragon: before he could obtain his son's liberty
then in prison in Venice, and at the Pop's disposing. And here we may have a
conspicuous Commentar on that Scripture, 2 These. 2: 3. that this let, which was
to be taken out of the way of the man of sin's being revealed, as is there
foretold, was not the heathen Empire of Rome only, but the Roman Empire in its
integrity and strength even after it was Christian.

2. It is undeniable from the Romish Doctrine and Principles, that power the
Pope and Rulers of their Church owns to dethrone Kings, and tranferre their
Kingdoms to others, and by there Interdiction to loose subjects from any tie
or alledgeance to their Prince, to bind or loose men's consciences, as they find
their own interest stand; and by that plenitude of their Churches power, to
exempt Ecclesiastic Persons from the Laws of Magistrates, so as they may not
be judged by these, for the most horride and notorious Crimes, which the Civil
Power ought to punish; whilst their Church immunities are a City of refuge for
retreat.

3. And as the Romish Religion stricks at the very roo^ of Piety and Godliness,
when by the Popes Power, yea of ordinary Priests, it can dispense with the most
horride Acts of wickedneis, murder, adultery, rapts, incest, sodomy, and has
their rates stated at what price they can purchass a full absolution for the
same, so does it thus no less visibly strick at the greatest security of
Government, and that which foundeth the strongest Obligations to all Civil and
Moral Duties, which is to have the aw and regard of Religion kept up in a
nation.

4. It is clear also how the Romish Doctrine subverts truth and righteousness
amongst men, which is the greatest security of all Personal interests, when it
avowedly warrants equivocation both in Oaths and Words, and in such doubtful
terms to swear, as may be directly contrair to the intention of the judge
requiring the same, so as an Oath in judgment cannot be the end of controversy,
yea by their Doctrine expressly teaches also, that a man is not bound to repent
presently for the most heinous sins, but is only necessar in the last extreme
of Life.

5. Are not the Principles of the Romish Religion such as are visibly
destructive even to humane society, in so professed owning, under a pretended
zeal against heresy (for such is the Doctrine of Christ unto them) those
Prodigies of cruelty, which we should think humane nature, though corrupt,
could not but tremble at, without being transformed into the very image of the
Devil? Such as the French and Irish Massacres, the Netherland persecution under
the Duke of Alva, the Spanish Inquisition, and those bloody years under Queen
Mary's reign in England, do before all the world witness; yea, its obvious,
how no cruelty, even of the Heathens in the first times of the Church can
almost be found to parallel with Popish cruelty, where they can have a door
opened for this. Oh! That it should be so little seen and laid to heart at this
day, how the common interest and concern of all Princes and Magistrates, even
upon their own civil rights, is to contend against this greatest adversary,
that ever Jesus Christ had upon the earth, and if now be not believed, saddest
experience may yet make this clear, that in those parts, where the truth has
been received and embraced, and by the good hand of the Lord rescued from the
yoke and dominion of Antichrist, that its sure, the security of the Church and
Commonwealth is there necessarily conjoined so, that if the Protestant interest
should wear out, and the truth decline, the land cannot possibly be safe,
where once this had been received.

The Romish interest now seems to gain ground, yea a strange and unusual
conju^ction to promote that way; but its well, we know a more blessed and
infallible security, than outward appearances to rest upon: and with that
assurance, as we can be persuaded of an eternal salvation by Jesus Christ. It
is sure also. 1. That the victory and decision of this war shall be on the
Lambs side, and those that are with him must overcome, when the living God has
past his word thereupon, to his Church; and though we may set no bounds, as to
any particular time, we have solid ground to believe that a more remarkable
stroke, above all that has been hitherto, hasteneth upon the Kingdom of
Antichrist. 2. That whosoever withdraw, and think it their interest now to
keep a distance in any adventuring for the truth, yet light and deliverance
shall arise to the Church from another airth; but this shall not be their
escape and outgate: Yea though it seem a strange contradiction to sense and
reason, it is to be the matter of our faith, that assuredly now the rise and
advance of the reformed Church is on foot, and her sharpest conflicts and
wrestlings must tend thereunto. 3. Though the Spirit of intercession and prayer
may be too discernably found under a sad restraint, as to what has been in
former times in the Church* yet this sure, that many prayers and groans once
put up by an innumerable company who now are in heaven, in behalf of the
Church, and for that solemn day of Babylons fall, yet waits and still cries
before the throne; such prayers, wherein they had greatest access and liberty
by the help of the Spirit, for pouring out their souls thus before the Lord. 4.
It Is sure we are to believe, that instruments shall be yet raised, and called
for that end with a mervelous appearance of God upon them, to execute the
judgment written against this Adversary; and O what a blessed, and honorable
service shall it be? 5. Should this not otherwise be made out, but through a
sea of blood, and wounding the heads over many Countries, yea in a way (as we
have clearest ground to judge) which humane reason could never reach. It is
sure, this cannot be wanting, and when the God of truth has said, such an
enemy shall be brought down, his Counsel must stand, though all the Kingdoms
of the earth stood in the way thereof; Oh! at what a rate does these now run
themselves in the way of his wrath and vengeance, and to be partakers of the
same plagues with Antichrist, who yet will not cease, for giving their power to
support that accursed and falling interest.

FINIS.
squirrel eating

