A DISCOURSE Concerning MILITIA'S AND Standing Armies, With relation to the
Past and Present Governments of EVROPE, AND OF ENGLAND in particular.

Res est periculi plena, summam Rei Publicae hominibus Mercenariis, sine re,
sine spe, quidvis ob pecuniam ausuris, committere; quorum profundam avaritiam
incendat ad nova molienda occasio, and fortuna secum fidem circumagat.

Thuan. Hist. London, Printed in the Year 1697.

A DISCOURSE Concerning Militia's and Standing Armies.
THERE is not perhaps in humane Affairs any thing so unaccountable as the
Indignity and Cruelty with which the far greater part of Mankind suffer
themselves to be used under pretense of Government. For some Men falsely
persuading themselves that bad Governments are advantageous to them, as most
conducing to gratify their Ambition, Avarice and Luxury, set themselves with
the utmost Art and Violence to procure their Establishment: and almost the
whole World has been trampled under foot, and subjected to Tyranny, for want of
understanding by what Methods they were brought into it. For tho Mankind take
great Care and Pains to instruct themselves in other Arts and Sciences, yet
very few apply themselves to consider the Nature of Government, an Enquiry so
useful and necessary both to Magistrate and People. Nay, in most Countries the
Arts of State being altogether directed either to enslave the People, or to
keep them under Slavery, it is become almost every where a Crime to reason
about Matters of Government. But if Men would bestow a small part of the Time
and Application which they throw away upon curious but useless Studies, or
endless Gaming, in perusing those excellent Rules of Government which the
Ancients have left us, they would be enabled to discover all such Abuses and
Corruptions as tend to the Ruin of Public Societies. It Is therefore very
strange that they should think Study and Knowledge necessary in every thing they
go about, except in the noblest and most useful of all Applications, The Art of
Government.

Now if any Man in compassion to the Miseries of a People should endeavor to
disabuse them in any thing relating to Government, he will certainly incur the
Displeasure, and perhaps be pursued by the Rage of those, who think they find
their Account in the Oppression of the World; but will hardly succeed in his
Endeavors to undeceive the Multitude. For the Generality of all Ranks of Men
are cheated by Words and Names; and provided the ancient Terms and outward
Forms of any Government be retained, let the Nature of it be never so much
altered, they continue to dream that they shall still enjoy their former
Liberty, and are not to be awakned till it prove too late. Of this there are
many remarkable Examples in History; but that particular Instance which I have
chosen to insist on, as most suitable to my purpose, is, the Alteration of
Government which happened in most Countries of Europe about the Year 1500. And
it is worth Observation, that tho this Change was fatal to their Liberty, yet it
was not introduced by the Contrivance of ill-designing Men; nor were the
mischievous Consequences perceived, unless by a few wise Men, who, if they saw
it, wanted Power to prevent it.

Two hundred Years being already passed since this Alteration began, Europe has
felt the Effects of it by sad Experience; and the true Causes of the Change are
now become more visible.

To lay open this Matter in its full Extent, it will be necessary to look
farther back, and examine the Original and Constitution of those Governments
that were established in Europe about the Year 400, and continued till this
Alteration.

When the Goths, Vandals, and other warlike Nations, had at different Times,
and under different Leaders, overrun the Western Parts of the Roman Empire,
they introduced the following Form of Government into all the Nations they
subdued. The General of the Army became King of the Conquered Country; and the
Conquest being absolute, he divided the Lands amongst the Great Officers of his
Army, afterward called Barons; who again parcelled out their several
Territories in smaller Portions to the inferior Soldiers that had followed
them in the Wars, and who then became their Vassals, enjoying those Lands for
Military Service. The King reserved to himself some Demeasnes for the
Maintenance of his Court and Attendance. When this was done, there was no
longer any standing Army kept on foot, but every Man went to live upon his own
Lands; and when the Defense of the Country required an Army, the King summoned
the Barons to his Standard, who came attended with their Vassals. Thus were the
Armies of Europe composed for about eleven hundred Years; and this Constitution
of Government put the Sword into the hands of the Subject, because the Vassals
depended more immediately on the Barons, than on the King; which effectually
secured the Freedom of those Governments. For the Barons could not make use of
their Power to destroy those limited Monarchies, without destroying their own
Grandeur; nor could the King invade their Privileges, having no other Forces
than the Vassals of his own Demeasnes to rely upon for his Support in such an
Attempt.

I lay no great stress on any other Limitations of those Monarchies; nor do I
think any so essential to the Liberties of the People, as that which placed the
Sword in the hands of the Subject. But since in our time most Princes of Europe
are in possession of the Sword, by standing Mercenary Forces kept up in time of
Peace, and absolutely depending upon them, I say that all such Governments are
changed from Monarchies to Tyrannies. Nor can the Power of granting or refusing
Money, tho vested in the Subject, be a sufficient Security for Liberty, where a
standing Mercenary Army is kept up in time of Peace: For he that is armed, is
always Master of the Purse of him that is unarmed. And not only that Government
is Tyrannical, which is tyrannically exercised; but all Governments are
Tyrannical, which have not in their Constitution a sufficient Security against
the Arbitrary Power of the Prince.

I do not deny that these limited Monarchies during the greatness of the
Barons, had some Defects: I know few Governments free from them. But after all,
there was a Balance that kept those Governments steady, and an effectual
Provision against the Encroachments of the Crown. I do less pretend that the
present Governments can be restored to the Constitution beforementioned. The
following Discourse will show the impossibility of it. My Design is, first of
all to explain the Nature of the past and present Governments of Europe, and to
disabuse those who think them the same, because they are called by the same
Names; and who ignorantly clamor against such as would preserve that Liberty
which is yet left.

In order to this, and for a further and clearer Illustration of the Matter, I
shall deduce from their Original the Causes, Occasions, and the Complication of
those many unforeseen Accidents, which falling out much about the same time,
produced so great a Change. And it will at first sight seem very strange, when
I shall name the Restoration of Learning, the Invention of Printing, of the
Needle and of Gunpowder, as the chief of them; things in themselves so
excellent, and which, the last only excepted, might have proved of infinite
Advantage to the World, if their remote Influence upon Government had been
obviated by suitable Remedies. Such odd Consequences, and of such a different
Nature, accompany extraordinary Inventions of any kind.

Constantinople being taken by Mahomet the Second, in the Year 1453, many
Learned Greeks fled over into Italy; where the favorable reception they found
from the Popes, Princes, and Republics of that Country, soon introduced
amongst the better sort of Men, the study of the Greek Tongue, and the Ancient
Authors in that Language. About the same time likewise some Learned Men began
to restore the Purity of the Latin Tongue. But that which most contributed to
the Advancement of all kind of Learning, and especially the study of the
Ancients, was the Art of Printing; which was brought to a great degree of
Perfection a few Years after. By this means their Books became common, and
their Arts generally understood and admired. But as Mankind from a natural
propension to Pleasure, is always ready to choose out of every thing what may
most gratify their vicious Appetites; so the Arts which the Italians first
applied themselves to improve, were principally those that had been subservient
to the Luxury of the Ancients in the most corrupt Ages, of which they had many
Monuments still remaining. Italy was presently filled with Architects,
Painters* and Sculptors; and a prodigious Expense was made in Buildings,
Pictures and Statues. Thus the Italians began to come off from their frugal and
military way of living, and addicted themselves to the pursuit of refined and
expensive Pleasures, as much as the Wars of those times would permit. This
Infection spread it self by degrees into the Neighboring Nations. But these
things alone had not been sufficient to work so great a Change in Government,
if a preceding Invention, brought into common use about that time, had not
produced more new and extraordinary Effects than any had ever done before;
which probably may have many Consequences yet unforeseen, and a farther
Influence upon the Manners of Men, as long as the World lasts: I mean, the
Invention of the Needle, by the help of which Navigation was greatly improved;
a Passage opened by Sea to the East Indies, and a new World discovered. By this
means the Luxury of Asia and America was added to that of the Ancients; and all
Ages, and all Countries concurred to sink Europe into an Abyss of Pleasures;
which were rendered the more expensive by a perpetual Change of the Fashions in
Clothes, Equipage and Furniture of Houses.

These things brought a total Alteration in the way of living, upon which all
Government depends. It Is true, Knowledge being mightily increased, and a great
Curiosity and Nicety in every thing introduced, Men imagined themselves to be
gainers in all Points, by changing from their frugal and military way of
living, which I must confess had some mixture of Rudeness and Ignorance in it,
tho not inseparable from it. But at the same time they did not consider the
unspeakable Evils that are altogether inseparable from an expensive way of
living.

To touch upon all these, tho slightly, would carry me too far from my Subject;
I shall therefore content my self to apply what has been said, to the immediate
Design of this Discourse.

The far greater share of all those Expenses fell upon the Barons; for they
were the Persons most able to make them, and their Dignity seemed to challenge
whatever might distinguish them from other Men, This plunged them on a sudden
into so great Debts, that if they did not sell, or otherwise alienate their
Lands, they found themselves at least obliged to turn the military Service
their Vassals owed them, into Money; partly by way of Rent, and partly by way
of Lease, or Fine for payment of their Creditors. And by this means the Vassal
having his Lands no longer at so easy a Rate as before, could no more be
obliged to military Service, and so became a Tenant. Thus the Armies, which in
preceding times had been always composed of such Men as these, ceased of
course, and the Sword sell out of the hands of the Barons. But there being
always a necessity to provide for the Defense of every Country, Princes were
afterward allowed to raise Armies of Volunteers and Mercenaries. And great
Sums were given by Diets and Parliaments for their Maintenance, to be levied
upon the People grown rich by Trade, and dispirited for want of Military
Exercise. Such Forces were at first only raised for present Exigencies, and
continued no longer on foot than the Occasions lasted. But Princes soon found
Pretenses to make them perpetual, the chief of which was the garisoning
Frontier Towns and Fortresses, the Methods of War being altered to the tedious
and chargeable way of Sieges, principally by the Invention of Gunpowder. The
Officers and Soldiers of these Mercenary Armies depending for their
Subsistence and Preferment, as immediately upon the Prince, as the former
Militia's did upon the Barons, the Power of the Sword was transferred from the
Subject to the King, and War grew a constant Trade to live by. Nay, many of the
Barons themselves being reduced to Poverty by their expensive way of living,
took Commands in those Mercenary Troops; and being still continued Hereditary
Members of Diets, and other Assemblies of State, after the loss of their
Vassals, whom they formerly represented, they were now the readiest of all
others to load the People with heavy Taxes, which were employed to increase the
Prince's Military Power, by Guards, Armies, and Citadels, beyond Bounds or
Remedy.

I am not ignorant that before this Change, Subsidies were often giv^^ by
Diets, States and Parliaments for maintaining Wars; but these were small, and
no way sufficient to subsist such numerous Armies as those of the Barons
Militia.

What I have said hitherto has been always with regard to one or other, and
often to most Countries in Europe. What follows will have a more particular
regard to England; where, tho the Power of the Barons be ceased, yet no
mercenary Troops are yet established. The Reason of which is, that England had
before this great Alteration lost all her Conquests in France, the Town of
Calais only excepted; and that also was taken by the French, before the Change
was thoroughly introduced. So that the Kings of England had no Pretense to keep
up Standing Forces, either to defend Conquests abroad, or to garrison a Frontier
toward France, which was their formidable Enemy, since the Sea was now become
the only Frontier between those two Countries.

Henry the Seventh seems to have perceived the Alteration beforementioned more
than any Prince of his time, and obtained several Laws to favor and facilitate
it. But the succeeding Princes were altogether improper to second him: For
Henry the Eighth was an unthinking Prince. The Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and
Queen Mary, were short, and Queen Elizabeth loved her People too well to
attempt it. King James the First was a Stranger, and of no Interest abroad.
King Charles the First did indeed endeavor to make himself Absolute, tho
somewhat preposterously; for he attempted to seize the Purse, before he was
Master of the Sword. But very wise Men have been of Opinion, that if he had
been possessed of as numerous Troops as those which were afterward raised, and
constantly kept up by King Charles the Second, he might easily have succeeded
in his Enterprise. For we see that in those Struggles which the Country Party
had with King Charles the Second, and in those Endeavors they used to bring
about that Revolution which was afterward compassed by a Foreign Power, the
chief and insuperable Difficulty they met with, was from those Forces. And tho
King James the Second had provoked the Nation to the last degree, and made his
own Game as hard as possible, not only by invading our Civil Liberties, but
likewise by endeavoring to change the Established Religion for another which
the People abhorred, whereby he lost their Affections, and even those of a
great part of his Army; yet notwithstanding all this Mismanagement, England
stood in need of a foreign Force to save it; and how dangerous a Remedy that
is, the Histories of all Ages can witness. It Is true, this Circumstance was
favorable to the Nation, that a Prince who had married the next Heir to the
Crown, was at the Head of our Deliverance; yet did it engage us in a long and
expensive War. And now that we are much impoverished, and by means of our
former Riches and present Poverty, fallen into all the Corruptions which those
great Enemies of Virtue want, and Excess of Riches can produce; that there are
such Numbers of Mercenary Forces on foot at home and abroad; that the greatest
part of the Officers have no other way to subsist; that they are commanded by a
wise and active King, who has at his Disposal the formidable Land and Sea
Forces of a Neighboring Nation, the great Rival of our Trade: A King, who by
Blood, Relation, other particular Ties, and common Interest, has the House of
Austria, most of the Princes of Germany, and Potentates of the North, for his
Friends and Allies; who can, whatever Interest he join with, do what he thinks
fit in Europe: I say, if a Mercenary Standing Army be kept up, (the first of
that kind, except those of the Usurper Cromwell and the late King James, that
England has seen for thirteen hundred Years) I desire to know, where the
Security of the Liberties of England lies, unless in the good Will and Pleasure
of the King: I desire to know, what real Security can be had against a Standing
Army of Mercenaries, backed by the Corruption of a Nation, the Tendency of the
way of Living, the Genius of the Age, and the Example of the World.

Having shown the Difference between the past and present Government of
England, how precarious our Libert^^^ are and how from having the best Security
(...) them we are in hazard of having none at al^ it is to be hoped that those
who are for a Standing Army, and losing no occasion of advancing and extending
the Prerogative, from a mistaken O^inion that they establish the ancient
Government of England, will see what sort of Patriots they are.

But we are told, that only Standing Mercenary Forces can defend England from
the perpetual Standing Armies of France. However frivolous this Assertion be,
as indeed no good Argument can be brought to support it, either from Reason or
Experience; yet allowing it to be good, what Security can the Nation have, that
these Standing Forces shall not at some time or other be made use of to
suppress the Liberties of the People, tho not in this King's time, to whom we
owe their Preservation? For I hope there is no Man so weak to think, that
keeping up the Army for a Year, or for any longer time than the Parliament
shall have engaged the Public Faith to make good all Deficiencies of Funds
granted for their Maintenance, is not the keeping them up for ever. It Is a
pitiful shift in the Undertakers for a Standing Army, to say, We are not for a
Standing Army; We are* only for an Army from Year to Year, or till the Militia
be made useful. For England cannot be in any hazard from France; at least, till
that Kingdom, so much exhausted by War and Persecution, shall have a breathing
space to recover. Before that time our Militia will be in order; and in the
mean time our Fleets. Besides, no Prince ever surrendered so great Countries,
and so many strong Places, I shall not say, in order to make a new War; but, as
these Men will have it, to continue the same. The French King is old and
diseased, and was never willing to hazard much by any bold Attempt. If he, or
the Dauphin, upon his Decease, may be suspected of any farther Design, it must
be upon the Spanish Monarchy, in case of the Death of that King. And if it be
objected, that we shall stand in need of an Army, in such a Conjuncture; I
answer, that our Part in that, or in any other foreign War, will be best
managed by Sea, as shall be shown hereafter.

Let us then see if Mercenary Armies be not exactly calculated to enslave a
Nation. Which I think may be easily proved, if we consider that such Troops are
generally composed of Men who make a Trade of War, and having little or no
Patrimony, or spent what they once had, enter into that Employment in hopes of
its Continuance during Life, not at all thinking how to make themselves capable
of any other. By which means heavy and perpetual Taxes must be entailed for
ever upon the People for their Subsistence; and since all their Relations stand
engaged to support their Interest, let all Men judge, if this will not prove a
very united and formidable Party in a Nation. But the Undertakers for a
Standing Army will say; Will you turn so many Gentlemen out to starve, who have
faithfully served the Government? This Question I allow to be founded upon some
Reason. For it ought to be acknowledged in Justice to our Army, that on all
Occasions, and in all Actions, both Officers and Soldiers have done their
part. And therefore I think it may be reasonable, that all Officers and
Soldiers of above forty Years, in consideration of their Unfitness to apply
themselves at that Age to any other Employment, should be recommended to the
Bounty of the Parliament.

But the Undertakers must pardon me if I tell them, That no well-constituted
Government ever suffered any such Men in it, whose Interest leads them to
imbroil the State in War, and are an useless and insupportable Burden in time
of Peace. Carthage, after the first Roman War, found how dangerous they were:
And Holland, in the Year 1672, how useless to defend them. If ever any
Government stood in need of such a sort of Men, 'twas that of ancient Rome,
because they were engaged in perpetual War. The Argument can never be so strong
in any other Case. But the Romans well knowing such Men and Liberty to be
incompatible, and yet, being under a necessity of having Armies constantly on
foot, made frequent Changes of the Men that served in them; who, when they had
been some time in the Army, were permitted to return to their Possessions,
Trades, or other Employments. And to show how true a Judgment that wise State
made of this Matter, it is sufficient to observe, that those who subverted that
Government, the greatest that ever was amongst Men, found themselves obliged to
continue the same Soldiers always in constant Pay and Service.

There is another thing which I would not mention if it were not absolutely
necessary to my present purpose; and that is, the usual Manners of those who
are engaged in Mercenary Armies. I speak now of Officers in other Parts of
Europe, and not of those in our Army, allowing them to be the best; and if
(...) have it so, quite different from all others will not apply to them any
part of what I shall say concerning the rest. They themselves best know how far
any thing of th^^ Nature may be applicable to them. I say th^^ most Princes of
Europe having put themselve upon the foot of keeping up Forces, rather (...)
than well entertained, can give but small Allowance to Officers, whom,
notwithstanding, they permit to live in all that Extravagancy which mutual
Example and Emulation prompts them to. By which means the Officers become
insensibly engaged in numberless Oppressions and Cruelties, the Colonels
against the Captains, and the Captains against the inferior Soldiers. So that
there is hardly any sort of Men who are less Men of Honor than the Officers of
Mercenary Forces: and indeed Honor has now no other Signification amongst them
than Courage. Besides, most Men that enter into those Armies, whether Officers
or Soldiers, as if they were obliged to show themselves new Creatures, and
perfectly regenerate, if before they were modest or sober, immediately turn
themselves to all manner of Debauchery and Wickedness, committing all kind of
Injustice and Barbarity against poor and defenseless People. Now tho the
natural Temper of our Men be more just and honest than that of the French, or
of any other People, yet may it not be feared, that such bad Manners may prove
contagious? And if such Manners do not fit Men to enslave a Nation, Devils only
must do it. On the other hand, if it should happen that the Officers of a
Standing Army in England should live with greate^ (...) and Modesty than was
ever yet seen in that sort of Men, it might very probably fall out, that being
quartered in all Parts of the Country, they might be returned Members of
Parliament for most of the Electing Boroughs; and of what Consequence that
would be, I leave all Men to judge. So that whatever be the Conduct of a
Mercenary Army, we can never be secure as long as any such Force is kept up in
England; and I confess I do not see by what Rules of good Policy any Mercenary
Forces have been connived at either in England or elsewhere. Sure, it is
allowing the Dispensing Power in the most essential Point of the Constitution.

The Subjects formerly had a real Security for their Liberty, by having the
Sword in their own hands. That Security, which is the greatest of all others,
is lost; and not only (...), but the Sword is put into the Hand of the King by
his Power over the Militia. All this is not enough; but we must have a Standing
Army of Mercenaries, who for the most part have no other way to subsist and
consequently are capable to execute any Commands. And yet every Man (...) think
his ^^^erties as safe as ever, under pain of being tho^^ht disaffected to the
Monarchy. But sure it must not be the ancient Limited and Legal Monarchy of
England, that these Gentlemen mea It must be a French Fashion of Monarchy,
where the King has Power to do what he pleases, and the People no Security for
any thing they possess. We have quitted our ancient Security, and put the
Militia into the Power of the King. The only remaining Security we have is,
That no Standing Army was ever yet allowed in time of Peace, the Parliament
having so often and so expressly declared it to be contrary to Law. If a
Standing Army be allowed, what Difference will there be between the Government
we shall then live under, and any kind of Government under a good Prince? Of
which there have been some in the most despotick Tyrannies. If this be a
Limited and not an Absolute Monarchy* then, as there are Conditions, so there
ought to be Securities on both sides. The Barons never pretended that their
Militia's should be constantly on foot, and together in Bodies, in times of
Peace. It Is evident that would have subverted the Constitution, and made every
one of them a Petty Tyrant. And it is as evident, that Standing Forces are the
fittest Instruments to make a Tyrant, tho not of so gracious a Prince as we now
live under, yet, to be sure, of some of his Successors. Whoever is for making
the King's Power too great or too little, is an Enemy to the Monarchy. But to
give him a Standing Army, puts his Power beyond Control, and consequently
makes him Absolute. If the People had any other real Security for their Liberty
than that there be no Standing Army in time of Peace, there might be some
color to demand it. But if that only remaining Security be taken away from the
People, we have destroyed the Monarchy.

It Is pretended, we are in hazard of being invaded by a powerful Enemy; Shall
we therefore destroy our Constitution? What is it then that we would defend? Is
it our Persons, by the Ruin of our Constitution? In what then shall we be
Gainers? In saving our Lives by the Loss of our Liberties? If our Pleasures and
Luxury make us live like Brutes, it seems we must not pretend to reason any
better than they. I would fain know, if there be any other way of making a
Prince Absolute, than by allowing him a Standing Army: If by it all Princes
have not been made Absolute; If without it, any. Whether our Enemies shall
conquer us is uncertain. But whether a Standing Army will enslave as, neither
Reason nor Experience will suffer us to doubt. It Is therefore evident, that no
Pretense of Danger from abroad, can be an Argument to keep up a Standing Army,
or any Mercenary Forces.

Let us now consider whether we may not be able to defend our selves by a
well-regulated Militia against any Foreign Force, tho never so formidably* that
the Nation may be free from the Fears of Invasion from abroad, as well as from
the Danger of Slavery at home.

It Is well known, that after the Barons had lost the Military Service of their
Vassals, Militia's of some kind or other were established in most parts of
Europe. But the prince having the Power of naming and preserring the Officers
of these Militia's, they could he no Balance in Government as the former were.
And he that will consider what has been said in this Discourse, will easily
perceive that the essential Quality requisite to such a Militia, as might fully
answer the Ends of the former, must be that the Officers should be named and
preferred, as well as they and the Soldiers paid, by the People that set them
out. So that if Princes look upon the present Militia's as not capable of
defending a Nation against Foreign Armies; the People have little reason to
entrust them with the Defense of their Liberties.

It Is as well known that after the dissolution of that Ancient Militia under
the Barons, which made this Nation so Great and Glorious, tho, by setting up
Militia's generally through Europe, the Sword came not into the Hands of the
Commons; which was the only thing could have continued the former Balance of
Government, but was every where put into the Hands of the King: nevertheless
ambitious Princes, who aimed at absolute Power, thinking they could never use
it effectually to that unless it were ^^^^ed by Mercenaries, and ^en that had
no other (...) the Co^mon-we^^th then their (...) have still endeavored by all
means to discredit Militia's, and render (...) to the People, by never
suffering them to (...) Right, or so much as tolerable (...) and all to per^^^
the (...) of (...). And indeed they have succeeded too well in this Design: For
the greatest part of the World has been fooled into an opinion, That a Militia
cannot be made serviceable. I shall not say 'twas only Militia's could conquer
the World; and that Princes to have succeeded fully in the Design
beforementioned, must have destroyed all the History and Memory of Ancient
Governments, where the Accounts of so many excellent Models of Militia are yet
extant. I know the Prejudice and Ignorance of the World concerning the Art of
War, as it was practiced by the Antionts; tho what remains of that Knowledge in
their Writings be sufficient to give a mean Opinion of the Modern Discipline.
For this Reason I shall examine, by what has passed of late Years in this
Nation, whether Experience have convinced us, that Officers bred in Foreign
Wars, be so far preserable to others who have been under no other Discipline
than that of an ordinary and ill-regulated Militia; and if the Commonalty of
England at their first entrance upon Service, be not as capable of a resolute
Military Action, as any standing Forces. The Battle of Naseby will fully
resolve this Doubt, which is generally thought to have been the deciding Action
of the late Civil War. The Number of Forces was equal on both sides; nor was
there any Advantage in the Ground, or extraordinary Accident that happened
during the Fight, which could be of considerable importance to either side. In
the Army of the Parliament, nine only of the Officers had served abroad, and
most of the Soldiers were Prentices drawn out of London but two months before.
In the King's Army there was above a thousand Officers that had served in
foreign Parts: Yet were they routed and broken by those new-raised Prentices;
who were observed to be obedient to Command, and brave in Fight; not only in
that Action, but on all Occasions during that active Campagn. The People of
this Nation are not a dastardly Crew, like those born in Misery under
Oppression and Slavery, who must have time to rub off that Fear, Cowardice and
Stupidity which they bring from home. And tho Officers seem to stand in more
need of Experience than private Soldiers, yet in that Battle it was seen, that
the Sobriety, and Principle of the Officers on the one side, prevailed over the
Experience of those on the other.

It Is well known that diverse Regiments of our Army lately in Flanders have
never been once in Action, and not one half of them above thrice, nor any of
them five times during the whole War. O, but they have been under Discipline,
and accustomed to obey! And so may Men in Militia's. We have had to do with an
Enemy, who, tho abounding in Numbers of excellent Officers, yet durst never
fight us without a visible Advantage. Is that Enemy like to invade us, when he
must be unavoidably necessitated to put all to hazard in ten days, or starve,
unless we will suppose we are to have no Fleet at all?

But to come to some of the Capital Errors committed by those that established
the Modern Militia's, besides what has been already mentioned; One of the chief
was, the discontinuing to exercise the whole People, for which there were many
excellent and wholesome Laws in this Nation, and almost every where else.
Another Error was, the taking Men without distinction, and, for the most part,
the Scum of the People into that small number which they listed and exercised.
Whereas if a small number only was to be exercised, no Man of Quality or Riches
ought to be excused from that Duty. Thus it was, that these Militia's fell into
contempt; and Men of Quality and Estates having Power to send any wretched
Servant in their place, became themselves abject and timorous, by being disused
to handle Arms, It Is well observed by a Judicious Author, that it is easier to
exercise a greater Number than a less; and consequently all that are able to
bear Arms in a Nation, than a small Number picked out of a wide Country; who
must march far, and be from home several days at each Exercise. And perhaps it
might be found an unnecessary trouble and burden, to have certain numbers of
Men listed and formed into Bodies in time of Peace, if the whole People were
exercised, and an easy Method laid down, by which such numbers of Men as shall
be thought convenient, may always be drawn out, even upon the most sudden
Occasion. For by this means the Choice will be greater, as it ought to be, that
so Trade, Manufactures and Husbandry may be as little disturbed as possible,
since the Impediments of the several Conditions of Men are so many and so
various.

'Twill be said, That I insist much upon the Errors of the present Militia, and
do not propose a new Model by which they may be amended. I answer, A Parliament
only can do that. The People are to tell wherein they are agrieved, and what is
amiss: It belongs only to that Wise Council to apply suitable Remedies: Which
cannot be difficult when the Causes of the Disease are discovered. And there
are many Models of Militia, both Ancient and Modern, from which diverse useful
things may be taken.

Of the Fleet I shall say little, having chiefly undertaken to speak of
Militia's and standing Forces. But surely England cannot justly apprehend an
Invasion, if the Fleet alone were in such order as it ought to be. And it can
never be the Interest of this Nation to take any other share in preserving the
Balance of Europe, than what may be performed by our Fleets. By which means our
Money will be spent amongst our selves, our Trade preserved to support the
Charge of our Navy; our Enemies totally driven out of the Sea, and great
numbers of their Forces diverted from opposing the Armies of our Allies abroad,
to the defense of their own Coasts.

If this Method had been taken in the late War, I presume it would have proved,
not only more advantageous to us, but also more serviceable to our Allies than
that which was followed. And it is in vain to say, that at this rate we shall
have no Allies at all: For the weaker Party on the Continent must be contented
to accept our Assistance in the manner we think fit to give it, or inevitably
perish. But if we send Mercenary Forces beyond the Seas to join those of our
Allies then, at the end of every War* the present struggle will recur, and at
one time or other the Nation will be betrayed, and a Standing Army established:
So that nothing can save us from following the Fate of all the other Kingdoms
in Europe, but putting our Trust altogether in our Fleets and Militia's, and
having no other Forces than these. The Sea is the only Empire which can
naturally belong to us. Conquest is not our Interest, much less to consume our
People and Treasure in conquering for others.

To conclude;

If we seriously consider the happy Condition of this Nation, who have lived
for many Ages under the Blessings of Liberty, we cannot but be affected with
the most tender Compassion to think that a Country, whose Fields are every
where well cultivated and improved by the Industry of rich Husbandmen; Her
Rivers and Harbors filled with Ships; Her Cities, Towns, and Villages,
enriched with Manufactures; where Men possessing vast Estates, are not hated
and abhorred as in other Countries, but deservedly blessed, by the poorer sort
of People; whose Merchants live in as great Splendour as the Nobility of other
Nations, and whose Commonalty not only surpasses all those of that degree which
the World can now boast of, but also those of all former Ages, in Courage,
Honesty, good Sense, Industry, and Generosity of Temper; in whose very Looks
there are such visible Marks of a free and liberal Education, which Advantages
cannot be imputed to the Climate, or to any other Cause, but the Freedom of the
Government under which they live: I say, it cannot but make the Hearts of all
honest Men bleed to think, that in their days the Felicity of such a Country
must come to a Period, if the Parliament do not prevent it, and his Majesty be
not prevailed upon to lay aside the Thoughts of a Mercenary Army, which tho it
may seem a Security in his time, yet by being continued, as will inevitably
come to pass, must produce, under his Successors, those fatal Consequences that
have always attended such Forces in the other Kingdoms of Europe; Violation of
Property, Decay of Trade, Oppression of the Country by heavy Taxes and
Quarters, the utmost Misery and Slavery of the poorer sort, the Ruin of the
Nobility and Gentry by their Expenses in Court and Army, Deceit and Treachery
in all Ranks of Men, occasioned by Want and Necessity. Then shall we see our
once happy Commonalty become base and abject, by being continually exposed to
the brutal Insolence of the Soldiers, our Women debauched by their Lust, ugly
and nasty through Poverty, and the want of things necessary to preserve their
natural Beauty. Then shall we see that great City, the Pride and Glory not only
of our Island, but of the World, subjected to the excessive Impositions Paris
now lies under, and reduced to a Pedling Trade, serving only to soment the
Luxury of a Court. Then will England know what Obligations she has to those who
are for Mercenary Armies.

FINIS.

